THE SALVATION OF ALL MEN STRICTLY EXAMINED; AND THE ENDLESS PUNISHMENT OF
THOSE WHO DIE IMPENITENT, ARGUED AND DEFENDED AGAINST THE OBJECTIONS AND
REASONINGS OF THE LATE REV. DOCTOR CHAUNCY, OF BOSTON, IN HIS BOOK ENTITLED
"THE SALVATION OF ALL MEN," etc.

BY JONATHAN EDWARDS, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN NEW HAVEN.

"Come now and let us reason together, says the LORD."

Isai. I. 18. "Is not my way equal? Are not your ways unequal?"

Ezekiel. XVIII. 25. NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY A. MORSE, M, DCC, XC.

PREFACE.
IT is to be hoped, that no man, who believes a future state of existence, will
grudge the time and pains which are necessary to obtain satisfactory evidence
concerning the nature of that state. A mistake here may be fatal. If the
doctrine advanced in the following pages be true, it is a most important, a
most interesting doctrine. However contrary to the wishes of any, however
mortifying to their feelings, however dreadful, it is by all means necessary to
be known. Surely no man would wish to flatter himself in his own eyes, till his
iniquity be found to be hateful. To a rational and scriptural view of the truth
in this case, and to a satisfactory solution of the difficulties which have
been objected to it, great attention and close examination are necessary. And
whether both our duty and interest require us to subject ourselves to the
labor of this attention and examination, rather than to sit down easy in the
expectation of peace and safety, till sudden destruction come upon us; no
rational man can hesitate.

IF any object to the size of my book, my apologies are, the size of that to
which it is intended as an answer, and the extent and importance of the subject.

DOCTOR Chauncy's book is indeed anonymous. Yet, as I am informed, that he and
his most intimate friends have made no secret of the author's name; I presume I
need not apologize for using the same name.

I AM sensible of the prejudice of many against controversy on religious
subjects. But is it possible in all cases to avoid it? What is controversy
properly managed, but rational or argumentative discussion? And is there to be
no rational discussion of the subjects of religion? -- Heat and personal
invective in such disquisitions are both impertinent and hurtful. But a cool
discussion of the doctrines of religion, on the ground of reason and
revelation, is undoubtedly one of the best means of investigating truth, of
diffusing the knowledge of it, and of obtaining and giving satisfaction with
regard to the difficulties which attend many moral and religious subjects. This
is the mode of discussion, which I have endeavored to observe in the following
pages. To point out the inconsistence and absurdity of an erroneous system, and
even to set them in the most glaring light; is not at all inconsistent with
this mode of discussion. If in any instances I have deviated from this mode,
and instead of adhering closely to the argument, have descended to
personalities, and have endeavored to bear hard on Dr. Chauncy, otherwise than
by showing the weakness and inconsistence of his arguments; for every such
instance I ask pardon of the reader, and allow it is of no advantage to the
cause which I espouse. That cause must be a bad one indeed, which cannot be
supported without the aid of personal reflections.

NEW HAVEN, June 29. A. D. 1789.
CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. In which the fundamental principles of Doctor Chauncy's system,
concerning future punishment, are pointed out and compared with each other.
Page 1. Chap. II. Whether the damned deserve any other punishment, than that
which is conducive to their personal good. Page 23. Chap. III. Whether the
damned will in fact suffer any other punishment, than that which is conducive
to their personal good. Page 48. Chap. IV. Containing an examination of Dr. C's
arguments to prove endless punishment inconsistent with justice. Page 80. Chap.
V. Is annihilation the punishment of the damned? Page 102. Chap. VI. The
justice of endless punishment consisting in misery. Page 117. Chap. VII.
Containing another view of the question concerning the justice of endless
punishment. Page 130. Chap. VIII. In which it is inquired, whether endless
punishment be consistent with the divine goodness. Page 132. Chap. IX. In which
is considered Dr. C's argument from Romans V. 12, etc. Page 159. Chap. X. In
which is considered Dr. C's argument from Romans VIII. 19 -- 24. Page 178.
Chap, XI. Containing remarks on Dr. C's arguments from Col. I. 19, 20. Ephesians. I.
10, and 1 Timothy II. 4. Page 201. Chap. XII. Doctor C's arguments from Psalm.
VIII. 5, 6. Heb. II. 6 -- 9. Phil. II. 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. XV. 24 -- 29, and Rev.
V. 13; considered. Page 216. Chap. XIII. In which Dr. C's scheme is considered,
with a reference to his ideas of human liberty and moral agency. Page 240.
Chap. XIV. A reply to Dr. C's answers to the arguments in favor of endless
punishment, drawn from those texts which declare the punishment of the damned
to be everlasting, forever, forever and ever, and the fire of hell to be
unquenchable. P. 246. Chap. XV. In which are considered Dr. C's answers to the
arguments drawn from what is said concerning Judas, Mark XIV. 21; -- from the
unpardonable sin; -- and from the tendency of the doctrine of universal
salvation to licentiousness. Page 277. Chap. XVI. In which some direct
arguments are proposed, to prove the endless punishment of the wicked, Page
282. CONCLUSION. Page 295. Appendix, containing I. Remarks on Bishop Newton. P.
298. II. Remarks on Relly. P. 305. III, Remarks on Petitpierre. P. 308.

UNIVERSAL SALVATION EXAMINED, etc.
CHAP. I. In which the fundamental principles of Dr. CHAUNCY's system
concerning future punishment are pointed out and compared with each other.
SECTION I. In which the fundamental principles etc. are pointed out etc
BEFORE we enter into the consideration of the particular arguments of Dr.
Chauncy, it may be proper to give some account of the fundamental principles of
his system.

BESIDE the doctrine of the salvation of all men, to establish which is the
design of his whole book; there are several other doctrines, which may be
considered as fundamental to his system. He does not deny all future punishment
of the wicked; but allows that they will be punished according to their
demerits, or according to strict justice. Thus he allows that many men will be
miserable in the next state of existence, in proportion to the moral depravity
they have contracted in this. There is no room for debate here Page 9.
. They must be unavoidably miserable in proportion to the number and greatness
of their vices P. 10.
. For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of GOD is eternal life through
JESUS CHRIST our LORD: i. e. if men continue the servants of sin, the wages
they shall receive, before the gift through CHRIST is conferred on them, will
be the second death P. 90.
. If some men suffer that punishment which is the wages of sin, they doubtless
suffer all which they deserve. No man deserves more than his wages. In the
collective sense, they will be tormented for ages of ages; though some of them
only should be tormented through the whole of that period; the rest variously
as to time, in proportion to their deserts P. 307.
. There shall be a difference in the punishment of wicked men, according to the
difference there has been in the nature and number of their evil deeds Page 320.
. He speaks of the wicked as liable to positive torments awfully great in
degree, and long in continuance, in proportion to the number and greatness of
their crimes P. 350, 351.
. The pardonableness of all other sins and blasphemies, [except that against
the HOLY GHOST] lies in this, its being possible for men, to escape the
torments of hell, though they should have been guilty of those sins. --
Accordingly the unpardonableness of the blasphemy against the HOLY GHOST, must
consist in the reverse of the pardonableness of other sins -- in the
impossibility of their escaping the torments of hell, who are chargeable with
this sin. -- This now being the meaning of the unpardonabness of blasphemy
against the HOLY GHOST, it is quite easy to perceive, that even these
blasphemers, notwithstanding the unpardonableness of the sin they have
committed, may finally be saved -- For if they are not saved till after they
have passed through these torments, they have never been forgiven -- The divine
law has taken its course; nor has any intervening pardon prevented the full
execution of the threatened penalty on them. -- Forgiveness strictly and
literally speaking has not been granted them P. 335, etc.
. This kind of sinners being absolutely excluded from the privilege of
forgiveness, must, as has been said, suffer the torments of another world,
before they can be saved P. 340
.

IN these passages concerning the blasphemers of the HOLY GHOST, the author
plainly supposes, that not only those of that character, but all who suffer the
torments of hell are finally saved without forgiveness, having satisfied by
their own sufferings the utmost demands of strict justice. He who is delivered
from further punishment in consequence of having suffered a punishment however
great in degree and long in duration, but not equal to that, to which he is
liable by strict justice, is the subject of forgiveness. Just so much
punishment is forgiven him, as is lacking to make the punishment, which he has
suffered, equal to that, to which he is liable by strict justice. Now our
author, in the passages just quoted, supposes that both the blasphemers of the
Holy Ghost and all others who pass through the torments of hell, are finally
delivered, not in consequence of a punishment inferior in degree or duration,
to that which may be inflicted on them, according to strict justice; as in that
case they would be the subjects of forgiveness: but in consequence of that
punishment, which is according to strict justice, and therefore they are
delivered without forgiveness. He says, "The pardonableness of all other sins,
lies in the possibility, that those who have been guilty of them, should escape
the torments of hell." Those therefore who actually pass through the torments
of hell receive no forgiveness; but are liberated on the footing of strict
justice. If pardonableness, or which is the same, a possibility of pardon
consist in a possibility of escaping the torments of hell; then actual pardon
consists in an actual escape from those torments. Of course they who do not
escape them, but pass through them, receive no pardon.

AGAIN: the only observation made by Dr. C. to show, that the blasphemers of
the Holy Ghost are not forgiven; or the only respect in which he asserts, that
they are not forgiven, is, that they pass through the torments of hell. But as
this holds good with regard to all the damned, it equally proves, that none of
them are forgiven; and that the divine law takes its course on them all; and
that no intervening pardon will ever prevent the full execution of the
threatened penalty on them. -- Now if the divine law take its course on the
damned, and the penalty threatened in the law, be fully executed on them; they
are undoubtedly punished according to their demerits, or according to strict
justice; and if after all, they be liberated from punishment, they are
liberated not in the way of forgiveness, nor on the footing of grace or favor;
but on the footing of strict justice.

But if this conclusion concerning all the damned be denied; yet as the
blasphemers of the Holy Ghost are some of mankind, some of mankind at least, if
not all the damned, will be saved on the footing of strict justice, and without
forgiveness.

The same observations for substance, may be made on the other quotations
above. If the damned suffer a misery in proportion to the number and greatness
of their vices; if "they receive the wages of sin;" if they be tormented
variously as to time, in proportion to their deserts; and according to the
difference there has been in the nature and number of their evil deeds; if they
suffer positive torments awfully great in degree and long in continuance, in
proportion to the number and greatness of their crimes; they are punished to
the utmost extent of justice. To punish them any further would be excessive,
injurious and oppressive. To exempt them from punishment, is so far from an act
of grace or favor, that it is an act called for by the most rigorous justice.

BY these quotations, and by the observations on them, it appears, that our
author holds, that the damned suffer a punishment properly and strictly
vindictive, and vindictive to the highest degree, and to the utmost extent to
which vengeance in any just government can proceed. Indeed speaking of the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, he plainly asserts a vindictive punishment
both of those cities, and of the damned; he says, P. 274.
that "the destruction of those cities" was, "for a public example of the
divine vengeance to after ages. And the fire of hell is doubtless called
everlasting for the like reason;" i. e. because it will last, till it shall
have accomplished the design of heaven in the destruction of the damned, for a
public example of the divine vengeance. In his Five Dissertations p. 110, he
speaks of the labor, sorrow and death which men suffer in this world, as
testimonies of GOD's vengeance, -- as judgments on his part, and real evils on
theirs; By vindictive punishment is meant, that which is sufficient to support
and vindicate the authority of the divine law, or which is sufficient to
satisfy the justice of GOD. But no advocate for vindictive punishment ever
supposed, that to vindicate the authority of the law and to satisfy the justice
of God, a greater punishment is necessary, than is according to justice or
according to the desert, or the nature and number of the sins, the vices, the
crimes of the person punished: or that to those ends, a greater punishment is
necessary, than is inflicted, when "the divine law takes its course;" or than
is implied "in the full execution of the threatened penalty." A punishment
greater than that which answers those descriptions, would be so far from
satisfying justice, that it would be positively unjust: it would be so far from
supporting the authority of the divine law, that it would bring it into
contempt by violating it. If that positive torment, which in degree and
continuance is according to the desert and the nature and number of the evil
deeds of the sinner, be not sufficient to satisfy the justice of GOD, I wish to
be informed what would satisfy it. -- But Dr. C. himself holds, that the
punishment which satisfies the justice of GOD, is vindictive and opposed to
that which is disciplinary and medicinal; If the next state is a state of
punishment not intended for the cure of the patients themselves, but to satisfy
the justice of GOD, and give warning to others; it is impossible all men should
be finally saved P. 1^.
. So that I am perfectly agreed with Dr. C. in his idea of a vindictive
punishment, and whether he do not hold such punishment in the utmost extent, I
appeal to every candid reader, who shall have perused the forecited quotations,
or the pages from which they are taken.

YET Dr. C. is a great enemy to vindictive punishment, and it is a fundamental
principle of his book, that the future punishment of the wicked is disciplinary
and intended for the good, the repentance and reformation of the patients, and
not to satisfy the justice of God. This appears from the quotation just now
made from page 11th; and by innumerable other passages, some of which I shall
now recite. The wicked shall be sent to a place of weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth; not to continue there always, but till the rebellion of
their hearts is subdued, and they are wrought upon to become the willing and
obedient subjects of God P. 220.
. "For ages of ages, the wicked shall be miserable -- as a mean to destroy the
enmity of their hearts and make them GOD's willing and obedient people P. 221.
." The rest "[the wicked]" shall have their portion in the place of blackness
of darkness, as a suitable and necessary discipline, in order to their being
reduced under moral subjection to CHRIST P. 221. P.
. The other "[the wicked]" shall be banished to dwell in unspeakable torment,
till they repent of their folly, and yield themselves up to GOD, as his
obedient servants 224.
. He considers "the many dispensations," through which he supposes the wicked
will pass, "as variously adapted for the discipline of stubborn and rebellious
creatures P. 309.
." Is it not far more reasonable to suppose, that the miseries of the other
world are a proper discipline, in order to accomplish the end of the recovery
of the damned, than that they should be final and vindictive only P. 322
? The consideration of hell as a purging fire, is that only, which can make the
matter sit easy on one's mind P. 324.
. With approbation he quotes from Mr. Hartley these words; the doctrine of
purgatory, as now taught by the Papists, seems to be a corruption of a genuine
doctrine held by the ancient fathers, concerning a purifying fire P. 324.
. He considers the misery of hell as intended for the good of the patients
themselves P. 325.
; -- for "their benefit P. 326.
;" as a discipline by which is to be effected the personal good of wicked men
P. 328.
. He says, The reason why the wicked suffer the torments of the next state, is
that they might be made the willing people of GOD. P. 343.


AS this is his idea of the nature and end of the future punishment of the
wicked, he often rejects with abhorrence the idea, that they are to be punished
for any other end exclusive of their own personal good. What he says in p. 325,
implies, that unless we believe, that the future punishment of the wicked is
intended for their personal good, we must believe, that the character of GOD,
as the Father of mercies, and the God of pity, is limited to this world only;
and that he is not the same good being in the other world, that he is in this;
-- That on that supposition, we shall say that of our father in heaven, which
we cannot suppose of any father on earth, till we have first divested him of
the heart of a father P. 327.
. And in page 11th, before quoted, he absolutely rejects all punishment which
is not disciplinary.

BUT how these two fundamental parts of Dr. C's system can be consistent with
each other, is difficult to be conceived. Is that punishment which is according
to the deserts of the sinner; that which in degree and continuance is according
to the nature and number of his evil deeds; in which the divine law takes its
course upon him, and in which the penalty threatened in the law is fully
executed: is this punishment no more than a suitable and necessary discipline
to the sinner; necessary "to reduce him to a moral subjection to CHRIST;"
necessary to his personal good, "his benefit," etc? If so, then that punishment
which is according to strict justice and satisfies the justice of GOD, and that
which is a mere merciful and beneficial discipline, are one and the same. The
damned sinner suffers no more punishment, than is necessary for his good, nor
can without injury and oppression be made to suffer more: and all ground of
distinction between vindictive and disciplinary punishment entirely vanishes.
But if any man should avow this sentiment, that such punishment only, as is
necessary and conducive to the sinner's personal good, can consistently with
justice be inflicted; I beg leave to refer him to the next chapter, in which
the subject is considered at large.

IN the mean time, it may be proper to observe, that Dr. C. could not
consistently adopt the sentiment just mentioned; because he in page 11th before
quoted, distinguishes expressly between that punishment, which is intended for
the cure of the patients, and that which is intended to satisfy the justice of
GOD; and asserts that the latter is inconsistent with the salvation of all men.
His words are, If the next state is a state of punishment, not intended for the
cure of the patients themselves, but to satisfy the justice of GOD -- it is
impossible all men should be finally saved. On this notable passage, I observe,
1. That Dr. C. here, as every where else through his book, distinguishes
between a vindictive and disciplinary punishment; or between that punishment
which is conducive to the sinner's good, and that which satisfies divine
justice. It cannot therefore be said, that according to Dr. C. a punishment
conducive to the sinner's good, is all that can in strict justice be inflicted
on him. -- 2. He asserts, that if future punishment be intended to satisfy
divine justice, it is impossible all men should be saved. Yet he himself in
holding, that the wicked will be punished according to their deserts, and in
degree and continuance according to the nature and number of their sins, crimes
and evil deeds; and that the divine law will take its course on them, the whole
threatened penalty be inflicted, and they never be forgiven; holds that
punishment, which entirely satisfies the justice of GOD. Therefore, as he also
holds that such future punishment as satisfies the justice of GOD, is
inconsistent with the salvation of all men; to be consistent, he must give up
the doctrine of the salvation of all men, to prove which, he wrote his whole
book.

ANOTHER fundamental principle of Dr. C's book, is, that all men, both those
who are saved immediately from this life, and those who are saved after they
have suffered the pains of hell; are saved by the mere mercy, compassion, grace
or favor of GOD, through CHRIST. -- He allows Page 43.
, that the Apostle's Doctrine of justification stands upon the foot of grace
through CHRIST, and that mankind have universally sinned and consequently
cannot be justified upon any claim founded on mere law. -- The gift by CHRIST
takes rise from the many offenses, which mankind commit in their own persons,
and finally terminates in opposition to the power and demerit of them all, in
their being restored, not simply to life, but to reign in it forever P. 56.
. As mankind universally are subjected to damage through the lapse of Adam; so
they shall as universally be delivered from it, through the gift by CHRIST P.
62.
. The gift on CHRIST's part, -- ought to be taken in its abounding sense P. 75.
. The plain truth is, final everlasting salvation is absolutely the free gift
of GOD to all men, through JESUS CHRIST -- he has absolutely and
unconditionally determined, of his rich mercy, through the intervening
mediation of his son JESUS CHRIST; that all men, the whole race of lapsed Adam
shall reign in life P. 86.
. He speaks of GOD as exercising pity, tender compassion and grace, toward the
damned; and speaking of the disciplinary punishment of the damned, he says,
that GOD, in the other world as well as this, must be disposed to make it
evident, that he is a being of boundless and inexhaustible goodness. P. 326.
He speaks of the doctrine of universal salvation, as the gospel plan of mercy
extensively benevolent; and a wonderful design of mercy 360.
as "the scripture scheme of mercy," and of the vilest of the human race as
"the objects of mercy 365.
." He quotes 405.
with approbation, from Mr. Whiston, That there may be in the utmost bowels of
the divine compassion, another time of trial allotted to the damned, in which
many or all of them may be saved, by the infinite indulgence and love of their
CREATOR.

OUR author abundantly declares also, that this rich mercy, this free gift,
this tender compassion and grace, this infinite indulgence and love of their
CREATOR, this boundless and inexhaustible goodness, in the salvation of all
men, is exercised through CHRIST only, and for his sake. JESUS CHRIST is the
person through whom and upon whose account, happiness is attainable by any of
the human race P. 17.
. The obedience of CHRIST, and eminently his obedience unto death, is the
ground or reason, upon which it has pleased GOD to make happiness attainable
by any of the human race P. 19.
. It was with a view to the obedience and death of CHRIST, upon this account,
upon this ground, for this reason, that GOD was pleased to make the gospel
promise of a glorious immortality to the sons of men P. 20.
. CHRIST died not for a select number of men only, but for mankind universally
and without exception or limitation P. 20.
.

NOW, how can this part of Dr. C's system be reconciled with that part, in
which he holds, that all the damned will be punished according to their
deserts? Can those who are punished according to their deserts, after that be
saved on the foot of grace through CHRIST? Can those who are punished according
to the nature and number of their evil deeds; in degree and continuance, in
proportion to the number and greatness of their crimes; in whose punishment the
divine law takes its course, and the threatened penalty is fully executed: can
these persons be saved by a gift? by a gift taken in the abounding sense? by
the free gift of GOD through Christ? by rich mercy? by pity, tender compassion
and grace? by mercy extensively benevolent? by a wonderful design of mercy? by
boundless and inexhaustible goodness? by the utmost bowels of the divine
compassion? by the infinite indulgence and love of their CREATOR? Is the man
who by his crimes has, according to law, exposed himself to the pillory, or to
be cropped and branded, and on whom the law has taken its course, and the
threatened penalty has been fully executed; is he after all delivered from
further suffering by grace, by pity, by tender compassion, by indulgence and
love, by the utmost bowels of compassion? -- No; he has a right on the foot of
mere law, and of the most rigorous justice, to subsequent impunity, with
respect to the crime or crimes, for which he has been thus punished: and to
tell him after he is thus punished, that he is now released by grace, by pity,
by utmost compassion, by indulgence and love, would be the grossest insult.

AGAIN; how can those who have been punished according to their deserts, be
saved through CHRIST, or on his account? How can the obedience and death of
CHRIST be the ground or reason of their salvation? Having suffered the full
penalty threatened in the law, they have a right to demand future impunity, on
account of their own sufferings. What need then have they of CHRIST, of his
obedience and death, or of his mediatory intervention, to be brought into the
account? Dr. C. speaks of the "deliverance" or "the redemption which CHRIST has
purchased" for all men P. 153, 154.
. But what need is there, that CHRIST should purchase deliverance for those,
who purchase it for themselves, by their own personal sufferings? Nay, what
justice would there be in refusing deliverance to a man, unless it be purchased
for him by another, when he has fully purchased it for himself? What if the
person before described to have suffered some corporal punishment according to
the strictness of law, should be told at his release, that he is delivered from
further punishment, not on account of his own sufferings; but on account of
some other person? on the ground, and for the reason of the obedience or merit
of that other person? Might he not with just indignation reply; Wherein has
that other person afforded me any relief? I have suffered all that could be
inflicted on me consistently with law and justice; and let the merit of that
other person be what it may, I thank him for nothing: his merit has benefited
me nothing. As little benefit from CHRIST does he derive toward his
deliverance, who suffers according to his deserts; and with as little propriety
can it be said, that he is redeemed or delivered through CHRIST or on his
account.

ON the whole, Dr. C's scheme comes to this; That not bare goodness, but that
goodness, which is boundless and inexhaustible; not bare compassion but the
utmost bowels of the divine compassion; not bare indulgence and love, but the
infinite indulgence and love of our creator; will grant to his creatures of
mankind, just so much relief from misery, as they are entitled to by the most
rigorous justice.

NOR did Dr. C. fall into these inconsistences, by mere inattention; he was
driven to them by dire necessity, provided it was necessary for him, to adopt
his favorite doctrine of the salvation of all men. Every one of the
forementioned principles is essential to his system, and can by no means be
spared.

1. THAT the damned are punished according to their deserts, is manifestly
essential to his system. For if in ages of ages they do not suffer a punishment
which is according to their deserts, they do not suffer that which might justly
be inflicted upon them; or, which is the same thing, that punishment which is
denounced in the divine law: and according both to justice and the divine law,
the damned might be made to suffer a greater punishment, than that which is for
ages of ages; or than the longest punishment, which any of them will in fact
suffer. But as no body pretends there is any greater punishment threatened in
the law, or in any part of scripture, than that which in scriptural language is
said to be for ever and ever, which D. C. supposes to be for ages of ages only,
and to be actually suffered by some men at least; he was necessitated to hold,
that some suffer the utmost punishment threatened in the law, and of course the
utmost which they deserve.

BESIDE; if he had allowed, that the damned do not suffer so long a punishment,
as they deserve, or as is threatened in the law; he might have been asked, how
much longer that punishment is, which is threatened in the law, than that which
they actually suffer. And the answer must have been, either that it is a longer
temporary punishment; or that it is an endless punishment. But which ever
answer should have been given, inexplicable difficulties would have followed.
If he should have answered, that the punishment threatened in the law, and
which the sinner justly deserves, is a longer temporary punishment, than that
which the damned actually suffer, he might have been challenged, to point it
out, as contained in the law, or in any part of scripture: and it is presumed,
that he would not have been able to do it.

BUT if he should have answered, that the punishment threatened in the law, and
which the sinner justly deserves, is an endless punishment, he must at once
have given up all arguments in favor of universal salvation, and against
endless punishment, drawn from the justice of GOD. Surely the justice of GOD
does not oppose that which is just, and which the sinner deserves; or that
which the just law of GOD threatens. He must also have acknowledged the
infinite evil of sin, which seems to have been a most grievous eyesore to him.
For nothing more is meant by the infinite evil of sin, than that on the account
of sin, the sinner deserves an endless punishment.

Again; Dr. C. could not assert, that the damned do not suffer all the
punishment, which they deserve, without contradicting apparently at least, many
clear and positive declarations of scripture: such as, That GOD will render to
every man according to his deeds, and according as his work shall be; That
every one shall receive according to the things done in the body; That the
wicked shall not come out of the place of punishment, till they shall have paid
the uttermost farthing, and the very last mite; That he shall have judgment
without mercy, that showed no mercy, etc. etc.

2. IT was equally necessary, that he should hold that the punishment of the
damned is a discipline, necessary and happily conducive to lead them to
repentance, and to promote their good. -- Otherwise he must have holden, that
future punishment is vindictive and intended to satisfy the justice of GOD;
which kind of punishment is, according to his own account, inconsistent with
the salvation of all men P. 11.
. And otherwise he must have given up all his arguments from the divine
goodness, mercy, compassion and grace, which are the chief arguments, on which
he himself depended most, for the support of his cause, and which are the most
popular, and the most persuasive to the majority of his readers. Otherwise too,
he could not have pretended, that his scheme of universal salvation is a scheme
of such benevolence, of such boundless and inexhaustible goodness, of such
tender compassion and grace, of such infinite indulgence and love: and must
have given up all the principal texts of scripture, from which he argues
universal salvation; as they are inconsistent with the idea, that the damned
will be finally admitted to happiness, having previously suffered the whole
punishment, which they deserve.

3. NOR could he make out his scheme of universal salvation, unless he held,
that all men are saved in the way of mere grace and favor through CHRIST. If
he had not holden this, what I observed under the last article, would be
observable under this too, that he must have given up all arguments drawn from
the divine goodness; and also all arguments drawn from what the scriptures say
of the extent of CHRIST's redemption* particularly those texts from which D. C.
chiefly argues in support of his scheme. Every one of those texts holds forth
that all who are saved, are saved by grace, through CHRIST. He must also have
given up all arguments from scripture. The scripture knows of no salvation, but
that which is founded on the mere favor of GOD forgiving the sins of men,
according to the riches of his grace, and justifying them freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in JESUS CHRIST.

Thus Dr. C. was compelled by necessity to associate in his scheme, principles
which will wage eternal war with each other.

SECTION II. In which objections to the preceding reasoning are considered.
I. IF to some part of the preceding reasoning, it should be objected, that
though the sinner, having suffered a punishment according to his deserts, has a
right on the footing of justice to subsequent impunity, and therefore cannot be
delivered from further punishment by grace, or through CHRIST; yet, as he has
no right on the footing of justice, to the positive happiness of heaven, he may
be admitted to this, entirely by grace, and through CHRIST: This would by no
means be sufficient to reconcile the forementioned inconsistences; as may
appear by the following observations.

1. THAT Dr. C. asserts, not only that all men will be admitted to the positive
happiness of heaven, (...) free grace; but that they will in the same way be
delivered from the pains of hell: As in these instances; P. 25, 26.
" The gift through the one man JESUS CHRIST, takes rise from the many sins
which men commit, in the course of their lives, and proceeds in opposition to
the power and demerit of them all, so as finally to terminate in justification,
justification including in it deliverence from sin, as well as from death;
their being made righteous, as well as reigning in life." " P. 27.
By the righteousness of the one man JESUS CHRIST the opposite advantageous gift
is come upon all men, which delivers them from death, to reign in life for
ever." " P. 30.
It seemed agreeable to the infinite wisdom and grace of GOD, that this damage
should be repaired, and mankind rescued from the state of sin and death -- by
the obedience of one man." " P. 37
Salvation from wrath is one thing essentially included in that justification
which is the result of true faith." He speaks to the same effect in many other
places. Indeed he never gives the least hint implying, that he imagined, that
the introduction of the sinner to the positive happiness of heaven is more an
act of grace, than his deliverance from the pains of hell: but all that he says
on the subject, implies the contrary. Nor do I state this objection, because I
find it in his book; but lest some of his admirers should start it, and should
suppose, that it relieves the difficulties before pressed upon him.

AS Dr. C. allows, that the deliverance of sinners from the pains of hell, in
all instances, is as really an act of grace, and as really through CHRIST, as
their admission to the joys of heaven; so the scriptures are very clear as to
the same matter. Gal. III. 13. CHRIST has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us. Romans V. 9. We shall be saved from wrath through
him. 1 These. I. 10. JESUS which delivered us from the wrath to come. And pardon
or forgiveness, which is a discharge from deserved punishment, is, in its very
nature, an act of grace, and is, in scripture, always spoken of as such, and as
dispensed through CHRIST only. Nor is any thing more clear from the scriptures,
than that every person, who is saved, is saved in the way of forgiveness.

2. THERE would be no propriety in saying, that a person who has suffered all
the punishment which he justly deserves, who is on the footing of law and
justice released from all further punishment, and is placed in a state of
mediocrity, in which he is the subject of no misery; is admitted to the
positive happiness of heaven, by mercy, by pity or compassion: much less by "
tender compassion" and " wonderful mercy," and by the utmost bowels of the
divine compassion. A being who has by his personal sufferings, satisfied the
law, stands as right with respect to that law, as if he had never transgressed
it; or as another person, who retains his original innocence. N^^, does any man
suppose, that Gabriel was admitted to celestial happiness, in the way of mercy,
pity, or tender compassion? -- That he was admitted to it in the exercise of
goodness, is granted. The same may be said of his creation, and of the creation
of every being rational and animal. But no being is created out of compassion.
With no more propriety can it be said, that an innocent being, or, which is the
same as to the present purpose, that a being who has indeed transgressed, but
has in his own person made satisfaction for his transgression, and on that
footing is delivered from all punishment and misery, is admitted to high
positive happiness, by mercy, pity or compassion. And how much more improperly
are the strong epithets used by Dr. C. applied in this case? Is it an instance
of tender pity, of wonderful mercy, of the utmost bowels of the DIVINE
compassion, to admit to the happiness of heaven, an innocent creature, or one
who, in his own person, stands perfectly right with respect to the divine law,
and is not the subject of any misery?

3. To grant that those who shall have suffered a punishment according to their
deserts, will on the footing of justice, be delivered from further wrath or
punishment, and yet to insist that their admission to high positive happiness,
is truly and properly an act of grace; would be only to raise a dispute
concerning the proper meaning of the word grace, and at the same time to grant,
that the deliverance of the sinner from wrath, is no fruit of forgiveness, or
of grace, even in the very sense in which the objector uses the word grace. It
is no act of favor, or of goodness, as distinguished from justice, to deliver
a person from wrath, who is innocent, or who in his own person has satisfied
the law, and therefore now stands right with respect to it. But the idea of
delivering a sinner from wrath, without forgiveness, and without grace, is as
foreign from the scriptures, as that of the admission of a sinner, without
grace, to the positive joys of heaven.

II. PERHAPS it may be objected to part of the preceding section, that by
punishment in proportion to their deserts, and "according to their evil deeds,"
etc. Dr. C. meant not a punishment equal to strict justice, or satisfactory to
the justice of GOD; but one in which a due proportion to the deserts of the
various persons, with respect to one another, who are the subjects of the
punishment, is observed. -- But to this it may be answered, Dr. C. doubtless
meant to use the expressions, in proportion to their deserts, "according to
their evil deeds," etc. in the same sense in which the scriptures say,
according to their works; "according to the fruit of their doings," etc. This
is manifest not only by the similarity of the expressions, but by his own
reference to those phrases in scripture, as in the following passages, Which is
plainly inconsistent with that difference the scripture often declares there
shall be, in the punishment of wicked men, according to the difference there
has been in the nature and number of their evil deeds P. 320.
. Under the prospect of being condemned by the righteous JUDGE of all the earth
-- to positive torments awfully great in degree, and long in continuance, in
proportion to the number and greatness of their crimes P. 350.
. Here he undoubtedly refers to those passages in which the scriptures assure
us, that the judge will render to every man according to his deeds; "according
as his work shall be," etc. Now these phrases of scripture are clearly
explained to us, by those representations, in which the punishment of the
wicked is illustrated by the imprisonment of a debtor, till he shall have paid
the uttermost farthing, the very last mite, etc. and by the passages, in which
it is declared, that the wicked shall have judgment without mercy; that GOD
will not pity, nor spare them etc. Whereas, if they suffer less than they
deserve according to strict justice; so far they are the objects of mercy and
pity; so far GOD does spare them; so far they have mercy mixed with judgment.
Nor can it be said, that they pay the uttermost farthing of the debt.

AGAIN; Dr. C. allows, that the wicked will in the second death receive the
wages of sin. But the wages of a man are not merely a part, or a certain
proportion of what he deserves, or has earned, but the whole. No man who has
faithfully done the work, which he contracted to do for ten pounds, will allow,
that five pounds are his wages for that work.

III. IT may also be objected to a part of the former section, that though "the
law shall have its course" on some men, and "the full penalty threatened in the
law, be executed on them;" still this does not imply a punishment equal or
satisfactory to strict justice; as the divine law itself does not, nor ever did
threaten all that punishment, which is deserved according to strict justice:
and therefore though the damned shall suffer all which is threatened in the
law, yet they will not suffer a vindictive punishment, a punishment which shall
"satisfy the justice of GOD." -- Concerning this objection it may be observed;

1. THAT by the law is meant, to use Dr. C's own words, "the moral law," the
law of nature, the law of reason, which is the law of GOD: and to say, that
this law does not threaten a penalty adequate to the demands of justice, is to
say, that it does not threaten a penalty adequate to the demands of reason. If
so, it is not the law of reason; which is contrary to the supposition.
Therefore to say, that the law of reason does not threaten a penalty adequate
to the demands of justice, is a real contradiction.

2. THAT Dr. C. neither does nor could consistently make this objection;
because if the objection were just, men might be justified, "on a claim founded
on mere law." On the principle of the objection, the law threatens a punishment
far less than we deserve; and a man having suffered this punishment, may be
justified on the foundation of mere law: the law would be satisfied, and the
man would stand right with respect to it, nor would it have any further claim
on him, in the way of punishment, more than on a person who had never
transgressed. Therefore he thenceforward obeying the law, might as truly be
justified on the foot of mere law, as if he had rendered the same obedience,
without ever transgressing.

BUT Dr. C. holds, that mankind universally have sinned, and consequently
cannot be justified upon a claim founded on mere law P. 43.
. And P. 34.
that the whole world had become guilty before God, and were therefore
incapable of being justified upon the foot of mere law. That all men are P. 36.
incapable of justification upon the foot of mere law, as having become guilty
before GOD. To the same effect in various other passages. So that according to
Dr. C. if future punishment be intended to satisfy the law, it is equally
impossible, that all men should be saved, as it is on the supposition, that
future punishment is intended to satisfy justice.

3. Dr. C. ALLOWS, that a man having suffered the penalty of the law, is not,
and cannot be, the object of forgiveness. P. 336.
If they are not saved, till after they have passed through these torments,
they have never been forgiven -- The divine law has taken its course; nor has
any intervening pardon prevented the full execution of the threatened penalty
on them. Forgiveness strictly and literally speaking, has not been granted to
them. But if those who suffer the penalty of the law, are not, in their
subsequent exemption from punishment, the objects of forgiveness, they suffer
all they deserve. So far as they are exempted from deserved punishment, they
are forgiven: forgiveness means nothing else than an exemption from deserved
punishment.

4. Dr. C. says, that Adam (and for the same reason doubtless men in general)
must have rendered himself obnoxious to the righteous resentment of his GOD and
KING, had he expressed a disregard to any command 5 Dissertations P. 55.
of the moral law, the law of which the Doctor is speaking in that passage. But
the righteous resentment of GOD for transgression is a just punishment of
transgression; and a just punishment is any punishment, which is not unjust.
And it is impossible that Adam should be obnoxious to such a punishment, if the
law, the most strict rule of GOD's proceedings with his creatures, had not
threatened it. -- Thus Dr. C. himself grants, that the punishment threatened in
the law is the same which is deserved according to strict justice.

THE Doctor every where holds, that "the law of GOD is a perfect rule of
righteousness Particularly 12 Sermons P. 36.
." But if the law do not threaten all the punishment which is justly deserved
by sin, it is no more truly a perfect rule of righteousness, than the gospel
is. -- Again; Is the law that rule of right, which GOD knows to be the measure
of men's duty to him, and of what is fit he should do for, or inflict upon
them, as they are either obedient, or disobedient? There is, without all doubt,
such a rule of men's duty toward GOD, and of GOD's conduct toward men, in a
way of reward or punishment, according to their works. (...)
There could scarcely be a more explicit concession, that the divine law
threatens all that punishment, which is acording to justice. It is declared to
be, not only the rule of right, but the measure of what is fit in punishment,
as well as of duty. Indeed Dr. C. never once, so far as I have noticed,
suggests the idea, that the divine law does not threaten all that punishment,
which is deserved by sin.

5. ACCORDING to this objection, the moral law is a dispensation of grace, as
truly as the gospel. But how does this accord with the scripture? That
declares, that "the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth," or the
gracious truth, "came by JESUS CHRIST;" Joh. I. 17. -- "If they which are of
the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect.
Because the law works wrath. -- Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by
grace;" Romans IV. 14. -- "The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is
the law;" 1 Cor. XV. 56. -- As in the objection now under consideration, the
law is supposed to be as really a dispensation of grace, as the gospel; we may
say, The strength of sin is the gospel, as truly as, The strength of sin is the
law. -- Beside; if the law be a dispensation of grace, how can it be said to be
the strength of sin? It threatens a part only of the punishment deserved by
sin; and therefore it neither points out, how strong sin is, to bring into
condemnation, nor does it give to sin its proper force to terrify and torment
the sinner, by exhibiting the whole punishment deserved by sin. On the ground
of this objection, the strength of sin consists in the rule of strict justice,
not in the law.

6. The apostle tells us, that "by the law is the knowledge of sin." But the
knowledge of the evil or demerit of sin is obtained by the knowledge of the
threatening of the law only. If the law do not threaten all that punishment,
which sin deserves, we know not by the law, what sin deserves, or how evil it
is. -- And if we know not this by the law, neither do we (...) by any (...)
means whatever. Nor do we know our own demerit, nor our own proper characters
as sinners; nor are we in any capacity to judge concerning our obligation to
gratitude for the redemption of CHRIST, or for salvation through him; nor have
we the the proper motive to repentance set before us, in all the scriptures.
The proper motive to repentance is the evil of sin. -- And if we have not the
knowledge of the evil of sin, it is impossible we should know the grace of
pardon, or of salvation from that punishment which is justly deserved by sin.

7. The apostle declares, as we have seen, that "by the law is the knowledge of
sin," and that "the law works wrath." But on the principle of this objection,
by the law is the knowledge of grace, and the law works grace: and GOD
without any atonement did grant to sinners some remission or mitigation of
deserved punishment. Why then could not complete remission or pardon have been
granted in the same way? What need was there of CHRIST and his death? Yet Dr.
C. holds, that it was with a view to the obedience and death of CHRIST, upon
this account, upon this ground, for this reason, that GOD was pleased to make
the gospel promise of a glorious immortality to the miserable sons of men."

8. IF the full punishment to which the sinner justly exposes himself by sin,
be not pointed out in the law; it is not a good law, as it does not teach the
subject of the law the truth in this matter; but it is a deceitful law, or is
directly calculated to deceive. It threatens a punishment, which the subject
would naturally believe to be the whole punishment to which he is exposed by
transgression, or which can be justly inflicted on him. -- But this, if the
objection be well grounded, is by no means the case. Thus the law would
naturally tend to deceive fatally all its subjects.

9. From what is granted by Dr. C. it certainly follows, that the threatening
of the law is all that can be inflicted consistently with justice, and that the
punishment threatened in the law, and that which is allowed by strict justice,
is one and the same. He says, "Whatever sin may in its own nature, be supposed
to deserve; it is not reasonable to suppose, that it should be universally
reckoned to death, when no law is in being that makes death the special penalty
of transgression."* -- "Sin is not reckoned, brought to account, ought not to
be looked upon as being taxed with the forfeiture of life, when there is no law
in being, with death as its asffixed sanction." Therefore whatever sin may be
supposed to deserve, it is not reasonable, that it should be reckoned, it ought
not to be reckoned, or which is the same thing, it is not just, that it should
be reckoned to any punishment whatever, when there is no law in being, which
makes that punishment the special penalty of transgression. Therefore, as I
said, the punishment threatened in the law, is all which can be inflicted
consistently with justice; and the punishment threatened in the law, and that
which is allowed by strict justice, are one and the same.

10. If the law do not threaten all that punishment, which is just, we cannot
possibly tell what is a just punishment, or what justice threatens or admits
with regard to punishment, and what it does not admit. If once we give up the
law and the testimony, we are left to our own imaginations. Dr. C. holds, that
the wages of sin are the second death, and that this death is a punishment
which shall last, according to the language of scripture, for ever and ever.
Are these wages, and this punishment which shall continue for ever and ever,
adequate to the demand of justice or not? If they are, then the law threatens
all which justice requires. -- If they are not; then the wages of sin, and the
punishment for ever and ever, are a gracious punishment, and sinners deserve a
longer punishment. But how do we know, that sinners deserve a longer
punishment, than this? No longer punishment is threatened in the law, or in any
part of scripture.

11. IF sin deserve a longer punishment, than that which is threatened in the
law, it deserves either an endless punishment, or a temporary punishment longer
than that which is threatened in the law. But if sin deserve an endless
punishment, it is an infinite evil. -- If it deserve a temporary punishment
though longer than that which is threatened in the law, all men may finally be
saved, even though the state of future punishment be intended to satisfy the
divine justice: the contrary of which however is asserted by Dr. C.

12. IF the damned, though they shall be punished according to law, will not be
punished as much as they deserve; what shall we make of the scriptures, which
declare, that they shall have judgment without mercy; that GOD will not spare,
nor pity them; that wrath shall be poured upon them without mixture? etc.

I NOW appeal to the reader, whether, notwithstanding this objection, the
damned, in suffering the whole penalty thretened in the divine law, do not
suffer as much as they deserve according to strict justice, and therefore
suffer a penalty to the highest degree vindictive.

IV. IF it should be further objected, that there is no inconsistency in
representing future punishment to be fully adequate to the demerit of sin; and
yet to represent it as disciplinary, and adapted to the repentance and personal
good of the patient: as both the ends of the personal good of the patient, and
of the satisfaction of justice, are answered by it: it is to be noticed,

1. IF this objection mean, that the punishment which is merely adapted to the
personal good of the patient, be all which is deserved by sin; I beg leave to
refer the objector to the next chapter.

2. IF it mean, that though sin do deserve, and the damned will suffer, more
punishment, than that which is conducive to the personal good of the patient;
even all that punishment which is according to strict justice; yet all will be
saved finally: then it will follow that an endless punishment is not deserved
by sin. In this case, I beg leave to refer the objector to chapter VI.

3. STILL on the foundation of this objection, the damned, as they will have
previously suffered all that they deserve, will finally be delivered from
further suffering of wrath, not by forgiveness, not by grace, nor through
CHRIST; but entirely on the footing of strict justice, as having suffered the
full penalty of the law.

4. Dr. C. COULD not consistently make this objection. The objection holds,
that the damned do suffer a punishment entirely satisfactory to justice: and
Dr. C. allows, that if the punishment of the wicked be intended to satisfy the
justice of GOD, and give warning to others, it is impossible all men should be
saved P. 11.
.

HAVING in this first chapter, so far attended to Dr. C's system concerning
future punishment, as to find, that it appears to be a combination of the most
jarring principles; and having particularly pointed out the mutual discordance
of those principles; I might spare myself the labor of a further examination
of his book; until at least it should be made to appear, that those principles
do in reality harmonize with each other. -- But as some may entertain the
opinion, that though there be inconsistences in the Book, yet the general
doctrine of universal salvation is true, and is defensible, if not on all the
grounds, on which Dr. C. has undertaken the defense of it, yet on some of them
at least; therefore I have determined to proceed to a more particular
examination of this doctrine, and of the arguments brought by Dr. C. in support
of it.

CHAP. II. Whether the damned deserve any other punishment, than that which is
conducive to their personal good.
ON the supposition, that future punishment is a mere discipline necessary and
happily conducive to the repentance and good of the damned; it may be asked,
whether such discipline be all which they deserve, and which can consistently
with strict justice be inflicted; or whether they do indeed deserve a greater
degree or duration of punishment, than that which is sufficient to lead them to
repentance, and that additional punishment be by grace remitted to them. Let us
consider both these hypotheses.

THE first is, that the wicked deserve, according to strict justice, no more
punishment, than is necessary to lead them to repentance, and to prepare them
for happiness. -- That this is not a mere hypothesis made by an opponent of Dr.
C. but is a doctrine implied at least, if not expressly asserted in his book,
may appear by the following quotations. P. 321, 322.
Is it not far more reasonable to suppose, that the miseries of the other world
are a proper discipline in order to accomplish this end [the recovery of
sinners] "than that they should be final and vindictive only?" If a final and
vindictive punishment be entirely just, what has reason to object to the
infliction of it, in some instances at least? -- P. 324.
The consideration of hell as a purging fire, is that only which can make the
matter sit easy on one's mind. But if hell, though not merely a purging fire,
be justly deserved, why does not the thought of it sit easy on one's mind? So
that it is manifestly implied in this reasoning of Dr. C. that no other
punishment of the wicked can be reconciled with justice, than that which is
adapted to their personal good.

THE same is implicitly asserted by other writers on the same side of the
question concerning future punishment. Bishop Newton, in his Dissertation on
the final state of mankind, As transcribed in the Monthly Review for March 1783.
says, It is just and wise and good, and even merciful, to correct a sinner as
long as he deserves correction; to whip and scourge him, as I may say, out of
his faults. Therefore all the punishment of the sinner, which is just, and
which he deserves, is correction, or to be scourged out of his faults. The
Chevalier Ramsay tells us, that Justice is that perfection in GOD, by which he
endevaours to make all intelligences just Principles of Not. and Rev'd
Religion, Vol. I. P. 432.
. Vindictive justice, is that attribute in GOD, by which he pursues vice with
all sorts of torments, till it be totally extirpated, destroyed and
annihilated. Therefore if GOD inflict any punishment with any other design,
than to make the subject of that punishment just, and to extirpate vice from
him, he violates even vindictive justice. M. Petitpierre in a tract lately
published in England, and highly applauded by some, declares, that repentance
appeases divine anger, and disarms its justice; because it accomplishes the end
infinite goodness has in view, even when arrayed in the awful majesty of
avenging justice; which was severe, because the moral state of the sinner
required such discipline; and which when that state is reversed, by conversion
and holiness, will have nothing to bestow suitable to it, but the delightful
manifestations of mercy and forgiveness.** The honor of the divine law is
sufficiently guarded by the punishment of the sinner as long as he remains
impenitent, and by the faithful and obedient adherence of the penitent
offender. Divine justice is always satisfied when it attains its end; and this
end is always attained, whenever the sinner is brought to repentance. Ibid. 112.
So that it is evident, that all these writers implicitly held the proposition
now under consideration, which is, that the wicked deserve according to strict
justice, no more punishment than is necessary to lead them to repentance, and
prepare them for happiness. This is not only a real tenet of those writers, but
is most essential and important to their system; for if the contrary can be
established, consequences will follow, which will greatly embarrass, if not
entirely overthrow that system. I therefore beg the patience of the reader,
while I particularly examine that tenet: Concerning it the following
observations may be made,

1. IT implies that the punishment which is necessary to lead the wicked to
repentance is the curse of the divine law. Without doubt that punishment which
amounts to the utmost, which strict justice admits, includes the penalty or
curse of the divine law. The latter does not exceed the former; because the
divine law is founded in perfect justice, and whatever is inconsistent with
justice, is equally inconsistent with the divine law. If therefore the sinner
deserve, according to strict justice, precisely so much punishment as is
necessary to lead him to repentance and no more, then this is the true and
utmost curse of the divine law. -- Yet such a punishment as this, is really
(...) whole no evil, and therefore no curse even to the subject; because by the
supposition it is necessary to lead him to repentance, and prepare him for the
everlasting joys and glory of heaven.

Dr. C. has given us his idea of a curse, in his Five Dissertations, P. 109 110.
in the following words, "A testimony of the divine displeasure against man's
offense": "A testimony of the vengeance of GOD, which is a judgment on his part
and a real evil on man's part." In the same book, P. 112.
he states his idea of a blessing to a man, to be, "That which is greatly to
his advantage." But the pains of hell, if they be absolutely necessary, and
most happily conducive to the repentance and endless happiness of the damned,
are no real evil on their part, nor any judgment or testimony of vengeance on
GOD's part: and therefore are no curse at all; but are according to the
Doctor's own definition a real blessing, and a real testimony of the
benevolence of GOD to the damned. Surely a medicine of disagreeable taste, but
absolutely necessary to preserve the life, or restore the health of a man, and
administered with consummate judgment, is no evil or curse to the man to whom
it is administered; but is a desirable good, or a blessing to him; and the
administration of it, is a full proof of the benevolence of the physician to
his patient. A proof equally demonstrative of the divine benevolence to the
damned, is the whole of their punishment in hell, if it be designed merely to
lead them to repentance and to prepare them for happiness: and this fruit of
the divine benevolence can, according to Dr. C's own definition of a curse, be
no curse.

IT is granted by Dr. C. and in general by other advocates for universal
salvation, that the torments of hell are not only wisely adapted, but that they
are absolutely necessary to lead the damned to repentance; that no more gentle
means would so well answer the proposed end; that therefore the divine goodness
and wisdom have chosen and applied those torments, as the means of good to the
damned. But certainly that which is on the whole necessary for a person's own
good, is to him, on the whole, no real evil, and therefore no curse; but a
good, a blessing; a wise man would choose it for himself, as it is, in its
connection, really and properly eligible or desirable. If the torments of hell
taken in connection with repentance and endless happiness be a curse, then
repentance and endless happiness taken in connection with the torments of hell,
are a curse too. If some bitter pill, considered as connected with life, be a
curse; than life connected with that pill, is a curse too. That and that only
is a curse to a person, which taken in its proper connections and dependences,
renders him more miserable, than he would be without it. On the contrary, that
is a blessing to a person, which taken in its proper connections and
dependences, renders him more happy than he would be without it. It is just as
great a blessing and just as great a privilege, as happiness itself. And with
what propriety this can be called a curse, I appeal to every man acquainted
with propriety of language to determine. To call this a curse is to confound a
curse and a blessing. -- This being the true idea of a curse and a blessing, it
immediately follows on the supposition now under consideration, that the
torments of hell are no curse, but a blessing to those on whom they are
inflicted; because the very supposition is, that they are necessary to secure
and promote their happiness and are inflicted for this end only.

THE absurdity then, to which on the whole we are reduced is, that those means,
which are the best that infinite wisdom itself could devise and apply, for the
salvation of those who die in impenitence, are the curse of the divine law; and
that the greatest evil which God can consistently with justice inflict on the
greatest and most obdurate enemy of himself, of his Son our glorious Savior,
of his law, of his grace, and of mankind, is, to put him under the best
possible advantages to secure and promote his highest everlasting happiness:
Which is no more nor less than to say, That the greatest curse which God can
consistently with his perfections inflict on the sinner dying in impenitence,
is to bestow on him the greatest blessing, which it is in the power of
omnipotence and infinite bounty to bestow on him, in his present temper of
mind; that the divine law has no curse at all annexed to it; and that the
penalty of the law is an inestimable blessing, the blessing of repentance, or
of that discipline, which is absolutely necessary, and most wisely adapted to
lead to repentance, and to prepare for the greatest happiness.

IF on this view of the matter, it should be said, that the punishment of hell
is not the greatest blessing which God can bestow on the sinner who dies in
impenitence; that it would be a greater blessing, to grant him repentance by
immediate efficacious grace, and then receive him to heavenly happiness; --
Concerning this I observe, that it gives up the only ground, on which the
supposition now under consideration rests, and on which alone it can be
supported. The supposition is, that the punishment of hell is inflicted with
the sole view of leading the sufferers to repentance, and of promoting their
good. But if their good might be as effectually secured and promoted by other
means, as is now asserted, then the torments of hell are not inflicted to
promote the good of the sufferers. So far as their good is concerned, those
torments are needless, nay they are a wanton exercise of cruelty. But as
cruelty cannot be ascribed to the only wise God, he must, if this objection be
valid, inflict the torments of hell, for some other end, than the final
happiness of those who are sent to that world of misery.

BESIDE; Dr. C. and other opposers of endless punishment, are no friends to the
doctrine of efficacious grace. According to their system, efficacious grace
destroys all liberty and moral agency, and reduces men to mere machines.
Therefore in their view, to be led to repentance by efficacious grace, is not a
greater blessing, than to be led to repentance by the torments of hell; because
it is not a greater blessing to be a watch or a windmill than to be a rational
moral agent. Nay, according to their system, there is no possibility of leading
by efficacious grace any man to a repentence which is of a holy or of a moral
nature: because according to their system, a necessary holiness is no holiness,
and a necessary repentance is no more of a moral nature, than the working of a
machine.

2. IF all who are saved, be delivered from wrath on account of the merit of
Christ in any sense, then that punishment, which leads to repentance, is not
the curse of the law, or is not all the punishment which justice admits. They
who suffer the curse of the law, satisfy the law, and therefore stand in no
need of the merit of Christ to satisfy the law or to deliver them from the
curse of it. They can no longer consistently with justice be holden under that
curse. To hold such persons still under the curse of the law, unless they can
obtain an interest in the merit of Christ, can never be reconciled with the
moral perfection of God. Yet this is the very fact, if that punishment which
leads to repentance be the curse of the law and at the same time, as Dr. C.
abundantly holds, salvation in the deliverance from wrath, as well as in the
bestowment of positive happiness, be granted to no man, but on account of the
merit of Christ.

3. ON this hypothesis, our Lord Jesus Christ will not save all men, nor will
all men be saved, whether by Christ, or without him. -- Deliverance from the
curse of the law is essential to salvation. But if the curse of the law be that
punishment, which is necessary to lead to repentance; and if, as the advocates
for universal salvation hold, a great part of mankind will suffer this
punishment; it follows, that a great part of mankind will not be saved. For to
be saved, and yet to suffer the curse of the law, is a direct contradiction. To
suffer the curse of the law is to be damned, and is all the damnation to which
any sinner is exposed, and to which justice, the most strict and rigorous
justice, can doom him. If then any man have suffered this damnation, from what
is he or can he be saved? Certainly from nothing, because he is exposed to
nothing: unless we say, that by the just law of the God of perfect justice, he
is exposed to unjust punishment.

IF to this argument it be objected, that though all men are not saved from the
curse of the law, whether by Christ, or without him; yet all are finally
admitted to happiness; those who repent in this life, are admitted to happiness
through the merits of Christ; those who die impenitent, are admitted to the
same, in consequence of enduring in their own persons, the curse of the law:
and that this is all which is intended by the salvation of all men: -- with
respect to this I observe.

(1) THIS is no proper salvation, which in its primary meaning signifies a
deliverance from evil. But according to the case now stated, some men are not
delivered from any evil, to which they ever were exposed; but suffer it all.
Therefore they are not saved.

(2) That this objection entirely sets aside, with regard to a great part of
mankind, salvation in the way of forgiveness of sin, and the free grace of God
in the pardon of the sinner, which is contrary to the whole gospel.

But to proceed; as Christ, on the present hypothesis, does not in fact save
all men; so it would be no favor to them, for him to attempt the salvation of
all those who die impenitent. An attempt to deliver them from the curse of the
law, would be an attempt to deprive them of the most necessary, wise, desirable
and merciful means of grace, on which their eternal happiness depends: an
attempt not to deliver them from any thing which on the whole is an evil, a
disadvantage even to themselves; but to deprive them of that on which their
supreme interest depends; of that which is in fact the greatest good, which
they, in their present temper can enjoy, and the greatest blessing which at
present God can possibly bestow on them. -- Now to deprive them of this, is
certainly no favor, nor any fruit of grace, mercy or goodness to them
personally. Even to take them to heaven, before they have passed through this
discipline would by no means be so great a favor to them, as to cause them to
pass through this discipline; as it would be to take them to heaven before they
were prepared for it, or could enjoy happiness in it.

FURTHER; if the curse of the law be that punishment, which is necessary to
lead to repentance, then Christ came not to deliver from the curse of the law,
all who are to be finally happy, but to inflict that curse on a part of them.
Christ is exalted to be a prince and a Savior to give repentance and
forgiveness of sins. It is a part of his office, to bring men to repentance, by
all wise and proper means. Dr. C. and other advocates for universal salvation,
suppose, that hell torments are the means, and most wise, proper and necessary
means too, by which Christ will execute the work of giving repentance to all
the damned. Therefore his work as a savior, so far as respects them, is, on
Dr. C's plan, not to deliver them from the curse of the law, but to inflict
that curse on them. But who is not struck with the contrariety of this idea, to
the constant, uniform declarations of scripture, that Christ came to redeem us
from the curse of the law, to save us from wrath, to deliver us from the wrath
to come, etc.

WILL it be said in opposition to the last observation, that those who die in
impenitence, are not saved in any sense by or through Christ, whether by his
atonement, or by him as God's prime minister, in the fullness of times bringing
all to repentance; and that therefore Christ is not come to inflict the curse
of the law on any who shall be finally happy? Then let it never more be
pleaded, that Christ is the savior of all men; that he gave himself a ransom
for all; that he tasted death for every man; that the grace of God, and the
gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto the many,
(meaning all men) that by the righteousness of one the free gift shall come
upon all men to justification of life; that Christ must reign, till he shall
have put all enemies under his feet, in genuine repentance; that peace being
made by the blood of the cross, it pleased the father by Christ to reconcile
all things to himself. For if Christ shall not finally have saved all men by
his merit, nor shall have led them to repentance in the execution of the scheme
of providence; in what sense can the salvation of all men be ascribed to
Christ? In what conceivable sense can he be called the Savior of all men? --
Therefore if any adopt the idea of the objection just stated, let them never
more plead in favor of the salvation of all men, any of those passages of
scripture referred to above, nor any passage, which relates to salvation by
Christ.

BESIDE; if the damned be led to repentance by the torments of hell, by whom
are those torments inflicted? Not by Christ it seems, because that would imply,
that Christ came not to deliver all who shall be finally happy, from the curse
of the law; but to inflict that curse on a part of them. By whom then will
those torments, those most excellent means of grace, be administered? Is not
Christ the judge of all men? The father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the son. We must all stand at his judgment seat and receive
according to that which we shall have done in the body whether good or evil:
and he will say; Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels.

4. IF the penalty of the law consist in that punishment, which is necessary to
lead to repentance, then all the damned, if brought to repentance at all, are
delivered out of hell, not on the footing of grace and mercy, or of favor and
goodness; but on the footing of the strictest justice; not on the footing of
the gospel, but of the rigor of law. -- By the present hypothesis, the damned
all suffer that punishment, which is necessary to lead them to repentance, and
therein suffer the curse of the law, or all that punishment which the utmost
rigor of law and justice denounces or can inflict. If the Deity himself were
to proceed in punishing, one step beyond this line, he would exceed the bounds
of justice, would rise in opposition to his own perfections, would deny
himself; in short, would no longer be God. Therefore as soon as a sinner in
hell is brought to repentance, he must be immediately released. Nor is he under
obligation to plead for grace or favor; he may demand rele^^^ on the footing
of personal justice. He is under no necessity to have recourse to the gospel,
he may insist on his personal right, on the footing of the law. He has
satisfied the law; he has satisfied the justice of God; it has taken its
course on him; he has nothing more to fear from it; and he must be delivered
from further punishment or else he is injured, he is oppressed.

NAY; to plead for mercy or favor in order to his deliverance, is not merely
needless; it is out of character, it is degrading himself who stands right with
respect to the law, to the place of one who is obnoxious to still further
punishment. It implies that he is ignorant of his own character and relation to
the Deity and his law. Equally out of character would he act, if on his
deliverance, he should render praise or thanks, either to God the father, or to
his son Jesus Christ. Surely a man condemned by a civil judge, to receive forty
stripes save one, after he has recived them, is under no obligation to render
praise or thanks for his release, either to the judge or to the executive
officer.

BUT how are these things reconcilable with the scriptures? Surely these
consequences fairly deducible from the hypothesis under consideration, are
entirely inconsistent with the gospel; and the hypothesis itself cannot
consistently be embraced by any believer in the New Testament.

PARTICULARLY: This hypothesis precludes all possibility of forgiveness of the
damned, even, on the supposition that they are finally to be admitted to
heavenly happiness. -- Forgiveness implies, that the sinner forgiven is not
punished in his own person, according to law and justice. But on the hypothesis
under consideration in this chapter, all the damned, are in their own persons
punished according to law and justice, in that they suffer that punishment,
which is necessary to lead them to repentance. Who would think of telling a
man, who has in his own person, received the corporal punishment, to which he
had been condemned, that the crime for which he received that punishment, is
freely forgiven him! This would be adding insult to the rigor of justice. --
But according to the scriptures, it seems there is no salvation on the footing
of the law, or without forgiveness. Therefore either it must be made to appear,
that the scriptures do admit the idea, that some men will be received to heaven
on the footing of law, and without forgiveness of sins; or the hypothesis, that
the punishment, which is sufficient to lead to repentance, is the curse of the
law, must be renounced.

5. ALL men who are by any means brought to repentance, whether by the torment
of hell or any other cause, are on the footing of justice entitled to perfect
subsequent impunity. By the supposition, the sole just end of all the
punishment inflicted by the Deity, is the repentance of the sinner. But this
end is already obtained in all who are the subjects of repentance. Therefore to
punish them is to inflict pain or misery for no just end whatever. But that the
Deity should inflict misery for no just end, is for him to commit injustice and
wanton cruelty, which is impossible. What then is become of the curse or
penalty of the divine law? The apostle declares, "Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the book of the law to do them." This
seems to import, that every transgressor is exposed to a curse. But he who
transgresses in ever so many instances, and then whether sooner or later
repents, whether his repentance be effected by mercies, or by judgments, or by
any other cause, is exposed to no curse, no punishment whatever; nor can
without injustice be made the subject of any. On this scheme, if there be any
curse in the law, it must, be repentance itself. By the curse of the law, is
doubtless meant the ill consequence, to which the sinner is by law and justice
subjected, on account of his transgression. -- BUT according to the scheme now
before us, repenttance, whenever and by what cause soever it may exist in a
sinner, is all the ill consequence (if it may be so called) to which he is by
law and justice subjected on account of any sin or sins. This therefore with
respect to him is the whole curse of the law, and can this be true? "Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us." But
has Christ redeemed us from repentance? and did he effect that redemption, by
becoming himself a penitent?

6. ON the hypothesis, that no man can be justly punished for any other end,
than his own personal good; no man commits any sin or moral evil, by any damage
which he does, or can do, to any being beside himself; and the whole evil of
sin consists in this, that by it a man does more or less damage to himself; but
he never does, nor can possibly commit sin, by dishonouring or doing damage to
any other being created or divine, only so far as, in the same action, he does
damage to himself personally considered -- If God never do nor can justly
punish a sinner, for any other end, than to lead him to repentance and to
promote his good; and if all just punishment be a mere discipline necessary and
wholesome to the recipient; then punishment inflicted for any other end is
unjust. It is unjust to punish a sinner on account of any contempt of the
Deity, any opposition to his designs, to his cause or kingdom in the world, or
on account of any abuses of any man or men, excepting so far as he damages
himself at the same time. If it be just to punish a sinner for any of those
sins, further, or in any other respect, than as he damages himself; it is just
to punish him for other end or ends, than his own personal good; which is
contrary to the supposition. -- But if it be unjust to punish for actions in
any other respect than as in those actions a man damages himself or his own
interest; it must be because there is no moral evil in those actions, on any
other account, or in any other view of them, than that by them he does a damage
to himself, and the whole evil of sin must consist in this, that it is
disadvantageous to the sinner's own interest or happiness. The end of all
punishment is the removal or prevention of evil: and the evil to be removed or
prevented by punishment, and which is the only ground of punishment, is the
only evil of sin. But the hypothesis which we are opposing throughout this
chapter is, that the only just ends of punishment, are the repentance and good
of the sinner himself; that is, the removal or prevention of personal evil to
the sinner, is the only just end of punishing him. Of course this personal evil
to the sinner, is the only just ground of punishing him, and is the whole evil
of sin.

NOW if this be the whole evil of sin, and it deserve punishment on no other
account than this; no wonder there is such opposition made to the doctrine of
endless punishment. For truly, if the nature and evil of sin be such, as has
been just now stated, not only the endless punishment of it is unjust, but any
punishment of however short duration is unjust; because sin carries its own
full punishment in itself. All that punishment which it deserves, is either
contained in sin at the time it is committed, or it follows afterward, as a
natural and necessary consequence, without any pain inflicted by the Deity; and
to inflict any the least pain on the sinner, as a punishment of his sin, is
manifestly unjust and absurd. -- If a child, in consequence of thrusting its
finger into a candle, should suffer great pain, surely it would not, beside
that pain, deserve chastisement: because all the evil of its imprudence
consists in bringing on itself that pain, and that pain itself is the full
punishment of the imprudence. Therefore to inflict any further punishment must
be unjust and cruel. -- To apply this; all the moral evil of which the sinner
is guilty, consists in bringing pain or loss on himself, and to punish him for
this, is as absurd, as to punish the child just supposed; or to punish a man
because he will walk with pebbles in his shoes, will whip himself, or will
bring on himself the pain of hunger, by going without his ordinary meal.

7. ON this hypothesis, he that repents, shall be saved, from what? from that
wise, wholesome and necessary discipline, which cannot be justly inflicted,
after he becomes a penitent; or in other words, he shall be saved from a
punishment which is entirely unjust. -- Therefore the promises of salvation to
those who repent, amount to nothing more than assurances; that GOD will not
abuse, injure or rob them of their personal rights. But do we want so many
"exceeding great and precious promises," to assure us of this? Or are these
promises so exceeding great and precious, as it seems they were in the judgment
of an apostle? Have we not abundant evidence of the same truth, from the moral
rectitude of the Deity, without the aid of even a single promise?

8. IF the sinner deserve no more punishment, than is necessary to lead to
repentance, then he experiences much more of the grace and mercy of GOD, while
he is in hell, than he does while he is on earth, or than he does in his
deliverance from hell. In hell he enjoys those means of grace which are far
better and more wisely and effectually calculated to secure his everlasting
happiness, than those means which he enjoys on earth. In hell he receives real
and demonstrative tokens of the divine grace and mercy in that discipline which
is so necessary and so happily conducive to his everlasting happiness. But in
deliverance from hell on his repentance, he receives no favor; his deliverance
is a mere act of justice which cannot be denied him.

9. ON the same hypothesis, the curse of the law, and the greatest, most
necessary and most desirable mean of grace with respect to the impenitent, are
one and the same thing. This is so plain, that not a word need be said to
elucidate it. Therefore if Christ were to save any man from the curse of the
law, he would deprive him of the best mean of grace, which he does or can
enjoy; and this salvation itself, so far from a blessing to the sinner, would
be an infinitely greater curse, then the curse of the law; because it would
deprive him of a necessary and most excellent mean of grace, the punishment
which is necessary to lead him to repentance. Nor would the gift of Christ
himself, his incarnation, sufferings, death, atonement, or any thing which he
has done, or can possibly do, to save us from the curse of the law, be any
favor or blessing to the person to be saved, but utterly the reverse. It is
evidently no blessing to any man personally, but the reverse, that any measures
should be taken to deprive him of the best and most necessary mean of grace,
without which he would not be prepared for heaven and could not be admitted to
it.

10. THE doctrine, that the sinner deserves no more punishment, than is
necessary to lead to repentance, confutes itself in this respect; that while it
holds forth, that no punishment can justly be inflicted on the sinner, but that
which is merely disciplinary, at the same time it supposes, that such a
punishment is in fact inflicted on all the damned, as is to the highest degree
vindictive. What is a proper vindictive punishment, but that which satisfies
the demands of law and justice? But that such a punishment is inflicted on all
the damned, is supposed by all who espouse the principle, which I am now
opposing. Therefore in that very doctrine, in which they mean to oppose all
vindictive punishment, they in the fullest sense hold it, by holding that such
punishment as is conducive to the good of the sufferer, is all which justice
admits.

IF they should say, that the punishment of the damned is not merely
vindictive; but at the same time disciplinary too, and therefore just: though
if it were merely vindictive, it would be unjust: I answer, the present
question entirely respects punishment which is merely disciplinary. Therefore
to allow, that the punishment of the damned is partly vindictive, is to give up
this question, and to substitute another. -- Beside; if a vindictive punishment
be unjust, how can it become just by being connected with a punishment, which
is just? To correct a child, to gratify a malicious temper, is doubtless
unjust. Now, if a man correct his child from two motives, partly from malice,
and partly from a view to the good of the child; the justice of his conduct, so
far as he is influenced by the latter motive, can never render his conduct
just, so far as it proceeds from the former.

A vindictive punishment is that which is inflicted with a design to support
the authority of a broken law, and of a despised government: And if the
punishment be just, it is at the same time according to the conduct or demerit
of the transgressor. This is demanded by every law; and if the law be just, it
is justly demanded: Or in other words, such a punishment of the transgression
of a just law, as is sufficient to support the authority of that law, is a just
punishment. At the same time it is a punishment as truly, and to as high a
degree vindictive, as justice will admit. Now if that punishment which is
necessary to lead the sinner to repentance, be sufficient thus to support the
authority and dignity of the divine law and government, and be inflicted for
this end; it is to the highest degree vindictive, and designedly vindictive. If
it be not sufficient to answer those ends, it is not the whole punishment,
which the divine law and justice demand: For as I have before observed, every
just and wise law demands that punishment which is necessary to its own support
or existence, and justice and wisdom enforce this demand.

Therefore let the advocates for universal salvation make their choice. If they
shall choose to hold agreeably to the present supposition, that such punishment
as is necessary to lead to repentance, is all that can justly be inflicted on
the sinner, and that therefore it is sufficient to support the authority and
dignity of the divine law and government; they stand convicted of holding, that
the punishment of the damned is by no means merely disciplinary, but to the
highest degree vindictive. If on the other hand, they choose to hold, that the
punishment which is necessary to lead the sinner to repentance, is not adequate
to the purposes before mentioned; then they must renounce the principle, which
we have been so long considering, and allow the divine law does denounce a
further punishment, than that which is necessary to lead the sinner to
repentance, and is a mere discipline. Because the divine law being perfectly
just, does justly, and must necessarily admit of that punishment, which is
sufficient to its own support or existence. -- Thus on either supposition, they
must renounce a very favorite tenet.

11. WITH what propriety can we talk of satisfying the law by repentance, or by
that punishment, which is necessary to lead to repentance; when the law says
not a word expressly concerning repentance, either in consequence of
punishment, or without it? By the law is the knowledge of sin; but by it we
know nothing of any good, to be obtained by repentance, whether in the way of
favor, or in the way of justice. The doctrine of any advantage to be obtained
by repentance, is a doctrine of the gospel only, not of the law. Yet if it be
unjust to punish a sinner with any other view, than to lead him to repentance,
this doctrine would undoubtedly be found in the law. The voice of the law is,
not cursed is every one that transgresses, and does not repent: But cursed is
every one that continues not in all things written in the book of the law to
do them.

12. From the principle, that sin deserves no other punishment, than that which
is subservient to the good of the sinner, it will follow, that what we call
sin, is no moral evil.

IT seems to be a dictate of reason and the common sense of mankind, that moral
evil should be followed, or deserves to be followed, with natural evil or with
pain and shame: and that this natural evil be a real evil to the sinner, an
evil to him on the whole. But that evil, which is necessary and subservient to
a man's personal good, is to him no real evil; but on the whole is, even to him
personally, a good, a blessing, and not a curse. Now it is not a dictate of
reason and common sense, that moral evil deserves a blessing. That which
deserves a blessing and no curse, is no moral evil. Therefore if sin deserve no
other punishment than that which is subservient to the personal good of the
sinner, it is no moral evil.

IF it be said to be no dictate of common sense, that moral evil should be
followed with natural evil: it may be answered, that surely it is not a dictate
of common sense, that it be followed, with natural good. This would imply, that
it deserves a reward. -- Nor is it a dictate of common sense, that it be
followed with neither natural good nor natural evil. This would imply, that it
is worthy of neither praise nor blame, reward nor punishment; and therefore is
neither a moral good nor a moral evil. Both which conclusions are absurd.
Therefore it remains, that it is a dictate of reason and common sense, that
moral evil be followed with natural evil. -- Or if it be further urged, that it
is a dictate of common sense, that moral evil considering the infinite goodness
and mercy of God, should be followed with no natural evil; it is to be
observed, that this is giving up the ground of justice, and going on that of
goodness and mercy, which is entirely foreign to the subject of this chapter.
The inquiry of this chapter is what sin deserves on the footing of justice, not
what it will actually suffer on the footing the divine infinite goodness and
mercy. This latter inquiry shall be carefully attended to in its place, chapter
VIII.

AGAIN; Moral evil is in itself, or in its own nature, odious and the proper
object of disapprobation and abhorrence. By its own nature I mean its tendency
to evil, the dishonor of the Deity and the misery or diminution of the
happiness of the created system. Therefore it is not injurious to the person
who perpetrates moral evil, to disapprove, hate and abhor it in itself, aside
from all consideration of the consequences of such disapprobation, whether such
consequences be to the perpetrator personally good or bad. Hence it follows,
that it is not injurious to the perpetrator of moral evil, to manifest
disapprobation of his conduct, so far as morally evil, whether such
manifestation be subservient to his good or not. And if sin be a moral evil, it
is not injurious to the sinner, both to disapprove, and to manifest
disapprobation of sin, whether such manifestation be subservient to his good or
not. -- But this directly contradicts the principle, that sin deserves no other
punishment, than that which is subservient to the good of the sinner. For what
is punishment, but a manifestation of disapprobation, which a person vested
with authority has, of the conduct of a subject? And if it be not injurious to
the sinner, to disapprove his sin, and to manifest that disapprobation, whether
it subserve his good or not; then his sin, or he on account of his sin,
deserves both disapprobation, and the manifestation of disapprobation, though
that manifestation be not subservient to his personal good: which is the same
thing as to say, that the sinner deserves punishment, whether that punishment
subserve his own good or not. On the other hand, if it be not just to manifest
disapprobation of sin, it is not just to disapprove sin. If it be not just to
disapprove or to hate sin, aside from the consideration, that the
disapprobation is conducive to the personal good of the sinner; then sin is not
in itself, or in its own nature and tendency, hateful or odious, but becomes
odious then only, when the hatred of it conduces to the personal good of the
sinner. But if sin be not in itself odious, it is not a moral evil; which was
the thing to be proved.

THERE seems to be no way to avoid this consequence but by holding, that moral
evil is not in itself odious and abominable, but that it becomes odious then
only, when the disapprobation of it subserves the personal good of the
perpetrator: which is the same as to hold, that moral evil, as such, is not at
all odious, but is odious in this particular case only, when the disapprobation
of it subserves the good of the perpetrator: but in all other cases, it is a
matter of indifferency at least, if not an object of cordial complacency; and
therefore in all other cases is no moral evil.

ON the supposition which I am now opposing, when a man sins and immediately
repents, he deserves no punishment, because the end of all punishment is
already obtained by his repentance, and a tendency of punishment to the
repentance of the sinner, which is the only circumstance, on the present
hypothesis which can justify his punishment, cannot now be pretended, as a
reason for his punishment. Therefore any punishment after repentance, must be
undeserved and unjust. But if sin be a moral evil or a crime, it is in its own
nature displeasing to GOD, and he may justly both be displeased at it, and
manifest his displeasure; that is, he may punish it, whether the sinner repent
or not, Repentance though it is a renunciation of sin in future, makes no
alteration in the nature of the sin which is past; nor is it any satisfaction
for that sin. If it were, it would be either the curse of the law, or such a
meritorius act of virtue, as to balance the demerit of sin: Neither of which
will be pretended. But if the only reason why it is, or can be just for GOD to
show displeasure at sin, be, that the sinner may thereby be led to repentance;
then sin itself, or the proper nature of sin, is not a just reason, why God
should either be displeased, or show displeasure at it. Impenitence or the
repetition of sin or the continuance of the sinner in it, is on this
supposition, the only just reason or ground of either displeasure, or of any
manifestation of displeasure at sin. Therefore sin in general, or sin as such,
deserves no displeasure or manifestation of displeasure; but sin in some
particular case only, as when it is persisted in or repeated. If we should
hold, that sins committed in the day time, do not deserve punishment; but that
those which are committed in the night, do deserve punishment, I think it would
be manifest to every man, that we denied, that sin as such, and by the general
nature common to all sins, deserves punishment; and that we confined the desert
of punishment to something which is merely accidental, and not at all essential
to sin. And is it not manifest, that the desert of punishment is as really not
extended to the general nature of sin, but is confined to something merely
accidental, when it is asserted, that sin deserves no punishment, unless it be
followed with impenitence? or unless it be persisted in? or, which is the same
thing, that no punishment is just, except that which is designed to lead the
sinner to repentance?

IF sin do not by its general nature deserve punishment, it does not by its
general nature deserve the manifestation of divine displeasure; because all
manifestation of divine displeasure at sin, is punishment. -- Again, if sin do
not by its general nature deserve the manifestation of divine displeasure, it
does not by its general nature deserve displeasure itself: and if so, it is not
by its general nature a moral evil.

IT appears then, that on the hypothesis now under consideration, sin deserves
neither punishment nor hatred, and is no moral evil, unless it be followed with
impenitence; or unless it be persisted in, for at least some time. The first
act of sin is no moral evil. But if the first act be not a moral evil, why is
the second, the third, or any subsequent act? Impenitence is nothing but a
repetition or perseverance in acts the same or similar to that of which we do
not repent. But if the first act, abstracted from the subsequent, be not a
moral evil, what reason can be assigned, why the subsequent should be a moral
evil? Thus the principle, that sin deserves punishment so far only, as the
punishment of it tends to the repentance and good of the sinner, implies, that
there is no moral evil in the universe, either in the first sin, or in any
which follow; none even in impenitence itself. -- On the other hand, if sin in
all instances be a moral evil, it is justly to be abhorred by the Deity,
whether repentance succeed or not: and if it may justly be abhorred by the
Deity, he may justly manifest his abhorrence of it, whether repentance succeed
or not. But to allow this, is to give up the principle, that sin deserves no
other punishment, than that which is subservient to the repentance and good of
the sinner.

PUNISHMENT is a proper manifestation of displeasure, made by a person in
authority, at some crime or moral evil. If sin, though repented of, be still a
moral evil, and the just object of the divine displeasure; why is it not just,
that this displeasure should be manifested? But the manifestation of the divine
displeasure at moral evil, is punishment. -- If on the other hand, it be an
injurious treatment of a sinner, that the Deity should, after repentance,
manifest his displeasure at him, on account of his sin; then doubtless it is
injurious in the Deity to be displeased with him on account of his sin, of
which he has repented. Again; if it be injurious in the Deity to be displeased
with a man on account of his sin, after he has desisted from it in repentance,
why is it not injurious to be displeased with him, on account of his past sin,
though he is still persisting in sin? If one act of murder be not the proper
object of the abhorrence of all holy intelligences, creator and creatures why
are two or one hundred acts of murder proper objects of abhorrence. Add naught
to itself as often as you please, you can never make it something. -- So that
by this principle we seem to be necessarily led to this conclusion, that no man
on account of any sin whatever, whether repented of or not, can consistently
with justice be made the object of divine abhorrence or displeasure, and
consequently that sin in no instance whatever is a moral evil.

ON the principle which I am now opposing, whenever a man commits any sin, for
instance murder, neither God, nor man has any right to manifest displeasure at
his conduct, or even to be displeased with it, till two things are fully known;
first whether the murderer do or do not repent; secondly, whether displeasure
in this case, or the manifestation of displeasure, will conduce to the
happiness of the murderer. If he do repent, no intelligent being has a right,
on the footing of justice, to be displeased; nor even if he be impenitent,
unless it be known for a certainty, that the displeasure of the person, who is
inquiring whether he have a right to be displeased or not, will conduce to the
repentance and good of the murderer. To say otherwise; to say that we have a
right in justice to be displeased with the conduct of a murderer, though he
does repent, or though such displeasure does not conduce to his repentance and
happiness, is to give up the principle in question. For if we may justly be
displeased with his conduct, though he is penitent, or though our displeasure
does not conduce to his personal happiness; we may justly manifest our
displeasure. But manifestation of displeasure, especially by a ruler, at the
misconduct of a subject, is punishment.

ONCE more; on the supposition that we have no right to be displeased with
murder, unless our displeasure conduce to the good of the murderer; if there be
any moral evil or turpitude in murder, it consists not in the murder itself, or
in the malicious action of murder; but wholly in this circumstance attending
it, that displeasure at it, conduces to the personal good of the murderer.

PERHAPS it may be objected to the reasoning in the last argument, that if it
prove any thing, it proves too much, and therefore really proves nothing; that
if sin, or any crime, do in all cases, and on account of its own (...) and
turpitude, deserve disapprobation and punishment, it will follow, that it
deserves the same, even after it has been punished according to strict
distributive justice; that after such punishment the nature of the crime is the
same which it was before; that the crime therefore is still the proper object
of disapprobation, and of the manifestation of disapprobation; and on the
ground of the preceding reasoning, deserves an additional punishment, after it
has been once punished according to strict distributive justice; which is
absurd.

TO this it may be answered, that a crime considered in connection with its
just and full punishment, is not that crime considered, in itself, or in its
own nature merely. Water mingled with wine, and thus become a compound
substance, is no longer mere water. The preceding reasoning supposes, that a
crime in its own nature and tendency deserves disapprobation and the
manifestation of disapprobation. But a crime taken with the full punishment of
it which is according to strict distributive justice, and considered in this
complex view, or that crime and the just punishment of it considered as one
complex object, is not that crime considered in itself and in its own nature
merely. Therefore although the crime considered in itself deserves punishment,
yet considered in the complex view just stated, it deserves not additional
punishment. -- And whereas it is implied in the objection now under
consideration, that a crime even after it has been punished according to strict
distributive justice, is still the just object of disapprobation, and therefore
that disapprobation may justly be manifested even by the magistrate, or the
crime may be punished; it is to be observed, that the whole force of this
reasoning depends on the meaning of the expression, a crime even after it has
been punished according to strict distributive justice, is still the just
object of disapprobation. If the meaning of that expression be, that the crime
considered in its own nature and tendency, and as abstracted from the
punishment or any thing done to prevent the ill effect of the crime, is a
proper object of disapprobation, and is an event most ardently to be
deprecated, or it is most ardently to be wished, that it might never have come
into existence, and in this sense, it is the just object of disapprobation and
of the manifestation of disapprobation: this is undoubtedly true, and no ill
consequence to the preceding reasoning will follow. But if the meaning of that
expression be, that a crime considered in connection with its just punishment
and the good effects of that punishment, as one complex object, is a proper
object of disapprobation, so that it is proper to wish, that this complex
object had not come into existence; it is not true that in this sense a crime
after it has been punished according to strict distributive jusice, is still
the just object of disapprobation. There have doubtless been many instances of
crimes in civil society, which taken with the just punishments inflicted on
them, have been on the whole the occasion of great good to society, have
established government and preserved the peace of society longer and more
effectually, than would have been the case, had no such crimes been committed.
Therefore the existence of those crimes taken with the punishments, as one
complex object, is no proper object of disapprobation or deprecation, but of
acquiescence and joy: because in this connection they tend not to impair, but
establish and promote the general good. In this sense any crime or any sin,
after it has been punished according to strict distributive justice, is not the
just object of disapprobation, and therefore not of the manifestation of
disapprobation or of punishment. -- So that the foregoing reasoning will not
prove that a sin or crime, once punished according to strict distributive
justice, deserves an additional punishment.

The essence of moral evil is, that it tends to impair the good and happiness
of the universe: in that the odiousness of sin or of moral evil consists. And a
punishment in the distributive sense just, is that punishment inflicted on the
person of the sinner, which effectually prevents any ill consequence to the
good of the universe, of the sin or crime punished. Now therefore sin taken
with the just punishment of it, no more tends to impair the good of the
universe, than poison taken with an effectual antidote, tends to destroy the
life of him who takes it.

Objection. 1. IF sin taken with its just punishment, do not tend to impair the
good of the universe, and if the essence of moral evil consist in its tendency
to impair the good of the universe, it seems that sin taken with its just
punishment is no sin at all. Answer: It is indeed not mere sin. It is no more
sin, than poison taken with its antidote, is poison. That poison which is mixed
with the antidote, if it were separated from the antidote, would produce the
same effects, is of the same tendency, and consequently of the same nature, as
before the mixture. Yet the compound made by the mixture, produces no such
effects, is of no such tendency, and consequently is of a very different
nature. So any sin which is punished according to strict justice, abstracted
from the punishment, is of the same tendency and nature, of which it was before
the punishment. Yet that sin taken with its full and just punishment, as one
complex object, is of a very different tendency and nature, and will be
followed with no such effects as would have followed from it, had it not been
punished. In this sense, sin taken with its full and just punishment is indeed
no sin at all.

Objection. 2. If the sinner do not deserve punishment, when the ill
consequences of his sin are prevented by his personal punishment; why does he
deserve punishment, when the ill consequences are prevented by the sufferings
of his substitute? -- Answer. Desert and ill desert are according to the
character of the person himself, and not according to that of his
representative or substitute. Now satisfaction for a crime by personal
suffering is as really a part of the criminal's personal character, as the
crime itself. But satisfaction by the suffering of another, is (...) part of
the personal character of the criminal.

IF then on the whole, it be an established point, that on the supposition that
no other punishment can be justly inflicted on the sinner, than that which is
necessary for his repentance and happiness, sin is no moral evil; this will be
attended with many other consequences equally, or if possible, still more
absurd:

1. THAT sin deserves no punishment at all. Surely nothing but moral evil
deserves punishment.

2. THAT neither sin itself, nor we as sinners are the objects of the divine
disapprobation.

3, THAT neither ought we to disapprove it, whether in ourselves or others.

4. THAT repentance is no duty of any man; yea, it is positively wrong. Shall
we repent of an innocent action?

5. THAT the calamities which God brings on men in this life, are not
reconcilable with justice. That these calamities in general are punishments or
demonstrations of God's displeasure at the sins of mankind, is manifest from
the scriptures. This is especially manifest concerning the most extraordinary
and unusual calamities which in scripture are mentioned to have befallen
communities or individuals; as the flood of Noah, the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple by the Chaldeans, and
afterward by the Romans, the death of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, of Nadab and
Abihu, of Uzzah, etc. etc. But all these punishments were unjust, if sin be no
moral evil.

6. THAT there is no foundation in any human actions or characters, for praise
or blame, reward or punishment. If sin be no moral evil, it is not blameable;
and if sin or vice do not deserve blame or punishment, virtue which is the
opposite, does not deserve praise or reward: and all moral distinctions are
groundless, as in a moral view there is no difference between virtue and vice,
sin and holiness. Therefore there is no moral government in the universe, nor
any foundation for it.

I NOW appeal to the reader, with regard to the propriety of the preceding
remarks, and whether the absurdities before mentioned, be not indeed implied in
the hypothesis, that the sinner can, consistently with justice, be made to
suffer no other punishment, than that which is disciplinary or conducive to the
good of the sufferer, by leading him to repentance and preparing him for
happiness. If those absurdities justly follow, not the least doubt can remain,
but that the principle from which they follow, is absurd and false.

CHAP. III. Whether the damned will in fact suffer any other punishment, than
that which is conducive to their personal good.
IN the last chapter the subject of inquiry was, whether the damned sinner
deserve, according to strict justice and the law of God, any other punishment,
than that which is necessary to lead to repentance and prepare for happiness.
But though it should be granted, that he does indeed deserve a further or
greater punishment, than that which is sufficient for the ends just mentioned;
yet it may be pleaded, that in fact he never will suffer any other punishment;
that in hell the damned are punished with the sole design of leading them to
repentance; that when this design shall have been accomplished, whatever
further punishment they may deserve, will be graciously remitted, and they
immediately received to celestial felicity. Whether this be indeed the truth,
is the subject of our present inquiry. -- With regard to this subject, I have
to propose the following considerations.

1. If the damned do indeed deserve more punishment, than is sufficient barely
to lead them to repentance; then they may, consistently with justice, be made
in fact to suffer more. That they may consistently with justice be made to
suffer according to their demerits, is a self-evident proposition. To punish
them so far, is not at all inconsistent with the justice of God, therefore the
objection drawn from the justice of God against vindictive punishment as
opposed to mere discipline, must be wholly relinquished. A merely disciplinary
punishment is one which is suited and designed to lead the sinner to repentance
only. A vindictive punishment is one which is designed to be a testimony of the
displeasure of God at the conduct of the sinner, and by that testimony, to
support the authority of the divine law, subserve the general good, and thus
satisfy justice: and it must be no more than adequate to the demerit of the
sinner. I do not find that Dr. C. has in his whole book, given us a definition
of a vindictive punishment, as he ought most certainly to have done. According
to Chevalier Ramsay's definition of divine vindictive justice, vindictive
punishment is, That dispensation of God, by which he pursues vice with all
sorts of torments, till it is totally extirpated, destroyed and annihilated.
Principles, Vol. I. P. 434.
What then is a disciplinary punishment? This definition perfectly confounds
disciplinary and vindictive punishment.

IF it be just to punish a sinner according to his demerit; as it certainly is
by the very terms; and if such a punishment be greater than is sufficient to
lead him to repentance merely; as is now supposed: then all objections drawn
from the justice of God, against a vindictive punishment, and all arguments
from the same topic, in favor of a punishment merely disciplinary, are
perfectly groundless and futile. The sinner lies at mercy; and if he be
released on his repentance, it is an act of grace, and not of justice.

2. IF the damned do deserve more punishment than is sufficient barely to lead
them to repentance, they will in fact suffer more. As it is just, so justice
will be executed. That they will be punished according to their demerits, is
capable of clear proof, both by the authority of scripture, and by that of Dr.
C.

(1) By the authority of scripture. -- This assures us, that God will render to
every man according to his deeds to them that are contentious, and do not obey
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish upon every soul that does evil, Romans II. 6, etc. For the work of a man,
shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according to his ways,
Job, XXXIV. 2. Thou renderest to every man according to his work, Psalm. LXII.
12. I the lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings, Jer. XVII. 10.
See also chap. XXXII. 19. For the son of man shall come in the glory of his
father, with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his
works, Matt. XVI. 27. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. V. 10. Behold I come
quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be, Rev. XXII. 12. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in
the way with him: lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and
the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I
say unto thee, Thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing, Mat. V. 25, 26. In the parallel text in Luke, it is thus
expressed, I tell thee, thou shall not depart thence till thou have paid the
very last mite. James. II. 13, He shall have judgment without mercy, that has
showed no mercy. Rev. XIV. 10, The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation? and
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
angels and in the presence of the Lamb; and the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever.

These texts, it is presumed, sufficiently show, that we have the authority of
scripture to prove, that in the future world, the wicked will be punished
accoding to their demerits, and that no mercy will be shown them.

(2) The same truth is evidently holden by Dr. C. -- He asserts, P. 10.
that there will be no salvation for those in the next state, who habitually
indulge to lust in this; but they must be unavoidably miserable,
notwithstanding the infinite benevolence of the Deity, and to a great degree,
God only knows how long, in proportion to the number and greatness of their
vices. P. 307.
That some of them [the damned] shall be tormented for ages of ages, the rest
variously, as to time, in proportion to their deserts: That they will suffer P.
350.
positive torments in proportion to the number and greatness of their crimes:
That P. 320.
there will be a difference in the punishment of wicked men, according to the
difference there has been in the nature and number of their evil deeds: That "
P. 336.
if they" [the blasphmers of the Holy Ghost are not saved till after they have
passed through these torments [of hell] they have never been forgiven. -- The
divine law has taken its course; nor has any intervening pardon prevented the
full execution of the threatened penalty. Some observations have been already
P. 2, etc.
made on these passages concerning the blasphemers of the Holy Ghost, to show,
that on Dr. C's plan they equally prove, that all the damned are saved without
forgiveness; that the divine law has its course on them all; that they all
suffer the full threatened penalty, and of course they suffer all that
punishment which they deserve.

THE other quotations set this matter in a light equally clear. If the wicked
shall be punished in proportion to the number and greatness of their vices; in
proportion to the number and greatness of their crimes; according to the nature
and number of their evil deeds; in proportion to their deserts; they will most
certainly receive the full punishment due to them according to their demerits,
and nothing will be remitted to them.

THUS it appears both by the authority of scripture and also by that of Dr. C.
that the damned will actually suffer all that punishment, which they deserve.
And as it is now supposed to be proved in the preceding chapter, that the
damned deserve a further punishment than that which is conducive to their
repentance and personal good; of course it follows, that they will in fact
suffer such further punishment.

OBJECTION. -- The argument from the scriptural declarations, that the wicked
shall be punished according to their works etc, to prove, that they will suffer
all which they justly deserve, is not conclusive; because the same expressions
are used concerning the righteous, setting forth, that they shall be rewarded
according to their works etc. Yet it is granted on all hands, that their reward
is not merely such as they deserve, or is not strictly according to justice.

ANSWER. The reward of the righteous is indeed not merely such as they deserve,
but infinitely exceeds their deserts. It is therefore at least equal to their
deserts; or it falls not short of them. If this be allowed concerning the
punishment of the wicked, it is sufficient for every purpose of the preceding
argument. If the wicked suffer a punishment at least equal to their demerits;
then no part of the punishment deserved by them, is remitted to them. Beside;
the declarations of scripture are, that the wicked shall pay the uttermost
farthing, the very last mite; that they shall have judgment without mercy,
wrath without mixture, etc. which are as strong and determinate expressions, to
represent that they will be punished to the full extent of justice, as can be
conceived.

3. ALTHOUGH Dr. C. is so great an enemy to vindictive punishment; yet he
himself, holds that men do even in this life suffer such punishment. But do
those testimonies of his vengeance lose their nature as judgments on his part,
and real evils on their's, because they may be an occasion of that repentance,
which shall issue in their salvation? When God threatened the Jewish nation, in
case they would not do his commandments, with famine, the pestilence, the
sword, and a dispersion into all parts of the earth; did he threaten them with
a benefit? And when those threatenings were for their sins carried into
execution, did he inflict a blessing on them? When he threatened in particular,
that if they where disobedient, they should be cursed in the field, Deuteronomy.
XXVIII. 16, did he hereby intend, that the field should be cursed; but that he
meant thereby a real benefit to them? 5 Dissertations, P. 110.
If vindictive punishment be inflicted even in this life, much more may we
conclude that it is inflicted in hell, the proper place of retribution to the
wicked.

4. IF the punishment of hell be a mere discipline happily conducive to the
good of the sufferers, there is no forgiveness in the preservation of a man
from it. It is no forgiveness for a parent to give his child a license to tarry
from school; or for a physician to allow his patient to desist from the cold
bath, which he had prescribed. Or if a parent, to inure his child to hunger and
cold, have kept him for some time on a scanty diet, and have clothed him but
thinly; it is no act of forgiveness, to allow the child in future a full diet,
or warm clothing. Forgiveness is to remit a deserved penalty, or to exempt from
penal evil; not to deprive of a benefit, or of any thing which is absolutely
necessary to our happiness, and which is therefore on the whole no real evil,
but a real good. If therefore there be nothing more penal or vindictive in the
punishment of hell, than in the cold bath, or in the scanty diet and thin
clothing just mentioned; there is no more of forgiveness in exemption from the
former, than in exemption from the latter. -- Thus the scheme of disciplinary
punishment in hell leads to a conclusion utterly inconsistent with the whole
tenor of scripture, and of the writings of Dr. C.

5. ALL those texts which speak of the divine vengeance, fury, wrath,
indignation, fiery indignation, etc. hold forth some other punishment, than
that which is merely disciplinary. The texts to which I refer are such as
these; Deuteronomy. XXXII. 41, If I whet my glittering sword and mine hand take hold
on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that
hate me. Romans III. 5, 6, Is God unrighteous, who takes vengeance? -- "God
forbid." Chap. XII. 19, " Vengeance is mine: I will repay says the Lord."
Luke. XXI. 22, "These be the days of vengeance." 2 These. I. 8, In flaming fire
taking vengeance of them, that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Jude. 7, Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. --
Job. XX. 23, When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his
wrath upon him. -- Isai. LI. 17, Awake, awake, stand up O Jerusalem, which have
drunk at the hand of the Lord, the cup of his fury; thou have drunken the dregs
of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out. -- Chap. LIX. 18, According to
their deeds, accordingly he will repay fury to his adversaries, recompense to
his enemies etc. Instances of the denunciation of wrath against the wicked, are
noted in the margin. Matt. III. 7. Luke III. 7, XXI. 23. John III. 36. Romans IV.
15, V. 9. IX 22. 1 Tes. I. 10. V. 9.
-- Romans II. 8, 9, " Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every
soul of man that does evil." Heb. X. 27, A certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. See also
Psalm. L. 22. Heb. XII. 29, Luke. XII. 46. -- Rev. XIV. 10. "Shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God poured out without mixture, into the cup of his
indignation." Therefore in the punishment of the wicked there will be no
mixture of mercy or forgiveness.

IT is of no importance, that in some of the texts now quoted, a reference is
not had to the punishments of the future world, but to those of this life. If
God can consistently with his perfections inflict a partial vengeance, why not
the whole of that which is justly due? If he can and does inflict vengeance in
this life, why not in the future too, provided, as is now granted, it be just?

THAT the passages now quoted, do indeed speak of a punishment more than merely
disciplinary, is manifest by the very terms of the passages themselves. To say
that vengeance, wrath, fury, indignation, fiery indignation, wrath without
mixture, mean a mere wholesome, fatherly discipline, designed for the good only
of the subjects, is to say that the inspired writers were grossly ignorant of
the proper and common use of language; and particularly that they were wholly
ignorant of that important distinction between vindictive and disciplinary
punishment, on which Dr. C. and other writers of his class so much insist. If
vengeance mean fatherly discipline, what is proper vengeance? If it be proper
to call fatherly chastisement, vengeance, wrath, fury, fiery indignation, wrath
without mixture; by what name is it proper to call a punishment really
vindictive?

6. THE same may be argued from various other passages of scripture, some of
which I shall now cite. 1 Cor. XVI. 22. If any man love not our Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be anathema maranatha. It is absurd to suppose, that this curse
means a discipline designed for the good only of the patients. Such a
discipline is so far from a curse, that it is a very great blessing. -- Deuteronomy.
XXVII. 26, compared with Gal. III. 10, Cursed be he that confirms not all the
words of this law, to do them. Deuteronomy. XXIX. 19. And it come to pass, when he
hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst. The Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord
and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord will blot out his name
from under heaven. And the Lord shall separate him unto evil, out of all the
tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant, that are written
in this book of the law. -- This text seems to be in several respects
inconsistent with the idea, that the future punishment of the sinner it merely
disciplinary. IT declares, that "the Lord will not spare him." But to inflict
that punishment only, which is far less than the sinner deserves, and which is
not at all vindictive, but wholly conducive to his good, is very greatly to
spare him. It is further said, that the anger of the Lord and his jealousy
shall smoke against him: which is not an expression properly and naturally
representing the discipline, which proceeds from parental affection seeking the
good only of the child. The same may be observed of this expression, The Lord
shall blot out his name from under heaven. It is added, All the curses that are
written in this book shall lie upon him -- And the Lord shall separate him unto
evil -- according to all the curses of the covenant, which are written in this
book of the law. These last expressions seem to be very determinate. Curses are
not blessings: but that discipline which is subservient to the good of the
subject is a blessing. The curses here mentioned are all the curses written in
this book of Moses, or the book of the LAW. Therefore some men will suffer the
curse of the law, even the whole curse of the law, or all the curses mentioned
in the law; which, by what has come up to our view in the last chapter, appears
to be more than a discipline promoting the good of the subject.

AGAIN; Deuteronomy. XI. 26 -- 29, Behold I set before you this day a blessing and a
curse. A blessing, if ye will obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which
I command you this day; and a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of
the Lord your God. -- Prove. III. 33, The curse of the Lord is in the house of
the wicked; but he blesses the habitation of the just. -- Job XXIV. 18, Their
portion is cursed in the earth. -- Psalm. XXXVII. 22, They that be cursed of
him, shall be cut off. -- Psalm. CXIX. 21, "Thou have rebuked the proud, that
are accursed." -- Jer. XI. 3, Cursed be the man that obeys not the words of
this covenant., Ibid. chap. XVII. 5, Cursed, be the man, that trusts in man,
and makes flesh his arm. Mal. I. 14, " Cursed be the deceiver," etc Chap. III.
9, "Ye are cursed with a curse." 2 Pet. II. 14, " Cursed children."

BY all these texts it appears, that some men do or shall suffer the curse of
God. Whether all these texts refer to a curse to be inflicted after death, does
not for reasons already given materially affect the present argument. A curse
is undoubtedly a punishment which does not promote the good of the subject*
otherwise a curse and a blessing are perfectly confounded.

IF it shall still be insisted, that the curse so often mentioned, means that
punishment only, which is conducive to the good of the subject: it may be
answered, then there would be no impropriety in calling the present afflictions
of the real disciples of Christ, by the name of a curse. Why then are they not
so called in scripture? Why are not the real children of God, even the most
virtuous and pious of them, said to be cursed by God, etc.? And why are not the
curses of the wicked, as well as the afflictions of the righteous, said to work
together for their good, and to work out for them a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory? Dr. C. loves to illustrate the punishment of hell by
the discipline inflicted by fathers on earth* with a sole view to the good of
their children. But would it be proper to call the necessary, wise and
wholesome discipline of earthly parents, by the name of a curse? or is it ever
so called, either by God or man? -- Equally absurd is it, to call the
punishment of hell by that name, if it be designed for the good only of the
patients.

I beseech the reader to consider what a contrast there is between the texts,
which have now been quoted, and those in which a punishment really disciplinary
is mentioned and described. In the former the punishment is called by the names
of vengeance, fury, wrath, smoking wrath, fiery indignation, wrath without
mixture, a curse, an anathema, all the curses of the law, etc. Whereas the real
discipline of God's children is called a chastisement; If ye be without
chastisement, then are ye bastards and not sons: a correction* I will correct
thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished. This correction
is said to be mingled with pity. Like as a father pitieth his children; so the
Lord pitieth them that fear him. I will visit their transgression with the rod,
and their iniquity with stripes, nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him. But where in all the scriptures is the punishment of the
future state represented to be designed for the good of the subjects? Where is
it in scripture called a fatherly chastisement, correction or discipline, or by
any other appellation of the like import? What right then have we to consider
it as a mere chastisement? Is not this an idea formed in the fond imagination
of those who would fain support a favorite system?

7. IF future punishment be merely disciplinary, the discipline will produce
its proper effect on some, sooner than on others. Some who shall in this life
have contracted a less degree of depravity and hardness of heart, will be more
easily and speedily brought to repentance, than others. This on the hypothesis
now made, is both agreeable to the dictates of reason, and is the very doctrine
expressly and abundantly taught by Dr. C. But how is this to be reconciled with
the account of scripture? That informs us, that all those on the left hand of
the judge are to be sentenced to everlasting fire, and shall go away into
everlasting punishment. The sentence denounced on all is in the same terms, and
not the least intimation is given, that some of them shall be punished longer
than others; much less that only some shall be punished for ages of ages;
others released, in a much shorter time. Dr. C. and other writers of his class
suppose, that in hell the wicked are put under those means of grace, which are
vastly more advantageous, powerful and conducive to the effect of repentance,
than those means which are enjoyed in this life. But the same writers will
allow, that in many instances, even the means which are enjoyed in this life
are followed with the desired effect of repentance, and this within so short a
term as threescore years and ten. Therefore we may reasonably conclude that
within the like term, many more will be brought to repentance by the vastly
more powerful means to be used with the damned: and so on through every
successive period of seventy years. I think then an answer to two questions may
justly be demanded of any one in Dr. C's scheme.

(1) WITH what truth or propriety can a sentence of everlasting punishment be
pronounced on the whole body of sinners, when some of them shall repent and be
saved very soon; others in large numbers, in every succeeding age, and even
every year? As well might a sentence of exclusion from pardon and the favor of
God during this life, be pronounced against the whole of every generation of
mankind, because some men do indeed continue in that state during this life.
Nay, with much greater truth and propriety might this latter sentence be
pronounced, than the former; because it is granted by Dr. C. and others, that
the greater part of men live and die in impenitence and alienation from God.
Whereas, allowing that the punishment of the wicked is a mere discipline, we
may presume, that very few indeed of the whole number of the damned, will
remain in torment, for that duration, which according to the ideas of our
opponents, is intended by everlasting and for ever and ever, and which is the
longest punishment to be inflicted on any of the human race. This is a
punishment reserved for a very few, the most depraved, hardened, abandoned
sinners, perhaps one in a thousand or ten thousand. The rest less hardened and
more easily wrought on by the powerful means of grace used with the damned,
will be brought to repentance by a punishment of shorter continuance.

I know Dr. C. says, that though all the damned shall not, yet as some of them
shall, suffer that punishment, which in his sense, is everlasting and forever
and ever, therefore everlasting punishment may be truly asserted of them
collectively. But the same reason would justify a sentence excluding the whole
human race from pardon and the divine savor, during the whole of the present
life. God might with the same truth and propriety have said to Adam and all his
posterity, even after the revelation of the covenant of grace, I doom you, in
righteous judgment, to live and die the objects of my wrath. This latter
sentence would, for the reason before assigned, have been not only equally, but
much more conformed to truth and fact, than that which shall be pronounced on
the wicked at the end of the world; if they shall be delivered out of hell from
time to time in every age and perhaps every year. Yet it is presumed, no man
will plead for the truth and propriety of the sentence just supposed.

(2) THE other question to which an answer may be expected, is, how has it come
to pass, that no intimation of a difference in the duration of the punishment
of the wicked, is hinted in any part of the scriptures? The difference between
a punishment of a few years, and one which is to last for ages of ages, or for
such a duration, as may with propriety be called an eternity, is very great,
and we should think, well worthy to be noticed in the scriptures. To say, that
it is noticed in those texts, which inform us, that the wicked shall be
punished according to their works, etc. is to beg a point in dispute: because
those who believe endless punishment, believe that the works of all sinners
deserve an endless punishment; and though they will suffer different
punishments according to their different demerits; yet the difference will not
consist in duration, but in degree: as the righteous will be rewarded
differently according to their works; yet the reward of every individual of the
righteous will be of endless duration.

8. IF future punishment be designed as a mere discipline, to lead sinners to
repentance, it is inflicted without any necessity, and therefore must be a
wanton exercise of cruelty. -- The repentance of sinners may be easily obtained
without those dreadful torments endured for ages of ages. Doubtless that same
wisdom and power which leads a goodly number of mankind to repentance in this
life, without the help of the torments of hell, might by the like or superior
means, produce the like effect on all. The gospel might have been preached to
all the heathens, and all those means of grace, which have been successful on
some men, might have been used with all. And who will venture to say, that
those means and that grace, which effected the repentance of Saul the
persecutor, of the thief on the cross, of Mary Magdalene, and of the old,
idolatrous Manasseh who had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; could not
have effected the repentance of any, or at least some of those who have been,
or shall be, sent into the future state of punishment? How does it appear, that
those means and that grace which were sufficient for the conversion of those
noted sinners before mentioned, would not, had they been applied, have been
sufficient for the conversion of thousands of others, who in fact have not been
converted? And how does it appear, but that similar though more powerful grace
and means, which are doubtless within the reach of divine power and knowledge,
would have been sufficient for the repentance and conversion of all mankind? If
so, the repentance of sinners might have been accomplished, at a cheaper rate,
and in a way more demonstrative of the divine goodness, than by the awful means
of hell torments. Those torments therefore are inflicted without any real
necessity, unless they be inflicted for some other end, than the repentance of
the damned.

I AM aware, it will be objected, that if God should bring men to repentance by
efficacious grace or means, it would be inconsistent with their moral agency,
would destroy their liberty, and reduce them to mere machines. But were Paul,
Mary Magdalene etc. brought to repentance in such a way as to destroy their
liberty? It will not be pretended. Neither can it be pretended, that the same
means and grace would have destroyed the liberty of others. This being granted,
it necessarily follows, that if repentance be the only end, hell torments are
arbitrarily inflicted on all those, who might have been, or may in future be
brought to repentance by those means, and that grace, by which Paul or any
other man has been brought to repentance in this life. -- I ask, does God in
this life, apply all those means and all that grace, to all men, to lead them
to repentance, which are consistent with their moral agency? And if he apply to
any man, more powerful means, or more efficacious grace, than he does apply to
him, would he destroy all his liberty and reduce him to a mere machine? If so,
then how are the more powerful means of hell torments consistent with moral
agency or liberty? They, it is said, are more powerful and efficacious means of
grace, than any employed in this life: and if in this life the utmost is done
to lead sinners to repentance, which is consistent with moral agency;
hell torments must entirely destroy moral agency and reduce poor damned souls
to mere machines; and of course they will be no more capable of repentance or
salvation, than clocks and watches.

If on the other hand it be said, that the utmost which is consistent with
moral agency, is not done in this life, to lead men, to repentance; it will
follow, that God chooses to inflict hell torments, not merely as a necessary
mean to lead sinners to repentance; to grant which, is to give up the whole
idea, that they are merely disciplinary.

Those whom I am now opposing, hold, that God cannot, consistently with their
moral agency, bring all men to repentance in this life. How then can he,
consistently with their moral agency, bring them to repentance in hell? If
those means which would be effectual in this life, would be inconsistent with
moral agency, why are not hell torments equally inconsistent with moral agency,
since it is allowed that they will be effectual? Or if those means which are
barely effectual in hell, be not inconsistent with moral agency, I wish to have
a reason assigned, why those means which would be barely effectual in this
life, would be any more inconsistent with moral agency.

Dr. C. and others hold, that to say, that God cannot consistently with moral
agency, or in a moral way, bring men to repentance in hell, is to limit his
power and wisdom. But to say, that God cannot, consistently with moral agency,
bring men to repentance in this life, as really implies a limitation of the
divine power and wisdom, as to say, that he cannot, consistently with moral
agency, bring them to repentance in hell. How is it any more reconcilable with
those divine perfections, that he cannot reduce a sinner to repentance, in
threescore years and ten, than that he cannot produce the same effect,
throughout eternity? To say, that there is not time in this life, for the
sinner to obtain a thorough conviction of the necessity of repentance, affords
no relief to the difficulty. For though it should be granted, that there is not
time for the sinner to obtain this conviction by experience, which however
there seems to be no necessity of granting; yet cannot God exhibit the truth in
such a manner, as to produce that conviction? And let a reason be given, why
that conviction produced by a clear divine exhibition of truth and a sense of
happiness and misery, set in such a light, as to lead to repentance, is more
inconsistent with moral agency, than the same conviction obtained by
experience, or by the torments of hell.

If hell torments be necessary to lead sinners to repentance, because they are
more painful, than the afflictions or other means used with men in this life;
why are not greater afflictions sent on men in this life? It is manifest, that
most men might suffer much greater afflictions, than they really do suffer. And
if greater pain be all that is wanting to lead them to repentance, it seems
that to inflict that, would be the greatest instance of goodness, and might
supersede the necessity of hell torments.

IT is granted by Dr. C. and others, that hell torments will certainly lead to
repentance all who suffer them. At the same time he objects to the idea of
leading sinners to repentance by the efficacious grace of God, that it destroys
moral agency. But if there be a certain established, un. failing connection
between hell torments continued for a proper time, and repentance; those
torments as effectually overthrow moral agency, as efficacious grace. All that
need be intended in this instance, by efficacious grace, is such an exhibition
or view of the truth and of motives, as will certainly be attended with
repentance. But such an exhibition of the truth as this, is supposed by Dr. C.
to be made in hell. And why this exhibition made in hell is more consistent
with moral agency, than an exhibition which is no more effectual, powerful or
overbearing, made in this life, I wish to be informed.

PERHAPS it will be further pleaded, that though it be feasible to lead sinners
to repentance in this life; yet it is not wise and best. But why is it not as
wise and good, to persuade sinners to repent, without the use of hell torments,
as by those torments? If indeed it be fact, that God does not inflict endless
but disciplinary misery on sinners, we may thence conclude, that it is wisely
so ordered. But this is not to be taken for granted; it ought to be proved
before an inference is draw from it. It is the great question of this dispute.

9. THAT future punishment is not merely disciplinary, appears from the various
declarations of scripture, that those who die impenitent, are lost, are cast
away, perish, suffer perdition, are destroyed, suffer everlasting destruction,
etc. as in these texts; John XVII. 12. None of them is lost, save the son of
perdition. -- Luke IX. 25. What is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole
world, and lose himself or be cast away. -- Matt. XIII. 48. Gathered the good
into vessels, but cast the bad ((...) the dead, rotten fish) away. 2 Peter II.
13. They shall utterly perish in their own corruption. -- Heb. X. 39. We are
not of them that draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe unto the
saving of the soul. -- 2 Peter, III. 7. But the heavens and the earth which are
now, are reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and perdition of
ungodly men. -- Matt. X. 28. Fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell. -- 2 Thessalonians. I. 9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power. -- But what truth or
propriety is there in these expressions, if future punishment be a mere
discipline? The damned in hell are no more cast away, lost, destroyed; they no
more perish, or suffer perdition, than any of God's elect are cast away, etc.
while they are in this world. Hell is no more a place of destruction, than this
world. The wicked in hell are no more vessels of wrath fitted to destruction,
than the saints are in this world. The damned are under discipline; so are even
the most virtuous and holy, while in this life. Yet they are not lost, cast
away, rejected as reprobate silver, or destroyed by God; but are kept as the
apple of his eye. And as the means of grace, under which the damned are placed,
are far more adapted certainly to secure and pomote their greatest good, than
any means which we enjoy in this state; to consider and to speak of them as
lost, cast away, destroyed, etc. because they are under those means, is to the
highest degree absurd. They are just as much further removed from a state,
which can justly be called destruction, perdition, etc. than they were, while
in this world, as the means of grace which they enjoy in hell are more powerful
and effectual to prepare them for happiness, than those means which they
enjoyed in this world.

SUPPOSE a man seized with some dangerous disease, and a variety of means is
used for his recovery, but in vain. Suppose it appears, that if no more
effectual means be employed, he will never be recovered. Suppose further, that
at length an entirely different course is taken with him, a course which is not
only far more likely than the former to be successful; but concerning which
there is absolute certainty, that it will be successful: I ask, can the man now
under the operation of these most excellent and infallible means, with any
truth be said to be lost, to be cast away, to be destroyed, etc? Or if those
terms must be applied to one or other of those situations, in which we have
supposed him to be at different times; to which of them are they applied with
the least truth and reason? This example may illustrate the subject now under
consideration.

10. IF it be consistent with the divine perfections, to subject a sinner to
misery, for the sake of advancing his own good, as is implied in the very idea
of disciplinary punishment; why is it not equally consistent with the same
perfections, to subject a sinner to misery, for the sake of promoting the good
of the system; provided that misery do not exceed the demerit of the subject?
-- I presume no believer in endless punishment, will plead for any degree or
duration of punishment, which is not subservient to the glory of the Deity
implying the greatest good of the universe. Therefore, all such punishment, as
is not subservient to that end, is foreign to the present question. Further, it
is now supposed to be proved, that other punishment than that which is adapted
to prepare the sinner for happiness, is justly deserved by the sinner. Now
since this it allowed or proved, why is it not consistent with every attribute
of the Deity, to inflict that other punishment, provided only it be subservient
to the good of the system?

IT is holden by our opponents, that the punishment of a sinner may lead him to
repentance. So it may lead other sinners to repentance; or it may restrain them
from sin, and in a variety of ways may equally subserve the good of those who
are not the subjects of the punishment, as it may the good of him who is the
subject of it. And that the good of other persons may be of equal worth and
importance, nay, of far greater worth to the system, than the good of the
transgressor himself, cannot be denied. Therefore, as I said in the beginning
of this article, if the personal good of the sinner be a sufficient reason why
he should be punished according to justice; why is not the good of others, or
the good of the system, a sufficient reason for the same proceeding? And is it
not evident, not only that such a punishment is consistent with the perfections
of God; but that those perfections, goodness itself not excepted, require it?
In this case, to inflict a punishment merely conducive to the good of the
person punished, would be no fruit of goodness, but of a contrary principle;
and the doctrine of merely disciplinary punishment, if it mean a punishment
conducive indeed to the good of the subject, but destructive to the good of the
system, is so far from being built on the divine goodness, as some boast; that
it is built on a very different foundation. I am aware, that it is holden by
the advocates for universal salvation, that the good of the system cannot be
promoted by the endless misery of any individual, but requires the final
happiness of every one. Merely to assert this however, as some do very
confidently, is perfect impertinence. Let them prove it, and they will do
something to the purpose.

11. IF none of the damned will be punished for any other end than their own
good, and yet they all deserve to be punished more than is subservient to their
own good; then some of them deserve to be punished for a longer term, than that
which in scripture, according to Dr. C's sense of it, is said to be forever and
ever. The punishment, which in the language of scripture, is said to be
everlasting, forever and ever, etc. will actually be suffered by some of the
damned, as is agreed on all hands. But if none of the damned will suffer any
other punishment than that which is conducive to their personal good, then the
punishment which in scripture is said to be forever and ever, is conducive to
their personal good. They therefore deserve a punishment of greater duration
than that which in scripture is said to be forever and ever: and of course that
more durable punishment is the curse of the divine law, and is threatened in
the law. But where in all the law, or in all the scripture, is any punishment
threatened, or even hinted at, of greater duration than that which shall last
forever and ever? -- So that this scheme of disciplinary punishment necessarily
brings us to this absurdity, that the true and real curse of the divine law, is
not contained in the law; and that the punishment justly deserved by the
sinner, is no where revealed or even hinted at, in all the scripture. Yet the
scripture assures us, that some sinners will be in fact punished according to
their demerits, so as to pay the uttermost farthing, and to receive judgment
without mercy. And no man pretends that any sinner will suffer more than that
punishment which in scripture is said to be forever and ever. The consequence
is, that that punishment which is forever and ever, is the whole that the
sinner deserves, and therefore is by no means a mere discipline.

12. OUR Lord informs us, Matt. X. 33; That whosoever shall deny him before
men, shall be denied by him before his Father. But on the hypothesis now under
consideration, this means only, that Christ will deny him till he repents. In
Luke XIII. 25, etc. we read, that when once the master of the house shall have
risen and shut the door, some will begin to stand without and to knock, saying,
Lord, Lord, open to us, and will urge several arguments in favor of their
admission: to whom the master will answer, I know you not, whence you are;
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. But on the present hypothesis,
Christ will deny them in no other sense than he denies every real penitent and
believer, during the present life. He will deny the wicked after the general
judgment no longer than till they shall have been sufficiently disciplined;
after that, he will know them, will own them, and receive them to eternal and
blissful communion with himself. The same is observable of all his most sincere
disciples in this life. While here, they are under discipline, though not so
merciful and gracious a discipline as that with which the damned are favored.
However, during the continuance of the discipline of this life, Christ denies
and refuses to confer on any of his disciples, an entire exemption from pain,
distress, or affliction; and subjects them equally with the rest of the world,
to these calamities: so that in this respect all things come alike to all. He
does indeed give them assurance of rest and glory after this life. As full
assurance of rest and glory after the expiration of the term of their
discipline, is, on the present hypothesis, given to all the damned. Also in the
prospect of this rest and glory, and in the certain knowledge that they are the
objects of his favor, he affords his disciples much relief and comfort under
their present trials. The same sources of relief and comfort are afforded to
all the damned. So that Christ denies the damned in no other sense, than that
in which he denies his most sincere followers, during this life.

THE same observations for substance may be made concerning the application of
the damned for admission into heaven, after the general judgment, and the
answer and treatment which they shall receive on that occasion. The door shall
be shut against them no longer than till they shall have been sufficiently
disciplined. The same is true of every real christian in this life. -- The
master of the house will answer, I know you not, (i. e.) I do not as yet own
you as my friends and disciples, because you have not yet been sufficiently
disciplined. The same is true of every real christian in this life. -- He will
tell them, Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. But this means no more,
than that they must not be admitted but heaven, till they shall have been
sufficiently disciplined* The same is true of all real christians in this life.

13. ON the hypothesis now under consideration, what damnation do those in hell
suffer, more than real christians suffer in this life? They are kept in a state
of most merciful and gracious discipline, till they are prepared, and then they
are taken to heaven. The same is true of every real christian in this life.
This difference however is worthy of notice, that the discipline of hell is far
more advantageous than that of this life, because more effectual, and likely to
fit the subject for heaven more speedily and thoroughly; otherwise it would
never have been applied. It is also a more merciful and gracious exhibiton of
the divine goodness. Doubtless that mean of grace, which is most happily and
effectually conducive to the speedy repentance and preparation of the sinner
for heaven, is to him the most merciful and gracious exhibition and
demonstration of the divine goodness.

IT is true, the discipline of hell is attended with more pain than that of
this life. So the discipline of this life, with respect to some individuals, is
attended with more pain, than it is with respect to others. Yet it does not
hence follow, that some christians suffer damnation in this life: nor will it
be pretended, that either the scriptures or common sense would justify the
calling of those greater pains of some chistians in this life, by the name of
damnation, in any other sense, than the less pains or afflictions of other
christians, may be called by the same name.

ON the whole then, when the scripture says, He that believes, and is baptized
shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned: The whole meaning
is, he that believes, shall be admitted to heaven immediately after death: but
he that believes not, shall not immediately be admitted, merely because he is
not yet prepared for it by repentance; but he shall be put under a discipline
absolutely necessary for his own good, and the most wise, effectual, merciful
and gracious, that divine wisdom and goodness can devise; and as soon as this
discipline shall have prepared him for heaven, he shall be admitted without
further delay. When the scriptures say, he that believes not the Son, shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him; the meaning is, he shall not
see life till he is brought to repentance by the merciful discipline just now
mentioned; and not the wrath of God abides on him; because he shall be made
the subject of nothing wrathful or vindictive; but the mercy, or most merciful
and benevolent discipline of God abides on him.

14. IF the only end of future punishment be the repentance of the sinner, and
if the means used with sinners in hell be so much more powerful and happily
adapted to the end, than those used in this life; it is unaccountable, that
while so many are led to repentance by the comparatively weak means used with
men in this life, and within so short a period as seventy years, the far more
powerful means applied in hell, should not be productive of the same effect, in
a single instance, within so long a period as a thousand years. That none are
to be delivered out of hell, within a thousand years after the general
judgment, is explicitly taught by Dr. C. His words are, Page ^^^
"This period" (a thousand years) must run out, before the wicked dead could
any of them live as kings and priests with Christ.

WE all doubtless believe, that many sinners die impenitent, who are not the
subjects of depravity and hardness of heart vastly greater, than are in some,
who are brought to repentance in this life. Now put the case of the class of
sinners, who are the subjects of a depravity and hardness of heart, the very
next in degree to that of the most depraved of those who are brought to
repentance in this life. Is it reasonable to believe, that these cannot be
brought to repentance, even by the most powerful means of grace enjoyed in
hell, within a less time than a thousand years? If it be not reasonable to
believe this, then it is not reasonable to believe Dr. C's scheme of
disciplinary punishment.

15. THE last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. This death is understood
by Dr. C. and other advocates for universal salvation, to mean the second
death. Then the second death is doubtless an enemy. But if it consist in a
necessary discipline, the most wise and wholesome, the most conducive to the
good of the recipients, and to the divine glory, which the wisdom of God can
devise; surely it is no enemy either to God or the recipients; but is a perfect
friend to both. With what truth then could the apostle call it an enemy?

16. THE scripture, so far from declaring those who suffer chastisement and
disciplinary pains, accursed, merely on that account, expressly declares them
blessed. Psalm. XCIV. 12; Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and
teach him out of thy law; that thou may give him rest from the days of
adversity. But where are the damned ever said to be blessed? They are
constantly declared to be accursed. -- Heb. XII. 5 -- 9, Ye have forgotten the
exhortation, which speaks to you, as unto children, my son, despise not thou
the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebubuked of him. For whom
the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives. If
ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons. For what son is he,
whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all
are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. -- This passage evidently
considers those who suffer chastisement from the hand of God, as his children,
his sons. If therefore the damned suffer a mere chastisement, they are not
accursed, but are the blessed sons or children of God. But are they ever so
called in scripture? -- Beside; this passage evidently supposes, that some men
do not suffer fatherly chastisement, of which all the sons or children of God
are partakers: and expressly declares, that such as do not suffer it are
bastards and not sons: which seems not to agree with the idea, that all the
damned, will by fatherly chastisement be brought to final salvation. If no
other punishment be inflicted by God, than fatherly chastisement, then there
are no bastards in the universe. Yet it is evidently supposed in this text,
that there are bastards.

HEB. X. 28, He that despised Moses law died without mercy -- of how much sorer
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the son of
God? etc. But if all who die impenitent, be sent to a state of discipline most
excellently adapted to their good and salvation, no man dies without mercy.
This discipline itself is the greatest mercy which can, in their state of mind,
be bestowed upon them. With respect to the same subject, it is said, Heb. II.
2; That every transgression and disobedience, received a just recompense of
reward. -- A just recompense, is a punishment adequate to the demands of
justice; and this, as we have seen in the preceding chapter, cannot be a mere
merciful discipline.

17. IF the punishment of hell be a mere wholesome discipline, then what the
apostle says of the discipline of christians in this life, may be said with
equal truth and propriety of the punishment of the damned: thus, We glory in
damnation; knowing that damnation works repentance, and repentance salvation.

18. IF no other than a disciplinary punishment be consistent with the divine
goodness; surely the requirement of an atonement in order to pardon, is
unaccountable. The doctrine of atonement, and of the necessity of it to pardon
and salvation, is abundantly holden by Dr. C. He says, Page 17.
Jesus Christ is the person upon whose account happiness is attainable by the
human race. He speaks P. 18.
of the " sacrifice of himself," which Christ offered up to God to put away
sin. The obedience of Christ to death, is the ground or reason upon which it
has pleased God to make happiness attainable by any of the race of Adam. P. 19.
"By thus submitting to die. he" (Jesus) made atonement, not only for the
original lapse, but for all the sins this would be introductory to. 5
dissertations, p. 245.
-- Christ was sent into the world to make way for the wise, just and holy
exercise of mercy toward the sinful sons of men. Ibid, p. 247.
The only begotten Son of God both did and suffered every thing that was
necessary, in order to a righteousness on account of which God might, in
consistency with the honor of his perfections, and the authority of his law,
make the grant of life. Accordingly this meritorious righteousness is that for
the sake of which, upon the account of which, this blessing is conferred. 12
sermons, p. 334.
According to Dr. C. then, Christ has not only made atonement by his obedience
and death, but that atonement was necessary to the wise, just and holy exercise
of mercy to the sinner; and without that atonement, saving mercy could not have
been exercised toward the sinner, in a consistency with wisdom, justice and
holiness, or the honor of the divine perfections, or the authority of the
divine law and government. The constitution therefore by which salvation can be
obtained in no other way, than in consequence and on account of his obedience
and death, is not only consistent with wisdom, holiness, justice, yea, all the
divine perfections, and the authority of the divine law and government: but it
was required by them all.

BUT the sufferings and death of Christ, or his atonement, is no discipline of
the sinner. They are as foreign from it as the vindictive punishment of the
sinner himself. The atonement, as Dr. C. has explained it, makes way for the
wise, just and holy exercise of mercy toward the sinner. It was therefore
designed to satisfy the divine wisdom, justice and holiness. It was designed to
make the grant of life to the sinner consistent with the honor of the divine
perfections, and the authority of the divine law and government. And if our
Lord Jesus Christ might, in the behalf of the sinner, be made to suffer in
order to satisfy divine justice; why may not the sinner himself be made to
suffer for the same end?

IF Christ have, on the behalf of sinners, suffered for the end of supporting
the authority of the divine law and government; what reason can be assigned,
why it should be inconsistent with any attribute of the Deity, that sinners
themselves should be made to suffer for the same end? But this would be a
proper vindictive punishment. Therefore Dr. C. is entirely inconsistent with
himself, in allowing the atonement of Christ, in the terms before quoted; and
yet denying the reasonableness of a vindictive punishment, or its consistency
with the divine perfections.

19. WE are assured, that all things work together for good to them that love
God, to them who are called according to his purpose; Romans VIII. 28. But this
implies, that all things do not work for good, to them who love not God. Yet
all things do work for their good, if they suffer no other than a disciplinary
punishment. Concerning those who are Christ's, it is said, that all things are
their's; whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death,
or things present, or things to come; all are their's; 1 Cor. III. 21, 22. But
on the supposition, that all punishment is disciplinary, it is equally true
concerning all mankind, that all things present and to come are their's. Yet
this is not said, but the contrary is implied in that it is said of those only
who are Christ's or are Christians, that all things are their's.

20. I ARGUE from those words of the wise man, Eccl. IX. 10; Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. If future punishment be
discilplinary, the damned are in a state of probation, and may and will so
exercise their rational powers, as shall finally issue in their salvation. But
can this be reconciled with the words of Solomon, that in the future state,
there is no work to be done, no device to be invented, no knowledge or wisdom
to be exercised by us, to the accomplishment of what we now leave undone? This
is manifestly the argument, by which he presses on us the present diligent
discharge of our duty; and this argument would be utterly inconclusive, if
there were another state, in which what our hand now finds to do, might be
done.

OF similar import is John IX. 4; I must work the works of him that sent me,
while it is day; the night comes when no man can work. As long as I am in the
world, I am the light of the world. That our Lord, by the day, means this life,
is manifest by the last words of the quotation. But if in the future state no
man can work, the future state is not a state of probation.

TO these I may add, Genesis VI. 3; My spirit shall not always strive with man --
yet his days shall be an hundred an twenty years. As if it had been said, my
spirit shall not always strive with man; yet he shall strive with him an
hundred and twenty years, and no longer; for so long only shall his days be
continued. But how is this consistent with the idea, that God will be striving
with man, for ages of ages after his days shall have been elapsed?

Objection 1. IF to some part of the foregoing reasoning it be objected, that
it supposes future punishment to be merely disciplinary, and designed to
subserve no other end, than the repentance of the sinner: whereas it is
granted, that God may and will inflict vindictive punishment, but not a
punishment merely vindictive; that he may take vengeance of the sinner,
provided at the same time he aim at the good of the sinner: To this I answer --

1. THAT in this objection it is granted, that God may and will inflict on the
damned a punishment properly vindictive, a punishment over and above that which
is conducive to the personal good of the sinner. But this is to grant all which
is pleaded for in this chapter, and all which at present is attempted to be
proved.

2. IF the meaning of this objection be, that God may inflict vengeance,
provided he do it with a sole view to the good of the sinner, it confutes
itself; it seems to grant something, but in reality it grants nothing. It seems
to admit a proper vindictive punishment, but really admits no punishment
besides that which is merely disciplinary. For to talk of inflicting vengeance
with a sole view to the good of the subject, can mean nothing more, than to
inflict pain with a sole view to the good of the subject; and this is nothing
more than a punishment merely disciplinary: if God show displeasure with a sole
view to the good of the sinner, this is mere discipline.

3. IF the meaning of this objection be, that God may consistently with his
perfections, inflict a proper vindictive punishment, provided at the same time
that he is aiming at a proper vindication of his broken law and despised
government, he aim at the good of the sinner also; I answer, if it be right and
consistent with the perfections of God, to vindicate his law and government,
there is no necessity of bringing in the aid of another motive or design, to
make it right or consistent with his perfections. If on the other hand, it be
not in itself right to vindicate his law and government, no other affections,
views or actions, however right and benevolent, co-existing with the supposed
vindication, can atone for it, or make it right.

TO illustrate this by an example: -- A parent has a disobedient child; and it
is become necessary both for the good of the child, and for the support of the
parent's authority in his family in general, and over his child in particular,
that he be properly punished. Accordingly from both these motives, the good of
the child and the support of his own authority, the parent inflicts the proper
punishment. This according to the objection now before us, is right. But
according to the same objection, if the child be desperate and there be no
prospect of effecting his good by punishment, it is not consistent with the
character of a good parent to inflict the same punishment, from the motives of
supporting his own government and the good of the family only. If this action
done from these motives only, be a wrong action, it is still wrong, so far as
it proceeds from the same motives, however it may arise in part from the motive
of the child's good. To render this still plainer, let us suppose, that a
parent inflicts pain on his child merely to afford amusement to his neighbors,
as the Romans were wont to exhibit fights of gladiators. It will be agreed on
all hands, that this action is abominable. Again, suppose the same pain be
inflicted partly from the motive of amusing his neighbors, and partly from a
regard to the child's good. I presume all will allow, that so far as the action
proceeds from the former motive, it is still abominable, and is not sanctified
by the co-existent motive of the child's good.

ON the whole, we arrive at this conclusion; that if it be consistent with the
divine perfections, that God should inflict punishment from the two motives of
vindicating his own law and government and benefiting the sinner; it is equally
consistent with the divine perfections to inflict punishment from the former
motive only. All the vindictive punishment pleaded for, is that which is
deserved by the sinner and is necessary to support the divine law and moral
government in proper dignity, and thus to promote the general good: and this
surely is opposed to no attribute of God, whether justice or goodness.

Objection 2. TO the argument drawn from the destruction threatened to the
wicked, it may be objected, that this destruction means, that they shall be
destroyed as sinners only, or shall be brought to repentance and a renunciation
of sin. To this it may be answered, that in this sense every one who in this
life repents and believes, is destroyed, and suffers destruction. Yet this is
never said in scripture. This sense of the word destruction makes the
punishment of hell, and the awful curse of the divine law, to consist in
repentance, which is no punishment or curse, but an inestimable blessing.
Besides, that repentance, on which the sinner is forgiven if it can be called a
destruction at all, is not an everlasting destruction, but an emotion of heart,
which is begun and finished in a very short time. Or if by this everlasting
destruction be understood the habitual and persevering repentance of the true
convert; then the glorified saints in heaven, are constantly suffering that
destruction which will be everlasting, and which is the curse of the divine law.

BEFORE this subject is dismissed, proper notice ought to be taken of some
arguments urged in favor of the sentiment, that the punishment of hell is
merely discipplinary.

1. IT is urged, Page 324, 325.
that the various afflictions of this life are designed for the good of the
patients: therefore probably the same end is designed by the sufferings of
hell. -- To this it may be answered, It is by no means granted, that all the
afflictions of this life are designed for the good of the patients. It does not
appear, that men in general, who are visited with the loss of children, wives,
or other dear friends; or with the loss of eyesight, of some other sense, or of
a limb; or with distressing pains or incurable diseases; are thereby rendered
more happy in this life. If men may be allowed to judge by their own
experience, they will in most cases decide the question in the negative. Nor
does the decision in many cases appear ill founded to those, who have
opportunity to observe persons under those afflictions. To say that men are no
proper judges, whether they themselves be, in this life, made more happy or
not, by the afflictions which they suffer, is to say, that they are no judges
of their own happiness or misery. This being once established, we may assert,
that hell torments though endless promote the happiness of the patients:
because being no judges of their own happiness or misery they may be extremely
happy, at the very time they judge themselves to be perfectly miserable.

IN any ease in which calamity proves fatal, it is absurd to pretend, that it
promotes, in this life, the happiness of the patient, unless calamity itself be
happiness. No man has opportunity in this life to derive any good from the
pains of death. Therefore at least these pains are not designed for the
subject's good during his present life.

HERE it may be proper to mention several remarkable instances of grievous
calamity recorded in scripture: As the instance of the old world, of Sodom and
Gomorrah, of Pharaoh, Saul, the house of Eli, Nadab and Abihu, Hiel, etc. It is
presumed, Dr. C, himself would not pretend, that these calamities were intended
for "the profit of the sufferers themselves" in this life. What right then had
he to argue, as in the following passage? Page 324, 325, etc.
The proper tendency and final cause of evils in the present state, are to do
us good. This is the voice of reason confirmed by experience, and scripture
concurs herewith. He then quotes Psalm. LXXXIX. 31 -- 34; and proceeds, If evil,
punishment or misery in the present life is mercifully intended for the good of
the patients themselves why not in the next life? Is the character of God, as
the father of mercies, and God of pity, confined to this world only? The force
of all this depends entirely on the supposition, that in all instances of
suffering in this life, the end is the sufferer's good during this life.

BUT this supposition, we see by what has been said already, is by no means
true. The superstructure therefore built on this foundation falls entirely to
the ground. We all grant, that in some instances afflictions are intended for
the good of the sufferers. A proof of this, which needed no proof* Dr. C. has
produced out of the eighty-ninth psalm. On this foundation extended in his own
imagination to comprehend all instances of affliction, he built an argument in
which he triumphed. -- Now since there are those several instances of calamity
before mentioned, which Dr. C. would not pretend were designed for the
sufferer's good in this life; I might as well suppose that no other instances
of calamity are designed for the sufferers good in this life; and then adopt
Dr. C's strain of ardent declamation, in manner following: If evil punishment
or misery in the present life, be not intended for the good of the patients
themselves, but to support the authority of the divine law, and thus subserve
the general good; why not in the next life? Is the character of God, as a God
of perfect purity and strict justice, limited to this world only? Why should it
not be supposed, that the infinitely holy God has the same hatred of sin in the
other world which he has in this? and that he has in the next state the same
intention which he has in this, to vindicate, by punishments, his law and
government.

THE truth is, that as some of the calamities of this life are intended for the
patient's good in this life and others are as manifestly not intended for his
good in this life; nothing certain can be hence concluded concerning the end of
the misery of the damned. Nay: if it were certain, that all the calamities of
this life are intended for the patient's good in this life or that they are not
intended for his good in this life; yet it could not be certainly thence
concluded, that the miseries of the damned are intended for the good of the
patients, nor that they are not intended for the good of the patients. But this
point must be determined by other evidence, the evidence of revelation.

IF it should be said, that though some of the sufferings of this life do not,
in this life, produce good to the patients; yet they will produce good to them
in the future life; it will be sufficient to reply, that this wants proof; that
it is a main point in the present dispute; and that it should be taken for
granted, is not to be suffered.

2. IT is also urged by our author, That the whole course of nature, and even
the revelations of scripture constantly speak of God, as the universal father,
as well as governor of men -- What now is the temper and conduct of fathers on
earth toward their offspring? They readily do them good and chastise them for
their profit; but they do not punish their children, having no view to their
advantage. -- And shall we say that of our father in heaven, which we cannot
suppose of any father on earth, till we have first divested him of the heart of
a father? He abounds in pathetic discourse of the same strain, which is much
more suited to work on the imaginations and passions of mankind, than on their
reason. The foundation of all this discourse is, that fathers on earth, acting
in character, never punish and never can punish their children, but with a
design to promote their personal good. But would Dr. C. himself adventure to
lay down this position, and to abide by it? Did never a wise and good father
find it necessary, to punish, and even to cast out of his family, a desperate
child, to prevent his ruining the rest of the children? Was there never, or can
there possibly never be, an instance of this? If such an instance ever has, or
ever may occur, the appearance of argument in the forecited passage, vanishes
at once. Not only do fathers find it necessary to punish desperate children,
without any prospect of their personal good; but very frequently do kings,
governors and chief magistrates find this necessary with regard to their
subjects. Now in the scripture, God much oftener illustrates his character, by
that of a king, a prince, a sovereign lord, than by that of a father. And
askings, etc. often find it necessary to inflict capital and other punishments,
without any view to the personal good of the sufferers; we may hence deduce an
argument, that God also will punish many of his rebellious subjects, without
any view to their personal good; but to support his moral government, to be an
example of terror to others, and thus to secure the general good: and this
argument would be at least as strong as that of Dr. C. just cited.

3. IT may be pleaded, that though calamities in this life do not always issue
in the sufferers good; yet God may compensate them in the future state, for the
loss or suffering, of which they are the subjects in this life. Thus our
author, It is possible that the evils which any suffer in this, may be made up
to them in another state. Benevolence of the Deity, p. 249.
-- It is granted, that God is able to compensate his creatures for the evils
of this life; but that he in fact will do it in all cases, is to be proved. --
Besides; the very idea of compensation is inconsistent with the idea of
disciplinary punishment and that all the evils of both this life and the future
are necessary and are intended for the good of those who suffer them. For if
this idea be just, what foundation is there for compensation? Will a father
compensate a child for the pain of that discipline which is absolutely
necessary for his good and most wisely adapted to it? No man would ever think
of it. Compensation supposes, that the evil for which compensation is made, has
been inflicted from other motives, than a regard to the good of the sufferer.
And if evil may in one instance be inflicted from other motives than a regard
to the good of the sufferer; it may in any other instance in which justice and
wisdom admit of it; and if in this state, in the future too. -- If the evils of
life be intended for the good only of the subjects, we may as well talk of
compensating a man for the pain of drawing a tooth which is a perpetual torment
to him; or for the disagreeable taste of the dose which cures him of the colic;
as to talk of compensating him for the calamities of life. The saints will
indeed be rewarded for their patience under these calamities; and this part of
their holiness is doubtless as amiable, and is as properly as any part of their
holiness the object of the complacency of the Deity, and of those rewards which
are the fruits of that complacency. But those rewards are not to be considered
as compensations of losses or of damages. The very idea of compensation
implies, that that for which compensation is made, is on the whole an evil to
the person compensated. But the very idea that present evils are necessary and
conducive to the good of the subjects, implies, that on the whole they are no
evils to the subjects.

IT is now submitted to the reader, whether the doctrine, that the damned will
in fact suffer no other punishment, than that which is subservient to their
personal good, be not in many respects most glaringly inconsistent with the
scriptures; and whether it be not equally irreconcilable with their general
tenor as with many particular passages; and also with many parts of Dr. C's
book.

CHAP. IV. Containing an examination of Dr. C's arguments to prove endless
punishment inconsistent with justice.
THAT the endless punishment of the damned is inconsistent with justice, is
positively and abundantly asserted by Dr. C. and other advocates for universal
salvation. Whether the arguments which the Doctor offers to prove the injustice
of endless punishment, be conclusive, is the subject of our inquiry in this
chapter.

BEFORE we proceed to this inquiry, it seems necessary, to explain the meaning
of the proposition -- That the endless punishment of the damned is consistent
with justice.

I DO not find that Dr. C. has any where given us a definition of his idea of
justice, or of a just punishment, which is certainly a great omission. The
Chevalier Ramsay gives the following definition of the divine justice: "Justice
is that perfection of God, by which he endeavors continually to make all
intelligences just. Principles, Vol. I. p. 432.
" But with the same reason he might have defined the divine mercy to be, not
that perfection in God, by which he is himself inclined to the exercise of
mercy to the miserable; but that by which he endeavors to make all
intelligences merciful: and the divine love to be, not that perfection in God,
by which he loves his creatures, but that by which he endeavors to make other
intelligences exercise love. By this definition of justice a human judge, who
wrongs every man, whose cause is brought before him, and yet endeavors to make
other men just, is a just judge.

THE word justice is used in three different senses. Sometimes it means
commutative justice, sometimes distributive, and sometimes general or public
justice. Commutative justice respects property only, and the equal exchange and
restitution of it. Distributive justice is the equal distribution of rewards
and punishments, and it respects the personal rights and demerit of the person
rewarded or punished. General or public justice respects what are called the
rights of a community, whether a city, state, empire, or the universe. This
kind of justice requires the public good; and whenever that I violated or
neglected the public is injured. This last use of the word justice, though very
frequent, yet is an improper use of it; because to practice justice in this
sense, is no other than to act from public spirit, or from love to the
community, and with respect to the universe, it is the very same with general
benevolence.

NOW when we inquire, whether the endless punishment of the wicked be
consistent with justice, no man will suppose that the word justice means
commutative justice; because the inquiry has no respect to property. Nor is the
word to be understood to mean general or public justice. It is indeed an
important inquiry, whether the endless punishment of a man dying in
impenitence, be consistent with the general interest of the universe; but this
is not the subject to be considered in this chapter. The question to be
considered in this and in one or two succeding chapters, is, whether to inflict
an endless punishment on a man dying in impenitence, be an act of distributive
justice, or be a treatment of him by his judge, correspondent and no more than
correspondent or proportioned to his demerit, to his crimes, or to his moral
conduct and personal character. This is a question entirely different from the
following; Whether the infliction of an endless punishment on a sinner dying in
impenitence, be subservient to the good of the universe? A punishment or
calamity inflicted on a person may be subservient to the public good of a
community, yet not be deserved by him on account of his personal crimes. It was
for the good of the Roman republic, that Regulus should return to certain death
at Carthage; yet he did not deserve that death; it was not correspondent to his
moral character. On the other hand, many a villain has by his attrocious crimes
deserved death; yet by reason of his power, his connections, or the peculiar
circumstances of the state, it could not, consistently with the public good be
inflicted on him. So that in a variety of instances public justice or the
public good is promoted by private or distributive injustice; and distributive
justice would be productive of public injury or damage. And in some cases the
public good may be promoted by a proceeding, which, though not in the
distributive sense unjust, yet is not according to distributive justice. An
innocent person may choose to be made the subject of sufferings, in the stead
of a criminal. Therefore though the sufferings which he chooses to endure, be
inflicted on him, no injustice is done him. For will it be p^^^ended, that this
proceeding is according to strict distributive justice, which requires the
criminal to be punished and not his substitute. Yet it may promote the good of
the community, or secure it from great detriment by a relaxation of its laws
and government; as in the well known instance of Zaleucus, who put out one of
his own eyes, to support the authority of the law against adultery, which his
own son had violated.

ON the whole, when we inquire whether the endless punishment of the damned be
consistent with justice, the word justice means distributive justice. This, as
has been already observed, respects the personal merit or demerit of the man
rewarded or punished. A man suffers distributive injustice when he is not
treated as favorably as is correspondent to his personal conduct or character.
On the other hand, he has justice done him, when he is treated in a manner
correspondent to his personal conduct or character. A just punishment then is
that which is proportioned or correspondent to the crime punished. But it may
be further inquired, when is a punishment proportioned to the crime punished?
To this the answer seems to be, when by the pain or natural evil of the
punishment, it exhibits a just idea of the moral evil or ruinous tendency of
the crime, and a proper motive to restrain all intelligent beings from the
commission of the crime.

FURTHER to elucidate this matter, let it be observed, that any crime, by
relaxing the laws and by weakening the government, is a damage to the
community; and deserves just so much punishment, as, by restoring the proper
tone of the laws, and proper strength to the government, will repair that
damage. The chief evil of any crime, on account of which it principally
deserves punishment, consists in the relaxation of the laws and government of
the community in which the crime is committed. For example, the chief evil of
theft is not that a certain person is clandestinely deprived of his property.
His property may be restored and he may in this respect suffer no damage. Still
the thief deserves punishment. If a man be defamed, the chief evil is not that
the person defamed is injured by the loss of his reputation. His reputation
may, by a full confession of the defamer or by other means, be restored. Still
the defamer may deserve punishment. If a man be murdered, the chief evil is not
that the man is deprived of his life, and his friends and the community are
deprived of the benefit of his aid. His life may have been a burden to himself,
to his friends and to the community; or he may by divine power be raised from
the dead. Still, in either case, the murderer would deserve punishment.

THE true reason, why all those criminals would, in all those cases, deserve
punishment, is, that by their respective crimes they would weaken the laws and
government of the community, thereby would break in upon the public peace, good
order, safety and happiness; instead of these would introduce confusion and
ruin; and thus would do a very great damage to the community. -- Therefore,
they would respectively deserve just so much punishment, as by restoring the
tone of the laws and government, would re-establish the peace, good order,
safety and happiness of the community, and thus would repair the damage done to
the community by their crimes. -- A punishment adequate to this end exhibits by
the natural evil of it, a just idea of the moral evil of the crime, and a
proper motive to restrain all from the commission of it: it is therefore duly
proportioned to the crime, is correspondent to the conduct of the criminal, and
is perfectly just.

THE passages in which Dr. C. declares positively, that the endless punishment
of the wicked would be unjust, are very numerous; but his arguments to prove
that it would be unjust, are, so far as I can find, very few. As this is a
capital point in the present controversy, it was to be expected, that he would
go into a formal consideration of it, and give us his reasons methodically and
distinctly. Instead of this, in all the various parts of his book in which he
declaims most vehemently on the subject, there are very few in which I find an
attempt to argue. These are as follows: -- An eternity of misery swallows up
all proportion: or though there should be some difference in the degree of
pain, it is such a difference, I fear, as will be scarce thought worthy of
being brought into the account, when the circumstance of endless duration is
annexed to it. Page 309.
-- The smallness of the difference between those in this world, to whom the
character of wicked belongs in the lowest sense, and those to whom the
character of good is applicable in the like sense, renders it incredible, that
such an amazingly great difference should be made between them in the future.
The difference between them, according to the common opinion, will be doubly
infinite. -- For the reward and punishment being both eternal, they must at
last become infinite in magnitude. How to reconcile this with the absolutely
accurate impartiality of God, is, I confess, beyond me. Page 320.
-- It does not appear to me, that it would be honorable to the infinitely
righteous and benevolent governor of the world, to make wicked men
everlastingly miserable. For in what point of light soever we take a view of
sin, it is certainly in its nature a finite evil. It is the fault of a finite
creature, and the effect of finite principles, passions and appetites. To say
therefore, that the sinner is doomed to infinite misery, for the finite faults
of a finite life, looks like a reflection on the infinite justice, as well as
goodness of God. I know it has been often urged, that sin is an infinite evil,
because committed against an infinite object; for which reason an infinite
punishment is no more than its due desert. But this metaphysical nicety proves
a great deal too much, if it proves anything at all. For according to this way
of arguing, all sinners must suffer the utmost in degree, as well as in
duration; otherwise they will not suffer so much as they might do, and as they
ought to do: which is plainly inconsistent with that difference the scripture
often declares there shall be in the punishment of wicked men, according to the
difference there has been in the nature and number of their evil deeds. Page
361.


THESE, I think, are the passages in which Dr. C. offers his most plausible and
strong, if not his only, arguments, to prove, that endless punishment is not
consistent with justice; and the arguments here offered are these three only --
That endless punishment implies such a different treatment of the smallest
sinners and smallest saints, as is out of all proportion to their respective
characters; it is therefore incredible, and not reconcilable with the justice
and impartiality of God. -- That endless punishment is out of all proportion to
the demerit of sin, as the latter is finite, the former infinite. -- That
endless punishment, on account of the infinite evil of sin, as committed
against a God of infinite glory, implies, that future punishment is infinite in
degree too, and therefore that the punishment of all the damned is equal.

I. THAT endless punishment implies such a different treatment of the smallest
sinner and smallest saint, as is out of all proportion to their respective
characters; it is therefore incredible, and not reconcilable with the justice
and impartiality of God. On this I observe,

1. That there is an infinite difference between the treatment of two persons,
one of whom is sent to endless misery, the other not, is readily granted. But
that the one, who is sent to such a punishment, is treated unjustly, is not
granted; and to assert, that he is treated unjustly, is to beg and not to prove
the thing in question.

2. That of the two persons now supposed, one should be treated according to
his demerits, and the other by the "boundless goodness of God," should be
exempted from that punishment, to which, by his demerit, he is justly liable,
is nothing incredible or unjust. Surely the gracious exemption of one man from
that punishment, which he deserves, renders not the punishment of another
unjust, which would otherwise be just.

3. As there is no injustice in the case now stated, so neither is there any
partiality in it. There is no partiality in the conduct of the Supreme
Magistrate, who condemns one criminal according to his demerit, and pardons
another criminal equally guilty. But partiality is then practiced, when of two
real and known criminals, one is condemned by the judge; the other cleared, on
the pretense, that he is innocent. So that this whole argument from the
incredibly different treatment of the smallest sinner and smallest saint, whose
characters are so nearly on a level, so far as it supposes the different
treatment to be incredible, on account of the endless punishment of the sinner,
is a mere begging of the question. It takes for granted, that the sinner does
not deserve an endless punishment. So far as it supposes the different
treatment to be incredible, on account of the infinite reward or happiness
bestowed on the saint, it supposes, that God in his infinite goodness, cannot
bestow an infinite good on a creature, who in his own person is entirely
unworthy of it. It also supposes, that if ever God pardon any sinner, he must
pardon all, whose demerits are no more than that of the man pardoned; otherwise
he is partial: and for the same reason, that if ever he condemn any sinner, he
must condemn all those, whose characters are equally sinful with that of the
man condemned. But it is presumed, that these sentiments will be avowed by no
man.

II. THE next argument is. That endless punishment is out of all proportion to
the demerit of sin, as the former is infinite, the latter finite. -- As this is
a matter of great importance in the present dispute, it requires our particular
attention. -- How then does Dr. C. make it appear, that sin is a finite evil?
By these several considerations, that it is the fault of a finite creature, --
during a finite life, -- and the effect of finite principles, passions and
appetites; the sum of which is, that it is impossible for a creature, in a
finite duration, to commit an infinite crime; or which is the same thing, a
crime which shall deserve an endless punishment. -- As to this let it be
observed,

1. THAT if it be impossible for a creature, in a finite duration, to commit a
crime which shall deserve an endless punishment, it is as really against what
Dr. C. holds, as against the opposite system. He says, P. 11.
If the next is a state of punishment intended to satisfy the justice of God,
it is impossible all men should be finally saved: that is, if in the next state
a punishment be inflicted, which satisfies justice, all men will not be saved.
But a punishment, which satisfies justice is a perfectly just punishment. It is
therefore just, that some men should finally not be saved; or it is just, that
on account of their sins, they be without end excluded from salvation. And what
is the endless exclusion of a sinner from salvation on account of his sins, but
an endless punishment inflicted for the fault of a finite creature, committed
in a finite life, and the effect of finite principles, passions and appetites?
-- This passage of Dr. C. is a plain and full concession both of the justice of
endless, punishment, and of the infinite evil of sin.

THAT sin is an infinite evil, or an evil deserving an endless punishment, is
implied in all those passages also, in which Dr. C. asserts, that the salvation
of all men, and even of the damned, after they have suffered all which they
ever are to suffer, is the fruit of boundless and inexhaustible goodness,
infinite indulgence and love, etc. In his argument that the punishment of the
damned is disciplinary, he says, P. 326.
That God must in the other world, as well as this, be disposed to make it
evident, that he is a being of boundless and inexhaustible goodness. It is
plain by the connection, that the Doctor means, that the deliverance of the
damned, in consequence of a punishment, which is conducive to their good, is an
act of boundless and inexhaustible goodness.

But that the goodness of that act of deliverance is not greater than the evil
or punishment from which it delivers, will be conceded by all. There is
goodness in delivering a man from the toothache; but no man will pretend, that
this is an act of boundless and inexhaustible goodness. To deliver from the
misery of a thousand years torment in hell, is an act of far greater goodness.
But this is not an act of boundless and inexhaustible goodness. Nor is any act
of deliverance worthy of these epithets, unless it deliver from an evil, which
is boundless and inexhaustible. Doubtless the act of God in delivering a sinner
from the punishment of hell is called an act of boundless and inexhaustible
goodness with respect to the greatness of the benefit conferred by that
deliverance, and not with respect to the inherent and essential goodness of
God. If the latter be Doctor C's meaning, what he says is no illustration of
the divine goodness in delivering a sinner from the pains of hell: he might
have said the same concerning the deliverance of any person guilty or innocent,
from the toothache, or from the prick of a pin. He says, that God in the other
world, as well as this, must be disposed to make it evident, that he is a being
of boundless and inexhaustible goodness. But if the deliverance of a sinner
from the pains of hell be not a boundless benefit, it does not make it evident,
that God is a being of boundless goodness. If it be a boundless benefit, the
evil delivered from is boundless. If therefore the deliverance of the damned
from the torments of hell, be an act and a proof of boundless and inexhaustible
goodness, as the Doctor holds, the evil from which they are delivered, and to
which they are exposed by the divine law, is boundless and inexhaustible. But
they are not by the divine law exposed to a greater punishment than they justly
deserve: therefore they justly deserve a boundless (...) inexhaustible
punishment: of consequence sin, by which they deserve this punishment, is a
boundless and inexhaustible or an infinite evil.

AGAIN, Dr. C. in the words of Mr. Whiston, says, P. 405.
"Many, or all of them," [the damned] may possibly be recovered and saved at
last, by the infinite indulgence and love of their creator. The same
observations, which were made in the preceding paragraph, are applicable here.
It cannot be the meaning of Dr. C. that the recovery of the damned is in no
other sense a fruit or proof of the infinite indulgence and love of their
Creator, than the recovery of a person in this life from the smallest disease,
or calamity; or the deliverance of even an innocent being from some slight
evil. A less degree of indulgence and love, than that which is infinite, would
be sufficient for these recoveries, or deliverances. And if nothing short of
infinite indulgence and love can recover the damned, then their recovery is a
proof of infinite love. Now what can be a proof of infinite love, but the
bestowment of an infinite benefit? And no benefit consisting in recovery from
evil is infinite, unless the evil, from which the recovery is made, be
infinite. But if the evil from which the damned are supposed to be recovered,
be infinite, sin, by which they are exposed to that evil, must itself be an
infinite evil.

IF here it should be objected, that the damned are not indeed delivered from
wrath, by boundless goodness and infinite love; but that boundless goodness and
infinite love are exercised in their admission to the positive happiness of
heaven only: I entreat the reader to observe, that in the former of the two
passages last quoted, Dr. C. is speaking of God's making evident his boundless
and inexhaustible goodness, by pitying sinners, and punishing them in order to
their benefit, or by the deliverance of the damned, in consequence of a
disciplinary punishment. In the other, he is speaking in the words of Mr.
Whiston, concerning the recovery of the damned. -- But for a more full answer I
beg leave to refer the reader to page 13, where this same objection has been
stated and considered.

THAT sin is an infinite evil, is implied in what Dr. C. holds concerning
annihilation; he says, If the foregoing scheme should be found to have no truth
in it -- the second death ought to be considered as that which will put an end
to their existence both in soul and body, so that they shall be no more in the
creation of God. By this it appears that the Doctor held, that endless
annihilation would be no unjust punishment of sin. But endless annihilation is
an endless or infinite punishment. It is an endless loss of not only all the
good which the man at present enjoys; but of all that good which he would have
enjoyed throughout eternity, in the state of bliss to which he would have been
admitted, if he had never sinned. This in an endless duration would amount to
an infinite quantity of good. Annihilation therefore is an infinite punishment
both as it is endless, and as the quantity of good lost is infinite: and Dr. C.
in allowing that endless annihilation would be no more than a just punishment
of sin, allows, that sin deserves an infinite punishment, or that it is an
infinite evil, though it is the fault of a finite creature, in a finite life,
and the effect of finite principles, passions and appetites. If therefore it be
a difficulty hard to be solved, that a finite creature, in a finite life,
should commit an infinite evil, meaning a crime which may be justly punished
with an endless punishment; it is a difficulty that equally concerned Dr. C. as
myself; and it was absurd for him to object that to others, which lay equally
in his own way.

IT may be objected to these observations, that endless annihilation is not an
infinite punishment, because it may be inflicted on even an innocent person.
God having once communicated existence is under no obligation to perpetuate it;
but for wise ends may without injury suffer even the most holy of his
creatures, after the enjoyment of existence and of good for a season, to drop
into their original nothing. To this it may be answered; that this objection
equally proves, that annihilation is no punishment at all, as that it is not an
infinite punishment. When an innocent creature is suffered in sovereign wisdom
to drop into nonexistence, this is not only not an infinite punishment, but is
no punishment at all. A punishment is some evil brought on a person, in
testimony that his conduct is disapproved by the author of that evil. This is
not the case in the annihilation of the innocent person now supposed. Therefore
it equally follows from the possible annihilation of an innocent creature, that
the annihilation of the wicked would be no punishment at all, as that it would
not be an infinite punishment. Annihilation is an infinite loss, and in that
sense, an infinite evil, to an innocent person, as well as to one ever so
guilty. But as it is not inflicted on the (...), in testimony of
disapprobation, it is not a punishment. On the other hand, if it be inflicted
at all on the wicked, it is inflicted in express testimony of the divine
abhorrence of their conduct, and therefore is a punishment: and any punishment,
which is an infinite evil, is an infinite punishment.

TO illustrate this, let the following example be taken. A parent having begun
the most liberal and advantageous education of his son, may for wise reasons,
entirely drop, without any injustice to his son, the course of education, which
he had begun, and may suffer him to grow up in comparative ignorance. This
would not only not be a very great punishment of his son, but no punishment at
all. Whereas, if he should treat his son in the same manner, from the motive of
testifying his displeasure at some trifling levity or childish inadvertence, it
would be both a real and a very great punishment: and though it would consist
in a loss or privation, yet it would be a much greater punishment than the
infliction of a very considerable positive pain. In like manner, though
annihilation may be inflicted in such a manner, as to be no punishment; yet
when it is inflicted with the declared design of exhibiting the divine
displeasure at sin; it is a far greater punishment, than a very great and long
temporary misery. -- That annihilation is an evil, no man will deny, who allows
that existence and happiness are good. And if it be an evil, it is an evil
equal to the good lost by it, taking into view the continuance of that loss;
and as this is infinite, final annihilation is an infinite evil: and whenever
it is inflicted in testimony of disapprobation of the conduct of the sinner, it
is an infinite punishment.

DOUBTLESS Dr. C. was of the opinion, that annihilation may be a punishment, as
it was his belief, that if his scheme of universal salvation be not true, the
wicked are to be annihilated. He would doubtless have allowed, that
annihilation will not be brought on them in testimony of the divine approbation
of their conduct. Nor can it be supposed to be the fruit of perfect
indifference in the divine mind, with respect to their conduct. It must
therefore be a testimony of divine disapprobation, which constitutes it a
punishment. And as it is an infinite evil, of course it is an infinite
punishment* To prove that sin does not deserve an endless punishment, Dr.
Priestly too says, There is no proportion between finite and infinite. Instit.
Vol. II. p. 383. Neither is there any proportion between this finite life and
endless annihilation. Yet Dr. Priestly is of the opinion, that endless
annihilation would not be an unjust punishment of sin.


PERHAPS it may be further said, in opposition to what has been now advanced,
that the meaning of those who assert, that sin does not deserve an infinite
punishment, is not, that sin does not deserve an endless privation, or negative
punishment; but that it does not deserve an endless positive punishment,
consisting in positive pains or torments. -- If the objection be thus
explained, it comes to this merely, that sin does indeed deserve an endless
punishment, and so is truly and properly an infinite evil, in the sense in
which any of us hold it to be an infinite evil: but it is not such an infinite
evil, as to deserve so great an endless punishment, as endless positive pain
and torment. But this stating of the objection entirely shifts the ground of
the dispute: granting, that an endless punishment is justly deserved by sin, it
denies, that so great a degree of punishment, as endless positive misery, is
deserved by it. Endless annihilation is equally and as truly an endless
punishment, as endless torment. Nor is there any ground of objection to the one
more than to the other, on account of any difference in duration, or that in
which alone the infinity consists. But the ground of objection to endless
misery, rather than to endless annihilation, is, that it is a greater, more
dreadful, and more intolerable punishment; or a greater punishment in degree.

BESIDES, not every degree of endless pain is a greater evil or punishment,
than endless annihilation. No man will pretend, that any slight pain continued
to eternity, is so great an evil, as endless annihilation and the endless loss
of all enjoyment and existence.

ON the whole, as the state of the argument before us, is now wholly shifted;
as it is granted by the objector, that sin deserves an infinite or endless
punishment, but not so great an endless punishment, as is implied in some
degrees of endless pain; every thing for which we contend, as to the duration
of future punishment, is granted. It is not pretended by the advocates for
endless punishment, that sin deserves an infinite degree of endless punishment.
Nor do they pretend to determine the degree of punishment, which it deserves.
It becomes all to leave that to God, who alone is able to determine it. The
advocates for temporary punishment will not pretend to determine the degree of
temporary punishment, which sin deserves. The degree of future punishment is
not the subject of the present dispute. I might now therefore fairly dismiss
the further discussion of the infinite evil of sin, as on account of the
concessions already mentioned, wholly impertinent to the present dispute. But
wishing to relieve what difficulties, and to throw what light on the subject, I
can, I proceed to observe,

PERHAPS it may be yet further pleaded, that the opposers of the infinite evil
of sin mean, that sin does not deserve such an endless positive misery, as is
worse than nonexistence. -- As to this, besides that it makes the subject of
the dispute to be wholly the degree of punishment, and not the duration of it;
it may be remarked, that it is granted in this plea, that it would be just, if
all the wicked, who die in impenitence, were annihilated. Annihilation
therefore is the punishment deserved by the least sinner, who dies in
impenitence; and those, whose guilt is more aggravated, deserve a greater
punishment; and as some are inconceivably greater sinners than the least, they
deserve an inconceivably greater punishment than annihilation. Again, as the
least sinner deserves annihilation, so he deserves that degree of positive
pain, or that mixture of pain and pleasure, which is equally undesirable, or
equally dreadful as nonexistence. Therefore those, who are inconceivably
greater sinners than the least, deserve that degree of positive endless pain,
which is inconceivably worse and more to be dreaded, than nonexistence, or
than that mixture of pain and pleasure, which is equally to be dreaded as
nonexistence. Therefore from principles conceded by Dr. C. it clearly follows,
not only that all sinners deserve an endless punishment, but that all sinners,
except those of the very lowest class, deserve that degree of endless misery,
which is worse than nonexistence; and which is not only an infinite evil, but
an evil doubly infinite, as the loss is infinite, and the positive misery
exceeding all the good enjoyed, being endless, is infinite too.

2. THE argument of Dr. C. now under consideration, "If it prove any thing,
proves a great deal too much," as it supposes, that any crime can justly be
punished for no longer time, than was consumed in the perpetration of the
crime. -- That this is implied in the argument, will appear, if we consider,
that if it be once allowed, that a crime may be punished for a longer time than
was consumed in the perpetration of it, the whole argument, that a creature
cannot, in a finite life, commit such sin, as shall deserve an endless
punishment, must be given up. If a man may in one day commit a crime, which
deserves a punishment to be continued for a year, who will say, that he may not
in one day commit a crime, which shall deserve a punishment to be continued for
two years, for ten years, or during his life? Therefore in determining the
duration of the punishment, no regard at all is had to the time taken up in the
perpetration of the crime. And if no regard be had to this, there is no
absurdity in supposing, that the crimes of a finite life may deserve an endless
punishment. To say, that there is an absurdity in it, supposes, that in
adjusting the punishment, a regard is always to be had to the time taken up in
the perpetration of the crime; which is contrary to known fact, as well as to
the deduction just now made. Nay, it implies, as I before observed, that no
just punishment can be continued for a longer time, than was consumed in the
perpetration of the crime. -- The mere duration of punishment is of no
importance or consideration, unless the whole punishment be excessive.
Therefore perpetual imprisonment is inflicted for crimes, which are perpetrated
in a very short time.

BY the same argument, by which Dr. C. undertakes to prove, that sin does not
deserve an endless punishment, any man may undertake to prove, that it does not
deserve a punishment to continue for ages of ages. The Doctor's argument is,
that sin deserves no more than a temporary punishment, because it is committed
in a finite duration. With the same strength of argument it may be said: Sin
deserves not a punishment of ages of ages, but a punishment of no longer
duration, than seventy years, because it is committed in the space of seventy
years. -- It is manifest, that when a punishment of ages of ages is inflicted
on the sinner, no regard is had to the time consumed in the perpetration of
sin. And if it be just to inflict a punishment in one case, without regard to
the time consumed in the perpetration of sin, why not in another? If because
sin is the fault of a finite life, it does not deserve an infinite punishment;
then because it is the fault of a life of less duration, than that of ages of
ages, it does not deserve a punishment which is to continue for ages of ages.
-- Or how will Dr. C. prove, that sin, the fault of a life, which is to
continue only seventy years, deserves a punishment, which is to continue for
ages of ages? I presume he will not pretend to prove it by any proportion
between the duration of seventy years and that of ages of ages; but merely by
revelation. From the same source of evidence, we undertake to prove both the
reality and justice of endless punishment. And it is as ineffectual to object
to our proof of endless punishment, the disproportion between an infinite and a
finite duration, as it is to object to his proof of a punishment of ages of
ages, the disproportion between the duration of ages of ages, and that of
seventy years. I grant that the disproportion between infinite and finite
duration, is greater, than that between ages of ages and seventy years. But,
when the time consumed in the commission of a crime is not at all regarded, let
the disproportion be what it may, nothing can be thence concluded.

IF it be still pretended, that a regard to the time consumed in the commission
of sin is had, in determining the duration of its punishment (...) ask what
regard is had to it? If the duration of the punishment may at all exceed the
time consumed in the commission of sin, how much may the former exceed the
latter? To say there is an infinite disproportion between a si^^^^ life, and an
endless eternity, affords no satisfaction. So there is a very great
disproportion between a life of seventy years, and ages of ages. And if on the
principles of Dr. C. an endless punishment be more unjust than that of ages of
ages, is not the latter on the same principles really unjust? If not, then a
punishment, the duration of which is greatly disproportionate to the time
consumed in the commission of the crime, is still just: and who will undertake
to fix the degrees of disproportion between the duration of the punishment, and
the time consumed in the commission of the crime, which are consistent, and
which are inconsistent with justice? And let a reason be given, why it is not
as really unjust to inflict a punishment, the duration of which is greatly
disproportionate to the time spent in the commission of the crime, as to
inflict a punishment, the duration of which bears no proportion to the time
spent in the commission of the crime. Why would not the same argument from the
disproportion of the duration of the punishment, to the time spent in
committing the sin, prove, that Adam was unjustly punished, in that he was
condemned to eat bread in the sweat of his face, all the days of his life, for
the sin of eating the forbidden fruit, which was doubtless finished in a very
short time? Also, that David was unjustly punished, in that the sword never
departed from his house, because of his sin in the matter of Uriah?

IF a finite creature, in a finite time, cannot commit an infinite evil, or one
which deserves an endless punishment, it will follow, that even our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, if he be a real creature, though the first born of every
creature, So far as can be judged from the book of Dr. C. now under
examination, and some others of his works, he would not have objected to this
character of Christ.
cannot, if he were disposed, commit an infinite evil. Yet as he created and
upholds all things by the word of his power, he doubtless has power to
annihilate all things. Now I ask, whether if Christ should annihilate the whole
created system, himself only excepted, it would be a finite or an infinite
evil? If the answer should be, that it would be a finite evil, I would ask
again, whether it would not be as great an evil to the universe, as the endless
misery of one sinner, provided he deserves that misery. -- I make this this
proviso, because we do not plead for endless punishment on any other
supposition, than that it is just: And if it should be said, that the endless
punishment of a sinner is an infinite evil, because it is unjustly inflicted,
this would be a begging of the question: it would also follow, that on the
supposition of the justice of the endless punishment of the sinner, it is not
an infinite evil, and therefore there is no foundation for the objection now
under consideration, that sin a finite moral evil is punished with an infinite
natural evil or punishment. -- Beside, that the endless annihilation of the
created system would be an infinite evil in the very same sense, in which the
endless punishment of the damned is an infinite evil, is evident from this
consideration, that the punishment of the damned is not pretended to be
infinite in any other respect, th^^ in duration. In the very same respect the
endless annihilation of which we speak, is infinite.

IF the answer to the question just proposed, should be, that the annihilation
of the created system would be an infinite evil; the consequence is, that an
infinite evil may be caused or committed by a finite creature, in a finite time.

POSSIBLY it may be further objected, that if our Lord Jesus Christ be a mere
creature, he had no power in himself to create the universe; but created it by
a divine power communicated for that purpose: and that if he should annihilate
it, he must do it by the same communicated power. Therefore Christ himself has
it not in his power, to effect an infinite evil. -- But we are to observe, that
if Christ was a proper intelligent moral agent in creation, that work is his
work, and properly to be ascribed to him, as properly as any actions of men are
to be ascribed to them. It is allowed on all hands, that all men have received
all their powers of action from their creator; yet no man will dispute, whether
these actions be the proper actions of men, or whether the effects produced by
these actions be imputable to them, as their proper causes. Therefore with at
least as great truth and propriety is Christ, even on the supposition that he
is a mere creature, the proper cause of all his works, whether of creation or
annihilation, as men in general are the causes of their works. He cannot
possibly be more dependent for his powers, than we are for ours. Nor is it of
any importance to the subject now under consideration, whether Christ had
originally the power of creation and annihilation, or whether it was
communicated to him afterward. A power given by God at one time, is as really
given by him, as if it were given at another time.

IN the argument against the infinite evil of sin, that a finite creature
cannot commit an infinite evil, in a finite time; the finitude of the time is
either essential to the validity of the argument, or it is not. If it be
essential, it implies, as was before observed, that no crime can deserve to be
punished for a longer time, than was consumed in the commission of the crime.
If the finitude of the time be not essential to the argument, but the meaning
be, that a finite creature cannot at all commit an infinite evil, because he is
a finite creature, it will follow, that if the whole system of intelligent
creatures were to revolt from God, and to continue in their revolt to an
absolute eternity, it would be but a finite evil.

OBJECTION: The time never can come, at which the system of creatures shall
have continued to an absolute eternity, in their revolt from God. Though
therefore we suppose that the whole created system should revolt, it is absurd
to suppose, that they shall have continued in their revolt to an absolute
eternity: and therefore it is impossible, that the whole created system should
have committed an infinite evil. -- ANSWER. For the same reason it is
impossible, that a creature should have been punished to an absolute eternity.
The longest punishment to which any suppose the wicked are doomed, is in no
other sense infinite, than that in which the revolt which has been supposed,
may be infinite. If then the wicked be not doomed to an infinite or endless
punishment; sin is not, on any scheme, punished with an infinite punishment;
and then the whole objection of punishing a finite evil, with an infinite
punishment, falls to the ground.

BUT this whole argument, founded on the finitude of the life and of the
capacity of the sinner, was virtually given up by Dr. C. in that he believed,
that endless annihilation would be a just punishment of sin: though the
duration of the punishment in this case, would infinitely exceed the time
consumed in the commission of sin.

III. WE come at length to consider the third argument of Dr. C. against the
justice of endless punishment, which is, that endless punishment, on account of
the infinite evil of sin, as committed against a God of infinite glory,
implies, that future punishment is infinite or to the utmost in degree, as well
as duration, and therefore that the punishment of all the damned is equal,
which is both absurd and contrary to scripture. This I take to be the argument
intended in the latter part of the last quotation made in the beginning of this
chapter. -- On this it is observable, that though a sinner, on account of the
infinite evil of sin as committed against a God of infinite glory, deserve and
shall suffer an endless punishment; it by no means follows, that he deserves or
will suffer that punishment which is infinite in degree too, or which is to the
utmost degree in which any sinner is punished. All that follows from the
infinite evil of sin is, that it deserves an infinite punishment; and an
endless punishment is an infinite punishment, though it be not to the utmost in
degree. Therefore, when Dr. C. says, According to this way of arguing, all
sinners must suffer to the utmost in degree, as well as duration, otherwise,
they will not suffer so much as they ought to do; he merely asserts what he
ought to have proved. Therefore he fails in his attempt to fasten on the
doctrine of the infinite evil of sin, the absurdity that the punishment of all
the damned will be equal. He might as well have argued, that because all saints
shall receive an infinite or an endless reward; the reward of every one will be
to the utmost in degree, and the reward of all will be equal.

OR if the meaning of this argument be, that the wicked will all be punished
equally, not because they will suffer an endless punishment, but because they
all sin against the same infinitely glorious object, and therefore their sins
are all equal: the answer is, that the consequence by no means follows from the
premises. Though it be true, that the wicked all sin against the same God, and
on that account all deserve endless punishment? yet it no more follows thence,
that they all deserve the same punishment in degree, than if a number of
subjects should rebel against the same excellent Prince, it would follow, that
they are equally guilty, and all deserve an equal punishment.

THE expression, infinite evil of sin, seems to be very offensive to some
gentlemen. They seem to conceive that it means as great an evil or crime, as it
is possible for a man to commit, the moral turpitude of which can in no respect
be increased. -- This idea of the infinite evil of sin is very different from
that which is entertained by those who hold, that sin is an infinite evil. All
they mean is, that sin is in such a sense an infinite evil, that it may be
justly followed by an endless punishment. It no more follows hence, that the
moral turpitude of any particular sin can not be increased, than that the
endless punishment of it cannot be increased; or than that the endless
happiness of the saints in heaven cannot be increased. Indeed, neither the
happiness of heaven, nor the misery of hell can be increased in duration: nor
can the turpitude of sin be so increased, as to deserve a greater duration of
punishment, than that which is endless. But as both the happiness of heaven and
the misery of hell, though endless, may be increased in degree; so may the
turpitude of sin be so increased, as to deserve a greater degree of punishment.

WHEN it is said, that if the evil of sin be infinite, it is as great as
possible, and so all sins are equal; it seems to be implied, that all infinites
are equal in all respects, than which nothing is more false. An infinite line,
an infinite superficies, and an infinite solid, are all infinites, and they are
all equal in one respect or dimension, that of length. But a line though truly
infinite in length, is not in the dimension of breadth equal to an infinite
superficies. Nor is a superficies, though truly infinite in the two dimensions
of length and breadth, equal in depth to an infinite solid. -- To apply this,
sin may be infinitely aggravated with respect to the object against whom it is
committed, and in that respect it may be incapable of an increase of
aggravation. Still it may not be infinite with respect to the degree of
opposition, or virulence and malignity to the object, against whom it is
committed.

BY the infinite evil of sin therefore is meant, that sin truly deserves an
endless punishment, as it is committed against an infinitely glorious object,
against God himself, his authority, his law, his government; and as it
enervates the laws, violates the peace and safety of his kingdom, introduces
confusion and ruin, and would actually ruin entirely that kingdom, and the
happiness of all who belong to it, were not measures taken by God to prevent
its natural effect. In this respect it is infinitely evil, and in this respect,
in which it is infinitely evil, the evil of it cannot be increased, because the
object against which it is committed, cannot be greater, more important, or
more excellent; and in this respect all sins are equal. But by the infinite
evil of sin, is not meant an evil, which deserves an infinite degree of
punishment; or an act of opposition to God and his kingdom, which is infinitely
virulent or malicious. In this respect the evil of sin may be increased, and in
this respect all sins are by no means equal. -- The evil of any one sin is not
so great, but that on the whole it may be increased, as the happiness of heaven
is not so great, but that on the whole that may be increased.

THOUGH the turpitude of sin is infinite with respect to the object opposed,
yet it is not infinite as to the degree of opposition. If a subject rebel
against the most excellent sovereign on earth, his crime is, in respect to the
object, as great as he can commit in rebellion against a temporal prince;
because by supposition he cannot be the subject of a better temporal prince,
and therefore he cannot rebel against a better. Yet this rebellion may be more
aggravated by greater degrees of opposition, abuse or insult to this same
excellent prince.

WHAT has been now said concerning the infinite evil of sin, has been in the
way of explanation, and in answer to Dr. C's objections. The positive proof,
that sin is an infinite evil, has been so largely and ably given by others,
that the reader will allow me to refer him to them. President Edwards's sermon
on the Eternity of hell torments, and his tract on Justification. Dr. Bellamy's
Essay on the Gospel, Sect. V. Mr. Hopkins on the Future State, Sect. IV.


THUS I have particularly attended to the arguments brought by Dr. C. to prove,
that the endless punishment of the wicked would not be just. -- I shall now
proceed to a more general consideration of the justice of endless punishment
consisting in misery, and to some arguments in proof of it. The first argument
to which I wish to direct the attention of the reader, is, that if endless
punishment be the curse of the divine law, or the punishment threatened in the
divine law, as the wages of sin, or as the proper punishment of sinners;
undoubtedly it is just. It is impossible, that a God of perfect and infinite
justice should threaten an unjust punishment. -- I am indeed aware, that it is
not a conceded point, that endless misery is threatened in the divine law: I
therefore purpose to attempt the proof of it. -- The curse of the divine law is
either endless annihilation, or it is that misery which the wicked in fact
suffer in hell, or it is some temporary misery of greater duration than that
which is actually suffered in hell, or it is endless misery. These several
hypotheses shall come under consideration in the following chapters.

BUT before I proceed, it may be proper to explain in what sense I use the word
law, in this inquiry concerning the curse of the divine law. -- By the divine
law, I mean not merely any positive, revealed law, as that given to Adam
concerning the tree of knowledge of good and evil: but what Dr. C. calls "the
moral law of God," and the law of works, as requiring perfect, actual,
indefectable obedience. The Doctor allows, that "he" [Adam] was, without all
doubt, under strict indispensable obligations to obey every command of God,
wherein it should be made known to him -- and must have rendered himself
obnoxious to the righteous resentments of his God and king, had he expressed
any disregard to any of them. 5 Diss. p. 55.
This he speaks concerning the moral law, as may be seen by the context. And
doubtless as Adam was obligated to obey "every command" of the moral law, and
in case of disobedience, was obnoxious to the righteous resentments of God, the
same is true of every other man. The righteous resentment of God for
disobedience to this law, is that very curse of the law, from which Christ has
redeemed his people, and which is the proper object of our present inquiry. By
law taken in this sense, Dr. C. abundantly holds, that no man can be justified.
By law, the apostle sometimes means law in general, both the law written in
men's hearts, and in the books of revelation -- sometimes -- the Mosaic law in
special. But whether he understand by it natural or revealed law, or law
including both; works done in conformity to it, when mentioned with reference
to justification, he always sets aside as totally insufficient for the
procurement of it. 12 Sermons, p. 4.
Here the Doctor tells us in what sense he uses the word law, which is the same
in which I use it, in the present inquiry: and as he asserts in this context,
and in very many other passages, that no man, "Jew or Gentile," can be
justified on the foot of law taken in the sense just explained; of course all
men are condemned by the law, and the punishment to which the law condemns all,
is the curse of the law; or the curse of the law is that punishment to which
the moral law condemns every man who transgresses it.

CHAP. V. Is Annihilation the Punishment of the damned?
DOCTOR C's first object was, to prove that all men will be finally happy. --
If he should fail in this, his last resort was annihilation. If the foregoing
scheme, says he, P. 282.
should be sound to have no truth in it, and the wicked are sent to hell, as so
many incurables, the second death ought to be considered, as that which will
put an end to their existence, both in soul and body, so as that they shall be
no more in the creation of God. Having made the supposition, that the next is
the final state of men, he says, P. 288.
It is most peremptorily affirmed, that they (the wicked) shall reap
corruption, perish, be destroyed, and die a second time; which fixes the sense
of the word everlasting, when joined with the misery they shall be doomed to
undergo, limiting its meaning to an age, or period of duration only.
Corruption, perdition, destruction, and the second death do not limit the
meaning of the word everlasting, unless it be on the supposition, that those
words themselves mean annihilation. Sometimes by those words Dr. C. seems to
have meant a transition from one future state of existence to another; at other
times he expressly declares that they mean misery, torment. Now if those words
applied to the wicked mean a transition from the next state of existence to
another, they by no means certainly limit their misery. This transition may be
from one state of misery to another state of misery; as Dr. C. supposed that
they might pass through several future states of misery, before they should
arrive at happiness. Nay, from the words used in this sense, no inference can
be drawn, that they will ever arrive at a state of happiness: because a
transition from one state of misery to another state of misery, is as truly a
transition, as a transition from a state of misery to a state of happiness. --
But if those words mean misery or torment, they certainly do not limit the
future misery of the wicked; as will more fully appear presently.

I DO not find any proof offered by Dr. C. that the wicked will be annihilated,
unless he consider the very meaning of the words destruction, death, etc. as a
proof. But this proof, if it be one, was absolutely given up by himself, as he
held, that those words signify not annihilation, but misery; as in the
following passages; Everlasting punishment, everlasting fire, everlasting
destruction: so the words are rendered in our English bibles; but we are very
obviously led to understand by them MISERY, that must be suffered for a certain
period. Page 224.
If men continue the servants of sin, the wages they shall receive before the
gift through Christ is conferred on them, will be the second death: whereas if
they become the servants of God, this gift through Christ will issue in their
eternal life, without their passing through the second death. Page 90.
That by the second death he here meant not annihilation, but the misery of
hell, is manifest, as it is to be followed with the gift of God through Christ,
which is eternal life. The going away into everlasting punishment, the being
cast into the furnace of fire, where there shall be wailing and gnashing of
teeth, mean the same thing in the sacred dialect, with the second death. Page
210.
They may be saved without first going through the torments of hell, or as the
scripture expresses it, without being hurt of the second death. Page 337.
How strange then is it, that Dr. C. should urge the literal and original
meaning of the words death, destruction, etc. as an argument for annihilation,
when he himself supposed that they mean not annihilation, but obviously mean
misery! and that he should suppose, that they limit the sense of the word
everlasting, when it is joined to the misery of the damned! As well might he
have said, that the word misery limits the sense of the word everlasting, when
it is joined to the misery of the damned!

Perhaps some admirers of Dr. C. may attempt to reconcile this inconsistence,
by saying, he held that the words death, destruction, etc. mean and prove
annihilation, on the sole supposition, that the next state is final: that on
any other supposition he held that they mean misery. -- But this would be a
vain attempt. For if those words do or may mean misery, they are no proof of
annihilation, whether the next state be final or not. They are no more a proof
of it, than (...) words misery and torment; because by his own concessions,
they are at least capable of meaning misery or torment. Therefore though Dr.
C's scheme of universal happiness should fail, we should from the application
of the words death, destruction, etc. to the wicked, be under no necessity of
supposing that they will be annihilated; everlasting destruction may mean
everlasting misery.

THE truth appears to be, that Dr. C. was led to adopt, as (...) last resort,
the idea of the annihilation of the wicked, not by the obvious meaning and use
of the words death and destruction in scripture; since he allows they obviously
mean misery or torment; but by the preconception, that it is a certain truth,
that the endless misery of any of mankind can never exist. To this preconceived
opinion the scripture must some way or other be accommodated.

BUT let us proceed to some considerations to confirm the proposition, that
annihilation is not the curse or punishment denounced against sin in the divine
law.

THE doctrine, that annihilation is the curse of the divine law, may be holden
in two different senses, both which I conceive to be entirely opposite to the
truth. -- It is the sentiment of many, that annihilation is the punishment of
sin threatened in the law, and is actually inflicted on those who die
impenitent. -- Again; it is the sentiment of some, that though annihilation
will not be inflicted on any; yet it is the curse which was originally in the
law denounced against sin; but that Christ has absolutely redeemed all from
it; and therefore none will suffer it.

I. IT is the sentiment of many, and was the sentiment of Dr. C. provided his
scheme of universal happiness do not hold; that annihilation is the punishment
threatened in the law, and is actually inflicted on those who die impenitent.
-- Concerning which it is to be remarked;

1. That on this hypothesis, all Dr. C's arguments both from scripture and
reason, to prove the salvation of all men, entirely fall to the ground; and it
is nothing inconsistent with either the justice or goodness of God, that a
great part of mankind should be forever cast off, and suffer an endless
punishment; and not only a great part, but the greater part of the whole; as he
acknowledges, that but few are saved immediately from this life. Page 8, and
322.
Nor is it at all inconsistent with the design of Christ's undertaking, nor
with his honor as the Savior of mankind, that the greater part of the whole
race should not be saved. The reader will take notice, that these observations
are made on the sole ground of Dr. C's concession, that but few of mankind are
to be saved immediately from this life, and do not imply, that this is the real
truth.
All that argument therefore of Dr. C. with his declamation on the supposed
absurdity, that Christ should undertake to defeat the devil and destroy his
works, and yet really be so far baffled by him, See p. 322, 323.
as still to fail of the salvation of the greater part of mankind, comes
entirely to nothing. -- Nor must it be any more urged as an argument in this
dispute, that God is willing that all men should be saved, and not willing that
any should perish; or that Christ died for all men, etc. etc. At least these
propositions must be received with the same limitations and distinctions, with
which the despised orthodox, systematic divines have received them. At the same
time, all those texts which speak of the restitution of all things; of God's
tender mercies over all his works; of the free gift coming upon all men to
justification of life; of the creature delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God; of the
destruction of the last enemy, death: of all things gathered together in
Christ; of all things reconciled to God by Christ; of every creature saying,
blessing and honor, etc, to him that sits on the throne and to the Lamb,
etc, etc, must be given up, or understood with the like limitations, as are put
upon them, by the believers in endless misery. -- At the same time, all Dr. C's
labored criticism on (...), and (...), etc, must be acknowledged to be
groundless: and all that he has said against vindictive punishment, and in
favor of mere discipline, is nothing to the purpose.

II. THE scriptural representations of the punishment of the wicked are
inconsistent with the idea that it consists in annihilation. According to the
scriptures the wicked depart into everlasting fire. -- The smoke of their
torment ascends up forever and ever. -- They shall weep and wail and gnash
(...) teeth. -- They have no rest day nor night. -- The (...) in hell lifted up
his eyes, being in torment. -- The damned shall dwell with ever lasting
burnings. -- When the master of the house shall have risen up and shut the
door, they shall stand without, crying Lord, Lord, open to us: to whom the
master shall say, I know you not* depart from me. -- After they themselves
shall have been thrust out, they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all
the prophets in the kingdom of God. -- The rich man in hell saw Abraham afar
off and Lazarus in his bosom. -- The saved shall go forth and look on the
carcases of transgressors, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh. -- The
beast and false prophet, and by parity of reason, all men dying in wickedness,
shall be cast into a lake of fire and shall be tormented forever and ever;
(...) in the plural number, determining, that they, the devil, the beast and
the false prophet, shall be tormented for ever and ever. -- The wicked shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the angels, and in the
presence of the lamb.

BUT how can those who are annihilated, be said to be cast into fire, into a
lake of fire and brimstone, and to be tormented there; to have no rest; to
weep, and wail and gnash their teeth; to dwell with everlasting burnings? -- As
well might these things be said of them before they were created. -- How can
they be said to plead for admission into heaven, and to reason on the subject
with the master of the celestial mansions? How can they see Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in the kingdom of God? How can they seeing Abraham and Lazarus in that
state, enter into discourse with the former? -- Rev. XIV. 11. The smoke of
their torment ascends up forever and ever, and they have no rest day nor
night. But those who are annihilated, so far as they have any thing, have
continual rest day and night.

THE different degrees of the punishment of the wicked in hell prove, that
their punishment does not consist in annihilation. Matt. V. 22, Whosoever shall
be angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment:
whosoever shall say to his brother, raca, shall be in danger of the council:
but whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire. -- The
servant who knows not his master's will, and commits things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes. but the servant who knows his master's will,
and commits things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with many stripes. -- It
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon and for Sodom, than for Chorazin,
Bethsaida and Capernaum. -- The wicked shall receive according to their works,
according to the fruit of their doings, and according to that which they shall
have done in the body. The scribes and Pharisees were to receive the greater
damnation, Matt. XXIII. 14. -- But if annihilation be the punishment of the
wicked, there is no difference between the punishment of the least sinner and
the greatest, who die impenitent: which is both absurd in itself and absolutely
contradictory to the scriptural account.

IF it should be pleaded in answer to this argument, that though all the wicked
shall suffer annihilation; yet the punishment of all will not be the same; as
the more aggravated sinners will be made the subjects of misery for a while,
and then be annihilated: it may be replied, that this supposes the curse of the
law to consist in two things, temporary misery and annihilation. But where have
we any hint in the scripture, that the curse of the law, as suffered in the
future world, is such a heterogeneous compound as this? -- After all, it seems,
that annihilation is but a small part of that curse; for that alone will be
inflicted on the least sinner only, and on account of the least sin; and all
that punishment which shall be inflicted on any person, above that which is due
to the least sin; is to consist in torment. Why then might not the constitution
have been, that the small additional part of the curse, which is to consist in
annihilation, should likewise be inflicted in torment? This was very feasible.
He who suffers the punishment of ninety nine sins in torment, might by a small
addition, in degree or duration to his torment, have suffered the punishment of
an hundred sins. Add to the torment of every sinner dying impenitent, a degree
or duration of misery, equal to that which is deserved by one sin, and that the
least, and there would have been no need that any of them be annihilated, but
having suffered the whole curse of the law, they would on the foot of strict
justice be entitled to exemption from further punishment. And who having by
misery satisfied for all the various and most aggravated sins of his life,
would not choose to satisfy, in the same way, for the least of all his sins,
rather than to be struck out of existence, and to lose inconceivable and
endless enjoyment? As therefore this supposed constitution would be so
apparently unnecessary and unwise, it cannot be expected to obtain credit,
unless it be most clearly revealed in scripture, which is not pretended
concerning it. -- Besides, this hypothesis places so small a part of the
punishment of sinners in annihilation, that it cannot with any propriety be
said, that the curse of the law consists in annihilation.

SHOULD it be further objected, that though all the wicked be annihilated, yet
their punishment may be of different degrees, as the losses they shall
respectively suffer, will be different according to their various degrees of
enjoyment or capacities for enjoyment: it may be answered, that the wicked are
to be punished according to their several crimes. A man guilty of murder, will,
if his other crimes be the same, be punished more than the thief, who steals
the value of five shillings. Yet the enjoyment of the latter and his capacity
for enjoyment, may be far greater than those of the former. By annihilation
therefore he would suffer a far greater loss. -- Not all those who know their
master's will, and yet commit things worthy of stripes, possess greater
enjoyments or capacities for enjoyment, than those who know not their master's
will.

3. THE punishment of the fallen angels does not consist in annihilation: and
the damned suffer the same kind of punishment with them. That the fallen angels
are as yet annihilated, I presume, will be pretended by no believer in divine
revelation, and that they are not to be annihilated, will be evident, if we
consider, that in expectation of that full punishment, to which they are
liable, they asked our Lord, whether he were come to torment them before the
time. It was torment then, not annihilation, which they expected. The present
state of the fallen angels is a state of torment to a certain degree. They
"believe and tremble:" "They are reserved in chains under darkness, to the
judgment of the great day," Jude, 6: "They are cast down to hell," 2 Peter, II,
4: "The devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
where the beast and the false prophet are, and [they] shall be tormented day
and night, forever and ever," Rev. XX, 10. This text proves,

(1) That the devil is now, before the general judgment, in a state of torment,
in the lake of fire and brimstone. The scene of which this text displays a
part, is manifestly an exhibition of what is to take place before the general
judgment. This is evident from the context.
And it appears from the question, which he put to our Lord, to which reference
was just now had, that he anxiously dreads the removal, which he is to suffer,
from this his present state, to that in which he is to be after the general
judgment, and to which he and his angels, are reserved in chains. But can we
suppose, that he would anxiously dread a deliverance by annihilation, out of
the lake of torment by fire and brimstone? This would imply, that endless
annihilation is more to be dreaded, than the endless torment which is the
subject of this controversy. If so, Dr. C. ought to have dropped all objections
to the justice of endless torments, since he allowed that the annihilation of
the wicked would be just. And if that be just, then also endless continuance in
the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the utmost punishment that any man
holds concerning the wicked, and which is now supposed to be a less punishment
than annihilation, is just. -- But if it be granted, that annihilation is not
so great a punishment as endless continuance in the lake of fire and brimstone;
it is as absurd to suppose, that the devils should dread or tremble at the
prospect of annihilation, as that a man tormented with the gout or stone,
should dread or tremble at an assurance, that he should ere long be delivered
from his tortures, and in their stead should suffer the prick of a pin.

(2) THAT text directly proves, that the devil is to be forever tormented, and
not annihilated. "And they," [the nominative to be supplied] "shall be
tormented forever and ever." -- To say that this means, that the devil will be
first tormented for ages of ages, and then be annihilated, leads into the
absurdities before noticed.

BUT to this state of torment, in which the fallen angels are, and are to be,
the wicked shall be sent. "Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels." "The devil that deceived them, was cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are." And as
the devil is not to be annihilated, but punished with torments, so are the
wicked.

4. ROMANS IX, 22, affords an argument pertinent to the present subject. The
words are, "What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction."
One end it seems of permitting sinners to proceed to such lengths in sin, is to
make known the divine power in their destruction. But annihilation is no
exertion of power, it is a mere suspension of power. -- The words imply
further, that the longer God endures with the wicked, the greater will be the
manifestation of both his wrath and power in their destruction. But as
annihilation is the same to every person annihilated, it exhibits no greater
manifestation of power toward one than toward another. And if it were a
manifestation of power, there would be no greater manifestation of power in the
annihilation of one, than of another. It is presumed, that no unbiassed judge
will say, that the meaning is, that God endures, with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath, to display his wrath and power in their annihilation; as the
very same display of both would be made, without any long-suffering.

THE only consideration urged from scripture in support of the sentiment, which
I am opposing, is the application of the words, death, destruction, perish,
corruption, etc. to the punishment of the wicked. -- This however came with a
very ill grace from Dr. C. who understood, and was necessitated by his scheme
of universal salvation, to understand, those words to mean misery, as I have
already shown. -- With regard to others, who make not this concession, let
them, if they believe in revelation, (and with such only I dispute) reconcile
the scriptures with themselves, and understand such like passages as those I
have quoted above, representing the punishment of the damned, to consist in
misery, in any consistence with the threatening of death, destruction, etc,
otherwise than by allowing that those words do mean positive misery. But to
allow this, is to give up the scheme of annihilation; or at least this argument
for it.

BESIDES, the scriptures themselves explain their own meaning in the use of the
words death, destruction, etc. The second death is expressly said to consist in
being cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, and in having a part in that
lake; which is not a description of annihilation, nor can be reconciled with
it. Rev. XX, 14. Chapter XXI, 8. -- Mat. XXIV, 51, "And shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with hypocrites, there shall be wailing and gnashing of
teeth." To divide a man into two parts, as determinately expresses
annihilation, as the words death, perdition, etc. This however the scripture
supposes to be consistent with a state of misery, expressed by wailing and
gnashing of teeth. Genesis V, 24. "Enoch walked with God, and was not, for God
took him." In this instance, though the scripture says, Enoch was not, which
more directly expresses annihilation, than death, destruction, etc, yet it
explains itself to mean not annihilation; indeed no man pretends that the
righteous are annihilated. -- When the scriptures say, that men are dead in
trespasses and sins, no man understands the expression to mean annihilation.
The same may be said of the apostle's words in 1 Timothy V, 6. "She that lives in
pleasure is dead while she lives."

THEREFORE, since the scriptures do often use the word death, etc. to signify
something entirely different from a cessation of life or of existence; and
since we cannot make the scriptures consistent with themselves, unless we
understand the same words in the same latitude, when applied to the punishment
of the wicked, we are necessitated to understand them in that latitude.

II. As I observed, there is another sense in which annihilation may be holden,
and was holden by Dr. C. which is this; that though annihilation will not
actually be inflicted on any man, yet it is the curse which was originally in
the divine law denounced against sin; but that Christ has absolutely redeemed
all men from that curse, so that no man is now liable to it. By Christ -- they
were absolutely and unconditionly put into salvable circumstances -- Upon this
foundation and this only, they are become capable of a future immortality. P.
132.
God might upon the first offense he [Adam] committed, have immediately turned
him out of existence, as he threatened he would; the effect whereof would have
been the total loss of all his principles bodily and mental, and of all his
obligations. 5 Diss. p. 198.
The same grace through Christ, which continued Adam in being after the lapse,
etc. Ibid. p. 243.
It will further enhance our idea of the greatness of God's grace [through
Christ] in restoring that possibility of existence which had been forfeited by
Adam's lapse, etc. Ibid. p. 244.
Death -- would have put a period to all possibility of perception or exertion
in any shape forever, had it not been for the interposition of grace through
Christ. Ibid. p. 140.
The term death when used with reference to the posterity of Adam, considered
simply as such, cannot contain more in its meaning, than is included in it,
when used with reference to Adam himself. Ibid. p. 144.


ON this hypothesis, the punishment actually suffered by the damned is no part
of the curse of the divine law, but merely a necessary and wholesome discipline
designed for the good of the patients. But this scheme of annihilation can, no
more than the former, be reconciled with the scripture, which says the wicked
shall receive according to their works, shall pay the uttermost farthing, shall
have judgment without mercy, wrath without mixture, etc. Nor indeed can it be
reconciled with Dr. C's book, which says, The wicked will be punished according
to their deserts, according to their sins, according to the nature and number
of their crimes and evil deeds: and so that the law will have its course, and
the threatened penalty will be executed on some of them at least. These
expressions certainly declare, that they will suffer the full curse of the
divine law. Otherwise the curse of the law is a greater punishment than that
which is according to the deserts of the wicked, and greater too than the full
penalty threatened in the law; which is absurd and contradictory.

HERE I might repeat the various arguments urged in the third chapter, to prove
that the punishment of the damned is not a mere salutary discipline. But to
avoid repetition, I beg leave to refer the reader to the considerations there
suggested: and to proceed to other considerations, which may further show, that
the future punishment of the wicked is not disciplinary, and that Christ has
not so redeemed all men from annihilation, that no man is now liable to it, if
indeed that be the curse of the law.

1. IF annihilation be the curse of the divine law, and the torments of hell be
a mere salutary discipline; then there is no forgiveness in exempting a sinner
from those torments. To forgive a sinner is to exempt or release him from the
curse of the law; not to excuse him from a salutary mean of grace. If a
physician excuse his patient from an emetic or from the cold bath, no man will
pretend, that he exercises forgiving grace.

2. I WISH the reader to attend to Gal. III. 10; For as many as are of the
works of the law, are under the curse: for it is written cursed is every one
that continues not in all things written in the book of the law to do them.
This proves that all men are not absolutely delivered from the curse of the
law, whether that curse consist in annihilation, or misery temporary or
endless: because some men are evidently supposed in this text, to be exposed to
that curse. As many as are of the works of the law, as doubtless many of the
Jews of that day were, are expressly said to be "under the curse." They
therefore were not absolutely and unconditionally delivered from that curse.
But if the curse of the law be annihilation, and all men be unconditionally
delivered by Christ from that curse, how can any man be under it?

IF it should be said, that this text is nothing to the purpose, because the
curse here mentioned is the curse, not of the moral, but of the ceremonial law;
it may be answered, If this text, with the context say nothing of redemption
from the curse of the moral law, how is it known, that Christ, according to the
hypothesis now under consideration, has delivered all men unconditionally from
annihilation, which is supposed to be the curse of the moral law? It is the
13th verse, which assures us, that "Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law." If this mean the ceremonial law, it seems, we have no assurance that
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the moral law, be that annihilation
or what it may; but all that Christ has done or suffered notwithstanding, we
are as liable to that curse, as we were before Christ undertook for us.

BESIDES, the curse of the law here mentioned, is the very curse mentioned in
Deuteronomy. XXVII, 26, from which it is quoted. But that was not the curse of the
ceremonial law, but of the moral, as every precept enumerated in that context,
and to which this curse is annexed, is purely moral. -- Or if this curse be
that to which any man is liable, who transgresses any precept, written in the
book of the law; it will certainly include the curse of the moral law. For
whether the book mentioned, be the book of Deuteronomy, or the whole
Pentateuch, it contained the whole moral law. Therefore the curse here
mentioned includes the curse of the moral law. And indeed with respect to us
under the gospel, the text must mean the moral law only, because, as the
ceremonial law is now repealed, it is no longer in existence, and therefore is
no longer contained in the book of the law. -- Further, if the redemption of
Christ was a redemption from the curse of the ceremonial law only; then it had
no respect at all to us Gentiles, who never were under the ceremonial law; nor
are we in any respect redeemed by Christ.

IT is also to be observed, that this curse is opposed by the apostle,
throughout the context, to the blessing of Abraham, as is manifest by
inspection. But the blessing of Abraham did not consist in freedom from the
ceremonial law. If it consisted in that, the Gentiles originally possessed the
blessing of Abraham, since they were as perfectly free from the ceremonial law,
as Abraham himself. Whereas the coming of the blessing of Abraham on the
Gentiles is spoken of as a new and adventitious blessing, not as one originally
possessed by them; see v. 8 and 14. The blessing of Abraham is not only not
said to consist in bare freedom from the ceremonial law, but it is positively
said to consist in justification by faith; v. 6 -- 10. v. 14 and 29.

THIS passage throws light on the present question in another point of view. As
the curse of the law is set in direct opposition to the blessing of Abraham,
all who are not entitled to the blessing of Abraham, are of course under the
curse, and are not unconditionally rescued from it by Jesus Christ. -- If it
should be said, that the blessing of Abraham is common to all mankind, all
being justified and exempted from the curse of the law, as he was; let it be
observed, that Abraham obtained this blessing in consequence of faith only: and
will it be pretended, that all men are now the subjects of the faith of
Abraham? The apostle constantly speaks of this blessing as suspended on the
condition of faith: v. 7, "They which are of faith, the same are the children
of Abraham." V. 8, "The scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the
heathen through faith." V. 9, "They which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham." V. 14, "That the blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the spirit
through faith." V. 29, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise." Now if faith in Christ be necessary to the
inheritance of the blessing of Abraham, and all who are not entitled to that
blessing, be liable to the curse of the law; then it cannot be true, that all
mankind are unconditionally freed by Christ from the curse of the law, whether
that curse be annihilation or any thing else.

3. ON the hypothesis now under consideration, what are pardon and
justification? They are every where in scripture represented to be conditional,
suspended on the conditions of repentance and faith; and the same is abundantly
holden by Dr. C. however inconsistently with his other tenet concerning the
unconditional exemption of all men from the curse of the law. The language of
scripture is, He that believes shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be damned. He that believes not is condemned already -- the wrath of God
abides on him, etc, etc. How can those be condemned, and how can the wrath of
God abide on those, who are unconditionally delivered from the curse of the
law? Pardon is generally supposed to consist in an acquittance from the curse
of the law: but if all men, penitent and impenitent, believing and unbelieving,
be acquitted and delivered from that curse, where is the propriety or truth of
limiting pardon to the penitent and believing, and of declaring, that all the
rest of men are condemned? To what are they condemned? Not to suffer the curse
of the law: From this they are by supposition unconditionally delivered. By
what are they condemned? Not by the law: this would imply, that they are under
the curse of it.

IF to this it be said, that the impenitent are condemned to suffer the curse
of the law, in this sense only, that the law declares the punishment to which,
according to strict justice, they are liable; but not that punishment to which
they are now liable, since the redemption of Christ: -- To this it may be
answered, In this sense the penitent and believing are equally condemned, as
the impenitent and unbelieving; nay, the whole body of the saints in heaven.
Nor would there be any truth in saying, in this sense, "He that believes on
Christ, is not condemned."

4. THAT single text, Gal V. 2, seems to confute the hypothesis now in
question. The words are, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.
Whereas according to the hypothesis now in question, whether the Galatians were
circumcised or not; whether they depended on their circumcision and other
conformity to ceremonial institutions or not: still Christ did profit them;
still by him was unconditionally secured to them the infinite profit of escape
from the curse of the law, and of an endless life of happiness and glory in
heaven. --

THIS argument is equally conclusive, whether it be supposed that Christ has
unconditionally rescued all men from annihilation or any other punishment. If
salvation be secured to all men by Christ, then he does profit them, however
they be circumcised or depend on their circumcision.

BESIDE the two lights in which the doctrine of annihilation has been stated
above, there is another in which some seem to hold that doctrine; it is this,
That if after God shall have used all proper means for the repentance and
salvation of the wicked, they shall still remain impenitent, he will annihilate
them from despair of ever bringing them to good. -- Concerning this sentiment
it may be inquired, what then is the curse of the law? Is it annihilation? If
so, then I refer to the arguments already urged in this chapter against that
idea; viz. That on that supposition endless punishment is just: That the
scripture abundantly represents the punishment of the damned to consist in
misery: That the punishment of all who suffer the curse of the law will be
equal: That the curse of the law is the same punishment which the devils
suffer, which is not annihilation: That the punishment which the finally
impenitent shall suffer, will be such, that in it God will display both his
wrath and power, and greater degrees of wrath and power in the case of those,
with respect to whom he exercises the greatest long-suffering: which cannot be
true, if the curse of the law be annihilation, as that is not an exertion of
power at all. or a display of greater wrath and power in the case of one sinner
than of another. If it be said, that the curse of the law is that discipline
which the wicked shall suffer, before they be annihilated, I refer to what has
been said, chap. II and III. -- If it be granted that the curse of the law is
endless misery; either it must be allowed, that endless misery will be suffered
by some men; or that though endless misery be the curse of the law, Christ has
redeemed and will save all men from it, by admitting some to endless happiness,
and by inflicting on others endless annihilation. With respect to this last
sentiment, I beg leave to refer to the considerations already hinted in this
chapter: and that the curse of the law, or all that punishment which the wicked
justly deserve, whether it consist in endless misery or any thing else, will
actually be inflicted, has been attempted to be proved in chap. III.

ON the whole; it is left with the candid and judicious to determine, whether
annihilation be the curse of the law: and whether that as the curse of the law
can be reconciled with the scriptures, on either of the forementioned
hypotheses. -- 1. That all who die in impenitence, will be annihilated, as the
proper and adequate punishment of their sins in this life. -- 2. That
annihilation was originally the curse of the law; but that Christ has rescued
all from it. -- If it shall be found that annihilation in any view of it, is
not the curse of the law; it will remain, that that curse consists either in
that punishment which sinners actually suffer in hell; or in some temporary
misery greater than that which they actually suffer in hell; or in endless
misery. In which of these it does consist, shall be farther inquired in the
next chapter.

CHAP. VI. The Justice of endless Punishment consisting in Misery.
ACCORDING to what was proposed in the close of the last chapter, I am to
inquire in the first place, Whether the curse of the law, or the punishment
which in the divine law is threatened against transgressors, consist in that
punishment which the wicked will actually suffer in hell. -- That this cannot
be the curse of the law, on the supposition that all men are to be saved,
appears at first blush from this consideration, that some men will actually
suffer that punishment: and if that punishment be the curse of the law, some
men will be damned and not saved. For salvation consists in deliverance from
tho curse of the law. "Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law:" and
all who are saved, are saved by the redemption of Christ, which is a redemption
from the curse of the law. But since all men are not saved from that punishment
which a great part actually suffer in hell; it is absurd to say, that that
punishment is the curse of the law from which Christ has redeemed and will
save all men.

I MEAN not now to enter into any dispute concerning the nature of Christ's
redemption. It is sufficient for my present purpose to take for granted no
more, than is granted by all christians, that all who are saved, are saved some
how by and through Christ. This is abundantly asserted in the various works of
Dr. C. But neither has he pretended nor will any other advocate for universal
salvation pretend, that the punishment which is actually to be suffered by a
great part of mankind in hell, is the curse of the law from which Christ is to
save all men: because by the very terms a great part of mankind are actually to
suffer it.

BESIDE; if that be the curse of the law; it is all the punishment to which the
sinner is justly liable. He having suffered that, cannot consistently with
justice be made to suffer any further punishment; and if after that he be
exempted from further punishment, he is exempted from it, not in the way of
grace, forgiveness or pardon; but entirely on the footing of justice and of his
own personal right. It is to be noticed however, that the gospel is ignorant of
any salvation of sinners, except in the way of grace and forgiveness.

IF the punishment actually to be suffered in hell be the curse of the law,
then the damned in their deliverance out of hell, and exemption from further
punishment, experience no salvation at all. They are delivered from nothing to
which they are or ever were exposed. We might as well say, that the most
innocent citizen in the state is saved from the gallows, when he has neither
committed any crime, nor is accused of any. -- The very idea of salvation is
deliverance from the curse of the law. But if the pains of hell for ages of
ages be the curse of the law, they who suffer those pains, are not saved; they
are damned to the highest possible degree consistent with law and justice;
which is all the damnation for which any man can argue.

ON the whole, I conclude, that the idea, that the curse of the law consists in
the punishment, which the damned are actually to suffer in hell, is totally
irreconcilable with the salvation of all men.

IN the next place we are to inquire, whether the curse of the law consist in
some temporary punishment, which is of greater duration than that which is
supposed to belong to the punishment which the damned shall actually suffer. If
the curse of the law be a temporary punishment of greater duration than that
which is actually to be suffered by the damned; that more lasting temporary
punishment is doubtless threatened in the law. Doubtless the curse of the law
is the curse threatened in law: the very terms imply this. Now, where in all
the law, or in all the scripture, is threatened any punishment of greater
duration, than that which in the sacred dialect is said to be everlasting,
forever, forever and ever, etc? But all these expressions are on all hands
allowed to be applied in scripture to the punishment which the damned shall
actually suffer. Unless therefore some longer punishment can be found
threatened in scripture, than that which is said to be forever and ever, etc,
it cannot be pretended, that the curse of the law is a temporary punishment of
greater duration, than that which is actually to be suffered by the damned. But
no punishment of greater duration, whether temporary or endless, than that
which the damned are constantly declared to suffer, can be pointed out from any
part of scripture. Therefore the curse of the law is not a temporary punishment
of greater duration, than that which is to be suffered by the damned.

NOW, if this train of reasoning be just, if the curse of the divine law be
neither annihilation, nor (on the supposition of the salvation of all men) that
misery which the damned are actually to suffer; nor a temporary misery of
greater duration; the consequence is inevitable, that it is endless misery. No
other hypothesis seems to be conceivable. The law certainly threatens some
punishment. This punishment must consist either in annihilation, or in
something else. If it consist in something else, that something must be either
temporary or endless misery. If it be temporary misery, it must be either a
misery of shorter duration than that which is to be suffered by the damned; or
that very misery which is to be suffered by the damned; or a temporary misery
of longer duration. That the curse of the law is a misery of shorter duration
than that which is to be suffered by the damned, no man will pretend; as this
would imply that the damned will suffer a greater punishment than was ever
threatened, and than is just. And that the curse of the law is neither the very
misery to be suffered by the damned, nor a temporary misery of longer duration,
I have endeavored to prove, and submit the proof to the candid and judicious.
If the proof shall be found to be good, we are driven to the conclusion, that
the curse of the divine law is endless misery.

IF then it be an established point, that endless misery is the curse of the
divine law; the inference is immediate and necessary, that the endless misery
of the sinner is a just punishment of his sin. It is impossible that a God of
inviolable and infinite justice should threaten in his law an unjust
punishment. A law containing such a threatening, is an unjust law; and an
unjust law can never be enacted by a legislator of perfect justice. -- It is in
vain to say, that God will never execute the law. To make an unjust law, is as
really irreconcilable with justice, as to execute it. What should we think of
a human prince who should enact a law, that whoever should walk across his
neighbor's ground without his consent, should die on the gallows. I presume no
man would pretend, that the forbearance of the prince to execute the law, would
save his character from abhorrence and contempt.

AGAIN; If all men shall be saved, they will be saved from something, from some
punishment. That punishment must be either temporary or endless. If it be
temporary, it must be either that punishment, which is to be endured by the
damned, or a longer temporary punishment. But for reasons already given, it can
be neither of these. Therefore it must be an endless punishment. But if all men
be saved from an endless punishment, they were exposed to an endless
punishment, and exposed to it by a divine constitution, and therefore an
endless punishment is just; otherwise it could not have been appointed by God.

IF all men shall be saved, they are redeemed by Christ, and they are redeemed
by him from some punishment. That punishment is either temporary or endless. If
it be temporary, it is either the punishment which the damned shall actually
suffer, or a longer temporary punishment. But for reasons already given it is
neither of these. Therefore, it is an endless punishment. Therefore they were
exposed to an endless punishment, and that punishment is just. Surely no
Christian will pretend, that our Lord Jesus Christ came to redeem and save us
from a punishment to which we never were exposed, and which the very justice of
God would never permit him to inflict.

IF endless punishment be unjust, it seems that Christ came to save mankind
from an unjust punishment; a punishment, to which they were not justly liable,
and which could not be inflicted on them consistently with justice. But what an
idea does this give us of God? It implies, that he had made an unjust law,
denouncing an unjust penalty; that having made this law, he was determined to
execute it, till Christ came and prevented him.

IF all men shall be saved, and shall be saved in the way of grace, favor,
pardon or forgiveness; then it would be just, that they should not be saved. If
their deliverance imply grace and forgiveness, then it would be just, that they
should not be delivered, and that they should suffer that punishment from which
they are delivered. But for reasons already given, if all men shall be saved,
they shall be saved from an endless punishment. And to be saved from an endless
punishment not on the footing of justice, but by mere grace and forgiveness,
implies, that the infliction of endless punishment would be just. Surely to
liberate a person from an unjust punishment, is no act of forgiveness.

ALL the ascriptions of praise, and all hymns of thanksgiving sung by the saved
on account of their salvation, prove, that it would have been just, that they
should not be saved. If God in delivering all men from endless punishment, be
worthy of praise and thanksgiving, it would have been just, if he had not
delivered them from it. A mere act of justice, which the object of it may
demand on the footing of his personal right, does not infer, an obligation to
any great praise or thanksgiving. No man conceives himself bound very much to
praise another for giving him his due, or for not injuring him, or for not
punishing him, when he deserves no punishment. But the only punishment, from
which God delivers all men, on the supposition, that all are to be saved, is an
endless punishment, as was shown before. Therefore, unless endless punishment
be just, there is no foundation for praise and thanksgiving for the salvation
of all men.

IF endless punishment be unjust, then God was bound in justice to save all men
from it, and could no more fail of granting this salvation, than he could deny
himself: and he was bound in justice to do whatever was necessary to that
salvation, and if that salvation could not be dispensed, but in consequence of
the incarnation and death of Christ; then unless God had given his son to
become incarnate and to die, he would have committed injustice. So that on this
plan, the very gift of Christ, of the gospel, and of all the means of grace,
are mere acts of justice, and not of grace or favor: and the revelation of the
gospel or of the salvation of all men is no gracious communication, but a
communication made entirely on the foundation of justice. For surely it is but
an act of justice to tell mankind, if there be any need of telling them, that
God will not injure them, and so preserve them from the tormenting fear of
injury from the hand of God. To have kept them without the necessary means of
knowing this, would have savoured of cruelty. -- Yet according to the
scriptures the forementioned divine acts and communications are no acts of
justice, but of free and infinite grace.

IF endless punishment be unjust, it is hard to imagine of what advantage the
mediation and redemption of Christ is to all mankind. Dr. C. speaking of his
own scheme of universal salvation, says, Nor is there any scheme that so
illustriously sets forth the powerful efficacy and extensive advantage of the
mediation of Jesus Christ. If mankind universally are the objects of his
concern, if he died for them all, if he ascended up to heaven for them all, if
he is there acting on their behalf, and managing all things in the kingdom of
grace, with a view to their salvation, and will not give up his ministry in
this kingdom, till he has actually accomplished this great design, and instated
the whole human kind in eternal glory, what more noble idea can we form of his
undertaking for us? etc. P. 14.
What is "the powerful efficacy and extensive advantage of the mediation of
Christ," with regard to those, who suffer for ages of ages, as Dr. C. allows
some men do? Is "the powerful efficacy and extensive advantage of Christ's
mediation" "illustriously set forth" in delivering them from an unjust
punishment? is the idea, that Christ came to save them from a punishment, which
they do not deserve, "the most noble idea we can form of his undertaking?"
Those who are saved by Christ, without suffering the torments of hell, do
indeed derive some advantage from the mediation of Christ. But this is no
greater advantage than is derived from Christ, according to the scheme of
those, who believe in endless punishment. They hold, that all who are preserved
from hell, are preserved from it by Christ. But what advantage do those men
derive from Christ's mediation, who pass through the torments of hell, and are
not saved, till they have been punished for ages of ages? To say that they are
rescued by Christ from endless misery, is either to give up the present
question, and to allow that endless misery is just: or it is to give up the
moral rectitude of the divine character, and to hold, that God has threatened,
and was about to inflict, an unjust punishment. -- To say, that the advantage,
which they derive from Christ, is that they are rescued from a temporary
punishment, which is longer than forever and ever, is to say, that for which
there is no foundation, as no such punishment is threatened or mentioned in
scripture. So that in any case, if endless punishment be unjust, it is
impossible to imagine, of what advantage the mediation and redemption of Christ
is to all mankind.

THE hope of the gospel implies that endless punishment is just. On the plan of
universal salvation, all men are encouraged to hope that they shall be
delivered from some punishment. Dr. C. applies Romans VIII. 20, to all men, and
supposes that they are all subjected to vanity in hope of "deliverance from the
bondage of corruption," and from "the final consequences" of it. P. 106, 119.
That is, all men have a ground to hope, that they shall be at last delivered
from sin and its punishment. This punishment as we have seen, can be no other
than an endless punishment. But that God encourages us to hope, that we may
escape endless punishment, as clearly implies that endless punishment is just,
as his encouraging us to hope, that he will never leave us nor forsake us in
this life, implies that it would be just, if he should leave us. If endless
punishment be not just, then God encourages us to hope, that he will not injure
us, will not rob us of our rights or tyrannize over us! The very idea of hope
in this case, implies some danger that God will injure us; however that there
is a possibility, and therefore a foundation to hope, that he will not injure
us.

IF endless punishment be unjust, we are as sure, that it will never be
inflicted, as we are of the justice of God, or as we are, that the judge of all
the earth will do right. But are we ever encouraged in scripture barely to
hope, that the judge of all the earth will do right? -- What if a subject who
has always entirely conformed to the laws of his prince and is conscious of his
own innocence, and also knows that his prince is fully informed of it, should
say, that he hopes his prince will not order him to be executed as a felon?
This would certainly imply great diffidence in the justice of his prince, and
would be a high reflection on his character. Much more is it a reflection on
the character of God, to express a bare hope, that under his government, no man
will be punished with an unjust punishment.

THE promises of the gospel appear to be a further proof of the justice of
endless punishment. They are promises of deliverance from some punishment. If
there be any promises of the salvation of all men, they are not promises that
all shall wholly escape the punishment of hell. Dr. C. and others grant, that
some men will suffer that punishment. Nor are they promises of escape from a
longer temporary punishment, than that of hell, as there is no mention in all
the scripture of such a punishment. Therefore they are promises of deliverance
from endless punishment. Therefore endless punishment is just: otherwise the
promises that God will save from it, would be absurd. The very idea, that God
promises to save from endless punishment, implies that he has a right to
inflict it. Do we ever find God promising in scripture, that he will not injure
or tyrannize over his creatures? And are the exceeding great and precious
promises, which the apostle Peter mentions, merely assurances that we shall not
be treated by God unjustly? There would be nothing at all precious in such
promises; because they would give us no greater security from such injury, than
we should have without them. If the bare justice of God do not secure us from
injury at his hands, neither will his veracity. -- What should we think of a
prince of good reputation for justice, if he make proclamation, that he would
not punish any of his subjects ten times as much as they deserve; and should
call this an exceeding great and precious promise? Whatever we might before
have thought of him and of his government, we should doubtless then think that
his subjects were not perfectly secure in their rights.

DR. C. allows that it is our duty to pray for the salvation of all men. This
appears especially in his comment on 1 Timothy II, 4, etc. P. 163.
But this proves the justice of endless punishment. If we are to pray for the
salvation of all men, we are to pray that they may be delivered from the curse
of the law; which, as we have seen already, is an endless punishment. Now, to
pray that God would save men from endless punishment certainly implies an
acknowledgement of just exposure to such punishment. Otherwise there would be
as much propriety, that the angels around the throne of God, should pray, that
they, perfectly guiltless as they are, may not be punished with the torments of
hell. What if an entirely innocent and most dutiful subject of some earthly
prince, and one who is by all acknowledged to be such, should prefer a petition
to his prince, that he would not order the petitioner to the stake or the
gallows?

HITHERTO the justice of endless punishment has been considered on the ground
of what I suppose to be the truth, that it is deserved by every sinner, on
account of the sins which he has committed in this lite only. -- There is
another ground, on which it may be supported, and which is equally inconsistent
with that capital argument in favor of the salvation of all men, that endless
punishment is not reconcilable with justice. -- Though it were not just, to
inflict an endless punishment for the sins committed in this life only, which I
by no means allow; yet there would be no injustice in suffering the sinner to
go on in sin, and to punish him continually and without end as he sins.

THAT it was no injustice in God, to leave man at first to fall into sin, will
doubtless be granted by all, because it is an evident fact. Now if God may
without injury permit a creature to fall into sin to day, and punish him for
it, why may he not do the same tomorrow, and so on through every day or period
of his existence. And if it be just to leave a sinner to endless sin, it is
doubtless just to inflict on him endless punishment for that endless sin.
Therefore the endless sin and punishment of a creature is no more inconsistent
with divine justice, than the existence of sin and punishment in any instance,
and for ever so short a duration. If it be not consistent with justice, that a
sinner be left by God to endless impenitence; then the leading of a sinner to
repentance is an act of mere justice, the payment of a debt, and not an act of
grace, which is utterly irreconcilable with the scriptures. -- If it be not
consistent with justice to leave a sinner to final impenitence, then God is
bound in justice, some time or other to lead every sinner to repentance. But
when is this time? How long may God, without injury, permit the sinner to
continue impenitent? If he may for one day, why not for two? for four? for
eight, etc. to eternity? -- Though the damned should, by their sufferings,
fully satisfy for all their past sins; yet God would be no more obliged in
justice, to lead them to repentance, or to preserve them from sin in future,
than he was obliged to preserve them from sin at the time they first fell into
it: and consequently he would not be obliged in justice to release them from
punishment. I take it to be abundantly conceded by Dr. C. that the damned may
justly be punished till they repent. Therefore if they never repent they may
justly be punished without end

NOW, that our advocate for universal salvation, may establish his favorite
proposition, that endless punishment is not reconcilable with divine justice;
he must show, that it is not consistent with divine justice, to leave a sinner
to proceed without end in his own chosen course of sin, and to punish him daily
for his daily sins. Till he shall have done this, it will be in vain for him to
plead, that those who die in impenitence, will all finally be saved, because
endless punishment is not reconcilable with the justice of God.

IF after all, any man will insist, that endless punishment is not
reconcilable with divine justice? he ought fairly to answer the preceding
reasoning, and to show that the curse of the divine law from which Christ has
redeemed us, is either annihilation, or that misery which the damned are
actually to suffer; or a longer temporary misery. He ought to show further,
that Christ came to deliver all men from some other punishment, than that which
is endless; or that it is reconcilable with the character of God to refuse to
release man from an unjust punishment, without the mediation of his son: that
deliverance from unjust punishment is an act of free grace, pardon, or
forgiveness: that deliverance from an unjust punishment is a proper ground of
extatic and everlasting praise and thanksgiving to God. That the very mission
of Christ, the institution of the gospel and of any means necessary to the
deliverance of sinners from endless punishment, can be considered as gracious
gifts and institutions, on any other supposition than that endless punishment
is just. He ought also to show, of what advantage the mediation of Christ is to
those who suffer in hell for ages of ages; and how the hope and the promises of
the gospel, and how praying for the salvation of all men, can be reconciled
with the idea, that endless punishment is unjust, and finally, that it is
unjust, that God should leave a sinner to perpetual sin, and to punish him
perpetually for that sin.

It seems to be but an act of justice to Dr. C. to repeat here, what I noticed
before, that he himself, whether consistently or not, does acknowledge the
justice of endless punishment: as in these words: If the next state is a state
of punishment, not intended for the cure of the patients themselves, but to
satisfy the justice of God, and give warning to others, it is impossible all men
should be finally saved. P. 11.
This is a plain declaration, that a state, in which all salvation, and all
possibility of salvation, are excluded, no more than satisfies justice, or is
no more than just. -- The same is confessed in those many passages of this and
the other works of Dr. C. wherein he has positively asserted, that man cannot
be "justified on the foot of mere law," of "rigid law" etc. P. 34, 36, 43, etc.
He would not deny, that the law of God is just, perfectly just. If therefore
we cannot be justified on the foot of the divine law, we must on that foot be
finally condemned, and consequently must be finally condemned on the foot of
justice. Therefore the final or endless condemnation of the wicked is entirely
just. The just law of God himself condemns them: and if that law, "mere law,"
"rigid law," be executed, they must be condemned to an endless punishment, and
cannot possibly be justified or saved. So long therefore as the divine law is
just, so long, according to the concession of Dr. C. the endless condemnation
and misery of the wicked are just. -- There seems to be no way to avoid this
consequence, but by holding that the curse of the law, and the punishment which
"satisfies justice," are annihilation, with respect to which sentiment, I must
refer the reader back to Chap. V. But how inconsistent it is, to hold, that
endless punishment, whether consisting in annihilation, or misery, is no more
than satisfactory to justice; and at the same time to hold, that the wicked in
temporary pains in hell, suffer according to their deserts, and endure the
whole penalty of the law, cannot escape the notice of any attentive reader. --
Or will it be said, that the Doctor held a commutation of punishment? that
endless annihilation is commuted for temporary misery? If so, then temporary
misery is the curse of the divine law now inflicted in commutation for endless
annihilation; and our author was entirely mistaken in a doctrine abundantly
taught in all his writings, that, "by law," "mere law," "rigid law," no man can
be justified or saved.

AS a corollary from the whole of the preceding reasoning concerning the
justice of endless punishment, may I not safely assert, what was most grievous
to Dr. C. and is so to all other advocates for universal salvation; that SIN IS
AN INFINITE EVIl? If every sinner do, on account of sin, deserve an endless
punishment, sin is an infinite evil: that is all that is meant by the infinite
evil of sin. -- Therefore if any man deny the infinite evil of sin, let him
prove, that it does not deserve an endless punishment, and let him answer the
preceding reasoning to evince the justice of endless punishment. In this
chapter it was often more convenient for me, on several accounts, to use the
expression endless punishment, than that of endless misery. Still the reader
will perceive, that the latter is my meaning. The reasons had been given in the
preceding chapter, why the endless punishment of the damned cannot be
annihilation.


PERHAPS some may object, that supposing sin do deserve an endless punishment,
when it is not repented of; yet how can it deserve so great a punishment, when
it is renounced in real repentance. -- But if repentance make atonement for
sin; if it satisfy the broken law of God; if it repair the damage done to
society by sin; or if it so far atone, that the good of the universe,
comprehending the glory of the deity, though it before required, that sin
should be punished with endless punishment, now requires that it be punished
with a temporary punishment only: then as repentance is a satisfaction made by
the sinner himself, and makes a part of his personal character, sin repented
of, does indeed not deserve endless punishment, otherwise it does. And if
repentance do make the satisfaction for sin which has been described, then the
satisfaction or atonement of Christ is in vain, since repentance would have
answered the purpose without the death and atonement of Christ. There was no
need that sinners be redeemed by Christ, or as Dr. C. says, that he should be
"the person upon whose account," and that his obedience and death should be the
ground or reason upon which happiness should be attainable by any of the race
of Adam. They might have redeemed themselves, and by repentance have made a
full satisfaction or atonement for their own sins, and thus might have been
saved on their own account,, and on the ground or reason of their repentance.
-- But if on the other hand it be granted, that repentance does not make
atonement or satisfaction for sin, and it be just to punish a sinner without
end, provided he do not repent; it is just to inflict the same punishment,
though he do repent.

THIS chapter shall be closed with a remark on a passage before quoted from Dr.
C. P. 309.
in which he says, that the difference in the degree of the pain of the damned
will scarce be thought worthy to be brought into the account, when the
circumstance of endless duration, is annexed to it. -- If the different degrees
of the misery of the damned be unworthy of notice, and do not sufficiently
distinguish them according to their several degrees of demerit; then the
different degrees in the happiness of the saints in heaven do not sufficiently
distinguish them, according to their characters. Therefore on the same
principle we ought to deny the endless duration of the happiness of heaven, as
well as of the misery of hell; and to say, that the difference in the degree of
happiness of the blessed in heaven, will scarce be thought worthy to be brought
into the account, when the circumstance of endless duration is annexed to it;
that if the happiness of heaven be of endless duration, the happiness of all
the inhabitants of that world will be equal, which is inconsistent with the
declarations of scripture, that all shall be rewarded according to their works;
and that therefore the doctrine of the endless happiness of heaven is not true.
-- But the falsity of this conclusion is evident to all: and equally false is
the conclusion from the like premises, that the punishment of the damned is not
endless.

CHAP. VII. Containing another view of the question concerning the Justice of
endless Punishment.
IN the preceding chapter, the question concerning the justice of endless
punishment was considered in the light in which it is stated by Dr. C. There is
another view of the same question, which is not indeed exhibited in his book,
but is much talked of by some who in general embrace his scheme. It is this:
Whatever the general good requires, is just: Whatever is not subservient to the
general good, is unjust. Now as the endless punishment of the wicked is, in
their opinion, not subservient but hurtful to the general good, it is, say
they, unjust. The question thus stated seems to be nothing more than a dispute
concerning the proper meaning of the word justice. It reduces all justice to
the third sense of justice as explained above, P. 80, etc.
and perfectly confounds justice with goodness as it respects the general
system. Therefore the question which comes up to view, according to the sense
of justice now proposed, is the very same with this, Whether the endless
punishment of the wicked be consistent with the general good of the universe,
or with divine goodness; which shall be considered at large in the next
chapter, and needs not be anticipated here. However it may be proper to point
out the impropriety and absurd consequences of this use of the word justice.

IT was doubtless subservient to the general good, that our Lord Jesus Christ
was crucified by wicked hands, and therefore in the sense of justice now under
consideration, his crucifixion was just; they who perpetrated it, performed an
act of justice. Yet will any man pretend, that our blessed Lord was not
injuriously treated by his wicked crucifiers? If they committed no injury to
our Lord, wherein did the wickedness of this action consist? -- The truth is,
the crucifixion of Christ was no injury to the universe, but an inestimable
benefit: yet it was the highest injury that could be done him personally.

EVERY instance of murder is doubtless made by the overruling hand of divine
providence, subservient to the general good and the divine glory. But does a
man murdered suffer no injury? The same may be said of all the assaults,
thefts, robberies, murders and other crimes that have ever been committed.
Though they will in the consummation of all things be overruled to subserve the
general good, so that the universe will finally suffer no injury by them; yet
very great personal injury may be done by them to those who have been robbed,
murdered, etc. These observations may show the necessity of distinguishing
between the private rights of individuals, and the rights of the universe, and
between private, personal injustice, and injustice to the universe. If all the
crimes in the world, because they will be finally rendered by the divine hand
subservient to the good of the universe, be in every sense ^ntirely just, and
the omission of them would be unjust; where shall any injustice be found? No
injustice is, ever was, or can possibly be committed by any being in this, or
any other world. No injustice can be committed, till some thing shall be done,
which God shall not finally render subservient to his own glory and the good of
the intellectual system.

ACCORDING to the principle now under consideration, it would not be just, that
any man should escape any calamity, which he does in fact suffer. It was not
just that Paul should escape stoning at Lystra, or that John should not be
banished to the isle of Patmos: and whenever it is subservient to the public
good, that any criminal, a murderer for instance, should be pardoned, or should
be suffered to pass with impunity; it is not just to punish him; he does not
deserve punishment: Cain did not deserve death for the murder of his brother,
nor did Joab, during the life of David, deserve death for the two murders of
Abner and Amasa, both better men than himself. And if he did not deserve death,
what did he deserve? It appears by the history and by the event, that it was
not subservient to the general good, that he should, during the life of David,
be punished at all. Therefore on the present supposition, he deserved, during
that period, no punishment at all for those murders. If so, then during the
same period, at least, there was no sin, no moral evil in those murders: for
sin or moral evil always deserves hatred and punishment. -- But afterward in
the reign of Solomon, the general good required Joab to be punished with death.
At that time therefore he deserved death for those murders; and those same
actions which for several years after they were perpetrated, had no moral evil
in them, grew, by mere length of time, or change of the circumstances of the
state, to be very great moral evils. -- See then to what consequences the
principle now under consideration will lead us! It must therefore be renounced
as false, or as a great perversion of language.

WHEN I assert the justice of the endless punishment of the wicked, I mean that
it is just in the same sense, in which it was just, that Cain or Joab should be
executed as murderers: i. e. it is correspondent to their personal conduct and
characters. If those with whom I am now disputing, allow that the endless
punishment of the wicked is just in this sense, they allow all for which I at
present contend. If they deny, that it is just in this sense, they give up
their favorite principle, and dispute against the justice of endless
punishment, not merely because it would be inconsistent with the general good,
but for the same reasons as those for which Dr. C. disputed against it: and
they place the question on the same footing, on which it has been so largely
considered in the preceding chapters. The execution of Cain as a murderer would
have been correspondent to his personal conduct, and therefore would have been
just. If the endless punishment of the wicked be denied to be just in this
sense, it is denied to be just, not merely because it would not be subservient
to the good of the universe; but because it would not be a punishment
correspondent to their personal conduct; instead of this, it would exceed the
demerit of that conduct, and therefore would rob them of their personal rights.

CHAP. VIII. In which it is inquired, whether endless punishment be consistent
with the divine goodness.
THAT this inquiry is very important, every one must be sensible, who is in the
least acquainted with this controversy. No topic is so much insisted on by the
advocates for universal salvation; on no subject do they throw out such
abundant and fervent declamation; no argument is urged with such an air of
triumph. This is their strong hold, in which they feel themselves perfectly
secure, and from which they imagine such effectual sallies may be made, as will
drive out of the field all believers in endless punishment. Therefore this part
of our subject requires particular and close attention.

I PROPOSE to begin with stating the question, -- then to proceed to some
general observations concerning the divine goodness and some concessions made
by Dr. C. -- then to consider Dr. C's arguments from the divine goodness; --
and in the last place, to mention some considerations to show, that the endless
punishment of some of mankind, is not inconsistent with the divine goodness.

I. IT is a matter of great importance, that the question now to be considered
be clearly stated. The question is, Whether it be consistent with the divine
goodness, that any of mankind be doomed to endless punishment consisting in
misery. This question is not now to be considered with any reference to the
atonement of Christ; or the argument in favor of universal salvation, drawn
from the divine goodness, does not depend at all on the atonement. To argue
that goodness requires the salvation of all men now since Christ has made a
sufficient atonement, implies that without the atonement no such argument could
be urged. To argue from the atonement is not to argue from goodness merely, but
from fact, from the gospel, from particular texts or from the general nature of
the gospel. The argument is this; Christ has made atonement for all, therefore
all will be saved. But that this argument may carry conviction, it must first
be made evident that the atonement did respect all mankind; also that it is the
intention of God, to apply the virtue of that sufficient atonement, to the
actual salvation of all. But these things can be proved from the declarations
of scripture only. Now all Dr. C's arguments from scripture shall be considered
in their place; but this is not their place.

THE question, Whether it be consistent with divine goodness, that any of
mankind be punished without end, means, either, Whether it be consistent with
the greatest possible exertion or display of goodness in the Deity; or Whether
it be consistent with goodness in general, so that God is in general a good
Being, and not cruel and malicious, though he do inflict endless punishment on
some men. -- It is not an article of my faith, that in all the works of
creation and providence taken together, God displays indeed goodness in
general, but not the greatest possible goodness. This distinction is made, to
accommodate the discourse, if possible, to the meaning of Dr. C. As he denies
that God has adopted the best possible plan of the universe, it seems, that he
must have distinguished in his own mind, between the goodness actually exerted
and displayed by the Deity in the present system, and the greatest possible
display of goodness.

IF the former of these be intended by Dr. C. and others, all their strong and
frightful declamations on this subject, come to this only, that endless
punishment is not the greatest possible display of the divine goodness; or that
the system of the universe, if endless punishment make a part of it, is not the
wisest and best possible. -- But this is no more than is holden by Dr. C. and
it is presumed by other advocates in general for universal salvation. Dr. C.
abundantly holds, as we shall see presently, that the present system of the
universe, according to his own view of it, without endless punishment, is not
the wisest and best possible. It is therefore perfect absurdity in him, to
object, on this ground, to endless punishment.

BUT it is manifest, by the vehement and pathetic exclamations of Dr. C. on
this subject, that he aimed at something more than this. It is manifest that he
supposed and meant to represent, that if the doctrine of endless punishment be
true, God is not a good, a benevolent being, but a cruel, malicious one. He
says, P. 8.
that the doctrine of endless punishment gives occasion for very unworthy
reflections on the Deity: That in view of that doctrine P, 14.
an horror of darkness remains, that is sadly distressing to many a considerate
heart. He quotes P. 356
with approbation those words from Mr. Whiston: If the common doctrine were
certainly true, the justice of God must inevitably be given up, and much more
his mercy. -- This doctrine supposes him, [God] to delight in cruelty, So that
the question agitated by Dr. C. is really, Whether, if God inflict endless
punishment on any sinner, it be not an act of cruelty and injustice, as all
cruelty is injustice. -- But this is the very question, which has been so
largely considered in several preceding chapters, and needs not to be
reconsidered here. So that Dr. C's arguments from goodness are mere arguments
from justice; and if endless punishment be reconcilable with divine justice,
it is equally reconcilable with divine goodness, in the sense in which he
argue from divine goodness.

If after all it be insisted on, that Dr. C. meant to consider the question, or
that the question ought to be considered, in the first sense stated above, viz.
Whether endless punishment be consistent with the most perfect display of
goodness; although if the negative of this question were granted, Dr. C. could
not consistently thence draw an argument in favor of universal salvation; yet
it may be proper to consider this state of the question, and perhaps sufficient
observations upon it will occur in the sequel of this chapter.

II. I AM to make some general observations concerning the divine goodness, and
take notice of some concessions made by Dr. C.

The goodness of God is that glorious attribute, by which he is disposed to
communicate happiness to his creatures. This divine attribute is distinguished
from the divine justice in this manner: the divine justice promotes the
happiness of the universal system, implying the divine glory, by treating a
person strictly according to his own character: the divine goodness promotes
the same important object, by treating a person more favorably than is
according to his own character or conduct: So that both justice and goodness
may and always do, as far as they are exercised, subserve the happiness of the
universal system, including the glory of the Deity, or the glory of the Deity,
including the happiness of the universal system. As the glory of God, and the
greatest happiness of the system of the universe, and even of the created
system, mutually imply each other; whenever I mention either of them, I wish to
be understood to include in my meaning the other also. The declarative or the
exhibited glory of God, is a most perfect and most happy created system; and a
most perfect and most happy created system is the exhibited glory of God; or it
is the exhibition, the manifestation of that glory; as a picture is an
exhibition of the man.

THAT infinite goodness is in God, and is essential to his nature, is granted
on all hands: God is LOVE. This attribute seeks the happiness of creatures, the
happiness of the created system in general, and of every individual creature in
particular, so far as the happiness of that individual is not inconsistent with
the happiness of the system, or with happiness on the whole. But if in any
case, the happiness of an individual be inconsistent with the happiness of the
system, or with the happiness of other individuals, so that by bestowing
happiness on the first supposed individual, the quantity of happiness on the
whole shall be diminished; in this case, goodness, the divine goodness, which
is perfect and infinite, will not consent to bestow happiness on that
individual. Indeed to bestow happiness in such a case would be no instance of
goodness, but of the want of goodness. It would argue a disposition not to
increase happiness, but to diminish and destroy it.

THEREFORE that Dr. C. might prove, that the endless punishment of any sinner
is inconsistent with the goodness of God, he should have shown, that the sum
total of happiness enjoyed in the intellectual system will be greater if all be
saved, than it will be if any suffer an endless punishment. To show that God by
his infinite goodness will be excited to seek and to secure the greatest
happiness of the system, determines nothing. This is no more than is granted by
the believers in endless punishment. It is impertinent therefore to spend time
on this. But the great question is, Does the greatest happiness of the system
require the final happiness of every sinner? If Dr. C, have not shown that it
does, his argument from divine goodness is entirely inconclusive.

INSTEAD of showing, that the divine goodness or the greatest happiness of the
general system, requires the final happiness of every individual; Dr. C. has
abundantly shown the contrary. In his book on the Benevolence of the Deity, P.
56, etc.
he expresses himself thus; It would be injurious to the Deity to complain of
him for want of goodness merely because the manifestation of it to our
particular system, considered singly and apart from the rest, is not so great
as we may imagine it could be. -- No more happiness is required for our system,
even from infinitely perfect benevolence, than is proper for a part of some
great whole. -- We ought not to consider the displays of divine benevolence, as
they affect individual beings only, but as they relate to the particular system
of which they are parts. -- The divine benevolence is to be estimated from its
amount to this whole, and not its constituent parts separately considered. --
The only fair way of judging of the divine benevolence with respect to our
world, is to consider it not as displayed to separate individuals, but to the
whole system, and to these as its constituent parts. -- P. 58.
No more good is to be expected from the Deity with respect to any species of
beings, or any individuals in these species, than is reasonably consistent with
the good of the whole of which they are parts. -- P. 84.
It is true, that destruction of life will follow, if some animals are food to
others. But it may be true also, that there would not have been so much life,
and consequently happiness, in the creation, had it not been for this
expedient. -- P. 107.
As we are only one of the numerous orders which constitute a general system,
this quite alters the case, making those capacities only an evidence of wise
and reasonable benevolence, which are fitted for a particular part sustaining
such a place in the constitution of this whole. -- P. 237.
I proceed to show wherein the unhappiness that is connected in nature, or by
positive infliction of the Deity, with the misuse of moral powers, is
subservient to the general good of the rational creation, which is hereby more
effectually promoted, than it would have been, if free agents might have acted
wrong with impunity. -- " P. 242.
For if they" [future punishments] are considered -- under the notion of a
needful moral mean intended to promote, upon the whole, more good in the
intelligent creation, than might otherwise be reasonably expected; they are so
far from being the effect of ill will, that they really spring from benevolence
and are a part of it.

BY these quotations it appears with sufficient clearness, that it was Dr. C's
opinion, that there are defects, miseries and punishments of individual
creatures, which are consistent with the good of the system, and are therefore
consistent with the divine goodness: and that the divine goodness does not seek
the happiness of any individual any further, than the happiness of that
individual is subservient to the happiness of the system, or to the increase of
happiness on the whole. Therefore Dr. C. supposes the miseries of men in this
life, and even the punishments of the future world, are not inconsistent with
the divine goodness, because they are subservient to the good of the system. --
Now the advocates for endless punishment believe the same concerning the
endless punishment of those who die impenitent: and for him to suppose without
proof, that this punishment is not consistent with the greatest good and
happiness of the system, is but begging the question.

WHAT is the absurdity of supposing, that the endless punishment of some
sinners may be subservient to the good of the system? Why may not the general
good be promoted, as well by endless misery, as by the miseries of this life?
And why may we not be allowed to account for endless misery in the same way,
that Dr. C. accounts for the miseries of this life, or for the temporary misery
which he allows to be in hell? It is now supposed to have been proved, that
endless punishment is just. If then the general good may be promoted by the
tortures of the stone endured for a year, by a man who deserves them, why may
not the general good be promoted by the same tortures, continued without end,
provided the man deserves such a continuance of them? If we were to judge a
priori, we should probably decide against misery in either case. But fact shows
that temporary miseries are consistent with the goodness of God, or with the
general good: and why may not endless misery be so too, provided it be just?

IF it be asserted, that the endless punishment of a sinner who deserves such
punishment, is so great an evil, that it cannot be compensated by any good,
which can arise from it to the system; I wish to have a reason given for this
assertion. It is granted that the good accruing to the system overbalances the
temporary miseries of sinners both here and hereafter. And is the endless
misery of an individual, though justly deserved, so great an evil, that it
cannot be overbalanced by any endless good, which may thence accrue to the
system? Endless misery is doubtless an infinite evil: so is the endless good
thence arising, an infinite good.

NOR does it appear, but that all the good ends, which are answered by the
temporary punishment of the damned, may be continued to be answered by their
continual and endless punishment, if it be just. God may continue to display
his justice, his holiness, his hatred of sin, his love of righteousness, and of
the general good, by opposing and punishing those who are obstinately set in
the practice of sin, and in the opposition of righteousness, and of the general
good. In the same way he may establish his authority, manifest the evil of sin,
restrain others from it, and by a contrast of the circumstances of the saved
and damned, increase the gratitude and happiness of the former, as well as
increase their happiness by the view of the divine holiness, and regard to the
general good, manifested in the punishment of the obstinate enemies of holiness
and of the general good; and by a view of divine grace in their own salvation,
and the salvation of all who shall be saved. These are the principal public
ends to be answered by temporary vindictive punishment, on supposition that
future punishment is temporary; and if any other good end to the universe shall
be answered by it, in the opinion of those who believe it, let it be mentioned,
that by a thorough enquiry we may see whether the same good end may not be
answered by continual and endless punishment.

ANOTHER question concerning the divine goodness proper to be considered here,
is, whether it secure and make certain the final happiness of every man; or
whether it be satisfied with this, that opportunity and means are afforded to
every man to obtain happiness, if he will seize the opportunity and use the
means. -- Concerning this also, Dr. C. has sufficiently expressed his
sentiments; as in * the following passages; Benev. of the Deity, p. 60.
We must not judge of the benevolence of the Deity merely from the actual good
we see produced, but should likewise take into consideration the tendency of
those general laws conformably to which it is produced. Because the tendency of
those laws may be obstructed, and less good actually take place, than they were
naturally fitted to produce. In which case, it is no argument of want of
goodness in the Deity, that no more good was communicated; though it may be of
folly in the creatures. -- Ib. p. 69.
It is impossible we should judge fairly of the Creator's benevolence, from a
view only of our world, under its present actual enjoyments. But if we would
form right sentiments of it, we must consider the tendency of the divine scheme
of operation, and what the state of the world would have been, if the rational
and moral beings in it had acted up to the laws of their nature and given them
full scope for the production of good. -- p. Ib. 73.
All the good suitable for such a system as this, is apparently the tendency of
nature and the divine administration, and it actually prevails so far as this
tendency is not perverted by creatures tbemselves, -- for which he [God] is not
answerable. The Doctor expresses himself to the same purport in many other
passages of the same book.

IT is manifest, that in these passages, Dr. C. esteems it a sufficient
vindication of the divine goodness, that God has established good laws, has
benevolently constituted the nature of things and has given opportunity to men
to secure to themselves the enjoyment of good: and that the divine goodness
does not imply that every individual creature shall actually enjoy complete
good or happiness. If these things be true, then no argument from the divine
goodness can prove, that every individual of mankind will be finally happy: the
divine goodness though complete and infinite does not secure actual happiness
to every individual: it secures the opportunity and means only of happiness: or
it secures such a divine scheme as has a tendency to the happiness of all, and
would actually prevail to the communication of happiness to all, if it were not
perverted by creatures themselves, for which perversion God is not answerable.

NOW that such a divine scheme as this is actually adopted, is undoubted truth,
and may be granted by every advocate for endless punishment. Therefore on the
same ground on which Dr. C. vindicates the goodness of God, from the objections
which arise from present calamities, and from future temporary punishment; may
the same goodness be vindicated from the objections which are raised from
endless punishment. In the former case it is pleaded, that God is infinitely
good, though creatures suffer calamities here and deserved punishment
hereafter, because he has given them opportunity to obtain happiness, and has
adopted a scheme of operation which has a tendency to good. Just so God is
infinitely good, though some men suffer deserved endless punishment; because he
has given mankind opportunity to obtain eternal life and salvation, and has
adopted a scheme of providence and of grace, which will actually prevail to the
final salvation of all, if it be not neglected or perverted by men themselves;
for which neglect or perversion God is not answerable.

IT is also conceded by Dr. C. 12 Sermon. p. 40.
that none of the sons of Adam, by the mere exercise of their natural powers,
ever yet attained to a perfect knowledge of this rule [the rule of man's duty,
and of God's conduct in rewarding and punishing.] Most certainly they are
unable, after all their reasonings, to say, what punishment as to kind, or
degree, or duration, would be their due, in case of sin. This is plainly to
give up all arguments against endless punishment, drawn from the goodness of
God, or from any other divine perfection. For if most certainly after all our
reasonings from the divine perfections as well as from other topics of reason,
we be unable to say what punishment, as to kind, or degree, or duration, is due
in case of sin; then " most certainly we are unable to say," but that an
endless punishment, and that consisting in misery too, is due, and is necessary
to secure and promote the good of the system. Therefore to have been
consistent, Dr. C. ought never to have pretended, that endless misery is not
reconcilable with divine goodness.

DR. C. further grants, that it may be necessary, that the penalty of the
divine law be inflicted, and that the infliction of it may be honorable to God,
and useful to creatures: yea, he grants, that the full penalty of the law will
actually be inflicted on some men. 5 Disser. p. 231.
Perhaps the reasons of government might make it fit and proper, and therefore
morally necessary, that the threatening which God has denounced, should be
executed. Would the wisdom of the supreme legislator have guarded his
prohibition with a penalty it was not reasonable and just he should inflict?
And might not the infliction of it, when incurred, be of service, signal
service, to the honor of the divine authority, and to secure the obedience of
the creature in all after times? -- If it be fit and proper, and morally
necessary; if it be of signal service to the honor of the divine authority, and
to secure the obedience of creatures, to inflict the penalty of the divine law;
doubtless the infliction of it is not only consistent with the general good,
but subservient to it, and therefore perfectly consistent with the divine
goodness. It is not "reasonable," that God should inflict the penalty of his
law, unless the infliction be consistent with the general good, and so with the
divine goodness. Therefore the question proposed in the last quotation may with
equal truth and force be proposed a little differently, thus, Would the wisdom
of the supreme legislator have guarded his prohibition with a penalty, which it
was not consistent with the general good of the universe, or with the goodness
of his own nature, that he should in any one instance inflict? -- Thus it
appears to be fully granted, that divine goodness does not oppose the
infliction of the penalty of the divine law, but requires it. -- Nay, as has
been hinted above, Dr. C. expressly asserts, that the penalty of the law will
be inflicted on some men; that on those who pass through the torments of hell,
the divine law will take its course, and the threatened penalty will be fully
executed. P. 336.
-- Now what the penalty of the divine law is, we have before endeavored to
show. Therefore if our reasoning on that head be just, it follows from that
reasoning and from Dr. C's concessions in the preceding quotations taken
together, that endless punishment is not only reconcilable with divine
goodness, but is absolutely required by it. Would divine goodness both denounce
and actually inflict a penalty, which that goodness did not require, and which
was not even reconcilable with it?

DR. C. informs us, 5 Diss. p. 247.
that Christ was sent into the world, and the great design he was sent upon was
to make way for the WISE, just and holy excrcise of mercy -- toward the sinful
sons of men. It seems then, that if it had not been for the mediation of
Christ, there would have been no way for the exercise of mercy toward men, in
a consistency not with justice and holiness only, but with wisdom? and if not
with wisdom, not with the general good: for wisdom always dictates that which
is for the general good. And if it would not have been consistent with the
general good, to exercise mercy toward sinners, without the mediation of
Christ, neither would it have been consistent with the divine goodness, for
that and that only which is subservient to the general good, is an object to
the divine goodness. In this sentiment Dr. C. was very full, as we have already
seen. -- Therefore without the mediation of Christ, divine goodness required,
that all mankind be left in a state of despair under the curse of the law. And
if it have been shown, that this curse is endless misery, it follows, that
divine goodness, required that all mankind, if it had not been for the
mediation of Christ, should suffer endless misery.

III. As was proposed, we now proceed to consider Dr. C's arguments from the
goodness of God, to prove the salvation of all men. -- If some of the following
quotations be found to be rather positive assertions than arguments; I hope the
fault will not be imputed to me, provided I quote those passages which contain
as strong arguments from this topic, as any in his book.

P. 14.
IT is high time, that some generally received doctrines should be renounced,
and others embraced in their room that are more honorable to the Father of
Mercies, and comfortable to the creatures whom his hands have formed. I doubt
not it has been a perplexing difficulty to most persons (I am sure it has been
such to me) how to reconcile the doctrine which dooms so great a number of the
human race to eternal flames, with the essential, absolutely perfect goodness
of the Deity. -- And perhaps they contain ideas utterly irreconcilable with
each other. To be sure, their consistency has never yet been so clearly pointed
out, but that a horror of darkness still remains that is sadly distressing to
many a considerate tender heart. -- In this passage it is implied, that the
doctrine of endless misery is not honorable to the Father of Mercies. But what
is the proof of this? If there be any, it consists in these several particulars
-- That this doctrine is uncomfortable to the creatures of God -- That it has
been a perplexing difficulty to some, Dr. C. thinks to most, and "is sure it
has been such to HIM," to reconcile that doctrine with the goodness of God --
That perhaps they are irreconcilable -- That to be sure (in Dr. C's opinion)
they never have been so reconciled, but that a horror of darkness remains.

IF these be arguments, they require an answer. -- The first is, that the
doctrine of endless misery is uncomfortable, or rather not so comfortable to
God's creatures, as some other doctrines: therefore it is not honorable to the
Father of Mercies. -- But would Dr. C. dare to say, that every doctrine is
dishonorable to God, which is not equally comfortable to sinful creatures, as
some other doctrines? and that no doctrine is consistent with the divine
goodness, but those which are in the highest degree comfortable to such
creatures? What then will follow concerning his doctrine of "torment for ages
of ages?" -- Or would any man choose that the comparison be dropped and that
the argument be expressed thus: -- The doctrine of endless misery is
uncomfortable to creatures, therefore it is dishonorable to God? This still
confutes the doctrine of torment for ages of ages. Beside, if the meaning be,
that it is uncomfortable to all creatures, it is a mistake. -- To those who
believe it to be a just and glorious expression of the divine hatred of sin,
and a necessary mean of vindicating the justice of God, of supporting the
dignity of his government and of promoting the general good; it is so far from
being uncomfortable, that it is necessary to their comfort; and they rejoice in
it for the same reasons, that they rejoice in the advancement of the general
good. They rejoice in it on the same principles of benevolence and piety, that
Dr. C. rejoiced in the prospect, that the divine law would have its course, and
the full threatened penalty be executed on some of mankind.

THE next particular of the above quotation is, that the doctrine of endless
misery has been perplexing to some, or to most men, and to be sure to Dr. C. --
Doubtless this is true of many other doctrines, which however have been
believed both by Dr. C. and by other Christians: such as the perfect rectitude,
goodness and impartiality of all the dispensations of divine providence: the
consistence between the existence of sin in the world and the infinite wisdom,
power, holiness and goodness of God: the final subserviency of all events to
the divine glory and the general good of the system, etc. Therefore, if the
argument prove any thing, it proves too much.

THE third particular is, Perhaps endless misery is not reconcilable with the
goodness of the Deity. -- Answer, Perhaps it is reconcilable with that divine
attribute.

THE last particular is, To be sure (in Dr. C's opinion) they never have been
so reconciled, but that a horror of darkness remains with respect to the
subject. -- Answer, In the opinion of many other men, they have often been so
reconciled, that there was no reason, why a horror of darkness in view of the
subject should remain in the mind of any man. They experience no more horror
of darkness in the idea, that God inflicts that endless punishment which is
perfectly just, is absolutely necessary to satisfy divine justice, and
vindicate the despised authority, government and grace of God, and is
subservient to the glory of God and the general good; than in the idea of most
other doctrines of the gospel.

BUT let us proceed to another passage of Dr. C. -- P. 321.
Multitudes are taken off before they have had opportunity to make themselves
hardened abandoned sinners: and so far as we are able to judge, had they been
continued in life, they might have been formed to a virtuous temper of mind, by
a suitable mixture of correction, instruction, and the like. And can it be
supposed with respect to such, that an infinitely benevolent God, without any
other trial, in order to effect their reformation, will consign them over to
endless and irreversible torment? Would this be to conduct himself like a
father on earth? Let the heart of a father speak on this occasion. Nay, it does
not appear, that any sinners are so incorrigible in wickedness, as to be beyond
recovery by still further methods within the reach of infinite power: And if
the infinitely wise God can, in any wise methods, recover them, even in any
other state of trial, may we not argue from his infinite benevolence, that he
will?

THE first branch of this argument is, that some die before they become
incorrigible; therefore the fatherly goodness of God will give them another
trial. -- But did Dr. C. know when sinners become incorrigible, and when not?
Does any man know how long a person must live in sin, to arrive at that state?
If not, what right has any man to say, that any sinners die, before God as
perfectly knows them to be incorrigible, as if they had lived in sin ever so
long? -- Beside, were sinners to live in sin ever so long, still this objection
might be made; and Dr. C. has in fact made it, not only with regard to those
who die prematurely, but with regard to all sinners. He says, "It does not
appear, that any sinners are so incorrigible, as to be beyond recovery by still
further methods." That is, if it do not appear, that sinners are in this world
beyond recovery by still further methods to be used for their recovery, we are
to believe from God's infinite benevolence, that those further methods will be
used for their recovery. But should a sinner go through the torments of hell,
and of ten other succeeding states of trial, it is to be presumed, that Dr. C.
would not say, but that possibly he might be recovered by some further methods
within the power of God to use, if indeed God should Ye cause to use those
further methods. The ground of this argument is, that goodness requires, that
God use means for the recovery of sinners, as long as it is in the power of God
to use any further means to that end. But this as much needs to be proved as
any one proposition advanced by Dr. C.

THE next branch of this argument is, that it would not be acting like a father
on earth, if God were to consign sinners to endless torment. -- And is it
acting like a father on earth, to doom men to the second death, the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, and there torment them for ages of ages? Let
the heart of a father on earth speak and declare whether it would be agreeable
to him, to inflict on his children these extreme and long continued tortures?
or even many of the temporal calamities which God inflicts on mankind; such as
poverty, shame, a feeble sickly habit, extreme pain and distress, loss of
reason, and death attended with the most afflicting circumstances? Would a
father on earth choose to plunge his children in the ocean, and leave them to
the mercy of the waves? Would he set his house on fire, while they were buried
in soft slumbers, and consume them in the flames? -- Such declamatory
applications to the passions are a two-edged sword which will wound Dr. C's
scheme, as certainly as that of his opponents. But this controversy is not to
be settled by an application to the passions.

THE last part of the above quotation destroys the whole. It is this; It does
not appear that any sinners are so incorrigible, as to be beyond recovery by
still further methods within the reach of infinite wisdom. If God have revealed
that no sinners shall be recovered after this life, it is doubtless a wise
constitution that this life is the only state of probation. Therefore it is not
within the reach of infinite wisdom, to use any further means after this life
for the recovery of those who are incorrigible here. So that this whole
paragraph is a mere begging of the question: it takes for granted, that this
life is not the only state of probation, or that the endless punishment of all
who die impenitent is not a doctrine of divine revelation.

DR. C. elsewhere P. 326, 327.
argues universal salvation from this, that God speaks of himself, as the
universal Father of Men; and says, fathers on earth chastise their children for
their profit, but do not punish them, having no view to their advantage. -- But
does a father on earth never punish an incorrigible child, when it is necessary
for the good of the rest of the family? If he did not, but suffered him to ruin
his whole family, or even one of his other children; would be act the part, or
deserve the name, of a father? And shall we say that of our Father in Heaven
(who instead of being evil, as all earthly fathers are more or less, is
infinitely good) which we cannot suppose of any father on earth, till we have
first divested him of the heart of a father? -- The truth is, this and all
arguments of the kind take for granted what is by no means granted, that the
salvation of all men, is subservient to the good, not of the persons saved
only, but of the universal system.

IN various passages P. 352, etc.
Dr. C. has much to say of our natural notions of God's goodness; particularly,
that the natural notions we entertain of the goodness and mercy of God, rise up
in opposition to the doctrine of never ending torments. I grant that our
natural notions of those divine attributes rise up in opposition to endless
torments, on the supposition that they are unjust and inconsistent with the
general good. But on the supposition that they are both just and subservient to
the general good, our natural notions rise up in favor of them. So that this
and such like arguments all depend on taking for granted what is no more
granted than the main question.

NEARLY allied to the argument from the divine goodness, is that by which Dr.
C. attempts to prove universal salvation from the end of God in creation. P. 1.
As the first cause of all things is infinitely benevolent, it is not easy to
conceive that he should bring mankind into existence unless he intended to make
them finally happy. P 2, 3.
If the only good God knew -- that some free agents would make themselves
unhappy, notwithstanding the utmost efforts of his wisdom to prevent it, why
did he create them? To give them existence knowing at the same time that they
would render themselves finally miserable -- is scarce reconcilable with
supremely and absosolutely perfect benevolence. -- This argument, as the
preceding, entirely depends on the supposition that the final happiness of
every individual is necessary to the greatest happiness of the system.
Doubtless God is absolutely and perfectly benevolent: but such benevolence
seeks the greatest happiness of the system, not of any individual, unless the
happiness of that individual be consistent with the greatest happiness of the
system. This is the plain dictate not of reason only, but of scripture, and is
abundantly conceded by Dr. C. as appears by the quotations already made. There
is no difficulty therefore in conceiving, that however the first cause of all
things is infinitely benevolent, he should bring mankind into existence, though
he never intended to make them all finally happy. He might in perfect
consistence with infinite benevolence, bring them into existence, intending
that some of them should suffer that endless punishment which they should
deserve, and thereby contribute to the greatest happiness of the system. And if
such a punishment be subservient to the greatest happiness of the system,
infinite benevolence not only admits of it, but requires it; nor would God be
infinitely benevolent, if he should save all men. Therefore this grand
argument, on which Dr. C. and other writers in favor of universal salvation,
build so much, is a mere begging of the question. Let them show that the
greatest good of the system requires the final happiness of every individual,
and they will indeed have gone far toward the establishment of their scheme.
But until they shall have done this, their argument from this topic is utterly
inconclusive. It is no more inconsistent with the goodness of God, that he
should create men with a foresight and an intention, that they should suffer
that endless punishment which they should deserve, and which is subservient to
the general good; than that he should create them with a foresight and
intention, that they should subserve the same important end, by suffering the
torment of ages of ages, or the pains of the stone or the colic; provided these
temporary pains are not subservient to their personal good. And to say that
temporary pains cannot consistently with the divine goodness be inflicted on
the sinner, unless they be subservient to the personal good of the patient, is
to contradict the plain dictates of reason, of scripture, and of Dr. C.
himself. But this subject has been largely considered in Chap. III.

THESE, I think, are Dr. C's principal arguments from the divine goodness, to
prove universal salvation: I presume, that in his whole book there are none
more forcible than these. His arguments of this kind generally, if not
universally, depend on taking for granted, what is as much in dispute as any
point in the whole controversy, that endless punishment is not consistent with
the greatest good of the universal system, or the greatest general good. If it
be true, that any man will be punished without end, no doubt it is so ordered,
because infinite wisdom and goodness saw it to be necessary to the general
good. If it be not true, it is equally certain, that infinite wisdom and
goodness saw endless punishment to be inconsistent with the general good. But
which of these is the truth, is the main question.

IV. THAT endless punishment is consistent with the divine goodness, not only
is implied in various sentiments and tenets of Dr. C, but appears to be a real
and demonstrable truth. To evince this, I shall now, as was proposed, mention
several considerations.

1. ALL arguments against endless punishment, drawn from the divine mercy,
grace or goodness, imply a concession, that endless punishment is just. Were it
not just, there would be no occasion to call in the aid of goodness. Stern,
unrelenting justice would afford relief. Nor is there the least goodness, as
distinguished from justice, exercised by a judge, in delivering a man from an
unjust punishment, attempted to be brought upon him by a false accuser. If
therefore the salvation of sinners, and of every sinner, be an act of goodness,
mercy or grace, as Dr. C. abundantly declares; then endless punishment is just.
And if it be just, it appears by Chap. III, that it will be inflicted, and
inflicted by God too. Therefore it is consistent with divine goodness.

It is hoped it has been made manifest in Chap. II and III, that the end of
future punishment is not the personal good of the patients, but to satisfy
justice, and support the authority and dignity of the divine law and
government; as both Dr. C. and the scriptures abundantly hold, that the wicked
will be punished to the utmost extent of their demerit. Now if the end of
future punishment, whether temporary or endless, be to satisfy justice, and to
support government; then the general good is promoted by the satisfaction of
justice: otherwise God would not inflict such punishment. And if the proof in
Chap. VI, that endless punishment is just, be valid, then justice is not
satisfied by any punishment short of endless. But by Chap. II and III it
appears, that all that punishment, which the wicked deserve, will actually be
inflicted upon them by God. Therefore endless punishment is perfectly
consisstent with divine goodness.

2. If the divine law may be in any one instance executed consistently with
divine goodness, endless punishment is consistent with the divine goodness. But
the divine law may, in some instances, be executed consistently with divine
goodness. -- I have before endeavored to show, that the penalty of the law is
endless punishment. If this be true, then when the law is executed, endless
punishment is inflicted. And who will dare to say, that God has made a law,
which he cannot in any one instance execute consistently with his own
perfections: And that if he should execute it in any instance, his goodness and
mercy must be inevitably given up? Nay, he delights in cruelty? If the law
cannot be executed without cruelty, it is a cruel unjust law: and to make a
cruel and unjust law, is as irreconcilable with the moral rectitude of God, as
to execute that law. If the infliction of endless punishment be cruel, the
threatening of it also is cruel. But this runs into the former question,
whether endless punishment be just.

IF it be said, though the law is just, and the execution of it would not be
cruel; yet it cannot be executed consistently with the divine goodness, because
the divine goodness seeks the greatest possible good of the system: But the
greatest possible good of the system requires the final happiness of all: -- As
to this I observe,

(1) THAT it is giving up the argument from divine goodness in the light, in
which Dr. C. has stated it. It appears by the quotations already made, that he
held endless punishment to be so inconsistent with divine goodness, that if
that punishment be inflicted, it will prove God to be destitute of goodness,
and to delight in cruelty.

(2) THAT the question as now stated comes to no more than this, Whether
endless punishment be consistent with the greatest possible display of divine
goodness: For a system, in which there is the greatest possible good, and the
greatest possible display of the divine goodness, are one and the same thing.
But if it were granted, that endless punishment is, in this sense, inconsistent
with the divine goodness, it would by no means follow, on Dr. C's principles,
that all men will be saved. Because it is an established principle with him,
that divine goodness is not and cannot be displayed, to the highest possible
degree, or so but that there is room for higher displays and further
communications of it. Benev. of the Deity, p. 40.
Neither is it to be supposed, because God is infinitely benevolent, that he
has in fact made an infinite manifestation of his goodness. -- Infinity in
benevolence knows no bounds, but there is still room for more and higher
displays of it. -- This perfection is strictly speaking, inexhaustible, not
capable of being displayed to a ne plus. Therefore, it would be absurd for Dr.
C. or any one, who agrees with him in the sentiment expressed in the last
quotation, to state the argument from divine goodness, in the light in which it
is exhibited in the objection now under consideration. This stating of the
argument runs entirely into the question, whether the present system of the
universe be the best possible; which Dr. C. has sufficiently answered in the
negative, in the passage last quoted, and in many other passages of his
writings. If it be true, that divine goodness does not adopt and prosecute the
best possible plan of the universe in general: what reason have we to think,
that it will adopt and prosecute the best possible plan with regard to any part
of the divine system; for instance the future state of those who die in
impenitence?

(3) ON the supposition, that God does adopt and prosecute the best possible
plan, both with regard to the universe in general, and in every particular
dispensation of his providence; still we shall never be able to determine a
priori, that the final salvation of all men is, in the sense now under
consideration, most subservient to the general good. It must be determined
either by the event itself, or by revelation: and whether revelation do assure
us of the salvation of all men, is not the subject of inquiry in this chapter,
but shall be particularly considered in its place.

3. IF divine goodness without respect to the atonement of Christ, which is
foreign from the subject of this chapter, require the salvation of all men; it
either requires that they be saved, whether they repent or not; or it requires,
that they be saved on the condition of their repentance only. If it require
that they be saved, whether they repent or not, it follows, that they have done
no damage to the universe, or have committed no sin. For the very idea of sin
is a damage to the universe, a dishonor to God, and an injury to the creature.
Now whenever a damage is done to the universe, the good of the universe, or
which in the present argument comes to the same thing, the divine goodness
requires reparation. But if the good of the universe require, that the sinner
be saved without even repentance, the good of the universe requires no
reparation, and if it require no reparation, it has not been impaired, or there
has been no damage done to the good of the universe: and if no damage have been
done to the universe, no sin has been committed. No wonder then, that the
divine goodness requires the salvation of those who have committed no sin or no
moral evil.

IF on the other hand it be allowed, that by sin damage is done to the
universe, and yet it be holden, that divine goodness requires the salvation of
all men, on the condition of their repentance only; it will follow, that
repentance alone makes it consistent with the general good, that the sinner be
saved. Repentance then repairs the damage done to the universe by sin; and so
makes satisfaction or atonement for sin. -- The very essence of atonement is
something done to repair the damage done by sin to the universe, so that the
sinner can be exempted from punishment, without any disadvantage to the
universe. And as repentance is a personal act of the sinner, he does on this
supposition make atonement for his own sin by his personal virtue. Therefore,
if after this he be saved from wrath, he is but treated according to his
personal character, or according to strict justice; not according to goodness
or grace. So that while Dr. C. professes and supposes himself to be arguing
from the divine goodness, the salvation of all men from the wrath to come; his
arguments are really drawn from the justice of God only. They imply either that
the sinner who is by divine goodness to be saved from the wrath to come, is no
sinner, deserves no punishment, and therefore is incapable of being saved from
wrath, as he is exposed to none; or that though he be a sinner, he has in his
own person, made full satisfaction for his sin, and therefore merits salvation
from wrath, and is incapable of it by an act of grace or goodness.

4. TO argue the salvation of all men from the goodness of God, without regard
to the atonement of Christ; and yet to allow that endless punishment is just,
is a direct contradiction. -- If it be allowed or proved, that endless
punishment is just, it follows of course that it is consistent with the general
good, and which is the same thing, with the divine goodness, and is even
required by divine goodness, on the supposition on which we now proceed, that
no atonement is made for sin. The very idea of a just punishment of any crime
is a punishment which in view of the crime only, is requisite to repair the
damage done to the system by that crime. Any further punishment than this is
unjust, and any punishment short of this, falls short of the demand of justice.
At the same time that this is demanded by justice, it is demanded by the
general good too: because by the definition of a just punishment, it is
necessary to the general good; necessary to secure it, or to repair the damage
done to it, by the crime punished. So that a just punishment of any crime is
not only consistent with the general good, but is absolutely required by it,
provided other measures equivalent to this punishment be not taken to repair
the damage done by sin, or, which is the same, provided an atonement be not
made. And if the endless punishment of sin be just; it is of course, on the
proviso just made, perfectly consistent with the general good of the universe,
and absolutely required by it, and equally required by the goodness of God. And
to say that though it be just, it is not reconcilable with the divine
goodness, is the same as to say, that though it be just, it is not
reconcilable with justice.

OBJECTION: Divine goodness does not admit of the endless punishment of the
apostle Paul; yet his endless punishment would be just. -- Answer: Divine
goodness, or the general good of the universe, considering the sins or the
personal character of Paul by itself, does both admit and require his endless
punishment. But considering the atonement of Christ, which, as I have
repeatedly observed, comes not into consideration in the present argument, it
does not indeed admit of it.

I BEG leave to ask the advocates for universal salvation, whether if Christ
had not made atonement, it would have been consistent with the general good of
the universe, that sinners be punished without end. If they answer in the
affirmative, then endless punishment is in itself reconcilable not with
justice only, but with goodness too, as goodness always acquiesces in that
which is consistent with the general good. For if only in consequence of the
atonement, endless punishment be inconsistent with the divine goodness, it
becomes inconsistent with it, not on account of any thing in the endless
punishment of sin, or in the divine goodness simply; but wholly on account of
something external to them both: and therefore that external something being
left out of the account, there is no inconsistency between the endless
punishment of sin and the divine goodness in themselves considered. But that
they are in themselves inconsistent is implied in Dr. C's argument from divine
goodness; and that they are not in themselves inconsistent is all for which I
am now pleading.

IF the answer to the question just proposed be, that it would not be
consistent with the general good, that a sinner be punished without end, even
if Christ had not made atonement; it follows, that such punishment is not just;
as the very definition of a just punishment is, one which in view of the
sinner's personal character only is necessary to the general good. -- Or if
this be not a proper definition of a just punishment, let a better be given.
Any punishment is just, or is deserved, for no other reason, than that the
criminal viewed in himself owes it to the public, or the general good requires
it.

5. IF divine goodness require, that every sinner be, on on his mere
repentance, exempted from punishment, it will follow, that sin is no moral
evil. -- If divine goodness require that every sinner be, on his mere
repentance, exempted from punishment, the general good of the universe requires
the same. If the general good do require it, then either the sinner has in
that action of which he repents, done nothing by which the general good has
been impaired; or that impairment is repaired by his repentance. For if he have
impaired the general good, and not afterward repaired it, then by the very
terms it requires reparation. And this which the general good in these cases
requires of the sinner for the reparation of the general good, is his
punishment, and not his exemption from punishment. But if the sinner have done
nothing which requires that reparation be made to the general good, then he
has committed nothing which has impaired the general good: or, which is the
same, he has committed no moral evil. For moral evil is a voluntary act
impairing the general good consisting in the glory of God and the happiness of
the created system. -- Or if it be said, that the repentance of the sinner
repairs the general good, and prevents the ill effects of his sin; I answer,
repentance is no punishment, nor any reparation of damage to the universe by a
past action. It is a mere cessation from sin and a sorrow for it. A man who has
committed murder, makes by repentance no reparation for the damage which is
thereby done to society or to the universe. So that if ever any damage were
done to the universe by sin, and if therefore the public good required that
reparation be made by the punishment of the sinner, it still requires the same,
and therefore does not require his exemption from punishment. Beside; the false
and absurd consequences See these considered at large in Chap. II.
necessarily following from the principle that the penitent deserves no
punishment, which is the same with this, that the general good does not require
that the penitent, viewed in his own character merely, be punished; plainly
point out the falsity and absurdity of the principle itself. Particularly this
consequence, that on that supposition the penitent never is nor can be
forgiven, as he makes by his repentance full satisfaction in his own person,
and thus answers the demand of justice or of the general good. -- But if it be
true, that repentance does not repair the damage done by sin to the universe;
and if as is now asserted, the general good do require that the penitent
sinner, without regard to the atonement of Christ, be exempted from punishment;
it required the same before he repented; consequently his sin never did impair
the good of the universe, and therefore is no moral evil.

OBJECTION 1. The fourth argument seems to imply, that sin consists in damage
actually done to the universe: whereas there are many sins, in which no real
damage is actually done. As if a man stab another with a design to murder him,
and open an abscess, whereby the man is benefited instead of murdered; and in
all acts of malice, which are not executed, no damage is actually done.

ANSW. Taking the word damage in a large sense, to mean, not merely loss of
property, as it is sometimes taken, but misery, calamity or natural evil; it
may be granted, that sin does consist in voluntarily doing damage to the
universe. It is a misery, a calamity, or a natural evil to any man, to be the
object of the malice of any other person, though his malice be never executed.
It exposes him to the execution of that malice: it renders him unsafe: and to
be unsafe is a calamity; especially to be the object of the malice of another
to such a degree, that the malicious man attempts the life of the object of his
malice. In this case the man who is the object of malice is very unsafe indeed.
-- And if but one person be in a calamitous situation, so far at least the
public good is impaired, or the universe is damaged. Besides, if that one act
impairing the public good, be left unpunished, and no proper restraint by the
punishment of the act, be laid upon the man himself and upon others, the
flood-gate is opened to innumerable more acts of the same, or a like kind. This
surely is a further calamity to the universe. So that every sinful volition,
though it fail of its object in the attempt, or though it be not attempted to
be executed in overt act, is a real calamity or damage to the universe.

OBJECT. 2. The preceding reasoning must needs be fallacious, as it implies,
that goodness or grace is never exercised in any case, wherein punishment is
deserved; that whatever is admitted by justice, is required by goodness; and
that if sin be a moral evil and deserve punishment, it cannot consistently with
the general good be forgiven.

ANSW. This is not true. The reasoning above does not imply, but that there may
be, consistently with the general good, the forgiveness of some sinners. Nor
does it imply, but that the general good may require the forgiveness of some
sinners; as undoubtedly it does require the forgiveness of all who repent and
believe in Christ, and so become interested in him according to the Gospel. Nor
does this reasoning imply, but that some sinners may obtain forgiveness on some
other account than the merits of Christ: though I believe it may be clearly
shown from scripture, that forgiveness can be obtained on no other account. But
this reasoning does assert, that if all penitents as such, or merely because
they are penitents, or on account of their own repentance and reformation, be
required by divine goodness to be exempted from punishment; then sin deserves
no punishment and is no moral evil.

6. THE voice of reason is, that divine goodness, or a regard to the general
good requires, that sin be punished according to its demerit, in some instances
at least: otherwise God would not appear to be what he really is, an enemy to
sin, and greatly displeased with it. -- It is certainly consistent with divine
goodness, that sin exists in the world, otherwise it would never have existed.
Now since sin is in the world, if God were never to punish it, it would seem,
that he is no enemy to it. Or if he punish it in a far less degree than it
deserves, still it would seem, that his displeasure at it is far less than it
is and ought to be. Nor can mere words or verbal declarations of the Deity
sufficiently exhibit his opposition to sin, so long as he uniformly treats the
righteous and the wicked in the same manner. His character in view of
intelligent creatures will appear to be what it is holden forth to be in his
actions, rather than what he in mere words declares it to be. But will any man
say, that it is conducive to the good order and happiness of the intellectual
system, that God should appear to be no enemy, but rather a friend to sin?

OBJECTION. God would still appear to be an enemy to sin, though he were not to
punish it: because he takes the most effectual measures, to extirpate it by
leading sinners to repentance. -- Answ. The extirpation of sin shows no other
hatred of it, than a physician shows to a disease, which he takes the most
effectual measures to abolish, by the restoration of health. But these measures
of the physician do not show, that he views his patient as blameable. Sickness
is no moral evil, and all the pains of the physician to remove sickness, are no
testimony of his abhorrence of moral evil. But sin is a moral evil, and it is
subservient to the general good, that the great governor of the universe should
testify his abhorrence of it, as a moral evil, or as justly blameable. To this
end he must do something further than is done by the physician, who heals his
patient: he must either in the person of the sinner, or in his substitute,
punish sin, and that according to its demerit; otherwise he will not show
himself displeased at it as a moral evil.

HATRED of sin is as essential to the Deity as love of holiness; and it is as
honorable to him and as necessary to the general good, that he express the
former as the latter. Indeed the latter is no further expressed, than the
former is expressed: and so far as the former is doubtful, the latter is
doubtful too. The question then comes to this, whether it be consistent with
the general good, that God should in actions, as well as words, express his
abhorrence of sin as blameable, or as a moral evil; and express this abhorrence
to a just degree. If this be consistent with the general good, it is also
consistent with the general good, that sin be punished according to its
demerit: and if it deserve an endless punishment, it is consistent with the
general good and with divine goodness, that such a punishment be inflicted.

7. THAT endless punishment is inconsistent with divine goodness, and that all
men are saved by free grace, is a direct contradiction. To be saved is to be
delivered from the curse of the law, which we have before endeavored to show
to be an endless punishment. But to be saved from this by free grace, implies,
that the person so saved, deserves endless punishment, and that such punishment
is with respect to him just. But whatever punishment is just with respect to
any man, provided no atonement be made by a substitute, is necessary to the
public good; and unless it be necessary to the public good, it is unjust. If it
be necessary to the public good, the public good requires it: and if the public
good require it, divine goodness requires it. Therefore to apply this reasoning
to the endless punishment of the sinner: -- The salvation of the sinner
consists in deliverance from the curse of the law: the curse of the law is
endless punishment; and to be delivered from this by free grace, implies, that
the endless punishment of the sinner is just. If the endless punishment of the
sinner be just, and no atonement be made by a substitute, the public good
requires his endless punishment, and the divine goodness of course requires it.
So that if the sinner can be saved by free grace only, and no atonement be made
by a substitute, the endless punishment of the sinner is not at all
inconsistent with divine goodness; and to say that it is inconsistent with the
divine goodness, and yet to say that all men are saved by free grace, and can
be saved in no other way, implies, as I said, a direct contradiction. It
implies, that endless punishment is just, as the deliverance from it is the
fruit of grace only: it also implies, that it is not just, as the public good
or the divine goodness does not require it, but is inconsistent with it.

CHAP. IX. In which is considered Dr. Chauncy's argument from Romans V, 12, etc.
HAVING in the preceding chapters considered Dr. C's arguments from reason and
from the divine perfections, I proceed now to consider those which are drawn
from particular passages of scripture. The first of those passages which
demands our attention is Romans V, 12, etc. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men; for that
all have sinned. For until the law sin was in the world; but sin is not
imputed, when there is no law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses,
even over them that had not sinned, after the similitude of Adam's
transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come. But not as the
offense, so also is the free gift. For if through the offense of one, many be
dead; much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man,
Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so
is the gift: for the judgment was by one to condemnation; but the free gift is
of many offenses unto justification. For if by one man's offense death reigned
by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the
offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. Moreover, the law entered that
grace might abound: but where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: That as
sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness
unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ, our Lord.

THE Doctor's argument from this passage depends wholly on the supposition,
that the apostle considers "Adam and Christ as the respective opposite sources
of death and life to mankind universally:" Or that Christ is the source of life
and eternal salvation to all men without exception, as Adam was the source of
death to all men without exception. The Doctor's reasons to support this
proposition are, -- (1) That in the 15th verse it is said, If through the
offense of one many be dead, much more has the grace of God abounded unto
many: and as by many in the former part of this verse is meant all men,
therefore he concludes that the same word is used in the same extensive sense,
in the latter part of the verse: "the antithesis," he says, "will otherwise be
lost." -- (2) The word many, (...), means all men, because the article is
prefixed to it, (...). -- (3) That in the 18th verse it is expressly asserted,
As by the offense of one, the judgment came upon all men, (...), to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men, (...), unto justification of life. Whence the Doctor concludes, that the
words all men in both parts of the comparison, are used in the same extent. --
(4) That the advantage by Christ exceeds, abounds beyond, the disadvantage by
Adam; but this, unless all men be saved, would be so far from the truth, that
the former would sink below the latter. -- Let us attend to these distinctly.

1. THE word many in the former part of the 15th and 19th verses, means all
men: therefore it means the same in the latter part of those verses: the
antithesis will otherwise be lost. P. 32, 60, etc.
Now how does the truth of this proposition appear? It must certainly be
supported by proper proof, to obtain credit. But in the very many instances in
which the Doctor is pleased to repeat this proposition, in his long commentary
on Romans V, 12, etc. I do not find one reason offered to prove it, beside that
quoted above, "The antithesis will otherwise be lost. P. 32, 60, etc.
" This therefore is now to be considered. -- In the rebellion in Great Britain,
1745, large numbers of men were engaged in the rebellion, and were led away by
the Pretender. After the Pretender was defeated, large numbers, by the
influence of some particular person, we will suppose, returned to their
allegiance, and took the proper oaths to the King: yet not all who were drawn
into the rebellion by the Pretender. Now would there be any impropriety in
saying in this case, As by the Pretender many had been drawn into the
rebellion, so by that other person many were brought back to their allegiance?
The former many is allowed to be more extensive, than the latter; yet there is
a manifest antithesis in the proposition; an antithesis as manifest as there
would have been, if the men who returned to their allegiance, had been just as
numerous as those who engaged in the rebellion, and had been the same
individuals. Equally manifest it is, that though the many, who died in Adam, be
more numerous than the many who are the subjects of saving grace by Christ: yet
there is a proper antithesis in this proposition, -- If through the offense of
one, many be dead; much more the grace of God by Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto many.

2. THE word many, (...), means all men, because the article is joined with it,
(...), the many. P. 60.
-- If this be evident at all, it must be evident either from the general use
of the adjective (...), when connected with the article, or from the
circumstances of the particular case in which it is used in this passage, Romans
V. 15 and 19. If the validity of the argument now under consideration, be
evident from the general use of (...) in the plural with the article; then
generally when used by good authors, and especially by the authors of the New
Testament, it means a strict universality. Let us therefore attend to
particular instances. -- Acts XXVI, 24. "Much learning does make thee mad;"
(...). But no man will say, that this expression means all learning. The use of
the article however is very proper, and the expression means the much learning
of which the apostle was possessed. -- 2 Cor. II, 17; For we are not as many,
(...), which corrupt the word of God. If (...) here mean all men, the apostle
in direct contradiction to himself in this very expression, means that he
himself, and all the other apostles, as well the rest of mankind, did corrupt
the word of God. -- Rev. XVII, 1; I will show unto thee the judgment of the
great whore, that sits upon many waters, (...). All waters, or all people
cannot be meant, because by far the greater part of the nations of the world
never were under the influence of the great whore. -- The only other instances
in the whole New Testament, in which (...) in the plural is used with the
article, are Mat. XXIV, 12. Romans XII, 5. Chapter XV, 22. 1 Cor. X, 17 and 33, which
the reader may examine for himself, and it is presumed, he will find, that in
no one of them is a strict universality clearly intended. If this be so, it is
by no means evident from the general use of (...) in the plural with the
article, that (...), many, in Romans V, 15 and 19, means all men.

NOR is this more evident from the circumstances of the particular case, in
which many, (...), is used in Romans V. 15. Let it be translated as Dr. C.
chooses to translate it, thus: If through the offense of one, the many be dead,
much more the grace of God, by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto the
many. Nothing appears from the expression, but that the meaning of the apostle
may be, what it has generally been understood to be, that the many who were
connected with Adam, and whose life or death depended on his standing or
falling, became dead through his offense: and the many who are connected with
Christ, and with a particular design to save whom, He died, shall be made the
subjects of the abounding grace of God in their most glorious salvation. -- I
say, nothing appears, either from the general use of (...), or from the
particular use of it in this case, but that this and this only is the real
sense of it, in this instance. And for Dr. C. to wish his readers, before he
has given them a reason, to give up this sense in favor of his own, is for him
to come to them in the humble character of a suppliant, and not in the
dignified character of a cogent reasoner.

3. IN the 18th verse, it is expressly asserted, As by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men, (...), to condemnation; even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men, (...), to justification
of life: whence Dr, C. concludes, that the words all men, in both parts of the
comparison are used in the same extent; and says, It can be no other than a
flat contradiction to the express words of the apostle to say, that in the
latter part of this comparison not all men are meant, but believers only; that
is, a few of them. P. 32.
It is indeed a flat contradiction to Dr. C's sense of the apostle's words; but
that it is a contradiction to the true sense of those words, does not appear.
If it should be further granted to be a contradiction to the most literal sense
of those words taken by themselves, it would not thence follow, that it is a
contradiction to the true and real sense of the words. The real sense of words
in all authors, is in thousands of instances to be known, not from the words
themselves merely, but from their connection and other circumstances.

THE Dr. rightly asserts, that the words all men in verse 18th, mean the same
with the many in verse 15th. And as it has been shown, that there is no
evidence given by the Doctor, that the many, to whom grace abounds through
Christ, mean all men; so all men in the 18th verse meaning, by his own consent,
the same with the many in verse 15th, must, until we have evidence to the
contrary, be understood with the same restriction. To carry on the comparison,
and maintain the antithesis, there is no more necessity of understanding the
words all men, when applied to the saved by Christ in the 18th verse, to mean
the whole human race; than there is of understanding in that extent, the many
in the latter part of verse 15th.

BESIDE; the meaning of those words is abundantly restricted by the context: as
verse 17th, For if by one man's offense death reigned by one; much more they
which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign
by one, Jesus Christ. The 18th verse is an inference drawn from the 17th, and
is introduced by (...), therefore. But the 18th verse would be no just
inference at all from the 17th, unless the words all men in the latter part of
the 18th verse be equally restricted as the words they which receive abundance
of grace, in the 17th verse. Let us make trial of understanding those phrases
in a sense differently extensive, thus; For if by one man's offense death
reigned by one; much more true believers in this life, who are the subjects of
the peculiar and abundant grace of God, shall reign in eternal life by one,
Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men
universally to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon all men universally unto justification of life, whether in this world
they believe or not. The whole force of this reasoning is more briefly
expressed thus; Those who believe in this life, shall reign in life eternal:
therefore also all men, whether they believe in this life or not, shall in like
manner reign in life eternal. But who does not see, that this consequence by no
means follows from the premises?

ALTHOUGH Dr. C. supposes "this therefore" [in verse 18th,] "is the same which
began the 12th verse:" -- yet he allows, it will make no essential difference
in the apostle's reasoning, if we should suppose, that the 18th and 19th verses
introduced by (...), are a conclusion from the three foregoing verses: P. 67.
And it is evident by the Doctor's own discourse, that he himself was full in
the opinion, that the 18th and 19th verses, are a conclusion from the three
preceding verses, though he was of the opinion that those three verses, are an
INTERPOSED parenthesis. Let the reader notice the following passage; The view
of the apostle in interposing these verses [the 15th, 16th, and 17th,] was that
he might argue from the gift in this abounding sense, when he came to prosecute
the comparison between Adam and Christ -- And if the gift through Christ might
be supposed to abound beyond the lapse, in the 15th, 16th, and 17th verses, why
not in the 18th and 19th? P. 68


INDEED the Doctor himself allows, that the all men in the latter part of the
18th verse, is no more extensive, than they which receive abundance of grace in
the 17th verse. But he supposes that the latter expression is equally extended
with the former, and that the former extends to all mankind. I say, he supposes
this: but his opponents in this controversy suppose the contrary; and how does
it appear, but that their supposition is as good as his? If the Doctor wished
that we should give the preference to his supposition, he ought to have given
us some reason.

THE Doctor with the help of a "learned friend" has given us a long
dissertation on the 17th verse, and on the Greek verb (...), with a design to
prove, that (...), they who receive, mean not those who receive the grace of
God actively, voluntarily and with a heart to improve it; but those who are the
"objects of this grace," "or the persons upon whom it is bestowed." But this is
altogether immaterial in the present dispute. By the abundance of grace Dr. C.
understands the abounding advantage by Christ, terminating in a reign in life.
-- Now it will be granted on all hands, that they on whom this grace is
bestowed, will be saved. Indeed the very expression, reigning in life, implies
salvation. Those therefore on whom this grace is bestowed, will as certainly
and as confessedly be saved, as those who cheerfully receive and improve the
grace of God. All the question is, and a very important one it is, whether this
abounding grace terminating in a reign in life, be bestowed on all men. That it
is preached or offered to all men, is granted. But that it is so communicated
to all, as to secure their reign in life, is a different idea, and is the main
subject of this controversy.

SO that all the labors of Dr. C. and his ingenious friend, to settle the
meaning of receive, (...), contribute nothing to establish this point, That all
men in the latter part of verse 18th, mean the whole human race. So long as the
Doctor grants, that the words all men, verse 18th, are not more extensive than
they which receive abundance of grace, verse 17th; and so long as he has not
proved, that they which receive abundance of grace, so as to reign in eternal
life, mean the whole human race; so long nothing is done to prove universal
salvation, from the use of the words all men, verse 18th. To say, that they
which receive abundance of grace mean all mankind, because that expression is
equally extensive as the words all men in the 18th verse, is a mere begging of
the question. It is in the first place to suppose and not to prove, that the
words all men mean all mankind; and then by them to prove, that also they which
receive abundance of grace, mean all mankind.

THE universal term all men, verse 18th, is by the former part of the chapter
limited to those who are justified by faith, who have peace with God, and who
joy in God, through Christ, as having received reconciliation. Dr. C's opinion
was, that the 18th verse is but the full expression of the sentence left
imperfect in the 12th verse, and that the therefore in the beginning of the
18th verse is the same which began the 12th verse. P. 67.
The 18th verse then is an immediate conclusion from the verses preceding the
12th, especially from the 11th. Now the believers in endless punishment hold,
that in all that part of the chapter, from the beginning to the 12th verse, the
apostle had been speaking of the privileges of believers only, and not those
privileges which belong to all mankind. And to infer from those privileges
which are peculiar to believers, that all mankind will be saved, is to infer a
consequence, which is by no means contained in the premises: and such reasoning
ought never to be imputed to any man of Paul's sound judgment, much less to
him, an inspired apostle.

TO illustrate this matter, permit me to descend to particulars. Verse 1st,
believers are said to be justified by faith and to have peace with God: verse
2d, to have access by faith into the grace of the gospel and to rejoice (or
glory) in the hope of the glory of God: verse 3d, to glory in tribulations:
verse 5th, to have the love of God shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy
Ghost: verse 8th, it is said that God commends his love toward believers, in
that Christ died for them: verse 9th, that believers are justified by Christ's
blood, and saved from wrath through him: verse 10th, that believers are
reconciled to God by the death of Christ and saved by his life: verse 11th,
that believers glory in God through Christ, by whom they have received the
atonement or reconciliation. -- Now what is the consequence really following
from these premises, ascribing to believers these peculiar and exclusive
privileges? Is it that by the righteousness of Christ the free gift unto
justification of life, is come upon all mankind, believers and unbelievers? By
no means: any man, without the aid of inspiration, would be ashamed to draw
such a consequence from such premises. The only just consequence of these
premises, is that which has been generally taken to be the meaning of the 18th
verse; viz That as by the offense of one, Adam, judgment to condemnation came
upon all mankind who were his seed; even so by the righteousness of one, Jesus
Christ, the free gift unto justification of life, came upon all his seed, who
are believers only, and who are the only persons of whom the apostle had been
speaking in the premises. -- May I not now adopt the same bold language which
Dr. C. often uses concerning his comments on scripture, that no other sense
than this, can be put on this 18th verse without making the apostle argue
inconclusively?

I KNOW very well that the Doctor understood differently the whole passage from
the beginning of this chapter to the 12th verse. But as his whole argument from
Romans V. 12. to the end, in the present view of it, depends on his different
construction of verse 1 -- 12; it is not sufficient to say, that the Doctor
understood that passage differently, or that it is capable of a different
construction. It must be shown that it is not capable of the construction which
is given above; and that the Doctor's construction must be the true one. Let us
therefore attend to his construction and his reasons in support of it.

THE construction is, that the last verse of the preceding chapter, the 6th,
7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, verses, and the latter part of the 11th verse of this
chapter, are spoken of all mankind. The reasons which he assigns for such an
understanding of those verses, are

(1.) THAT in the 6th verse Christ is said to die for the ungodly. P. 35.
But if we should assert, that by the ungodly here are meant those only, who
afterward and during this life become godly or believers, though Christ died
for them while ungodly or considering them as ungodly, the Doctor has given no
confutation of such a construction. Therefore he had no right to expect, that
it would be rejected by any one who should choose to adopt it. -- Or if we
allow, that Christ did die for all men in this sense, that he died to introduce
a dispensation of grace which should offer salvation to all, and invite all to
it, and to use Dr. C's own expression, to put all into salvable circumstances;
nothing will hence fellow favorable to the actual salvation of all men, or to
the Doctor's argument from Romans V. 12, etc. It will not follow, that all will
accept the invitations to salvation and act upon them. Still the we and us,
which occur so often from the 1st to the 12th verse, and particularly in verse
6th, may mean believers only.

(2.) IT is a gross mistake to think, that the apostle in this 9th verse is
speaking of that justification he had in the 1st verse connected with faith;
and for this decisive reason, because -- as salvation from wrath is one thing
essentially included in that justification which is the result of true faith;
it would be ridiculous to argue, much more being justified, meaning hereby this
justification, we shall be saved from wrath. P. 37.
-- But did Dr. C. entertain the opinion, that justification and salvation are
one and the same? Abraham believed God and it was counted to him for
righteousness: he was then justified: but he did not then receive complete
salvation. Believers being in this life justified by faith, have peace with
God, according to the 1st verse of this chapter, as Dr. C. allows. Yet they are
not in this life saved from wrath in the sense they will be, at the day of
judgment. Therefore, however Dr. C. asserts it, it does not appear to be
ridiculous to argue, that believers being in this life justified by faith in
the blood of Christ, shall at the day of judgment, much more be saved from
wrath through him. Is it ridiculous to argue, that Abraham being justified by
faith here, will much more be saved from wrath hereafter?

(3) THE particle (...), now, connected with the justification here treated of,
is emphatical, making it clear, that the apostle is not to be understood of
justification at the great day; but of justification that had at that time been
completed. P. 37.
-- No body pretends, that the apostle means a justification at the great day.
It is allowed on all hands, that he means a justification, which had at that
present time been completed. But what follows hence? Did Dr. C. imagine, that
believers are not in a proper sense completely justified in this life? And that
the justification of Abraham, Rahab, etc. was in no proper sense completed
before their death, or before the great day? Concerning the former, it is
expressly said, that he believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness -- that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness, etc, and
concerning the latter, was not Rahab the harlot justified, etc? Nor is it
material to the present purpose, whether this justification of Rahab mean a
justification by God, or a manifestative justification, proving, that she was
justified in in the sight of God; because the latter, equally as the former,
implies that she was then justified in the sight of God.

THAT believers are in this life justified in a peculiar sense, is further
taught in 1 Cor. VI, 11, And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. -- I presume it will be granted, that pardon or forgiveness
is an essential part of justification, and that when a man is forgiven by God,
he is justified by God. But that believers are forgiven in this life, is
evident from the following texts, Mat. IX, 2, "Son, thy sins be forgiven thee."
See also, Mark, II, 5, and Luke V, 20, -- Col. II, 13. And you being dead in
your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together
with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. 1 John II. 12, I write unto you,
little children, because your sins are forgiven you, for his name's sake.

But why need I produce proofs of what Dr. C. grants, though it seems in his
comment on the 9th verse, he had forgotten it? In his comment on the 1st verse,
etc, he speaks of the justified by faith, as glorying in hope of the glory of
God -- and in their sufferings -- because they knew that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. The Doctor, as the
apostle did before him, evidently considers these things as taking place in
this life. Indeed the contrary cannot be pretended without the grossest
absurdity. He also considers these views and affections as peculiar to the
justified by faith. Therefore some men are completely justified by faith in
this life: at least so completely, as to render the 9th verse properly
applicable to them. Therefore his argument from (...), now, that the
justification spoken of in the 9th verse, is not peculiar to believers, proves
nothing.

BESIDE, Dr. C. could not, without the most glaring absurdity and
inconsistency, understand this 9th verse of all mankind: because the persons
here referred to, shall be saved from wrath. But according to the Doctor some
men will not be saved from wrath, they will suffer all that wrath to which they
are liable on the footing of strict justice: they will suffer according to
their sins, according to their crimes, and their deserts, and so that the whole
threatened penalty will be executed on them.

(4) DOCTOR C. argues, that because it is said in verse 10th, when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God; by the we here, we must understand, not
believers only, but all mankind: or because, as the Doctor paraphrases the
words, while they were enemies, they were reconciled; therefore this
reconciliation cannot mean the cordial reconciliation of true believers. P. 38.
The force of this argument wholly depends on this supposition, that the
persons here intended, were reconciled, and yet after the reconciliation was
effected, they still remained enemies. But what necessity of this gloss of the
text? Why may it not mean this merely, that when the persons here intended were
going on in their enmity, they were arrested by the grace of God, reclaimed
from their enmity, and reconciled to God? There appears to be nothing absurd or
unusual in this expression understood in this sense. If it should be said, When
a subject was waging war against his sovereign, and was in actual battle with
the troops of his sovereign, he was reconciled to him; the expression would not
naturally imply, and no man would understand it to mean, that notwithstanding
the reconciliation, he still continued a fixed and malicious enemy to his
sovereign No man would understand the expression in any other sense than this,
that in the midst of the war and battle, he was struck with conviction of his
wickedness, and became cordially reconciled to his sovereign.

IF the Doctor depended on the original words (...), to make out that the
reconciliation here intended took place, while the persons spoken of remained
enemies; he might as conclusively have argued, that the person mentioned in
Joh. IX, 25, ((...)) had his sight restored to him, while he remained perfectly
blind; and that Saul went to Damascus, with the expectation of bringing certain
persons to Jerusalem, who at the same time should still remain at Damascus,
((...)) Act. XXII, 5.

AT length we come to the Doctor's exposition of the 11th verse, to which his
criticism, on all the preceding verses refers. He tells us, The meaning plainly
and briefly is, We believers glory in God of our interest, and relation to him,
as our covenant God, through Jesus Christ, by whom we were so changed in our
state, while enemies -- in common with the rest of mankind, as to be capable of
-- final justification upon the foot of faith. On this it may be remarked, That
if by interest in and covenant relation to God, Dr. C. meant any thing
different from that state of reconciliation, which is obtained by Christ, and
which is mentioned in the latter part of this verse, it does not appear, that
the text gives him any warrant to insert that interest, etc. in his comment, as
a ground of rejoicing or glorying. I appeal to the reader, whether the most
natural sense of the text be not this, We believers glory in God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, as having by Christ received reconciliation; or for this
reason, that of God's rich grace through Christ, we have obtained
reconciliation with God. Otherwise, why is the circumstance of our receiving
the reconciliation by Christ mentioned in this connection with our glorying in
God? Beside, to glory in God as our covenant God, and to glory in him on
account of our reconciliation with him, is one and the same thing.

THE glorying of which the apostle speaks, is through Christ; and this implies,
that it is on account of some benefit or blessing received through Christ: and
what this blessing is, which the apostle had in view, and which he considered
as the ground of glorying to believers, he immediately explains in these words,
by whom we have received the reconciliation, that reconciliation of which he
had been speaking in the 10th verse. -- But if the reconciliation, which the
apostle makes, the great ground of rejoicing or glorying to believers, be, as
Dr. C. holds, common to believers and unbelievers? then the great ground of
glorying to believers is not any blessing peculiar to believers; but something
common to all mankind; and therefore unbelievers have just the same reason to
glory in that blessing as believers; which is no more credible than the
doctrine of universal salvation, and wants as much proof as that doctrine; and
therefore cannot be admitted as any evidence of the truth of that doctrine.

I BEG the reader's patience, while I make a few other remarks on Dr. C's
construction of the passage from Romans IV. 25, to Chap. V. 12; and I wish the
reader to keep before him the passage itself, while he follows me in these
remarks.

THIS whole passage is expressed in the first person, and is manifestly one
continued discourse. Yet Dr. C. was of the opinion, that in this short passage
of only twelve verses, the persons, or the we, us and our, which occur in
almost every sentence, are shifted no less than four times. In the last verse
of Chap. IV, it was his opinion, that all men are intended: that from the first
to the sixth verse of Chapter V, only believers are intended: that from the 6th
to the 11th verse all men are intended: that in the former part of the 11th
verse believers only are intended: that in the latter part of the 11th verse
all men are again intended. I beg leave to set down this whole passage,
according to the Doctor's explanation, together with the text itself: -- Thus
TEXT.
CHAP. IV. 25.
Who was delivered for our offenses and raised again for our justification.

CHAP. V. 1.
Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

2. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience;

4. And patience experience; and experience hope;

5. And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.

6. For when we were without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.

7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: Yet per adventure for a good
man some would even dare to die.

8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us.

9. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him.

10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son: much more being reconciled, we shall he saved by his life.

11. And not only so; but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have now received the atonement, [or the reconciliation.]

DR. C's EXPLANATION.
Who was delivered to put all men into a capacity to obtain the pardon of their
offenses, and was raised again to put them into a capacity of being justified
at the great day.

Therefore believers being justified by faith, have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also believers have access by faith into this grace
wherein they stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

And not only so, but believers glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience; and patience experience and experience hope: and
hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in the hearts
of believers, by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto them.

For when all men were without strength, in due time Christ died for them all,
while they were ungodly.

For scarcely for a righteous man would one die: Yet peradventure for a good
man, some would even dare to die.

But God commends his love toward all men, in that while they were yet
sinners, Christ died for them all.

Much more then all men being now by the blood of Christ brought into a
capacity or possibility of salvation, shall in fact be saved from wrath through
Christ.

For if when all men were enemies, they were by the death of Christ brought
into a possibility of salvation; much more being brought into a possibility of
salvation, those all men shall be actually saved by the life of Christ.

And not only so; but believers also glory in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom all men have received the possibility of salvation.



HOW strange, that in a continued discourse all in the first person plural, the
we and us should be changed backward and forward four times! What torturing of
the scripture is here! At this rate, what discourse in the world will be
intelligible? How will it be possible for any man, and especially for the
common people, for whom as well as for the learned, the scriptures were
written, to understand them?

BUT this is not all. By this various reference of the pronouns we and us, the
reasoning of the apostle is rendered utterly inconclusive, in almost every step
of it. Thus the first verse of the fifth Chapter is manifestly brought in by
the apostle, as a consequence drawn from the last verse of the preceding
Chapter. But from the consideration, that Christ died and rose to put all men
into a capacity of obtaining justification at the great day, it by no means
follows, that believers are now justified by faith, and have peace with God.
Verse 9th, if it be ever so true, that all men are put into a possibility of
salvation, it by no means follows, that all men will be actually saved. It no
more follows, than from the opportunity given all men, of obtaining salvation
immediately after this life, it follows, that all will actually be saved
immediately after this life: Or than from the opportunity of entering the land
of Canaan, given all that generation, which came out of Egypt, it followed,
that all that generation would in fact enter that land: Or than from the
opportunity given any man to become rich or honorable, it follows, that he will
in fact become rich or honorable. The same observation is equally applicable to
the 10th verse. What was before observed concerning the 11th verse, understood
in Dr. C's sense, needs not to be repeated.

BUT what is of chief importance is, that according to the Doctor's
construction, there is no argumentative connection between the 11th and the
12th, or which is the same thing, between the 11th and the 18th verses. If the
Doctor's sense of the 11th and 18th verses be true, the latter is no just
consequence from the former. The Doctor's sense of the 11th verse is, that all
men through Christ have received a possibility of final salvation; and his
sense of the 18th verse is, that all men will actually be saved. But if it be
ever so true, that all men have received a possibility or opportunity of final
salvation, it does not follow, that all will actually be saved. Yet as the 12th
or 18th verse, (the intermediate verses being a parenthesis) is a deduction
from the 11th, the last of the propositions just expressed, should justly
follow from the other; otherwise the apostle argues inconclusively. And as the
Doctor's gloss of these two verses makes the apostle reason inconclusively, we
may be sure, that he has not given the true sense of them. -- But according to
the common understanding of these verses, the reasoning is clear and certain.
For if believers have obtained through Christ a cordial reconciliation and
peace with God, then certainly those same believers will, in the same way,
obtain eternal life and salvation.

THAT the 12th, and therefore the 18th verse, is an inference from the 11th,
is, I think, manifest from a careful perusal of the passage, and it is at least
implicitly granted by Dr. C. He expressly says, that the therefore in the
beginning of the 18th verse, is the same which began the 12th verse. The
protasis or first part of the comparison was there entered upon, but left
unfinished. It Is here resumed, I say, therefore, as by the offense of one man
etc. P. 67.
And his paraphrase of the 18th verse is in these words: I say, therefore, (to
resume now and pursue the comparison I began in the 12th verse) as it was by
the lapse of the one man, Adam, etc. P. 26.
The Doctor also quotes Dr. Doddridge's assertion, that the 12th verse is an
inference from the 11th, and does not contradict that assertion, though he
labors through a number of pages, to affix a different sense from that of Dr.
Doddridge, to the 11th verse, that thus he may evade the construction of the
18th verse, which Dr. Doddridge had given, and establish his own. But all this
was needless, if indeed the 12th and 18th verses are not an inference from the
11th. -- Nor is there any inconsistence in the opinion, that the 18th verse may
be at the same time an inference from the 11th and from the 15th, 16th and 17th
verses. True and sufficient premises or reasons of the proposition of the 18th
verse, may be contained in the 11th verse. Those reasons maybe explained, and
even others added in the 15th, 16th and 17th verses, which fall into a
parenthesis; and the 18th verse may contain an inference justly deducible from
either, or from both.

I AM indeed sensible, that Dr. C. in his paraphrase of the 12th verse, does
not consider it as an inference from the 11th; but the 11th as deducible by way
of inference from the 12th, in this manner: Because sin and death came upon all
men by Adam, therefore all men have obtained a possibility of salvation by
Christ. His words are, For this cause or reason, we have received
reconciliation by Jesus Christ, namely, because as sin entered into the world
by the one man, Adam, P. 23.
etc. But this is as surprising as any part of Dr. C's truly surprising
exposition of this chapter. In the first place, it is a mere conjecture,
unsupported by any thing, but pure imagination. In the second place, to apply
this paraphrase to the 18th verse, which is but the full expression of the
12th, it will stand thus: For this cause or reason all men have received a
possibility of salvation, namely, that as by the offense of one, judgment came
upon all men to condemnation, even so, by the righteousness of one, the free
gift came upon all men to actual salvation. Or more briefly thus: The reason,
why all men have obtained a possibility of salvation, is, that salvation is
actually come upon all men: Or to place the sentence in its proper arrangement,
Salvation is actually come upon all men; therefore all men have received a
possibility of salvation. -- On this reasoning I need make no remark. -- It is
not however probable, that the Doctor was sensible, that his paraphrase of the
12th verse, applied to the 18th, would come to this. Nor is the reason just
expressed, that which the Doctor believed to be the true one, why we have
received the reconciliation. But that which in the Doctor's opinion was the
true reason, he expressly declares to be, That it was in such a way, viz. by
the offense of one, that judgment came upon all men to condemnation. P. 30.
-- Who is answerable for this inconsistency, I need not inform the reader.

BEFORE I dismiss this part of Dr. C's book, I cannot but observe, that he
speaks of a double justification, P. 38.
the one meaning absolution at the great day; the other meaning the
advantageous state, or the possibility of the salvation of all mankind through
Christ. It seems then that the Doctor had forgotten, that he had but a few
pages before made out a threefold justification: THe first kind consisting in
the introduction to a capacity or possibility of salvation through Christ: The
second in the justification of believers, who have peace with God while in this
life; such was the justification of Abraham: The third in absolution at the
great day. -- But when any thing is abundantly multiplied, no wonder if the
author himself of that multiplication forgets the number of units contained in
his own product.

DR. C. says, P. 32.
It can be no other than a flat contradiction to the express words of the
Apostle himself, to say that in the latter part of the comparison in the 18th
verse, the words all men are not used in the same extensive sense, as in the
former part of that verse. This is indeed a strong, positive assertion, but
where is the reason to support it? Beside; he thought it no flat contradiction
to the express words of the Apostle, to say that we in the former part of the
11th verse, is not used in the same extensive sense as in the latter part of
that verse: nor any flat contradiction to the words of our Savior, to say,
that the word everlasting is not used in the same extensive sense in the former
part, as in the latter part of Matt. XXV. 46, These shall go away into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into everlasting life.

BUT it is time we should proceed to the other argument of Dr. C. to prove that
universal salvation is taught in Romans V. 12, etc. viz.

4. THE advantage by Christ exceeds, abounds beyond, the disadvantage by Adam.
But unless all men be saved, the former "sinks below" the latter. P. 32 and 81,
etc.
-- It is granted, that the advantage by Christ, to those who obtain salvation
by Christ, exceeds, and abounds beyond, the disadvantage by Adam. But the
question is, whether this saving advantage extend to all those, to whom the
disadvantage by Adam extended. That it does extend to all the same subjects to
whom the disadvantage by Adam extended, is holden by Dr. C. But how does he
prove it? By no other arguments than those which we have already particularly
considered; and whether they be conclusive, is submitted to the reader, -- Dr.
C. did not imagine, that the advantage by Christ was more extensive, or
extended to a greater number of persons, than the disadvantage by Adam. He
believed, that they both extended to all mankind. -- Therefore, the
super-abounding, the excess, or surplusage of the advantage by Christ, does not
consist in the extent of it, but in something else, and that something else may
exist, though the extent as to the number of persons be the same, or even less
than the extent of the disadvantage by Adam.

IF the glory of God, and the happiness of the created system, be more advanced
by the salvation of a part of the human race, and by the rejection of the rest,
than they would have been, if Adam had never fallen; then surely the advantage
by Christ on the general scale, does not "sink below" the disadvantage by Adam:
and to assert, that the divine glory and the happiness of the created system
would be most advanced by the salvation of all men, is to beg material points
in question. -- But if Dr. C. mean, that if all be not saved by Christ, then
the advantage by Christ to those who shall be finally miserable, "sinks below"
the disadvantage by Adam to the same persons; I grant it, and apprehend no
disadvantage to my cause by the concession. For it is granting no more than is
implied in the very proposition, which I endeavor to defend, that all men will
not be saved.

I HAVE now finished my remarks on Dr. C's argument from Romans V, 12, etc. -- If
the reader think I have been prolix in these remarks, I hope he will remember
how prolix the Doctor was in his argument from this passage; and I presume he
will not think it unreasonable to take up nineteen pages in answering
sixty-nine.

IT is now left to the reader to judge, whether it be certain, that because the
word many in the former part of the 15th and 19th verses means all men, it
means the same in the latter part of those verses: -- Whether it be certain,
that the word many means all men, because the article is joined with it, (...),
the many: -- Whether because the words all men in the former part of the 18th
verse, mean all mankind, they certainly mean the same in the latter part of
that verse: -- Whether because the advantage by Christ exceeds the disadvantage
by Adam, it certainly follow, that the advantage to every individual man, will
exceed the disadvantage to that man.

CHAP. X. In which is considered Dr. C's Argument from Romans VIII. 19 -- 24.
THE text is, For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for the
manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature was made subject to vanity
not willingly, but by reason of him who subjected the same in hope. Because the
creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the children of God. For we know that the whole
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. And not only they,
but ourselves also which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves
groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
body. -- The words of chief importance are those of the 21st verse; The
creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the children of God: which are supposed by Dr. C. to
hold forth the salvation of all men. But the main question here is, what is the
meaning of the word creature. Dr. C. supposes it means the human race. Others
suppose it means the whole of the creation which was made for the sake of men,
and is subjected to their use. -- Beside the word creature, the following words
and expressions, manifestation of the sons of God -- "vanity" -- "willingly" --
bondage of corruption -- are all understood differently by Dr. C. and by those
who believe in endless punishment. Let us therefore attend to them respectively.

I. THE meaning of the word (...), creature or creation, is to be sought. It
may not be impertinent to inform the reader who is unacquainted with the
original, that the word translated creature in the 19th, 20th and 21st verses,
is the very same which in the 22d verse is translated creation; and doubtless
whatever be the meaning of it, it ought to have been translated uniformly
throughout this passage. -- Dr. C. was of opinion that it means all mankind or
the rational creation of this world. His reasons for this opinion are, that
earnest expectation, groaning, travailing together in pain, are more naturally
and obviously applicable to the rational, than the inanimate [and brutal]
"creation" -- that (...), the whole creation, is never used (one disputed text
only excepted, Col. I. 15.) to signify more than the whole moral creation, or
all mankind -- that it would be highly incongruous, to give this style [the
whole creation] to the inferior or less valuable part, wholly leaving out the
most excellent part, mankind.

1. EARNEST expectation, groaning, travailing together in pain, are more
naturally applicable to the rational, than the inanimate [and brutal]
"creation." P. 98.
-- If this prove any thing, it will prove too much: it will prove, that when
in Psalm. CXIV, it is said The sea saw it and fled; Jordan was driven back; the
mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs; the meaning is,
that men saw it and fled; that men were driven back; that men skipped like rams
and like lambs* it will prove, that Jer. XLVII. 6, O thou sword of the Lord,
how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest
and be still; means that men should put up themselves into a scabbard, and
there rest and be still. It will prove that Hos. XIII. 14, I will ransom them
from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from death. O death, I will be
thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction; means that God will be the
plagues and destruction of men: and when once it is established, that death and
the grave mean men, as men are to be ransomed from the grave and redeemed from
death, it will follow that men are to be ransomed from themselves and redeemed
from themselves. -- But there is no end to the absurdities which will follow
from this mode of construing the scriptures.

THE truth is, that the figure of speech, whereby inanimate things are
represented as living, sensible and rational persons, and are addressed as
such, is very common in scripture. Beside the instances already mentioned, I
beg leave to refer to the following: Deuteronomy. XXXII. 1. Give ear, O ye heavens,
and I will speak; hear, O earth, the words of my mouth. Psalm. LXV. 12, 13. The
little hills rejoice on every side. The pastures -- the valleys -- shout for
joy: they also sing. Isai. LV. 12. The mountains and the hills shall break
forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands. Hab. II. 11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out
of the timber shall answer it. Psalm. LXXXIX, 12. Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice
in thy name. Psalm. XCVII, 1. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice; let the
multitude of the isles be glad thereof. Isai. XXIV, 4. The earth mourns and
fades away, the world monrneth, languisheth and fades away. See also Psalm.
XCVIII, 8. Isai. XVI, 8. XXXV, 1, 2. XLIX, 13. Lev. XVIII, 28, etc, etc.

NOW rejoicing, shouting for joy, singing, breaking forth into singing,
clapping of hands, crying out, answering, mourning, languishing, etc, are
certainly in these passages applied to inanimate creatures. But they are
applicable to such creatures, not more naturally and obviously, than earnest
expectation, groaning and travailing in pain.

THOUGH the Doctor thinks these expressions not properly applicable to any
other creatures than mankind; yet he himself applies them to mankind in no
other sense, than that in which they are applicable to the brutal creation. The
sense in which he supposes all mankind long and wait for the manifestation of
the sons of God, is, that they groan under the afflictions of this world,
sensible of its imperfections, and consequently desire something better. Now
the calamities of the world fall not on the rational part of it only, but on
all the animal, sensitive parts, and consequently they, as well as mankind,
desire something better. From these calamities and miseries the animal parts of
the world will be delivered, at the manifestation of the sons of God.

FURTHER, the inanimate parts of the world, once personified, as they are in
innumerable instances throughout the scriptures, may as properly have the
particular personal affections, actions and sufferings, of expectation,
waiting, groaning, travailing, etc. ascribed to them, as any other personal
affections, actions or sufferings.

IF any should think it impossible for brutes and inanimate matter to enjoy the
liberty of the children of God, and therefore that it is absurd to represent,
that they shall be delivered into that liberty: let it be observed, that though
this would be absurd, while they are represented to be still brutes and
inanimate matter; yet as soon as they are represented to be intelligent beings,
the absurdity ceases. There is in this case no more absurdity in representing
them, as brought into the glorious liberty of the children of God after the
resurrection, than in representing, that they rejoice in the manifestation of
the divine perfections and in the prevalence of true religion in this world; as
is done in the passages before quoted.

OBJECTION. Though there would be no absurdity in figuratively representing
brutes and inanimate creatures, in this world, as rejoicing in the
manifestations of divine power, wisdom and goodness, yet there is an absurdity
in the representation, that they shall be brought into the liberty of the
children of God, after the end of the world; because then they will be
annihilated; and to represent that after they shall be annihilated, they still
enjoy glorious liberty, is a gross inconsistency. This is the objection in its
full strength. -- Let us attend to it.

IT is not agreed by all writers, that the liberty of the children of God
mentioned in the 21st verse, means that liberty and blessedness which they
shall enjoy after the resurrection and general judgment; some are of the
opinion, that it means that liberty which they shall enjoy on earth in the
latter days, when Christ shall reign on earth for a thousand years. See Guise's
Paraphrase in loc. and Hopkins's Inquiry concerning the Future State of the
Wicked. P. 101.
If this be the true sense of the apostle, the objection vanishes at once, as
the brutal and inanimate creation will then be in as real existence, as they
are now.

NOR is it agreed among writers, that this world will, after the general
judgment be annihilated. It is the opinion of many, and of great authority too,
that after a purification by fire, it will be restored to a far more glorious
state, than that in which it is at present, and will forever be the place of
the residence of holy and happy beings. -- If this be true, the objection again
vanishes.

FINALLY, if it be the real truth, that the brutal and material creation will
be annihilated, after the general judgment, yet there is no absurdity in
representing, that it shall be brought into the glorious liberty of the
children of God. Wherein does the liberty of the children of God consist?
Doubtless in a great measure in deliverance from sin, and from the influence of
it in themselves and others. So the brutal and material creation, even if it be
annihilated, shall be delivered from the power, abuse and abominable perversion
of wicked men, to which it had been long subjected, and under which it had long
groaned. Therefore this creation introduced as a rational person, may, without
impropriety be represented as earnestly wishing for that deliverance. And as
the deliverance from sin in themselves and from the effects of sin in others,
is at least a great part of the liberty which the children of God shall obtain
after the general judgment; so the aforesaid deliverance of the creation may
not improperly be called a deliverance into the liberty of the children of God,
into a similar liberty, a like freedom from the tyranny, abuses and perversions
of wicked men. Or the sense may be a deliverance in, at, or on occasion of, the
glorious liberty of the children of God. The preposition us, is capable of this
sense, and then the construction of this passage will be, That the creation
itself will be delivered from the bondage of corruption, at the time, or on
occasion, of the glorious liberty or deliverance of the children of God.

2. DOCTOR C. further pleads, That (...), the whole creation, is never used
(one disputed text only excepted, Col. I. 15) to signify more than the whole
moral creation, or all mankind. P. 99.
-- This is a matter of importance, and requires particular attention. -- The
phrase (...) is used four times only in all the New Testament, beside the
instance which is now under consideration. The places are, Mark XVI. 15; Go ye
into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. Col. I. 15; "The
first born of every creature." V. 23; The gospel which ye have heard, which is
preached to every creature, which is under heaven. 1 Pet. II. 13; Submit
yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake.

AS to Mark XVI. 15, it is granted, that in that text every creature means
human creature. -- Though Dr. C. says, that Col. I. 15, is disputed; yet he
pretends not, that every creature here means mankind merely: nor does it
appear, that the text is in this respect disputed. It is indeed disputed,
whether (...), every creature, or rather, all the creation, refer to the new
creation, i. e. the church, or to the old creation, which was made at the
beginning of the world. It is also disputed, whether Christ be so the first
born of all the creation, as to be a creature himself; or whether he be the
first born in this sense only, that he is the heir, the head and Lord of all
the creation. (...), in our version rendered firstborn, is by some rendered
first creator or producer, which gives a still different sense to the passage.
But it does not appear, that it has ever been contended, that (...) signifies
no more than all mankind. For in whatever sense Christ is the firstborn of all
the creation, he is the firstborn not only of the human race, but of all the
creation absolutely. If it be said, that Christ is the firstborn of all the
creation, as he is the first creature which was made; this implies, that he was
made not before all men only, but before all creatures. If it be said, that he
is the firstborn of all the creation, as he was begotten from eternity, and so
begotten before all the creation; still he was in this sense begotten not
before all men only, but before all creatures. If it be said, that he is the
firstborn of all the creation, as he is the heir, the head, the Lord of all;
still in this sense he is the firstborn not of mankind only, but of all
creatures. -- What right then had Dr. C. to suggest, that it is disputed,
whether (...) in this text signify more than the whole moral creation of this
world, or all mankind?

THE next passage, in which (...) occurs, is Col. I. 23; The gospel, which was
preached to every creature under heaven. The Doctor, who was well acquainted
with the original, doubtless recollected, or at least, he ought to have
examined, and then he would have seen, that in the original it is, (...), in
all the creation under heaven, or in all the world. Surely the Doctor did not
imagine, that the gospel was preached within every man.

The other passage is 1 Pet. II. 13, Submit yourselves to every ordinance of
men; (...), every human creature. The question is whether these words signify
all mankind: and the very proposing of the question, I presume, suggests the
answer. Will any man say, that every Christian is required, either by reason or
revelation, to submit to every individual of the human race, whether man, woman
or child; and whether the Christian be a lord or a tenant, a king or a subject?
-- Besides; allowing that the phrase as it stands, means the human race; the
addition of (...) to (...) shows that (...) without (...), would not signify
the human race; otherwise why is it added? If the words in our language, every
creature, mean always every human creature, it would be needless in any case to
insert the adjective human; and the very insertion of it would imply, that the
writer or speaker was of the opinion, that the bare words every creature, were
not certainly limited to human creatures, but would most obviously be taken in
a greater extent. -- This text therefore is so far from a proof, that (...),
every creature, is never used in all the New Testament (except in one disputed
text) to signify more than all mankind; that it is a clear proof, that it does
naturally signify more than all mankind, and to make it signify no more, must
be limited by (...), human.

AFTER all, the very drift of the apostle shows, that in 1 Pet. II. 13, he was
so far from meaning all mankind by the expression (...), that he meant either
not one of the human race, or at most but very few; that he meant either human
laws and constitutions, or human magistrates, the king as supreme, governors
who are sent by him, etc.

NOW let the reader judge, whether (...) be never used in all the New Testament
to signify more or less than all mankind; and whether of the four instances, in
which it occurs, beside this of Romans VIII, it do not in every one signify
either more or less than all mankind; excepting Mark XVI, 15. And it is equally
against Dr. C's argument from Romans VIII, whether it be used in other places to
signify more, or to signify less than all mankind. If it signify more in other
places, it may signify more in Romans VIII. If it signify less in other places,
it may signify less in Romans VIII: and when the apostle says, the earnest
expectation of the creature waits for the manifestation of the sons of God,
he may mean that only believers and true Christians, or the true church in all
ages, as distinguished from the Apostle, and first converts, who had the first
fruits of the Spirit, are thus waiting, etc.

IT is further to be observed, that (...), creature or creation, without (...),
is in the whole New Testament used ten times, beside the use of it in Romans
VIII; in no one of which does it mean mankind. The places in which it is used
are all noted in the margin, that the reader may examine them for his own
satisfaction. Mark X. 6. XIII. 19. Romans I. 20, 25. 2 Cor. V. 17. Gal. VI. 15.
Heb. IV. 13. IX. 11. 2 Pet. III. 4. Rev. III. 14.


IN the Septuagint version of the Old Testament, (...) occurs but three times:
2 Chronicles. XIV. 15, where it is translated cattle: Ezra VIII. 21; where it is
translated substance: and Psalm. CIV. 24, where it is translated riches. -- In
the Apocrypha it is used nine times; and not once to signify all mankind and
not more or less. The places are, Judith IX. 12. XVI. 14, Wisd. II. 6. V. 17.
XVI. 24. XIX. 6. Eccl. XVI. 17. XLIII. 25. XLIX. 16.


BUT it is time we attend to Dr. C's other reason for understanding the
creature to mean all mankind; or at least to include all mankind, if it mean
any thing more. The reason is,

3. That it would be highly incongruous, to give this style [the whole
creation] to the inferior or less valuable part, wholly leaving out the most
excellent part, mankind. P. 98.
-- But is there more propriety in calling a small part, though it be the most
excellent part, the whole creation; than in calling by far the greater part the
whole creation, though it be not so excellent? The learned men in any nation,
are, in some respects, the most excellent part of the nation. But would it be
more proper to call them, to the exclusion of all the unlearned the whole
nation, than to call all the unlearned, to the exclusion of the few learned,
the whole nation? The few truly virtuous and holy persons who love God
supremely and their neighbor as themselves, and who find the strait gate, are
undoubtedly the most excellent part of any nation. But would it be more proper
to call them alone the whole nation, than to call the rest alone, the whole
nation? Those of the apostolic age, who had the first fruits of the Spirit,
were, without doubt the most excellent of that generation. But would it
therefore be more proper to call them as distinguished from the rest of men,
that whole generation; than to call the rest of men as distinguished from them,
that whole generation? -- Beside; propriety or congruity of language depends
wholly on use. If the words creature, creation and whole creation be frequently
in scripture used without any reference to mankind; then there is no
incongruity in the same use of the same words, in this eighth chapter of
Romans: and that this is the use, I appeal to the texts before quoted, which
are all the texts in which the words here translated creature, and the whole
creation, are to be found in all the scriptures.

II. WE are to inquire into the meaning of the expression, "manifestation of
the sons of God." -- These words, The earnest expectation of the creature
waits for the manifestation of the sons of God; are thus paraphrased by Dr.
C. The creature, the rational creature, mankind in general, waits for the time
when it shall be revealed, that they are the sons of God. P. 92.
He here takes it for granted, that the word creature means mankind. Whether
this be a supposition justly founded, is now submitted to the reader who has
perused what has been offered on this subject.

BUT even on the supposition that the creature does mean mankind, how strange
it is that the waiting of this creature for the manifestation of the sons of
God, should mean that this creature is waiting to be itself manifested to be
the sons of God! Would it not be strange arguing, to say, that because the Jews
waited for the manifestation of the Messiah, therefore they waited to have it
manifested, that they were the Messiah! or that because Simeon waited for the
manifestation of the consolation of Israel; therefore he waited to have it made
apparent, that he was the consolation of Israel! Yet either of these
expressions as naturally imports the sense which I have now given, as the
expression, the creature waits for the manifestation of the sons of God,
imports, that the "creature" or race of creatures. is waiting to have it
revealed that they are the sons of God.

III. THE meaning of the word "vanity" next requires our attention. -- By this
word Dr. C. understands mortality and all other unavoidable unhappiness and
imperfection of this present weak, frail, mortal state. P. 104.
Again, "mankind were subjected to vanity or mortality." P. 106.
God subjected mankind to vanity, i. e. the infelicities of this life. Ibid.
According to Dr. C. then, the vanity here spoken of is a natural evil. But it
may at least be made a question, whether he be not mistaken, and whether it be
not a moral evil. The same word, (...), is used twice more in the New
Testament; Ephesians. IV. 17; That ye henceforth walk, not as other gentiles walk in
the vanity of their mind, having the understanding darkened, being alienated
from the life of God, etc; and 2 Pet. II. 18, For when they speak great
swelling words of vanity. In these two, the only instances of its use in the
New Testament, beside the text under consideration, it manifestly means not a
natural but a moral evil, either positive wickedness or at least a sinful
deficiency. Is not this a ground of presumption at least, that also in Romans
VIII. 20, it means a moral evil?

IN the same sense (...) the adjective from which (...) is derived, is used
Jam. I. 26, This man's religion is vain: and 1 Pet. I. 18; Ye were not redeemed
with corruptible things -- from your vain conversation. (...) is also used in
the same sense, Romans I. 21; Became vain in their imaginations and their foolish
heart was darkened. Vain and vanity in none of these instances signify
"mortality" or "infelicity;" but either positive sin or sinful deficiency.

BESIDES; the very nature of the case shows, that vanity in this instance was
not used by the apostle, in Dr. C's sense. According to his sense of vanity,
the apostle under the influence of the Holy Ghost, advances this proposition;
The human race was made subject to mortality, unavoidable unhappiness and
imperfection, not willingly. But who ever supposed that the human race was made
subject to these things willingly? or that any man, or any intelligent being,
ever chose to be subject to mortality and unhappiness? This is a proposition
too insignificant to be advanced by so sensible and grave a writer as Paul, and
under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost too. -- The Doctor seems to have been
aware of this objection to his construction of vanity, and therefore supposes
the word willingly means, not what is naturally understood by it, a voluntary
consent of the heart; but that it means, through some fault, "by a criminal
choice." Therefore

IV. WE are to inquire into the meaning of the word willingly. -- Is it not at
first blush a little extraordinary, that willingness must certainly mean a
fault, a criminal choice? Suppose an historian should say, that Hugh Peter's and
others who were executed at the restoration of Charles the second, were
executed not willingly; must we understand him to mean, that they were not
executed in consequence of any fault of their own? -- The original word (...)
is used once more only in all the New Testament, I Cor. IX. 17, "If I do this
thing" (i. e. preach the gospel) willingly, (...), I have a reward: but if
against my will, (...), a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.
According to Dr. C's construction of willingly in Romans VIII, the meaning of the
apostle is, If I preach the gospel "through some fault of my own," or "by my
own criminal choice," I have a reward; but if I do it without any fault or
criminal choice of my own, a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.

(...) derived from (...), and of the same signification, is in the New
Testament used in Philem. 14, only; That thy benefit should not be of
necessity, but willingly: which I presume even Dr. C. would not expound thus;
That thy benefit should not be of necessity, but through some fault of thine
own. -- The adverb, (...), is used twice in the New Testament, Heb. X. 26; If
we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth: and 1 Pet.
V. 2, Taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint but willingly. To the
first of these the Doctor in a quotation from Tailor, refers, as an authority,
to confirm his sense of willingly in Romans VIII. But surely both he and Tailor
made this reference with little consideration; for according to them the sense
of the verse in Hebrews is this; If after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, we sin through our own fault, or "by our own criminal choice." Did Dr.
C. or Dr. T. indeed believe, that we ever sin without any fault of our own, or
without our own criminal choice? -- It is plain, that the meaning of Heb. X.
26, is what is well expressed in the translation; If we sin wilfully, not
through some inattention, but pertinaciously, after we know the truth, know our
duty and the proper motives to it; there remains no more sacrifice for sin.

THUS the construction, which Dr. C. gives of willingly, as meaning, "through
our own fault," or by our own criminal choice, appears to be wholly unsupported
by any authority; to be a mere invention to help over the difficulty of the
supposition, that the inspired apostle should advance so trifling a proposition
as this; that mankind do not choose misery: and also appears to be attended
with many absurdities.

THE error of that construction further appears from this, that if what comes
upon us not through our own fault, be properly expressed by saying, that we are
subjected to it, not willingly; then what does come upon us through our own
fault, may be properly expressed, by saying, it comes upon us willingly. At
this rate the inhabitants of the old world were drowned willingly: Sodom and
Gomorrah were burnt up willingly: Pharaoh was first plagued, and then destroyed
in the Red Sea willingly: Korah, Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up in the
earth willingly: Those whom Dr. C supposes to be punished in hell for ages of
ages, are punished willingly.

NEITHER is it true, in Dr. C's sense, that mankind are made subject to vanity,
not willingly: i. e. Not through any fault of theirs; not by their own criminal
choice. -- By vanity he understands "mortality," "and the infelicities of this
vain mortal life," Therefore according to him, men are not made subject to
mortality, and the infelicities of this life, through any fault of their own.
And if so, then death and the various infelicities of life are not any
evidence, that the subjects of death and those infelicities are themselves
sinners, or the objects of God's displeasure. But this is contrary to the whole
current of scriptural representations; particularly to Ps. XC. 3, etc. Thou
turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye children of men. -- Thou
carriest them away, as with a flood; they are as a sleep. In the morning they
are like grass, which grows up; in the evening it is cut down and withers.
For they are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath they are troubled. Thou
have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance. For our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our days as a
tale that is told. The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if
by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and
sorrow: for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. Who knows the power of thine
anger, according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. So teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. How plain and full is this testimony,
that the general mortality of mankind is an evidence of God's anger for the sin
of those, who are the subjects of such a dispensation? For further proof that
temporal death and infelicities came on men, on account of their own sins, I
beg leave to refer the reader to President Edwards's book on Original Sin, Part
I. Chap. II.


BUT if mortality and the calamities of life be an evidence of God's anger at
the sin of those, who suffer death and those calamities; then it is not true,
that men in general are subjected to death and those calamities, without any
fault of their own; but the truth is, that they are subjected to them on
account of their own sin, as this is the very cause of the divine anger, of
which calamity and death are the effects and tokens.

If it should be objected, that to be made subject to vanity, in this passage,
does not mean, to be made actually to suffer death and infelicity, or does not
include the infliction of death and infelicity; but implies mortality only, or
that constitution whereby men are made mortal or liable to death and
infelicity: this objection grants, that death and infelicity are actually
inflicted on men on account of their own fault or sin; but holds, that the
sentence of mortality and liableness to infelicity took place in consequence of
Adam's sin only. So that according to this, the sense of the apostle will be,
That the human race was put under a sentence of mortality, without any fault of
their own; yet this sentence was never to be executed, but on account of their
own fault. And the consideration that mankind are put under the sentence of
mortality, without any fault of their own, is a ground of hope, that they will
be delivered from that sentence of mortality. But as the actual infliction of
death is on account of their own fault, there is no such ground of hope, that
they will be delivered from death and infelicity themselves. -- A mighty
privilege this (were it possible) to be delivered from the sentence of death,
and from mortality, but not from death itself! To be delivered from liableness
to infelicity, but not from infelicity itself!

I AM not insensible of the absurdity and impossibility of such a supposition.
But who is answerable for this absurdity? Doubtless the objector himself, who
is of the opinion, that to be made subject to vanity, is to be under the
sentence of death, and to be made liable to infelicity, but not to suffer death
or infelicity.

The idea, that to be made subject to vanity, (...), means not the state of
subjection to vanity, but the act by which the creature was subjected: and that
(...) means, as Dr. C. says, P. 105.
by or through him, who subjected it; implies this further absurdity, that the
act, by which the creature was made subject to vanity, was by him who subjected
it; or that act was really the act of him whose act it was; that he who
subjected the creature to vanity, really did subject it to vanity. -- But who
will dare to impute such identical propositions to the inspired apostle?

V. WE at length come to consider Dr. C's sense of the phrase bondage of
corruption. -- This according to him is synonymous with vanity: Therefore the
same observations for substance, which were made concerning his sense of
vanity, are applicable to his sense of the bondage of corruption. But a few
things in particular are worthy of remark. Dr. C. says, that in consequence of
the subjection of man to a frail, mortal, corruptible condition -- he is upon
the foot of mere law, and without the supposition of grace or gospel, in
bondage to bodily or animal appetites and inclinations. P. 109.
It seems then, that since all christianized nations are under not mere law,
but grace and gospel, they are not in bondage to bodily or animal appetites and
inclinations, and doubtless for the same reason, are not in bondage to any
principle of depravity. But is this indeed so, that men under mere law are so
depraved, as to be in bondage to animal appetites; but as soon as they are
placed under the gospel, in the mere external dispensation of it, they are no
longer the subjects of any depravity? It seems then, that the natural depravity
of men depends on their mere external circumstances; that while they are
without the gospel their hearts are in bondage to animal appetites: but as soon
as they are placed under the gospel, however they disregard it, they are free
from that bondage. But all those nations, to whom Christianity is published,
are under the gospel; therefore they are already free from bondage to animal
appetites; and it is absurd for them to hope, that they shall be delivered from
this part of the bondage of corruption.

BESIDE; Dr. C. says, that both these senses of bondage [i. e. bondage to death
and bondage to animal apetites] are certainly included in that vanity the
creature is subjected to. Ibid.
Then by the creature Dr. C. must mean, not the whole moral creation, or all
mankind including those nations and individuals to whom the gospel is made
known: because they are not under mere law, and therefore according to him are
not subjected to that part of vanity which consists in bondage to animal
appetites. Yet he abundantly holds, that all men are subjected to vanity, which
certainly includes, according to him, bondage to animal appetites.

ACCORDING to Dr. C. vanity includes bondage to bodily or animal appetites. Yet
mankind are subjected to vanity not through any fault or crime of their own.
But is it not a fault or crime in any man, to be governed by his bodily
appetites, or to be in bondage to them? With what truth or consistency then
could he hold, that men are subjected to vanity not through any fault or crime
of their own, and that therefore their subjection to vanity is a ground of hope
of deliverance from it; when the very state of subjection to vanity is a very
great fault or crime? Can a fault or crime be a ground of hope of impunity, or
of the divine favor?

BUT perhaps it may be pleaded, that though the state of subjection, or the
being subject to vanity, implies a fault; yet the act of subjecting, or the act
by which mankind were subjected, to vanity, is not through, or on account of
any previous fault of mankind in general; and this is the ground of hope that
they shall be delivered. If this be the meaning of Dr. C. it comes to this.
That because mankind are, in consequence of Adam's sin, not their own personal
sin, subjected by God to frailty, mortality, bodily appetites and sin;
therefore they do not deserve to be left without hope of deliverance: the
divine perfections do not admit of it: it would not be just: at least it would
be a hard case. Otherwise where is the ground of hope of deliverance? No
promise is pleaded as the ground of this hope. The only pretended ground of
hope in this argument is, that mankind were subjected to vanity, not through
any fault of their own: as in the following passage; For if mankind were
subjected to a state of suffering, not through any wilful disobedience which
they themselves had been personally guilty of, it is congruous to reason to
think, that they should be subjected to it not finally -- but with room for
hope that they should be delivered from it: and was it not for this hope, it
cannot be supposed -- it would be a reflection on the -- benevolence of the
Deity to suppose, that they would have been subjected to it. P. 102.
But if this subjection to vanity by God be perfectly just, what right have we
to expect, that God will deliver all men from the consequences of it? Have we a
right, without a divine promise to expect, (...) God will suffer none of the
sinful race of men, to bear the consequences of a just and wise constitution?
And would it be a reflection on the Deity, not to expect this?

SO that this whole argument of Dr. C. implies that God in subjecting mankind,
on account of Adam's sin, "to a state of suffering," made an unjust
constitution. Yet Dr. C. himself abundantly holds, that this is a real
constitution of God.

AT the same time, it is implied in all this, that if mankind had been thus
subjected to vanity, in consequence of their own personal sin; they might
justly have been left without hope. Thus it is really granted by Dr. C. after
all his labor to prove the contrary, that the personal sins of men, deserve a
hopeless state of suffering. And the whole question in the present view of it,
comes to this, Whether the personal actual sins of mankind, under the present
divine constitution, be real sins, and deserve the punishment justly due to
sin: or whether these sins be not excusable, because they are the established
consequence of Adam's transgression, and not the consequence of their own
voluntary act. Or in other words, whether the moral evil of any action consist
in the nature of the action itself, or in its cause or antecedents. Of this
question I should be very willing to enter into the discussion, were it
necessary: but as it has been so particularly considered by another author, I
beg leave to refer to him. President Edwards's Enquiry into Freedom of Will
throughout; particularly Part IV. Sect. I.
I beg the reader's patience however, while I make only one or two brief
observations.

IF the present actions of mankind be excusable, because they are the
consequence of Adam's transgression and not of their own previous sinful
actions or volitions, in the first instance; it will follow that there is no
sin or moral evil in the world, nor ever has been. All the present actions of
men, if they be excusable, are no moral evil. The same is true of all the
actions of men ever since the fall of Adam. And even Adam's transgression
itself is no moral evil; for this did not take place in consequence of any
previous criminal choice or action; because by supposition, that transgression
was the first sin committed by man. Whatever transgression he first committed,
is the very transgression of which we are speaking: and it is absurd to talk of
a sin previous to the first sin.

CONCERNING Dr. C's idea, that mankind are subjected to mortality, infirmity,
and the influence of bodily appetites, on account of Adam's sin only, without
any regard to their personal sins; and that this subjection was the cause and
occasion of all the actual transgressions and temporal calamities of the
posterity of Adam; it may be observed;

1. THAT for reasons already given, See page 190.
it appears not to be true, that mortality and the calamities of life are
brought on men on account of Adam's sin merely, without regard to the personal
demerit of those who suffer them.

2. THAT the human race was indeed, in the sentence of God on Adam, subjected
to infirmity and mortality: but it was no more subjected to these, than it was
to depravity and sin. At least to assert the contrary would be to beg an
important point in dispute: and to be sure, Dr. C. could not with any
consistency assert the contrary. He holds throughout this, and all his other
works, that the human race is subjected to infirmity on account of Adam's sin,
and the Doctor's idea of this infirmity amounts to a proper moral depravity of
nature. All that is meant, or that needs to be meant, by the moral depravity
natural to mankind, in this fallen state, so far as that depravity is distinct
from actual sin, is something in our nature, which universally leads to actual
sin. Whether this something exist primarily in the body and bodily appetites,
or primarily in the soul, is perfectly immaterial, so long as it is an
unfailing source of actual sin, as Dr. C. manifestly considers it. See page 45,
etc.
In his Five Dissertations he is very explicit and abundant in this matter. His
words are, In consequence of the operation of appetites and inclinations seated
in our mortal bodies, we certainly shall, without the interposition of grace --
do that -- the doing of which will denominate us the captives of sin and the
servants of corruption. P. 277.
"He" [the apostle] ascribes it to the flesh, by means of the overbearing
influence of its propensities in this our present mortal state, that -- we do
that which our minds disapprove; Ibid.
and in many other passages to the same effect. -- So that Dr. C. really,
though it seems undesignedly, held, that moral depravity of nature comes upon
all mankind, on account of Adam's sin: and his favorite construction of Romans
V. 12; And so death passed upon all men, for that (or as he will have it,
whereupon, in consequence of which) "all have sinned;" comes to this only; that
on account of Adam's sin, a divine sentence was denounced on the whole human
race, dooming it to a state of moral depravity; in consequence of which moral
depravity all men commit actual sin. What then has the Doctor gained by the
construction of this passage, which he has labored so hardly in this and his
other works to establish; and in which he claims to be an original; and which
perhaps is the only particular in his whole book, with respect to which he has
a right to set up this claim? It is also curious to see a gentleman of Dr. C's
abilities, both opposing and defending with all his might, the native moral
depravity of human nature!

REASONS have been already given, why willingly ought to be understood not to
mean through the fault of a person; but in its original proper sense, with the
consent of a person. If those reasons be sufficient, there is a further
difficulty in Dr. C's construction of this passage, especially of the 20th
verse. According to his construction of (...), creature, the apostle declares,
that mankind are subject to their bodily appetites, and so to sin, not
willingly, not with their own consent. But is it possible, that men should be
subject to bodily appetites, and should commit actual, personal sin, without
their own consent? -- If, to evade this observation, it be said, that they are
however by the act of God, without any previous consent of their own, subjected
to frailty, mortality, bodily appetites, and so to sin; this would be mere
trifling. Who ever imagined, that God first waited for the consent of mankind,
and having obtained their consent, established the constitution, by which they
became mortal, frail, subject to the influence of their bodily appetites and so
to sin?

AFTER all, Dr. C's exposition of this paragraph in Romans VIII, is by no means,
even on his own principles, a proof of universal salvation. His translation of
those most important words in the 20th and 21st verses, is this, The creature
was subjected to vanity, not willingly; but by the judicial sentence of him,
who subjected it, in consequence of a previous hope, that even this very
creature should be delivered from its slavery of corruption into the glorious
liberty of the children of God. So that the utmost, which this passage teaches,
according to his own account, is, that mankind may now hope, that they shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
children of God. But what if there be a foundation to hope that this will be
the case? Does it thence follow, that this hope will certainly be fulfilled? In
consequence of the death of Christ and the proclamation of the gospel, there is
a door of hope set open to all men. But does it hence follow, that all men will
certainly enter in at this door, and secure the blessings for which there is a
foundation to hope? D. C. would doubtless grant, that there is a door of hope
opened to mankind in general, that they may be saved immediately after death.
Yet he would not pretend, that this hope is realized. God delivered the
Israelites out of Egypt in such a manner, as gave hope that even that
generation would enter the promised land. Yet this hope was not fulfilled. --
Therefore, though it should be granted, that God has subjected mankind to
vanity in hope, that they shall be delivered from it, into the glorious liberty
of the children of God, it would by no means follow, that all men will be
saved: and Dr. C. is entirely mistaken, when he says, Mankind universally is
expressly made, in the 21st verse, the subject of this glorious immortality. P.
102.
No such thing is expressly said, and in these words he contradicts his own
paraphrase of that verse, in which he pretends no more, than that there is a
foundation for hope, that mankind shall attain to a glorious immortality.

IN the preceding remarks on Dr. C's construction of this passage, the sense,
which I suppose to be the true one, has been sufficiently expressed. Yet it
may be proper here briefly to repeat it. -- The earnest expectation of the
creation waits for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creation is
subject to that use to which it is applied by sinful men, which, as to the end
of its existence, the divine glory, is in its own natural tendency, vain and
unprofitable, and in many respects positively sinful; I say, to this it is
subject not voluntarily, but on account of him, for the sake of his glory,
((...) governing the accusative) or for the accomplishment of the mysterious,
but wise and glorious purposes of him, who subjected the same in hope, that
this same creation shall be delivered from this unprofitable and sinful use,
which may justly be considered as a state of bondage to it, into a liberty, in
several important respects, similar to that of the children of God; or at least
shall be delivered at the time, when the children of God shall be admitted to
the enjoyment of their most glorious liberty. For we know, that the whole
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now, by reason of that
vile abuse and perversion, which is made of it by sinful men, and through
desire of that deliverance just mentioned, and in due time to be granted it.

BESIDE the observations on particular parts of Dr. C's construction of Romans
VIII. some more general remarks occur. -- One is, that his construction
implies, that the divine law is unjust, and cannot be executed consistently
with justice. He says, P. 109.
that man on the foot of mere law, without grace, is in bondage to bodily
appetites: therefore on the foot of mere law, without grace, there is no hope
for him. And he speaks P. 122.
of the case of mankind as remediless, without the grace manifested in Jesus
Christ. Yet in the same page he says, It is the thought, that mankind were
subjected to suffering, not remedilessly, but with an intention of mercy, and
it is this thought only, that can reconcile the unavoidable sufferings of the
race of men, as occasioned by the lapse of Adam, with the perfections of God.
So that God made a law, which could not be executed, consistently with his
perfections, and he was obligated in justice to show mercy through Christ, to
mankind. By mere law men were remediless, and if they had been suffered to
remain in that remediless state, as they would have remained in it without
Christ and the gospel, such a dispensation could not have been reconciled with
the perfections of God. Therefore the divine law cannot be reconciled with
justice, or with the perfections of God.

ACCORDING to Dr. C. vanity included in it bondage to bodily appetites, as well
as bondage to death. P. 109.
Therefore, as God could not consistently with his perfections, subject mankind
to vanity, without an intention of mercy; P. 122.
and as it would be a reflection on the Deity, to suppose, that he has
subjected mankind to vanity, without hope of deliverance: P. 103.
therefore on these principles, God could not consistently with his perfections
and character, avoid giving mankind a ground of hope of deliverance from sin,
or he could not withhold the grace of the gospel: but he was obliged in justice
to his own character, to deliver men from both sin and the sufferings of this
life, and it may be presumed, that Dr. C. would have consented to add, and from
the sufferings of hell too. Where then is the grace of the gospel, and of the
gift of Christ? In the gift of Christ, in the institution of the gospel, and in
every thing pertaining to it, so far as was necessary to our deliverance from
sin and punishment, God has done no more than was necessary to save his own
character from reflections and reproach.

IT may be further remarked, that Dr. C. P. 103.
argues, that because men are subjected to a state of suffering, not through
their own personal disobedience; it is congruous to reason to think, that they
should be subjected to it, not finally. But why does he say, "not finally"? He
might with the same strength of argument have said, not at all. The calamities
of this life, with temporal death, are inflicted on mankind, either as a
punishment, or as sovereign and wise dispensations of Providence. If they be
inflicted as a punishment, without any sin, by which the subjects deserve them,
they are as real an injury as endless misery would be, if it were inflicted as
a punishment, in like manner without any sin, by which it should be deserved.
And if God do indeed injure his creatures in a less degree, he is an injurious
being: and what security have we concerning such a being, that he will not
injure them in the highest possible degree? -- So that if God be a just being,
as it is agreed on all hands, that he is, it is equally "congruous to reason to
think," that he would not subject his creatures to a temporary state of
suffering, as a punishment, without any sin, by which they deserved it, as that
he would not subject them to a state of final suffering.

IF it be said, that death and the calamities of life are not a punishment of
mankind, but mere sovereign, wise dispensations of providence; this supposition
opens a door for endless misery. For how do we know, that the same sovereign
wisdom, which is now supposed to inflict temporal evils on mankind, may not
also see fit to inflict on them endless evils?

ACCORDING to Dr. C. men are by a divine constitution subjected to vanity
including mortality, infelicity and bondage to bodily appetites. But why was
this constitution made? Was it made for the greater happiness of every
individual, or of the system, or of both? Which ever of these answers be given,
it will follow, that evil, both natural and moral is subservient to good; and
is introduced, if not in the first instance of Adam's transgression, yet in
every other instance, by the positive design and constitution of God. Evil
therefore both natural and moral, makes a part of the scheme of God, takes
place by his constitution, and is subject to his control? What then becomes of
the scheme of self-determining power, for which Dr. C. is so zealous an
advocate? And here how justly may many passages in Dr. C's writings be
retorted? Particularly the following; If men's volitions and their consequent
effects, are the result of invariable necessity in virtue of some exterior
causes so inviolably connected, as that they will and must come to pass, the
author of this connection, which according to this plan is God, is the only
efficient and real author of whatever has been, or shall hereafter be brought
into event; not excluding any of the most complicated villainies that have been,
or may be perpetrated by any of the sons of Adam. Is this a scheme of thoughts
fit to be embraced by intelligent creatures? Benevolence of the Deity, P. 136.


BESIDE, if this constitution were made for the greater happiness of every
individual, then every individual is more happy than he would have been, if he
had not been subjected to vanity; and then there is no such thing as punishment
in the subjection to vanity, or in any of its consequences; nor any foundation,
with a view to the private interest of any man, to regret any of the evils of
this life, or of that which is to come.

IT does not however appear to be fact, that every individual is in this life
rendered more happy, by the evils which he suffers here: and to say that he
will be rendered by them more happy on the whole hereafter, neither appears to
be fact, nor to be capable of proof. How will any man prove, that the Sodomites
will on the whole be more happy, than Enoch and Elijah, who never tasted death?

IF all men be subjected to vanity, to promote not their personal good, but the
good of the system, and the good of individuals be given up to this end; why
may we not in the same way account for endless punishment? -- If it be not
consistent with the divine perfections to subject men to suffering, unless it
issue in their personal good; then it is not consistent with the divine
perfections to punish at all, either in this world, or the future.

CHAP. XI. Containing remarks on Dr. C's arguments from Col. I. 19, 20. Ephesians. I.
10. and 1 Timothy II. 4.
THE first of those texts is: For it pleased the Father, that in him all
fullness should dwell. And having made peace by the blood of the cross, by him
to reconcile all things unto himself: by him, I say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven. -- Dr. C's sense of this passage is this: P. 127.
It pleased the Father -- by Jesus Christ -- to change back all things to
himself -- to change the state of this lower world, of the men and of the
things, whether they be on earth, or in the aerial heaven, that encompasses it.
It was his opinion, that to reconcile all these things, is to rechange their
state, or bring them back to that state they were originally in. P. 129.
With reference to mankind, he says, P. 132.
By Christ their state was changed back, they were absolutely brought back to
the condition they would have been in, had it not been for the lapse; what I
mean is, that they were absolutely and unconditionally put into salvable
circumstances. -- But what follows from all this; One would think Dr. C. had
forgotten himself. Supposing all this were granted, would it follow, that all
men will be saved? That because they are in salvable circumstances, therefore
their actual salvation will be effected? No, no more than from the original
state of Adam, it followed that he would never fall. He was endued with a power
to stand: he was in such circumstances, that he might have continued in his
original innocence. Yet he fell. So, though it be granted, that all men are by
Christ put into salvable circumstances, yet through their obstinate impenitence
and unbelief they may fail of this great salvation. -- Doubtless Dr. C.
believed, that by Christ the state of mankind is so changed, that they are all
salvable, or may be saved, immediately after the end of this world. But this
notwithstanding, he believed also, that a great part of mankind would die
impenitent, and that none of them would be saved within a thousand years of the
end of this world, and some of them not till after ages of ages.

BUT in aid of his argument from this passage, the Doctor brings in again, Romans
V. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of
his son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved, by his life. I have
formerly remarked on the Doctor's use of this passage; and need not repeat
those remarks. It may be observed, however, that the manner of his applying
this passage to strengthen his argument from Col. I. 20, really implies, that
this last text taken by itself, contains no argument at all, and therefore
ought never to have been introduced as a proof. Whatever force there is in it,
to prove universal salvation, depends entirely, according to Dr. C's stating of
the matter, on Romans V. 10, which has been considered already. -- So that if his
sense of Col. I. 20, be true, it does nothing toward proving the salvation of
all men.

I DO not however mean to suggest, that Dr. C's sense is, in my opinion, the
true one. It is impossible, that all things should be brought back, in all
respects, to their original state. All mankind cannot now live in the garden of
Eden. It cannot be again fact, that all the knowledge of God possessed by men,
should be such as is derived from either the works of creation and providence,
or from immediate intercourse of God and angels with men. Nor can it be ever
again true, that God is propitious to men immediately, without a mediator. In
these, and perhaps many other respects, mankind cannot be changed back to their
original state. But if once the advocates for universal salvation admit of
limitations, and say, that all things will however be brought to their original
state in many respects, the believers in endless punishment too must be allowed
to apply their limitations; and they will allow, that as the original state was
a state of order, regularity and due subordination, wherein every person and
thing were in their proper places; so in this sense all things will finally be
brought back to their original state, and order will be again restored to the
universe.

NOR does the verb (...) signify in general to change any thing back to its
former state. For instance, if two men had been long and habitual enemies to
each other; and if having for a while become friends, they should return to
their former enmity; I believe no critic in the Greek language would think this
return to their enmity, would be properly expressed by (...), reconcile. When
the Jews were brought home from the Babylonish captivity, they were changed
back to their former state. But is this change ever expressed by (...),
reconcile?

THIS verb is never used in the New Testament, but to signify a change, whereby
those who were at enmity, become friends. This observation is true of all those
words of the same derivation, on which Dr, C. criticizes so abundantly from
page 128, to 142. It is therefore not applicable to all the things on this
earth, and in the aerial heaven, unless it be by the figure prosopopoeia. By
that figure indeed every thing animate and inanimate may be said to be
alienated from man, in consequence of his sin; and to be reconciled to him in
consequence of the blood of the cross, and of the return of man to God through
Christ. But if this were the idea of Dr. C. he should have given up his
objection to the sense of Romans VIII. 19, etc, given by the believers in endless
punishment; and at the same time he would have virtually given up his own sense
of that passage.

IT is strange, that Dr. C. as well as the translators of the bible, should
render the words (...) in Col. I. 20, unto himself. In the preceding verse we
have (...); in the 20th verse we have (...), and again, (...). Now it seems
very odd, that in this multiplied use of (...) in its various cases, one
instance only should be selected from the rest, and rendered himself, meaning
the Father, and in all the other instances it should be referred to Christ. No
person without prepossession, construing this passage, would render it in that
manner. It is altogether unnatural to suppose, but that (...) refers to the
same person in all these instances, and ought to be rendered accordingly.

IT is further to be observed concerning (...) and (...), that in all instances
in which they occur in the New Testament, in the Septuagint and in the
Apocrypha, the person to whom the subject of the proposition is said to be
reconciled, is never once expressed in the accusative case governed by the
preposition (...); but is always expressed in the dative case. Hence it may be
inferred that (...) in Col. I. 20, does not mean the person to whom all things
in heaven and earth are reconciled: but that it means, that all things in
heaven and earth are reconciled to each other, into him: i. e. so as to be
brought into Christ, to be united under him as their head, and be interested in
the common advantages and blessings of his glorious kingdom.

TO be in Christ is a common phrase of the New Testament to express subjection
to Christ, and an interest in the blessings of his kingdom; and to be
reconciled into Christ, may mean to become united to him by faith, to become
subject to him in obedience, and to be interested in all the blessings of his
kingdom. Whether this criticism on the words (...), be just or not, it affects
not the main question of the salvation of all men.


BY sin angels and men, Jews and Gentiles, became alienated from each other;
and men in general, by the predominancy of self-love, became virtually enemies
to each other. Now it pleased the Father to reconcile by Jesus Christ, angels
and men, Jews and Gentiles to each other, and to diffuse by his grace a spirit
of benevolence among them, whereby they should love their neighbor as
themselves. And as to the universal term all things, we cannot take it in its
literal and utmost extent, unless by the figure before mentioned, which Dr. C.
cannot admit, without giving up what he most earnestly contends for, in his
comment on Romans VIII. 19, etc. But if we once admit a limitation of that
universal term, every one must be allowed to propose his own limitation, and
some doubtless will insist, that it extends to angels and to believers only
from among men: as it is said, that all Judea, and all the region round about
Jordan, were batized by John: all men counted John that he was a prophet: all
men came to Christ, John III. 26.

BUT if we should allow, that all things in heaven and earth include all
mankind; still even in this extent it is true, that it pleased the Father to
reconcile all things; but in such a sense, as not to imply the salvation of all
men. This is true in the same sense, in which God has no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, Ezekiel. XXXIII. 11; or in the death of him that dies, Chap.
XVIII. 32; in the same sense in which God was unwilling to give up Ephraim,
Hos. XI. 8; and in the same sense in which Christ was unwilling to give up the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and would have gathered them together, as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings; though they would not. -- The
destruction of the sinner is not in itself agreeable to God; as the punishment
of a child is not in itself agreeable to a good parent. Yet as a good parent
may, to secure the general good of his family, punish a disobedient child; so
God, to secure the general good of his kingdom, may punish a rebellious
creature. As the good parent who, to prevent that punishment to which his
disobedient and apostate child must, going on in his disobedience, be
subjected, uses all proper means to reclaim him; may be said to be pleased with
the idea of his impunity; so the Deity who uses all proper means to reclaim all
mankind, and to reconcile them to one another, may be said to be well pleased
with the idea of this reconciliation, or to choose to reconcile all men to one
another, and to bring them into Christ. In itself it is the object of his
choice and complacency. -- In this sense it pleased the Father to reconcile all
things: it was what pleased him.

ON the whole it appears, that if Dr. C's sense of this passage be the true
one, it affords no proof at all of universal salvation; -- That his
construction of it is far less favorable to that doctrine, than that which
seems to be holden forth by our translation; -- That if this last construction
be adopted, still it would be no real proof of universal salvation, for two
reasons; (1) That the universal term must be limited, and therefore may be so
limited as to comprehend angels and believers only of all nations. (2) That
even if the universal term be extended to all mankind, still the text is
capable of a construction both rational and analogous to other passages of
scripture, which yet does by no means imply universal salvation. And the sequel
of the aposle's discourse favors this last construction, implying, that it
pleased the father, or was in itself pleasing to the father, to reconcile all
men, on the terms of the gospel, and not absolutely, as Dr. C. supposes. The
sequel is, And you that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by
wicked works, yet now has he reconciled -- to present you holy and unblamable
and unreprovable in his sight: if ye continue in the faith grounded and
settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel. -- Will any man
pretend, but that this implies, that if they did not continue in the faith,
they would not be presented unblamable in the sight of God? -- But this is far
from the doctrine which teaches, that all mankind, whether believers or
unbelievers, whether they continue in the faith or not, shall be saved.

BEFORE I quit this part of the Doctor's book, I shall add one remark more. In
his comment on this, Col. I. 20, and on Rom, V. 10, he takes great pains to
make out a double reconciliation to be taught by the apostle Paul. The one, he
says, means that change of state all men are absolutely brought into by the
death of Christ; and is opposed to the condemnation through the lapse of the
one man Adam. The other is that change of state, which is connected with an
actual meetness for, and present interest in, eternal life. P. 135.
But these two reconciliations are really but one; for the definition which the
Doctor himself gives of the latter, perfectly agrees with the former. He
abundantly holds, that that change of state, into which all men are brought by
the death of Christ, is connected with an actual meetness for, and present
interest in, eternal life; and his whole scheme implies this: otherwise there
is no certainty, that all men will be saved, in consequence of the death of
Christ. The Doctor himself, in the very next sentence to that just quoted,
allows, that the former reconciliation is connected in the scheme of God, with
the latter, and will finally issue in it. Now, if his first kind of
reconciliation be connected with that kind, which is connected with actual
meetness for, and present interest in, eternal life: then that first kind of
reconciliation is itself connected with actual meetness for, and present
interest in, eternal life. If Jacob be connected with Isaac, and Isaac be
connected with Abraham, then Jacob too is connected with Abraham.

LET us now attend to the Doctor's argument from Ephesians. I. 10: That in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one, all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in
him. -- On this text the Doctor says, By means of the lapse, and what has been
consequent thereupon, all things in heaven and on earth, were got into a
broken, disjointed, disorderly state; and the good pleasure of God to reduce
them from their present separated, disorderly state, into one duly-subjected
and well subordinated whole, may very fitly be signified by the phrase, (...),
to gather together in one all things. And this I take to be the thing intended
here. P. 144.
But what is this to the purpose of the salvation of all men? It is granted on
all hands, that by the lapse, all things relating to men, got into a broken,
disjointed, disorderly state; and that it is the good pleasure of God to reduce
them from their present separated, disorderly state* into one duly-subjected,
well subordinated whole, under Christ as their head; and that this is the thing
intended by the apostle in this passage. But if the Doctor supposed, that this
implied the repentance and salvation of all men, it was but a mere supposition
without proof.

SUPPOSE a rebellion be excited in the kingdom of a most wise and good prince,
and this rebellion extend far and wide, so as to throw the whole kingdom into
confusion. At length the king's son, at the head of his armies, subdues the
rebels, pardons the generality, sentences the leaders, some to the gallows,
others to perpetual imprisonment: and thus restores peace, tranquillity, good
order and government. Is not a well subjected and duly subordinated state of
things in that kingdom now restored and established, although those rebels who
are confined in prison, still retain their rebellious tempers, and are not in a
state of happiness?

NOR does Dr. C. pretend to point out how a well subordinated state of things
proves the salvation of all men; unless it be in the following and other
passages not more conclusive: If God created all men -- by Jesus Christ, we may
easily collect hence, how he comes to be their common Father -- and if they are
his children, how fit, proper and reasonable it is, that they should be fellow
heirs to, and joint partakers in, that happy state, which he has proposed shall
take place, etc. P. 160.
It seems then that Ephesians. I. 10, proves that all men will be saved, not by any
thing contained in the text itself, but because all men are the creatures of
God. The argument is this: All men are the creatures of God, therefore that
well subjected and duly subordinated state of things, which is to be effected
by Jesus Christ, implies the salvation of all men. It seems then that that well
subjected and duly subordinated state of things, does not of itself imply the
final salvation of all men, and therefore this text is introduced with no force
of argument. Dr. C. might have argued just as forcibly thus, All men are the
creatures of God, therefore all men will be saved. But as to this argument it
is entirely different from Ephesians. I. 10, and has been already considered.

WE are, in the last place, to attend to Dr. C's argument from 1 Timothy II. 4;
Who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. --
The questions concerning the meaning of this text, are, as Dr. C. justly
observes, two; (1) Who are meant by all men; whether all men individually, or
generically. (2) Is there a certain connection between God's willing, that all
men should be saved, and their actual salvation.

1. WHO are meant by all men, whether all men individually, or generically. --
Dr. C. gives two reasons, why this expression should be understood of all men
individually.

(1) That God's willingness that all men should be saved, is brought in as an
argument to enforce the duty of praying for all men, P. 164.
mentioned in the first and second verses. The Doctor takes for granted, that
it is our duty to pray for all men individually; and then concludes, that all
men individually are those, whom God wills should be saved. But it is by no
means true, that we are to pray for all men without exception. The apostle John
expressly mentions a sin unto death, and for those who commit that sin we are
not to pray; 1 John V. 16, 17. Our blessed Savior not only did not in fact
pray for the world, but openly and in the most solemn manner avowed the
omission; John XVII. 9. And the prophet Jeremiah was forbidden by God, to pray
for the Jews, for their good; Jer. XIV. 11. So that when the apostle in the
first verse of the context now under consideration, exhorts to pray for all
men, we must of necessity, as we would not set the scripture at variance with
itself, understand him to mean not all individuals without exception.

BESIDE, if it were our duty to pray for all individuals, it may not have been
the design of the apostle in this passage to inculcate this duty. The Jewish
converts to christianity were full of prejudices against the Gentiles, and
above all, against the Gentile kings, and those, under whose authority they
were; and who, in their opinion, had no right to exercise authority over their
nation. Therefore with the utmost propriety does the apostle give the
exhortation contained in the first and second verses of this context, though he
meant no more, than that Christians should pray for the Gentiles of every
nation, as well as for the Jews, and especially for kings and rulers among the
Gentiles.

(2) THE other reason given by Dr. C. why all men should be understood of all
men individually, is the reason given, why God desires the salvation of all
men, viz. that there is one God, and one mediator between God and men. "This,"
he says, "is a reason, which extends to all men" individually, "without
limitation." Very true; and it is a reason, which extends to all men
generically too: and therefore is a very good reason, why we should pray for
the salvation of men of all nations; nor is there any thing in this reason,
which proves, that the apostle meant, that all men individually would be saved.

AS to Dr. C's reasoning in the following passage; P. 164.
God is as truly the God of one man, as of another; and there is therefore the
same reason to think, that he should be desirous of the salvation of every man,
as of any man; it is by no means allowed to be conclusive. It depends on this
postulate, which is a begging of the question: That God cannot give existence
and other common benefits to a man, and not save him. I might with the same
force argue thus; God is as truly the God of one man, as of another; therefore
there is the same reason to think, that he should be desirous of the temporal
prosperity of every man, as of some men. It is no more granted, and therefore
ought no more to be asserted, without proof, that salvation is connected with
this circumstance, that God is a God to every man, in the sense in which it is
granted, that he is a God to every man, than that temporal prosperity is
connected with that circumstance.

FURTHER, that all men individually are intended, Dr. C. argues from this, that
the apostle says, There is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus. The Doctor says, that the man Jesus mediates between God and men
universally. If by the mediation of Jesus, the Doctor meant such a mediation as
will certainly issue in the salvation of all men; this again is a mere humble
begging of the question. But if he meant a mediation of the following
description, that Christ has made atonement sufficient for all men; is now
offering the virtue of that atonement to all men; and is using a variety of
means to persuade all men to accept and trust in that atonement, and to return
to God, seeking his favor and eternal life, for the sake of Christ alone; it
follows not at all from such a mediation of Christ, that all individuals will
be saved. It no more follows, than from the facts, that God led the Israelites
out of Egypt by the hand of a mediator; that he gave them opportunity to enter
the land of promise; and that that mediator was the mediator of that whole
generation individually; it followed, that that whole generation individually,
would certainly enter the land of promise.

DR. C. says, P. 165.
No good reason can be assigned, why the man, Christ Jesus, should mediate
between God and some men only, to the exclusion of others. Can a good reason be
assigned, why Christ leads to repentance in this life, some men only, to the
exclusion or dereliction of others? When such a reason shall be assigned,
doubtless we shall be supplied with a reason, why Christ should effectually and
savingly mediate in behalf of some men only.

2. THE other question concerning the meaning of this text, which also Dr. C.
notices, 166
is, Whether there be a certain connection between God's willing in the sense
of this text, that all men should be saved, and their actual salvation. -- Dr.
C. grants that men as free agents have power to oppose those means which God
uses with them for their salvation; and yet holds that God has a power to
counteract, in a moral way, this opposition of men. P. 166, 167.
Of this and other remarkable things in Dr. C. on the subject of free agency,
particular notice will be taken hereafter. -- In the mean time it may be
observed, that it appears from various passages of scripture, that God is
frequently said to will things which do not in fact come into existence, or
with respect to which his will is not efficacious: as in the following
passages: Matt. XXIII. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
prophets and stonest them which are sent unto thee; how often would I, (...),
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under
her wings; and ye would not! Hos. XI, 8; How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How
shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set
thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. Deuteronomy. V. 28, 29; They have well said all that they have spoken. O
that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep my
commandments always! Chap. XXXII. 28, 29; For they are a nation void of
counsel, neither is their any understanding in them. O that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Psalm.
LXXXI. 13; O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways! Isai. XLVIII. 18; O that thou had hearkened to my commandments! Then
had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.
Luke XII. 47; And that servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, etc. Matt. XXI. 31; Whether of them
twain did the will of his Father? They say unto him, the first.

NOW what right had Dr. C. to suppose, that the will of God in 1 Timothy II. 4, is
not used in the same sense as in the passages just quoted? And if it be used in
the same sense, there is no more absurdity in supposing that the will of God
should be resisted in the one case, than in the other: no more absurdity in the
supposition, that God should will the salvation of all men, and yet all should
not be saved: than that he should will to gather together the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings; and yet th^^ they
should not be thus gathered.

BESIDE the texts quoted above, I may further refer to Ezekiel. XVIII. 32; I have
no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God. Yet his death
did, by the words of this text, take place in fact. So that here is a most
plain instance of an event which takes place contrary, in some sense, to the
pleasure or will of God. -- Dr. C's reasoning is this; Whatever God wills, will
come to pass. God wills the salvation of all men; therefore this will come to
pass. To apply this reasoning to the text last quoted, it will stand thus;
Whatever God wills, comes to pass. But God wills the continued life of him that
dies; therefore it comes to pass, that he who dies, does not die.

THE truth is, God wills the salvation of all men, in the same sense that he
wills the immediate repentance and sanctification of all men; or as he wills
them to be as perfect, in this life, as their heavenly Father is perfect. He
now commands all men every where to repent, to believe the gospel and to comply
with the necessary conditions of salvation: and complying with those
conditions, they shall be saved immediately after the present state. -- So that
God's willing that all men should be saved, no more proves that all men will be
saved, than his willing that all men should immediately repent, proves, that
all will immediately repent; or than his willing that all men should be perfect
in this world, and comply with his law as perfectly as the angels do in heaven,
proves that these things will actually take place in this world.

IT is presumed, that Dr. C. would not have denied, that it is the will of God
in some sense, and that a proper sense too, that all men be brought to
repentance in this state, and that they be saved immediately after this state.
Yet God does not efficaciously will either of these things. -- Was it not in a
proper sense the will of God, that our first parents should retain their
original innocence, and not by their apostasy deluge the world in sin and
misery? I presume this will not be denied. It was his will, if it was his
command. But if it was the will of God, that Adam should stand and not fall;
the will of God in this case was not efficacious. And if it was not efficacious
to prevent the entrance of sin into the world, how can we know, that it will be
efficacious to extirpate it out of the world, or from among the human race? If
God was not in any proper sense willing that sin and misery should enter and
predominate in the world; then it seems, that infinite power and wisdom were in
this instance baffled. And if these divine perfections have been baffled once,
they may be baffled a second time, and notwithstanding all their attempts, sin
and misery may continue without end, in some of the human race. If on the other
hand, although God commanded and in a proper sense willed, that man should
stand: still in another sense he consented, or willed, that he should fall: in
the same sense God may consent, that some men shall be the subjects of sin and
misery to an endless duration.

DR. C. readily owns, that men, as free agents, have the power of resisting and
opposing those means, which God from his desire of their salvation, may see fit
to use with them. P. 166.
"Yet it appears" to him a gross reflection on that being, who is infinitely
perfect, to suppose him unable finally to counteract, and in a moral way too,
the weakness, solly and obstinacy of such poor inferior creatures, as men are.
P. 167.
How these two propositions, which in the Doctor's book occur within a page,
can be reconciled with each other; how man can have a power to resist all the
means which God uses to effect his salvation, and at the same time God can have
a power to counteract, in a moral way, this obstinate resistance of man, must
certainly be set down among the things hard to be understood in Dr. C.

BUT perhaps the word finally in the second quotation is emphatical, and Dr.
C's meaning is, that though the power of resisting in man cannot consistently
with free agency be counteracted even by God, at once, or in a short time; yet
it may be counteracted in a very long time. This however will not agree with
Dr. C's own language. He says, P. 166.
The power in men of resisting the means, which God from desire of their
salvation sees fit to use with them, ought not to be overruled, nor indeed can
be in consistence with moral agency. Now to counteract or overrule in a long
time this power of resisting, is as really to overrule it, as to overrule it in
a short time. But according to Dr. C. it cannot be overruled in consistency
with moral agency. It seems then, that if the damned shall be finally brought
to repentance by God counteracting their obstinacy, they are stripped of their
moral agency.

OR if it be pleaded, that this counteracting is not an effectual overruling;
but such an influence of means and motives, as is consistent with moral agency:
still this gives no satisfaction. Is it such a counteracting, as will certainly
and " insallibly" be followed by the repentance and salvation of the sinner?
This is holden by Dr. C. P. 167.
If this be so, what moral power of still resisting has the sinner at the time
of his repentance? And if he have at that time no moral power of further
resistance, then this power is overruled effectually, and of course, according
to Dr. C's scheme, the sinner is deprived of his moral agency.

IF on the other hand it be said, that the counteracting be not such as will
certainly and "infallibly" be followed by the repentance of the sinner; then
there is no certainty that the sinner will ever under the most powerful means
which God shall use with him, be brought to repentance and be saved. Thus the
certainty of universal salvation at once comes to nothing. There is no
certainty, no ground of assurance, that all will be saved; and all the truth
is, that God will use means with sinners hereafter, as he does in this state,
to prepare them for salvation; but as in this state, so in the future, sinners
may, or may not, comply with those means.

TO Dr. C. it appeared a gross reflection on that being who is infinitely
perfect, to suppose him unable finally to counteract, and in a moral way too,
the obstinacy of men. P. 167.
But is it no reflection on God, to suppose him not to have been able in a
moral way, to prevent the entrance of sin into the world? Is it no reflection
on him to suppose, that he is not able in a moral way to counteract the
obstinacy of men in this life? Is it no reflection to suppose, that he is not
able, by the powerful means used in hell, to counteract it, in a single
instance, for the space of a thousand years? See p. 402, 403.
How long must God be unable to counteract human obstinacy, before the
imputation of such inability becomes a reflection on him? How long may he
consistently with his perfections be unable to counteract that obstinacy? and
what duration of that inability may be imputed to him, without a reflection on
him, and what duration of it cannot be imputed to him without a reflection? If
it be no reflection on God, to say, that he is unable to counteract that
obstinacy within a thousand years; is it a reflection to say, that he is unable
to counteract it in two thousand, in ten thousand, or in an hundred thousand
years? If not, why does it become a reflection to say, that he is unable
finally to counteract it? -- Let any believer in Dr. C's scheme answer these
questions.

DOCTOR C's reasoning in the following passage, is worthy of notice; P. 168.
If God desires the salvation of all, and Christ died that this desire of God
might be complied with, is it credible that a small portion of men only should
be saved in event? -- This reasoning may be retorted thus: If God desires that
all men be saved immediately after this life, and Christ died that this desire
might be complied with; is it credible, that a small portion of men only should
be then saved?

THE advocates for universal salvation, one and all, bring in the text now
under consideration, Who will have all men to be saved, as a proof of their
doctrine. Therefore I wish to ask them, from what they believe all men are,
according to these words, to be saved? From an endless punishment? Then they
were by a divine constitution exposed to an endless punishment; then an endless
punishment is just; then sin deserves an endless punishment; then sin is an
infinite evil; which to them is an infinitely horrible doctrine. But let them,
if they can, avoid it, once allowing that all men are to be saved from an
endless punishment. Or are all men, according to these words, to be saved from
a temporary punishment? What temporary punishment? Not that which is to
continue for ages of ages: some will suffer that. Not from a longer temporary
punishment; because none such is threatened; and sinners are not exposed to a
punishment greater than that which is threatened in the divine law. -- On the
whole, according to universalism, these words mean, that all men shall be saved
indeed, but shall be saved from -- NOTHING.

CHAP. XII. Doctor C's arguments from Psalm. VIII. 5, 6. Heb. II. 6 -- 9. Phil.
II. 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. XV. 24 -- 29. and Rev. V. 13; considered.
HIS argument from Psalm. VIII. 5, 6, and Heb. II. 6 -- 9, is built on those
words, Thou have put all things under his feet. He was of the opinion, that
those words mean, by the universality of the terms, that even sin itself shall
be subjected to Christ; and that sin cannot be subjected to Christ in any other
way, than by the destruction of it. P. 179.
But this is to suppose what is by no means granted, and ought not to have been
asserted without proof. An enemy may be overpowered, taken, imprisoned, and put
entirely under the power, or under the feet of the conqueror; and yet not be
put to death or annihilated. When it is said Christ's enemies shall be made his
footstool, Psalm. CX. 1, Heb. X. 13; No one will pretend, that this means either
a cordial submission to Christ, or annihilation. When the captains of Israel
put their feet on the necks of the Canaanitish kings, Josh. X. 24, as this was
no token of cordial submission or reconciliation; so it is certain, that those
kings were not then annihilated. The same idea is naturally suggested by that
expression, Put under his feet. Not any of these phrases is allowed to be used
in scripture, to express either a cordial submission, or annihilation. Sin is
such an enemy, as never can in its nature be reduced to a cordial submission to
Christ. Nor needs it to be annihilated, to answer the expression of being put
under the feet of Christ: Nor indeed does that expression naturally suggest the
idea of annihilation; but naturally, if not necessarily implies the contrary.
An enemy may be under the feet of his conqueror before he is annihilated, but
after he is annihilated, he is neither under his feet, nor in any other place.
To be under the feet therefore implies existence: and sin may properly be said
to be put under the feet of Christ, when it is so restrained and exemplarily
punished, that on the whole no dishonor is done by it to Christ, or to the
Deity; no evil results from it to the universe, or to any of Christ's real
followers: but on the other hand it is made, contrary to its own tendency, the
instrument of promoting the glory of God and of the Savior, and of increasing
the happiness of his universal kingdom, and of all his true subjects.

DR. C. makes a distinction between God's government of power and his moral
government: by which it is supposed, that he meant to show, that sin cannot be
brought into subjection to Christ, but by the willing submission of the sinner.
P. 179.
Men by sinning oppose the government of God; not his government of power; for
this ever was, and ever will, and ever must be, submitted to; but his moral
government which he exercises over intelligent and free agents. Here is room
for opposition. Men may resist that will of God, which requires their
obedience, etc. It may be presumed, that the passage now quoted was entirely
out of the Doctor's mind, when he wrote the following; It Is readily
acknowledged, the glory of Christ's power, as head of the government of God,
will be illustriously displayed, if by force only he finally subdues obstinate
sinners. By this it appears, that it was Dr. C's opinion, that men do oppose
the power of Christ, and the power Christ as the head of the government of God
too; and that his power may be illustriously displayed, if it be employed to
subdue by force their obstinate opposition. But to say, that power and force
are employed to subdue obstinate opposition, and yet that this opposition is no
opposition to that power and force, is as absurd, as to say, that a prince
exerts his power and force to subdue the opposition of an army of rebels, and
yet that those rebels do not at all oppose his power; or it is as absurd as to
say, that opposition can be subdued where there is no opposition.

IT is by no means clear what Dr. C. meant by God's government of power, as
opposed to his moral government. Can there be any government without power? It
is plain by the last quotation, that Dr. C. did not imagine, that God's moral
government is without either power or force, and that both power and force may
be employed to subdue sinners, who as sinners are subjects of God's moral
government only. -- But let the Doctor have meant by this distinction what he
will, it is by no means true, that sinners are always so far restrained and
subjected by God's moral government, that in the present state of things, and
if all things were to remain as they now are, no dishonor would be done to
God, no injury to his kingdom, to his chosen people, or to the intellectual
system. There is room therefore for sin and sinners, in this sense, to be
subjected and restrained by the government of God. When the wrath of men shall
praise God, and the remainder of wrath shall be restrained, then will sinners
be brought to that subjection to Christ, of which I am speaking. But Dr. C.
would not pretend, that in this sense, sinners ever have been, ever will be,
and ever must be subject to God. -- In one word, to be subjected to Christ is
to be made either actively or passively subservient to his purposes and to his
glory.

WHEN the enemies of a prince are overcome, and in chains and prisons are
restrained from interrupting the peace and happiness of his faithful subjects;
then they are put under his feet and are subjected to him, and all their "rule,
authority and power, are put down or abolished." So when all the enemies of
Christ, all "obstinate sinners" shall be, to use Dr. C's own words, by force
finally subdued, shut up in prison, bound with chains, and prevented from doing
the least mischief to the disciples and kingdom of Christ; then those enemies
will be put under the feet of Christ; then an end will be put to the dominion
of sin; then the works of the devil will be destroyed; then the serpents head
will be bruised, and the devil's kingdom will be overthrown, as really and
effectually, as the power of a rebel can be overthrown by an entire conquest of
him and his adherents, by his perpetual imprisonment and other proper
punishment according to the laws of the kingdom, though he and some of his
partisans be permitted to live, and though they retain a rebellious spirit. --
The verb (...) in Romans VIII. 20, signifies, as Dr. C. holds, an involuntary
subjection. It may therefore mean the same in Heb. II. 8, and 1 Cor. XV. 27,
etc,

DOCTOR C. insists on the words in 1 John, III. 8, For this purpose was the Son
of God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. By the works
of the devil, he understands all sin: by destroying he understands an entire
abolition. On the other hand, by destroying the works of the devil, some
understand a perfect defeat of every attempt in opposition to the peace,
happiness and glory of God's kingdom: The devil will be most effectually
subdued, his works will be destroyed and his head bruised in the highest sense
and degree, when he shall be perfectly defeated and disappointed in all his
designs, and every thing he has attempted against Christ and his interest,
shall be turned against himself, to answer those ends which he constantly
sought to defeat by all his attempts; and Christ shall be more honored, and
his kingdom more happy and glorious forever, than it could have been, if Satan
had never opposed him, or seduced and destroyed any of mankind. Hopkins's
Inquiry into the Future State.
-- As the text now under consideration is capable of the sense just given;
until it shall be proved, that the Doctor's is the true sense, it proves
nothing to his purpose.

DOCTOR C. grants, P. 224.
That by destruction the scriptures mean the misery and punishment of sinners.
Therefore sinners are in the sense and language of scripture destroyed, when
they are sent to the place of restraint, imprisonment and misery prepared for
them. And as sinners will be destroyed without annihilation, so may sin and the
works of the devil.

THAT God has always power to subdue or to subject to himself his enemies, is
one thing: actually to subject them, by restraining them from doing any damage
to his kingdom or his subjects, is another. In the present state, the enemies
of Christ tempt his subjects, obstruct his cause, and do many things, which if
they were to remain as they now are, would be an everlasting dishonor to
Christ. But they shall be made his footstool, they shall no more do any of
those things.

WHEN Christ puts his enemies under his feet, he treads them down in his anger
and tramples them in his fury, agreeably to Isai. LXIII. 3. But this surely is
not to bring them to a cordial reconciliation.

THEREFORE, as Psalm. VIII. 5, 6; Heb. II. 6 -- 9, are fairly capable of a
construction entirely different from that on which Dr. C's whole argument from
them depends; they prove nothing to his purpose: especially as they are not
naturally capable of his construction.

WE are now to attend to Phil. II. 9, 10, 11; Wherefore God also has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. -- The question concerning this text
is the same as that concerning the text last under consideration; What are we
to understand by that subjection, to which Christ in consequence of his
exaltation, was to reduce mankind? Is it a free and voluntary subjection in all
men? Or in some men a subjection to which they shall be reduced by the power
and authority of Christ, in opposition to their own inclinations? Dr. C.
asserts that the former is the most plain and natural sense, and that the
latter is evidently too low and restrained an interpretation. But positive
assertions prove nothing.

AS to the Doctor's reasons to prove that the subjection in question is a free
and voluntary one, they are as follows; That Christ is now endeavoring to
reduce mankind to a voluntary subjection to himself P. 190.
-- That though Christ do not in this state, prevail on all men voluntarily to
subject themselves to him, yet he may prevail on them in the next state. P. 191.
-- That if Christ was exalted for this end, that every knee should bow to him,
etc. he will fail of his end unless all men be reduced to a voluntary
subjection P. 192.
-- That the genuflection in this Phil. II, 10, evidently means a voluntary act
Ibid.
-- That a compelled subjection is a poor, low kind of subjection in comparison
with that which is voluntary; therefore the reward of Christ's humiliation,
unless it imply an universal voluntary subjection of mankind, is low and small
in comparison with what it would have been, had it implied a voluntary
subjection. P. 192, 193.


1. Christ is now endeavoring to bring all men to a voluntary subjection to
himself; and these endeavors will sooner or later be successful: therefore
Phil. II. 9, etc. means a voluntary subjection. -- Answer: Christ is now in no
other sense endeavoring to bring all to a voluntary subjection, than in the
days of his incarnation he endeavored to gather the inhabitants of Jerusalem
together, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings: or tha^ (...) always
has endeavored to prevent the death of him that dies. But as those endeavors
have not been efficacious; so his endeavors to bring all men to a voluntary
subjection, may not be. Therefore this argument proves nothing.

2. Though Christ do not in this state prevail on all men voluntarily to
subject themselves to him; yet he may prevail on them in the next state:
therefore in the next state all will in fact be brought to a voluntary
subjection: therefore Phil. II. 9, etc. means voluntary subjection. -- Answer:
It does not follow from the power of Christ to reduce all men to a voluntary
subjection, that he will in fact, reduce them to that subjection.

3. If Christ were exalted for this end, that every knee should bow to him,
etc. he will fail of the end of his exaltation, unless all be reduced to a
voluntary subjection. -- Answer: The consequence by no means follows from the
antecedent. For though it be allowed that Christ was exalted for the end, that
every knee should bow to him; yet it is not allowed that this bowing of the
knee is a voluntary subjection. So that Christ may obtain the whole end of his
exaltation, without effecting a voluntary subjection of all men. This argument
takes for granted, that the bowing of the knee mentioned in Phil. II. 10, is a
voluntary submission.

4. The genuflection in Phil. II. 10, evidently means a voluntary act. --
Answer: It does not evidently mean a voluntary act. -- A mere contradiction is
a sufficient answer to a mere assertion.

5. A compelled subjection is a poor, low kind of subjection in comparison with
that which is voluntary. Therefore the reward of Christ's humiliation, unless
it imply a voluntary subjection of all mankind, is low and small in comparison
with what it would have been, had it implied a voluntary subjection. Therefore
it does imply a voluntary subjection; therefore a voluntary subjection is
intended in Phil. II. 10.

ANSWER: We are very improper persons to determine a priori what is the proper
reward of Christ, or what reward is the greatest, and most honorable to
Christ. Some may imagine it would be most honorable to Christ, to reduce all
men to a voluntary submission in this life; as in that case they would be saved
from all future punishment; and thus might the grace, power and wisdom of
Christ in their opinion be more glorified. Hence they might argue just as
forcibly as Dr. C. does in the other case, That undoubtedly Christ will in this
life reduce all men to a voluntary subjection to himself. On the same principle
it might also have been proved, before the fact showed the contrary, that all
men would be reduced to a voluntary subjection to Christ, in a very short time,
long before the time of their ordinary departure out of life. On the same
principle too it might have been proved, that God would never permit sin and
misery to enter the world. -- Thus it appears, that Dr. C's argument, if it
prove any thing, proves too much, therefore proves nothing.

THE Doctor was not insensible, that the same words are quoted by the Apostle
Paul, and applied to the general judgment; at which time Dr. C. does not
pretend, that all men will be voluntarily subject to Christ. P. 196.
See Romans XIV. 10, 11, 12. For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ. For it is written, as I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to God. Therefore we have clear evidence, that these words
do sometimes mean that subjection which is not voluntary. And that in Phil. II.
10, they mean a voluntary subjection and that only, we must have good evidence,
before we are obliged to believe it. The utmost evidence which Dr. C. gives us,
respecting that matter, I have exhibited above; and concerning the sufficiency
of it, the reader will judge.

DOCTOR C. acknowledges, Ibid.
that the words are pertinently applied by the Apostle, to that subjection
which shall take place as to all, at the general judgment: but says that his
thus applying them is no argument that they mean nothing more. To which it may
be answered, that it is an argument that they mean nothing more in Phil. II.
10, unless good reason can be given to show, that in this passage they do mean
more: and whether the reasons which Dr. C. gives, be good and satisfactory, is
submitted as before.

WE come at length to the consideration of that passage of scripture, which Dr.
C. considers as decisive of itself, were there no other text in the Bible of
the like import. It is 1 Cor. XV. 24 -- 29; Then comes the end, when he shall
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the father; when he shall have put
down all rule, and all authority and power. For he must reign, till he has put
all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.
For he has put all things under his feet. But when he says all things are put
under him, it is manifest, that he is excepted which did put all things under
him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the son also
himself be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be all
in all.

THE Doctor prefaces his criticism on this text, with some observations on the
previous context, which demand our first attention. -- He quotes the 21st and
22d verses; For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of
the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive:
and adds, It is with me beyond all controversy evident, that the apostle is
speaking here, not of a partial, but universal resurrection, not of the
resurrection of the righteous only, but of the whole race of Adam. -- The same
all who suffer death through Adam, shall through Christ be made alive. The
comparison between the damage by Adam and the advantage by Christ, lies in this
very thing. P. 201.
Here we have the Doctor's opinion, and his reason for it. His opinion is, that
in the 22d verse the apostle is speaking of all mankind: his reason for this
opinion is, that otherwise there would be no proper comparison of Adam and
Christ. But the truth of this observation is by no means conceded. The reader
may have seen my ideas of this case in the remarks made above, on Romans V. 12,
etc. -- If an army under one general be all killed or taken, and afterward the
surviving part of the same army, now liberated, and under the command of
another general, return every one in safety from a dangerous battle; it may be
justly said, As under the former general all the army was killed or taken, so
under the latter general all the army returned from the battle in safety. There
would in this case be a true and proper comparison. Yet the very same all would
not be intended in both parts of the comparison. Dr. C's reason therefore is
not sufficient to support his construction. There is a proper comparison of
Adam and Christ, if the apostle say, and intended to say, As in Adam all his
seed die, even so in Christ all his seed shall be made alive.

IT is indeed a truth granted on all hands, that all mankind will be raised at
the last day; but it does not hence follow, that the apostle in this verse is
speaking of such an universal resurrection.

BESIDE, if it should be granted, that the 22d verse refers to the resurrection
of all men, it would not follow, that all will be saved. For Dr. C. grants,
that had the apostle no where else opened his mind more fully and particularly
upon this matter, the utmost we could have argued from his words, would have
been, that as all men die in Adam, so in Christ they should all be delivered
from this death, by a resurrection to life. P. 201.
How then does this text prove universal salvation? And especially how is this
verse, or even the whole passage of itself decisive? Although Dr. C. in page
197, declares his opinion, that this passage is decisive of itself, was there
no other text in all the Bible of the like import; yet he himself in page 207,
gives it up as decisive, in the following words; This parenthesis, comprehended
within the 24th and 29th verses, was purposely interposed to bring us to a
pause -- and give us opportunity -- to reflect upon -- the truths -- here
revealed; pursuing them in their just tendency, necessary connection and final
result: In the doing of which, we should virtually continue the discourse, and
finish it with respect to the wicked, as the apostle had done -- with respect
to the righteous. Thus it appears by the authority of Dr. C. that this portion
of scripture does not contain any thing plain, or positive concerning the
salvation of those who die in wickedness; but to investigate that which to him
was so important and favorite a doctrine, we must virtually continue and
finish the discourse ourselves. How then is this passage decisive of itself?
Unless we virtually continue and finish the discourse ourselves with respect to
the wicked, as the apostle had done with respect to the righteous, we shall
never, even in Dr. C's opinion come to the same conclusion concerning the
wicked, to which the apostle came concerning the righteous, that they shall be
saved.

THE chief thing, which Dr. C. endeavors by this passage to prove, with a
final view to the establishment of universal salvation, is, that the mediatory
scheme will not be finished at the second coming of Christ; but a great deal
will then remain to be done before the plan of God, for the accomplishment of
which the mediatory kingdom is entrusted to the son, shall be completed. P. 208.
By the "finishing," "the completing," etc, of "the mediatory scheme," the
mediatorial kingdom, etc, Dr. C. must have meant the finishing of the work of
salvation, or of delivering sinners from sin and misery: otherwise he meant
nothing to the purpose of proving the salvation of all men. What if the
mediatorial kingdom be not finished at Christ's second coming? Yet if after
that period, Christ will never more deliver any of mankind from sin and from
wrath; those who shall at that time remain in sin, and under the wrath of God,
will never be saved.

THAT in the sense now explained, the mediatorial scheme will not be finished
at the second coming of Christ, is indeed a point in dispute, and the Doctor's
proofs of this point are to be heartily weighed. They are these two -- (1) This
passage of scripture teaches, that an universal subjection to Christ is to be
effected before the finishing of the mediatory scheme; but this universal
subjection to Christ is not effected at the second coming of Christ. -- (2) The
reward of the good and faithful subjects of Christ is to be bestowed on them in
the kingdom of Christ, and therefore Christ's kingdom will not be at an end,
till after they shall have enjoyed that reward for some time at least. -- I
think these two are all the reasons which Dr. C. has given to support the
proposition in question. He has indeed divided his long and complicated
discourse on the text now before us, into five heads: but for what reason is
not manifest.

I. IT was the opinion of Dr. C. that 1 Cor. XV. 24-29, teaches us, that an
universal subjection to Christ is to be effected before the finishing of the
mediatorial scheme, which is not effected at Christ's second coming. -- By
subjection to Christ Dr. C. meant with respect to intelligent creatures, a
cordial, willing subjection. By subjection to Christ, with respect to sin and
death the first and second, he seems to have meant abolition. But though it is
agreed on all hands, that there will be an universal subjection to Christ
effected, before the finishing of the mediatorial scheme; yet it is not agreed
that this subjection, with reference to all intelligent creatures, will be a
willing subjection or submission. Concerning this particular, some observations
have been made in the former part of this chapter. That the text now under
consideration does teach a willing subjection, must be shown, or the text will
not appear to be to the purpose. -- Now to show, that all intelligent creatures
will be cordially subjected to Christ, and will be saved, the Doctor insists,
that both sin and the second death will be destroyed.

1. THAT sin will be destroyed. With reference to those words, "he must reign
till he has put all enemies under his feet" -- "All things shall be subdued
unto him" -- The Doctor asks, "Is sin an enemy?" -- Supposing it is an enemy,
what follows? Not what the Doctor asserts, "Then it will be destroyed," meaning
abolished, extirpated by universal obedience and virtue. For the apostle does
not say, that all enemies shall be destroyed, abolished, extirpated or
annihilated: but that all enemies shall be subdued and put under Christ's feet.
So that the true and only consequence from the supposition, that sin is an
enemy, is, that it shall be subdued, restrained and put under Christ's feet;
which may be done in a sense true, proper, and as Dr. C. grants, P. 193.
glorious to Christ, without the abolition of it.

INDEED the apostle says, that the last enemy, death, shall be destroyed; which
by no means implies, that all other enemies shall be destroyed. It may mean,
what our translators evidently understood by it, that the last instance which
we shall have of the destruction of any enemy, will be in the destruction of
death. -- The words literally, and according to the order of the original, are
thus translated; the last enemy is destroyed death; and they may mean, and may
very properly be rendered thus, Death is destroyed the last enemy. Now suppose
an historian, in the account of a battle, should say, The general was killed
the last enemy: must we necessarily understand him to mean, that all the
enemies of the whole army were killed, and the general was killed after all the
rest? Might not his words be justly taken in this sense, that the general was
the last enemy who fell, and many others might escape?

OR death may by the apostle be called the last enemy proverbially and with
respect to this life only; as it is now sometimes called the last debt due to
nature. Since the expression, the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death,
is capable of this sense; and since it does not appear, that it implies, that
all other enemies will be destroyed: therefore it is no proof of universal
salvation; as both sin and misery may still be allowed to be enemies, and yet
may be in existence, after the destruction of death.

BUT it may be asserted in a true and proper sense, that sin, in the damned, is
not an enemy. It does no damage to Christ, to his kingdom, or to the peace and
happiness of his subjects. It is to be sure, an enemy in no other sense, than
the damned themselves are enemies: and if from that expression, the last enemy
that is destroyed, abolished, (...), is death, it follow, that all Christ's
enemies will be abolished or annihilated; it will also follow, that all the
damned will be annihilated. So that if this argument prove any thing, it proves
too much; so much that it entirely overthrows universal salvation.

BUT sin in the damned, and the damned themselves, instead of doing any damage
to Christ or his subjects, will be the means of increasing the glory of the
former and the happiness of the latter, to eternity.

IT is observable, that the verb (...) is never in all the New Testament,
applied to express the destruction of all wicked men, of the enemies of God in
general, or of all sin. Therefore as neither sin itself, nor all the enemies of
God, are said (...), to be abolished, we have no right, even on the supposition
that sin is an enemy in every sense, to say that it will be abolished, or
extirpated from the universe. -- The peculiar phraseology of the passage now
under consideration, is worthy of particular notice. In the 24th verse it is
said, that Christ will abolish, (...), all rule and all authority and power.
But he is said to put all his enemies under his feet, (...), verse 25th, and to
put all things under his feet, (...), verse 27th. Although therefore all the
rule, and all the authority and power of Christ's enemies shall be abolished,
and the apostle is careful to inform us of that; yet he is equally careful to
inform us, that his enemies themselves shall be only subjected to him, and put
under his feet; as it seems, designedly shifting the phraseology and avoiding
the application of the verb (...) to them. What right then have we to apply it
to them? Is not the application of words to persons or things, to which the
apostle designedly did not apply them, a gross perversion of scripture?

DOCTOR C's argument that sin will be destroyed, depends wholly on this general
proposition, That all Christ's enemies will be destroyed. Now the word
destroyed in this case, doubtless means either abolition, or restraint and
punishment. If it mean abolition, extirpation, annihilation; then as was before
observed, all the enemies of Christ will be annihilated, and the doctrine of
universal salvation falls to the ground at once. If it mean restraint,
punishment, preventing from doing mischief, etc, then sin may be said to be
destroyed, and yet have an endless existence in the universe.

IF then these words, The last enemy death shall be destroyed, do certainly
imply, that all Christ's enemies shall be destroyed? and if it be also certain,
that sin in the damned is, in every proper sense, an enemy, those words are
equally inconsistent with Dr. C's scheme, as with the opposite. They either
imply an universal annihilation of all Christ's enemies; and so are equally
inconsistent with universal salvation, as with endless torment; or they are not
at all inconsistent with it, and therefore are no argument against it. If they
imply an universal annihilation of the enemies of Christ, as they are equally
against Dr. C's scheme, as against the opposite; it equally concerns him, as
his opponents, to provide an answer to them, and it is absurd in him to object
them to the doctrine of his opponents.

THE sum of what has been said on this head of the destruction of sin is (1)
That it does not appear, that sin in the damned is properly an enemy to Christ
and his kingdom; as it does no harm to that kingdom. (2) If it be determined
that sin in the damned is an enemy to Christ, it will not follow, that it will
be destroyed, meaning by destruction annihilation or abolition; because it is
no where said, that all Christ's enemies will be destroyed, (...). -- Or even
if this were asserted concerning all Christ's enemies, and the verb (...) were
applied to them all, it would not certainly determine, that they will all be
annihilated, as that verb is capable of another sense, and is doubtless used in
another sense, Heb. II. 14; That through death he might destroy, (...), him
that had the power of death, that is the devil. Dr. C. did not believe, that
the devil will be annihilated. Therefore if that verb were applied to all
Christ's enemies, and sin in the damned were allowed to be an enemy to Christ;
still it might mean something else beside annihilation: nay, it must
necessarily mean something else, or it would equally disprove universal
salvation, as endless misery.

IN Dr. C's discourse on this subject, it is implied, that when a sinner is
brought to repentance and cordial reconciliation to Christ, he is destroyed.
His words are, P. 214, 215.
Christ shall continue vested with regal power, till he has brought all enemies
into subjection to him -- Christ will continue head of the kingdom of God --
till he has actually subdued all enemies -- Is sin an enemy? -- then it shall
be destroyed -- for Christ must destroy all enemies. By these several
expressions it appears, that it was Dr. C's opinion, that all Christ's enemies
will be subjected to him, that they all will be subdued under him, and that
they will all be destroyed by him. Now it is abundantly evident, that by
subjection, subduing, etc, when applied to those, who die in impenitence, Dr.
C. meant a cordial reconciliation to Christ: and he by no means held, that
these enemies thus reconciled, will be destroyed by annihilation. It follows
therefore, that as all Christ's enemies are to be destroyed, to be destroyed,
and to be reconciled to Christ in true repentance, are, according to Dr. C. one
and the same thing. Therefore, when Paul was converted, he was destroyed; and
as he will eternally be the subject of repentance, he will suffer an eternal
destruction. The punishment of God's enemies is, that they shall be destroyed;
they shall be punished with everlasting destruction. But what punishment are
everlasting repentance and complacency in God? they are among the greatest
blessings which Deity himself can confer on a creature. Endless destruction and
endless salvation are throughout the scriptures opposed to each other. But
according to Dr. C's scheme, they perfectly harmonize and mutually imply each
other. -- Now whether this scheme harmonize with the scriptures is submitted to
the reader.

WHETHER this scheme harmonize with the scriptures or not,, it does not
harmonize with other parts of Dr. C's book. He says, P. 224.
that by the destruction of the wicked, mentioned in 2 These. I. 9, and in
various other texts, we are very obviously led to understand misery. Surely
convrersion from sin to holiness, and especially the everlasting holiness of
the saints in heaven, is not misery.

DR. C. holds, that all enemies will be subdued and subjected to Christ, and
that sin will be subjected to him, when it is abolished or annihilated. But if
sin be subjected to Christ, when it is annihilated, then the sinner would be
subjected to Christ were he annihilated. But this kind of subjection is no more
a cordial subjection, than that which is effected by mere power, and which
consists in restraint and punishment. -- Beside, according to Dr. C. there are
two ways of subjecting to Christ intended in this passage; one is by cordial
reconciliation, the other is by annihilation. This then will keep in
countenance the opponents of Dr. C. who believe, that there are two ways of
subjecting to Christ; one by cordial reconciliation, which respects the elect
only; the other by restraint and punishment, which respects the reprobate.

ON the whole, whether this passage be sufficient to prove an universal
abolition of sin, is now left to the judgment of the reader.

2. DOCTOR C. was of the opinion, that 1 Cor. XV. 24 -- 29, teaches, that
before the finishing of the mediatorial scheme, the second death will be
destroyed. -- He says, P. 210.
The second death may with as much propriety be called an enemy, as the first
death. -- Let any sense be assigned, in which the first death can be properly
spoken of as an enemy, and it will at once be easy to make it appear, that the
second death is, in the same sense, as truly an enemy, and much more so. -- Is
P. 215.
death, the second death, an enemy? Then this enemy shall be destroyed; for
Christ must destroy all enemies. This is the Doctor's argument; in answer to
which two observations may be made -- That the second death is not an enemy, in
the sense which the Doctor's argument implies -- That if it were in every sense
an enemy, it would not follow, that it shall be destroyed, i. e. abolished.

THE reader has seen the observations made above, concerning sin as an enemy
and concerning the destruction of sin: similar observations may be made
concerning the second death.

(1) THE second death is not an enemy in the sense which Dr. C's argument
implies and requires. -- If the Doctor meant, that the second death is an enemy
to those who are the subjects of it, as it destroys their happiness and
prevents their admission to a glorious immortality; this is granted. But it is
not granted, that therefore it will be destroyed: and for the Doctor to take it
for granted, that therefore it will be destroyed, is the same thing as to take
for granted that all mankind will finally be admitted to a glorious
immortality, which is the grand subject of the present controversy. -- But if
the Doctor meant, that the second death is an enemy to Christ, as it prevents
the brightest display of his glory, the greatest prosperity of his kingdom, and
the greatest happiness of his subjects; in this sense it is denied to be an
enemy. -- This is a sense in which the first death is an enemy, and
notwithstanding what Dr. C. says, it does not seem easy to make it appear, that
the second death is, in the same sense, as truly an enemy. The first death,
while it continues, prevents the brightest display of the glory of Christ, the
greatest prosperity of his kingdom, and the greatest happiness of his subjects:
if it should continue, it would be inconsistent with the promises of Christ,
with the complete salvation of the elect, and would defeat the gospel. Now to
make it appear, that in this sense the second death is an enemy, it may be
presumed, is not a more easy talk, than to prove the salvation of all men. --
The second death is no more an enemy to Christ, to his kingdom, or to his
faithful subjects, than the execution of some most attrocious and ungrateful
rebels, whose lives cannot be spared consistently with the glory of their king,
the prosperity of his kingdom, or the happiness of his faithful subjects; is an
enemy to the king, to his kingdom, or to his faithful subjects.

DOCTOR C. further urges, that the second death is the last enemy, and the only
one that is so. P. 210.
If it be no enemy, it is neither the last nor the first enemy. Therefore, "it
seems" not reasonable, when the apostle says, the last enemy which is death,
shall be destroyed, to understand him to mean by death, the second death. The
first death is in the sense before given, the last enemy; the last who prevents
the complete display of Christ's glory, the last who prevents the perfection of
his kingdom, the last who has power to hurt the saints. After the destruction
of this death, they immediately receive the adoption of sons. Although the
devils and those who have been persecutors in this world, will still be in
existence after the destruction of the first death, they will no more have it
in their power to dishonor Christ, or to interrupt the happiness of his
subjects, than if they were annihilated.

(2) IF the second death were in every sense an enemy, it would not follow,
that it shall be destroyed, meaning abolished. All the enemies of God or of
Christ, are no where said to be abolished (...), meaning annihilation. To be
subdued, subjected, put under feet, is by no means the same as to be
annihilated. If therefore the second death be ever so truly and properly an
enemy, the utmost that would thence follow, is, that it would be so restrained
and subjected to Christ, as to be prevented from doing mischief, and to be made
an instrument of promoting the glory of God, and the happiness of his kingdom.
In this sense it may be granted, that the second death will be destroyed; yet
the salvation of all men would no more be implied in the concession, than it is
implied in the destruction of the devil, mentioned, Heb. II. 14, that he will
be annihilated. Nor can we hold, that all Christ's enemies will be destroyed in
the sense now opposed, without holding the annihilation of the wicked, and
giving up universal salvation.

DR. C. endeavors to make out, that if death, the last enemy, do mean temporal
death, still the destruction of this death implies universal salvation. Simple
restoration to life, says he, P. 211, etc.
is not the thing the scripture means by death destroyed. To be sure the
apostle Paul had quite another notion of it. -- What is the idea he leads us to
entertain of it? Plainly not a bare return to life, but such an one as is
connected with a glorious immortality. That in this chapter the apostle speaks
of such a return to life, as is connected with a glorious immortality, is
granted; because in this chapter he is speaking of the resurrection of the
saints only. The Doctor indeed tells us, that it was with him beyond all
controversy evident, that the apostle is speaking here, not of a partial, but
universal resurrection. To others however it is beyond all controversy evident,
that the apostle is speaking here of the resurrection of the righteous only.
Even the Doctor acknowledges, that after the 28th verse the apostle confines
his discourse to the righteous, without saying any thing of the wicked. P. 207.
Now this affords some ground of presumption at least, that in the former part
of the chapter too, he confines his discourse to the resurrection of the
righteous. Nor has Dr. C. given any reason, beside that which has been already
examined, viz. That the comparison between the damage by Adam, and the
advantage by Christ, lies in this very thing, that the same all men are meant
in both parts of that expression, as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive. So that Dr. C's argument, P. 211.
that from the resurrection of all mankind, it follows, that all will be saved,
depends on principles, which are neither granted nor proved, and therefore is
utterly inconclusive.

HE further says, P. 210, 211.
This second death, strictly and properly speaking, is THE LAST ENEMY, and THE
ONLY ONE, that is so. Then surely there will not be a third, a fourth death,
etc, etc, for ages of ages. Yet this is taught in other parts of his book; as
in the following passage, P. 309, 310.
They may all -- be doomed -- to a state of misery, which shall last for an
age: In which state some -- may be wrought upon to submit themselves to God --
Others may die in this state stupid -- And those who thus died in their
obstinacy may again -- be put into a place of suffering for another age; in
which some may be reduced -- and others stand it out still. These others may.
in yet another form of existence, be sent into a place of discipline for
another age; and so on, till there has been torment for ages of ages. Here the
Doctor distinctly mentions three future states of suffering, and supposes there
may be others continued in succession for ages of ages, which are so many
distinct deaths, as really as the first state of suffering after this life, is
the second death, with respect to temporal death. What right then had the
doctor to say, and with what consistency could he say, that the second death is
the last enemy, and the only one that is so?

II. THE other argument of Dr. C. is, that the reward of the good and faithful
subjects of Christ is to be bestowed on them in the kingdom of Christ; and
therefore Christ's kingdom will not be at an end, till after they shall have
enjoyed that reward for some time at least; and therefore will not be at an
end, at the second coming of Christ, or immediately after the general
judgment." P. 222, 223.
-- This argument wholly depends on the supposition, that at the time at which
the work of salvation shall be completed by Christ he will entirely abdicate
all government of superintendency over those who shall be saved by him. If
otherwise; if he shall still retain a superintendency over those who shall be
saved by him; if he shall still be their immediate head or ruler, and the
source of their happiness; though he shall not be the supreme ruler of the
universe, nor even of the redeemed; but in this respect he shall resign the
kingdom to the Father: he may be said yet to have a kingdom, and to sit on his
throne; and to reign, etc. Before the resignation of the mediatorial kingdom,
the government of all things is in the hands of Christ, being delegated by the
Father to this government. Or as Dr. C. expresses it, he will be head over all;
he will govern all; he will be all unto all. P. 217.
Christ during that period acts as the supreme head of the universe. But when
he shall have resigned the mediatorial kingdom, the Father will act as supreme
head. Still Christ may, under the Father, be the head and governor of his
redeemed and saved people. The Father will be supreme ruler, and Christ with
his Church united to him, and dependent on him, will receive the benefits of
his government. This does not imply, but that Christ himself, in subordination
to the Father, will have a government over his saints.

NOR does it imply, but that the son as one with the Father, as being in the
Father, and the Father in him, shall reign after the resignation of the
delegated sovereignty over all things. It may be presumed, that no man will
say, that the Father does not reign now while the administration of universal
government is in the hands of the Son. If he did not now reign, there would be
no propriety in speaking as the scripture often does, of him that sits on
the throne, and the Lamb; nor any propriety in the promise, Joh. XV. 16; That
whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you; nor in
those words of James, Chap. I. 17; Every good gift, and every perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights. But I need not add
texts, to prove this. -- For the same reason therefore that the Father now
reigns in and with the Son; so after the resignation of the general delegated
administration, the Son will still reign in and with the Father. Now the
government is conducted in the name and by the immediate agency of the Son:
then it will be conducted in the name and by the immediate agency of the
Father. Yet as now the Father reigns in and with the Son; so then will the Son
reign in and with the Father. Christ now reigns with supreme sovereignty by
delegation from the Father. After the resignation of this sovereignty, he will
still reign over the saints by delegation from the Father, but with dominion,
which shall be subordinate to that of the Father. He will also at the same time
reign in and with the Father, in the exercise of a dominion, which shall not be
delegated, but which is essential to him as a divine person, and one with the
Father; as the Father, by virtue of his divinity, now necessarily reigns in and
with the Son. -- So that although Christ shall immediately after the general
judgment, resign the supreme delegated sovereignty, which he now possesses;
still he will reign in these two respects, by a delegated subordinate authority
over his saints; and by an undelegated, essential authority, which by virtue of
his divinity, he possesses necessarily with the Father.

BUT whether the true idea of Christ's delivering up the kingdom to the Father,
concerning which Divines have repeatedly differed, have been now precisely
exhibited or not; still the scriptures necessitate us to believe, that in some
sense Christ will reign to an absolute eternity. Heb. I. 8; Unto the Son, he
says, Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever. Rev. XXII. 5; "They" [the
saints] "shall reign forever and ever." 1 Pet. V. 4; When the chief shepherd
shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away. 1 Cor.
IX. 25; "We do it to obtain an incorruptible crown." Heb. XII. 28; We receiving
a kingdom that cannot be moved. Both these last texts are quoted by Dr. C. P.
267.
to prove that the righteous shall live and be happy without end: and they
equally prove that they shall reign without end. -- But the saints are to sit
down with Christ on his throne and reign with him: and it is absurd to imagine,
that they are to reign after the cessation of his reign; that they are to wear
crowns which are incorruptible and fade not away; but that his crown is
corruptible and fades away. Beside; the kingdom which the apostles and
primitive christians received, according to Heb. XII. 28, was not the kingdom
of the Father, as distinguished from that of the Son, but was the kingdom of
the Son, which he himself had then lately set up. This kingdom is said to be
incapable of being shaken or dissolved; and therefore is endless, as Dr. C.
himself believed: otherwise it was absurd for him to quote that text to prove,
that the righteous will live and be happy without end. -- Dan. VII. 14. "HIS"
[the Son of man's] dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. Isai. IX. 7: Of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end. Luke I. 33; He
shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there shall be
no end. -- More determinate language could not be used, to express the endless
continuance of Christ's kingdom.

IT is therefore granted, that the kingdom of Christ will continue, after the
general judgment, and even without end. Yet it does not thence follow, that he
will not at that time have finished the mediatorial work, or rather the work of
saving sinners. I make this distinction, because though Christ will at the
general judgment, have finished the work of saving sinners from wrath; yet he
will without end be the mediator between the Father and the saints, and will be
the medium of all divine communications to them, whether of knowledge, of
happiness or of honor. It by no means follows from the circumstance, that
Christ will, after the general judgment, retain a kingly power and dominion,
that he will exert that power in delivering sinners from sin and misery.

THE whole of Dr. C's discourse on this subject implies, that the kingdom of
the Father, in which he shall be all in all, will not begin immediately after
the general judgment. But how can this be reconciled with Matt. XIII. 40 -- 44;
As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire; so shall it be in
the end of this world. The Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and they
shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them that do
iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth. Then, (...), at that very time, shall the righteous
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their FATHER. This single text proves
that the kingdom becomes the Father's immediately after the end of this world,
and therefore entirely overthrows all Dr. C's labor to prove, that the kingdom
does not become the Father's till ages of ages after the end of this world; and
equally overthrows his great labor to fix a construction on 1 Cor. XV. 24,
consistent with his scheme.

BESIDE; the Doctor's construction of the last passage mentioned seems to be
absurd in itself. For he connects the end, as to the time of it, with Christ's
delivery of the kingdom to the Father. P. 198.
And by the end he in the same page explains himself to mean the shutting up of
the scene of providence with respect to the sons of Adam: which is and can be
no other than the end of Christ's mediatorial kingdom. According to Dr. C.
therefore, the apostle, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, gravely tells
us, that the end of Christ's kingdom will be, when he shall deliver up his
kingdom to the Father: or the end of it shall be at the very time, at which the
end of it shall be! But what is this, but the most childish tautology! Who ever
imagined, that Christ would still retain his kingdom, after he should have
delivered it up? Surely that scheme must be in distress indeed, which requires
such construction as this to be put on the sacred scripture!

DOCTOR C. says, The reward promised, under the administration of Christ's
kingdom, in this present state, in order to persuade men to become his good and
faithful subjects, is not the final happiness God intends to bestow upon them;
but the happiness of that state which intervenes between the resurrection and
God's being all in all. P. 222.
But all the promises of the Bible are given in this present state; therefore
there are no promises in all the Bible of final happiness. How then does Dr. C.
know that all men, or even any man will be finally happy? This is at once
giving up his favorite doctrine, to establish which he wrote his whole book.

DOCTOR C. calls out, P. 225.
What a poor, low, lean idea the common explanation of this text gives us of
the final effects of Christ's reign -- in comparison with that, the above
interpretation lets us into! Such exclamations occur in almost every argument
of his book. I observe therefore concerning them once for all, that they seem
better suited to work on the passions and imagination, than on the reason; that
at least they are attempts to determine what is most for the general good and
the glory of the Deity, not from revelation or from fact; but a priori, by our
own imagination concerning what is best and most eligible. Now that we are in
this way utterly incapable of determining what is most eligible, and most for
the divine glory, in a thousand instances; every man of reflection must grant.

I HAVE now finished my remarks on Dr. C's "decisive" argument from 1 Cor. XV.
24, etc. Whether it be indeed "decisive;" whether it be "unanswerably stong,"
P. 211.
is submitted to the reader.

WE are next to consider the Doctor's argument from Rev. V. 13; And every
creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as
are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing and honor,
and glory and power be unto him, that sits upon the throne, and unto the
Lamb forever and ever. -- The main question concerning these words is, whether
they look forward to a completion of the scheme of God, and assert a fact which
is not to take place, till that scheme shall be completed. This is Dr. C's
idea: he says, they they evidently look forward to the completion of that
scheme; he says it merely; he gives no reason to prove it. The context gives no
suggestions of such an idea. It may be presumed, that Dr. C. himself did not
imagine, that the song of the four beasts and four and twenty elders, contained
in verse 9th, etc. looked forward to the completion of the scheme of God. It
was evidently sung on occasion of the Lamb's taking the book sealed with seven
seals, and before any of these seals were opened. Nor is there the least hint,
but that what is described in the 13th verse, took place on the same occasion:
but the narration naturally implies that it did then take place. The 14th verse
confirms the construction now given. And the four beasts said, Amen. And the
four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped him that lives forever and
ever. These words are evidently a part of the song mentioned in the 9th verse,
as it was sung by the same four beasts and four and twenty elders. Whereas
according to Dr. C's construction of the 13th verse, they are either a song
which is to be sung after the completion of the scheme of God; or though they
are a part of the song mentioned in the 9th verse, the apostle's account of
that song is interrupted by inserting in the midst of it, a song to be sung by
all mankind, after the completion of the scheme of God. -- To assert therefore,
that the fact of the 13th verse did not take place on the occasion of the
lamb's taking the book; but is to take place ages of ages after the end of this
world; and to support this assertion by no proof or reason, is to act an
unreasonable part: especially considering the context and the difficulties
attending that construction.

THESE words appear to contain a figurative representation of all creatures
joining in joy and praise to the Father and the lamb on occasion of Christ's
taking and being about to open the seals of the book sealed with the seven
seals; the book of providence toward the church. That such representations are
common in scripture, we have already seen, while we were considering Romans VIII,
19, etc. Therefore no argument in favor of universal salvation is afforded by
this passage.

DR. C. mentions several other texts as favoring his scheme; but says himself,
that he does not depend on them as proofs, or as "conclusive in themselves." We
need not therefore spend time to remark upon them. The reader of himself will
easily conceive from the answers given to those on which he does depend as
conclusive, what answers would be given to the rest.

TOWARD the close of that part of his book, which contains the direct evidence
of universal salvation, Dr. C. comes down wonderfully, seems to relent, and to
be scared at the result of his own reasoning. He owns, that after all, he may
be mistaken; that concerning the state which he supposes will succeed the next
state, neither the prophets, Jesus Christ, nor the apostles, have spoken in
plain and explicit language, leaving no room for doubt. P. 252, 253.
How these mild concessions are reconcilable with his many previous
declarations, that his arguments are at least in his opinion, " evident," "
decisive," " unanswerably strong;" that it is " positively affirmed" (in Romans
VIII. 19, etc.) "that they -- shall be instated in immortal glory;" that "it is
absolutely declared in this passage of scripture," (Romans V. 12, etc,) "that
they" (mankind universally) "shall be made righteous," etc, etc. remains to be
pointed out.

CHAP. XIII. In which Dr. C's scheme is considered, with a reference to his
ideas of human liberty and moral agency.
IT is an essential part of the system of Dr. C. and of the generality of the
advocates for universal salvation, that all fixed certainty of any actions of
men, whether external or internal, is inconsistent with liberty and moral
agency in those actions. -- That this is really a tenet of the Doctor may
appear from the following quotations.

HE says, Benev. of the Deity, P. 219.
Such exertions of the Deity, as shall be certainly effectual to restrain them
[free agents] from perverting their faculties, look like a moral impossibility,
or a method of conducting toward free agents, which is unfit, in the reason of
things, as not being suited to the nature of such kind of beings. He considers
it as Ibid.
" inconsistent with the powers bestowed" on free agents, if by any extrinsic
power, their faculties are unavoidably put into exercise in one certain way
only. He asks, If motives should in all cases be set in such a strong and
powerful light, as that no wrong choice could be made -- how could such a
method of operation consist with the proper powers of free agents? It does not
appear to the human mind, a thing fit, that they [free agents] should be thus
irresistibly guided by any extrinsic power, though it were even divine. And
much more to the same effect is to be found in various parts of our author's
writings. Indeed it is indisputably his scheme of liberty and moral agency,
that if any power or cause extrinsic to the will itself, should either
certainly and effectually restrain free agents from perverting their faculties
to sin and vice; or certainly and effectually influence them to exercise their
faculties in repentance and virtue, or in any one way; it would be entirely
inconsistent with liberty and moral agency.

THAT Doctor C. also held, that the future repentance and salvation of all men,
is certain, and that this certainty is caused and established by a cause
extrinsic to the will of all men, is evident in the following passages out of
many, P. 244.
God -- really meant -- an engagement, that mankind universally should, in due
time -- resemble Abraham in his moral temper -- which is the same thing with
their being blessed in Christ, or being reduced BY HIM under moral subjection
to the government of God. P. 85.
"They" (all men) will be wrought upon sooner or later in a moral way, such an
one as is adjusted to moral agents, to become righteous persons. P. 86.
It is absolutely declared in this passage of scripture, that they shall be
made righteous, -- Unless they are thus made righteous etc. -- God -- has
absolutely and unconditionally determined -- that all men, the whole race of
lapsed Adam shall finally reign in life, and be prepared for that state, by
being formed into righteous persons. P. 22.
It is the purpose of God -- that mankind universally -- shall certainly and
finally be saved. He speaks P. 231.
of some persons as " infallibly selected for salvation." -- In these passages
it is manifest, that Dr. C. held, not only an absolute infallible certainty of
the salvation of some, yea of all men; but that this certainty is established
by God, and is the effect of his determination, and also, that all men will
finally be brought to repentance, to the moral temper of Abraham, to a moral
subjection to the government of God: and that they shall be made righteous, and
" formed into righteous persons:" all which expressions imply a cause extrinsic
to the will of man, which cause effectually and certainly operates to lead him
to repentance, or to an exercise in one certain way only. How these things can
be reconciled with the Doctor's avowed principles of liberty and moral agency,
is hard to be conceived.

NOR was it through inattention, that the Doctor held an extrinsic cause
certainly operating on the minds of men. It is a doctrine essential and
important in his scheme, that all the damned will be finally and certainly
brought to repentance, and brought to repentance by the torments of hell too.
Are not those torments a cause extrinsic to the human will? If that cause be
certainly effectual to lead the damned to repentance, what, on the Doctor's
plan, becomes of their moral agency? If that cause be not certainly effectual
to lead them all to repentance; it is not certain that all men will be saved --
So that on the plan of the Doctor's book, either his grand doctrine of the
final certain salvation of all men, by a disciplinary punishment, must be given
up, or it must be supposed, that all who are in that way saved, are divested of
their moral agency and are reduced to mere machines.

INDEED if the salvation of all men be certain, and it be certain that all men
will repent; it is by some cause or other made certain. That which is now a
certain futurity, was a certain futurity from the beginning; yea from eternity.
As it is now a certain futurity, that Christ will come to judgment, so it was
certain from the beginning. Therefore if it be now a certain futurity, that all
men will repent and be saved, it was a certain futurity from the beginning; and
that certainty was established by some cause: and that cause must have been
extrinsic to the wills of men; because both the certainty and the cause of it
existed before the existence of men or their wills. -- So that if it be a real
and certain truth, that all men will be saved, to prove which, Dr. C. wrote his
whole book, it is equally certain on his plan, that all men are divested of
their moral agency.

SHOULD it be still pleaded, that this certainty of the salvation of all men,
is not effected by any cause extrinsic to the wills of those, who are to be
saved, but by their wills themselves; the absurdity of this supposition must be
glaring to every man on the slightest reflection. A great part of those who are
to be saved, are not as yet in existence: and it will not be pretended that
their wills can have produced an effect, or established a certainty, before
they exist. And doubtless Dr. C. and other universalists would allow, that the
salvation of those who are in existence, was as certain before their existence,
as the salvation of those is, who are in future to come into existence. But
that certainty could not, for the reason already mentioned, be the effect of
any exertion of their own wills.

BESIDE; if it were not for this absurdity, a certainty established by the will
of man with respect to the will itself, as effectually binds that will, and is
equally inconsistent with its liberty, as if that certainty were established by
any other cause. Suppose the will of any man shall establish in itself a
certain and unfailing bias to any particular action or series of actions; it
cannot be pretended that this fixed bias already established, is any more
consistent with liberty and moral agency, in the man in whom the bias exists,
than if it had been established by any other cause. If a man were to cut off
his own leg, though he might be more blamable for the act of cutting it off,
than he would be for the same act performed by another; yet the effect, as to
his subsequent inability to walk, would be the very same.

THEREFORE whatever be the cause of the certainty and fixed futurity of the
repentance and salvation of all men; the doctrine of the certain salvation of
all men, is on Dr. C's plan of liberty, wholly inconsistent with human liberty,
and implies that all men are, and ever have been, mere machines.

IN vain does Dr. C. endeavor to relieve this difficulty, by observing in
various passages, as in one of the quotations above, That this repentance is
brought about in a moral way, such an one as is adjusted to moral agents. For
he has told us that such exertions of the Deity, as shall be certainly
effectual to restrain free agents from perverting their faculties, and such an
influence of any extrinsic power, motives or whatever, as shall* unavoidably
put their faculties into exercise in one way only, are not adjusted to moral
agents; but are inconsistent with their proper powers. Therefore, according to
the Doctor, it is not in the power of the Deity himself, certainly and
infallibly to lead all men, in a moral way, to repentance. It is a direct
contradiction. And though he observes, P. 167.
That that being who is infinitely perfect will be able, in a moral way,
finally to counteract human obstinacy; he is utterly mistaken, if there be any
truth in his idea of liberty. If God were to overcome human obstinacy, an
extrinsic cause would effectually and certainly incline the human faculties to
an exercise in one way; winch the Doctor says is inconsistent with moral agency.

THE Doctor tells us, P. 344, 345.
that to represent hell to the view of sinners in such a striking light, as
that they should be irresistibly stopped in their wicked pursuits, would not
comport with their free agency. Yet he supposes, that to be in hell, and to
feel its torments so strikingly as to be certainly and infallibly stopped in
wicked pursuits, and thus to be brought to repentance, is to be brought to
repentance in a moral way, entirely comporting with free agency.

UPON Dr. C's plan of liberty, there not only is not, and cannot be, any
certainty, that all men will be saved; but there is not, and cannot be, any
certainty that any one man will be saved. The Divine Being himself cannot make
it certain, without destroying moral agency. Not any of the promises of the
gospel give us assurance of the salvation of any man: nor is it in the power of
God to give a promise of salvation which shall insure the event, so long as men
remain moral agents. Therefore it was to no purpose that Dr. C. quoted so many
promises and scriptural declarations to prove the salvation of all men.

ON the same hypothesis concerning liberty, even though all men were delivered
from hell and admitted to heaven, there would be no certainty that they would
continue there. They would be constantly liable to sin anew, and bring on
themselves a second damnation. To deny this, would be, to allow that their
faculties might consistently with moral agency, be certainly and fixedly
inclined to "exercise themselves in one way only."

THAT the inhabitants of heaven are liable to sin and damnation, is actually
allowed by honest Bishop Newton. This life is indeed a state of trial, See
Newton's works, vol. VI. p. 361.
but not a trial to fix our fate forever, without any possibility of changing
for better or for worse, in the world to come. For if the righteous can be but
righteous, and the wicked can be but wicked, and cannot act otherwise; there is
an utter end of all freedom of will and morality of action. Their virtue ceases
to be virtue, and their sin is no longer sin. -- The scripture P. 362.
assures us, that in the next life men will be made (Luke XX. 36.) equal unto
the angels; but angels, we know, have apostatized and and fallen; and why may
not men, even when made equal unto the angels? -- If righteousness P. 360.
should degenerate and become wickedness; or if wickedness should amend and
become righteousness; the tables would then be turned, and with the change of
their nature, their state and condition would be changed too. How then is it
certain that all men will be finally holy and happy? It neither is, nor can
possibly be certain; because certainty in this case would imply that the
righteous can be but righteous; and so there would be an utter end of all
freedom of will and morality of action.

WHAT then becomes of the boasted evidence of the final salvation of all men?
There is no certain evidence of it. There is not, nor can be, on this scheme of
liberty, any certain evidence but that all men will finally apostatize, and of
course be doomed to misery correspondent to their wickedness.

IT is true, the Bishop abundantly contradicts this sentiment concerning
liberty, and holds that the damned must repent, and cannot but repent, as in
the following passages; It is impossible for any creature to live in eternal
torments -- If nothing else yet his own sensations and feelings must bring him
one time or other, to an acknowledgement of his sin and of his duty. P. 362.
-- The fire must in time purge away and consume the dross and leave only the
gold behind. No creature can be so totally depraved and abandoned, as to hold
out under the most exquisite tortures, obstinate and obdurate to all eternity.
-- In short, if they have any sense or feeling, any reason or understanding,
any choice or free will, they must one time or other, sooner or later, be
brought to repentance. P. 364.
Tortures upon tortures, tortures without end, no creatures of the least sense
or feeling can support; but must all be brought to submission at last: and they
had much better make a virtue of necessity P. 366.
-- Virtue then is consistent with necessity. How is this idea consistent with
what has been before quoted from this same author? But inconsistence and self
contradiction relieve no difficulty.

FROM the same hypothesis it follows that God himself does not and cannot
possibly govern mankind with certainty; that there is no foundation to pray for
any event which depends on the volitions of our own minds, or those of other
men; that there is no ground for confidence in the divine providence; and that
it is impossible that any future free actions of men, or any events depending
on those actions, should be certainly foretold, or even foreknown by God
himself; because what is absolutely uncertain, cannot be certainly known, and
what is certainly known is certainly fixed and determined. But it is not
consistent with my design to enlarge on the endless absurdities of this scheme
of human liberty, absurdities from which, though long since pointed out to
belong to that scheme, the ablest advocates for it, have not been able, and it
is presumed never will be able, to clear it.

CHAP. XIV. A reply to Dr. C's answers to the arguments in favor of endless
punishment, drawn from those texts, which declare the punishment of the damned
to be everlasting, forever, forever and ever, and the fire of hell to be
unquenchable,
DOCTOR C. says, P. 258.
that the misery of the damned is said to be eternal or everlasting, in five
texts only in all the New Testament. Whatever was intended by this ambiguous
proposition, the fact doubtless is, that many of his readers have been grossly
deceived by it, as they have been led to believe, that the doctrine of endless
punishment is apparently taught, in no more than five texts in all the New
Testament; or that no more than five texts can be produced, the words of which
seem to import an endless punishment. Whereas, all that Dr. C. or any man can
pretend is, that the punishment of the damned is in five texts only, in the New
Testament, asserted to be eternal, by the use of the adjective (...), commonly
translated eternal or everlasting. It cannot be pretended, but that the texts
in which the punishment of the damned is in some manner or other declared to be
eternal, and in words as determinate, as the adjective, (...), eternal, far
exceed the number five. The five texts now referred to, do not comprise any of
those, in which the damned are said to be punished forever, forever and ever;
to be punished by a worm that dies not, and a fire that is not quenched; to be
confined by an impassable gulf; to be shut out from the kingdom of heaven; not
to see life, etc. etc. etc.

NOW what follows from this circumstance, that the punishment of the damned is
in five texts only, in the New Testament, declared to be eternal, by the
application of the Greek adjective, (...)? It may still be declared to be
eternal, by other words equally determinate, in above five hundred texts.

OR if there were no other texts, expressing in other words, endless
punishment; are not five divine asseverations of any truth, sufficient to bind
our faith? If five be not sufficient for this end, neither are five thousand.

BESIDES; all that Dr C. says on this head, may be justly retorted: and if his
observations in page 259, 260, be of any force to show, that the doctrine of
endless punishment is not caught in the scriptures; just as forcibly may it be
proved, that the damned will not be punished for an age. Supposing, as Dr. C.
does, that the words (...), etc. do not mean an endless duration, but the
duration of an age; I might say, The misery of the wicked is said to be for an
age, in only five texts, in all in all the New Testament: Upon which I cannot
help making a pause to express my surprise to find the sacred writers so very
sparing in the use of this word age, as referring to future torments. It is
used but three times by Matthew; but once by Mark; but once by Paul; and not
once by the other writers of the New Testament. All which is very
extraordinary, if it be a doctrine of Christianity, that the wicked are to be
punished for an age. -- And the omissions of the sacred writers upon this head,
are a strong presumptive argument, that they know nothing of this doctrine,
which has been so vehemently pleaded for in these latter days, by Dr. C. and
some others. Therefore, whenever it shall be proved, that notwithstanding the
rare use of the word age, with a reference to the punishment of the wicked,
that punishment will really last for an age; it is presumed, that it can be
proved from the same topics, that it will last without end. -- If a word,
signifying an age, applied five times to future punishment, prove that
punishment to continue for an age; why will not a word signifying an endless
duration, applied five times to that punishment, prove it to be without end?
Nothing therefore can be concluded from the number of times, (...), eternal, is
applied to future punishment. The whole question, in this state of it, depends
on the proper meaning of the word; not at all on the frequency of its use.

DR. C. says, P. 260.
That (...) and (...) may signify a limited duration; and that from this remark
it follows, that the preceding evidence in favor of universal salvation,
remains strong and valid. It is acknowledged, that if those words may signify,
and all things considered, do as probably signify, a limited, as an unlimited
duration, when applied to the punishment of the wicked; nothing either for or
against endless punishment, can be concluded from the use of those words. It is
also, on the same suppositions, acknowledged, that by that application of those
words, the evidence which Dr. C. has exhibited in favor of the salvation of
all men, is not at all impaired. But it is not granted, that those words, when
applied to the punishment of the wicked, do as probably signify a limited as
unlimited duration. Nor is it granted that Dr. C's evidence of universal
salvation is valid. Though we should grant that it remains unimpaired by the
words (...) and (...), eternity and eternal; yet it may be utterly invalidated
by other considerations: and that this is in fact the case, I have endeavored
already, and shall further endeavor to show; how successfully, is submitted to
the reader.

THE Doctor manifestly argues, on this head from possibility to probability,
and even to fact. He says, P. 261.
If (...) may signify a period of time only, there is not a shadow of an
interference between its connection with the punishment of wicked men, and
their being finally saved: i. e. If it may possibly signify a period of time
only, it is absolutely certain, that when it is applied to future punishment,
it does signify a period of time only. The inconclusiveness of such
argumentation must be manifest to every reader. In the same manner it is easy
to prove, that there is not the shadow of an interference between the
connection of (...), eternal, with the life and happiness of the righteous, and
their final damnation.

THE Doctor P. 261.
says, These words, (...) and (...) are evidently more loose and general in
their meaning, than the English words eternity, everlasting -- If it were not
so, how comes it to pass, that (...) and (...) will not always bear being
translated eternity, everlasting? By the same argument it may be proved, that
the words eternity and everlasting in our language, are more loose and general
in their meaning, than the Greek (...) and (...). We frequently say, such a man
is an everlasting talker, or he talks eternally; he is eternally slandering and
quarrelling with his neighbors. But according to Dr. C's sense of the Greek
words (...) and (...), the English phrases just mentioned cannot be properly
translated, by the use of those Greek words. The Doctor says, they properly
mean the duration of an age. But when it is said, a man talks eternally, the
meaning is not, that he talks for an age. -- The truth is, there are idioms in
all languages, which will not bear a literal translation into any other
language. -- The circumstance that (...), will not always bear to be rendered
eternity and eternal, no more proves, that they do not properly signify the
same with our words eternity and eternal, than the circumstance that they will
not always bear to be rendered an age, and during an age, proves that they do
not properly signify the duration of an age. It is said, Romans XVI. 26.
According to the commandment of the everlasting God, (...); but no man would
render this, according to the commandment of the God who lives for an age.

THE Doctor thinks that before eternal times is an impropriety in English, and
hence infers, that (...) Tit. I. 2, means a limited duration. It is presumed,
that the Doctor would not have objected to the propriety of expressing a proper
eternity, by saying, From eternity, from everlasting, from eternal ages. Yet in
reality there is as great an impropriety in these expressions, as in that which
the Doctor pronounces an impropriety. Understood strictly and literally they
imply, that there is a point at which eternity began, and from eternity is from
that point. The very use of the preposition from implies this. It implies, that
the computation is made from something, at which eternity began. This something
must strictly be some time, or some point in endless duration. So that from
eternity taken strictly, is as real and as great an impropriety as before
eternity or before eternal times. The same is observable of to eternity. Yet
from eternity and to eternity, are in fact used among us to express an absolute
eternity: and how does it appear absurd, that the apostle should express the
same idea by a phrase, in which no greater impropriety is naturally implied,
and which may as well, and in the same way, as the phrases from eternity and to
eternity, be made properly to signify an absolute eternity? The impropriety
supposed to be in the expression, Before eternal times, is, that it implies a
beginning to eternity. The same is implied in the expression from eternity: and
in the phrase to eternity it is implied that there is an end to eternity. But I
mean not to insist on this: I do but just mention it, to show, that Dr. C's
most favorite proof, that (...) means a temporary duration, is not
demonstrative.

THE Doctor further observes, P. 263.
The particles (...) and (...), are sometimes added in the Septuagint, to the
word (...). Whereas, should we add the English words answerable to those Greek
particles, to the term eternity, it would make evident nonsense. The Doctor was
mistaken: we do say forevermore, forever and ever, forever and for aye. Yet no
man will hence infer, that in our language the words forever do not properly
mean an endless duration, or that forever and ever implies an addition to
eternity.

DOCTOR C. insists, P. 264 and 267.
that (...) and (...) signify nonothing more than an age, dispensation, period
of continuanee, either longer or shorter; That it is certain, this is the sense
in which they are commonly, if not always used in the sacred pages; That this
is the frequent and almost perpetual use of the words -- in the sacred
writings. It is by no means granted, nor has the Doctor made it evident, that
this is almost the perpetual use of those words, especially in the New
Testament. (...) reckoning the reduplications of it, as (...), to be but single
instances of its use, occurs in the New Testament in one hundred and four
instances; in thirty-two of which, it means a temporary duration. The places
are, Matt. XII. 32. XIII. 22, 39, 40, 49. XXIV. 3. XXVIII. 20. Mark IV. 19.
Luke I. 70. XVI. 8. XX. 34, 35. Acts III. 21. Romans XII. 2. 1 Cor. I. 20. II. 6,
twice, 7, 8. III. 18. X. 11. 2 Cor. IV. 4. Gal. I. 4. Ephesians. I. 21. II. 2. VI.
12. 1 Timothy VI. 17. 2 Timothy IV. 10. Tit. II. 12. Heb. I. 2. IX. 26. XI. 3.
In seven, it may be taken in either the temporary or endless sense. The places
are, Mark X. 30. Luke XVIII. 30. John IX. 32. Ephesians. II. 7. III. 9. Col. I. 26.
Heb. VI. 5.
In sixty-five, including six instances in which it is applied to future
punishment, it plainly signifies an endless duration. The places are as
follows; Matt. VI. 13. XXI. 19. Mark XI. 14. Luke I. 33, 55. John IV. 14. VI.
51, 58. VIII. 35, twice, 51, 52, X. 28. XI. 26. XII. 34. XIII. 8. XIV. 16. Acts
XV. 18. Rom I. 25. IX. 5. XI. 36. XVI. 27. 1 Cor. VIII. 13. 2 Cor. IX. 9. XI.
31. Gal. I. 5. Ephesians. III. 11, 21. Phil. IV. 20. 1 Timothy I. 17, twice, 2 Timothy IV.
18. Heb. I. 8. V. 6. VI. 20. VII. 17, 21, 24, 28. XIII. 8, 21. 1 Pet. I. 23,
25. IV. 11. V. 11. 2 Pet. III. 18. 1 John II. 17. 2 John 2. Rev. I. 6, 18. IV.
9, 10. V. 13, 14. VII. 12. X. 6. XI. 15. XV. 7. XXII. 5. -- The six instances
in which it is applied to future punishment, are, Mark III. 29. 2 Pet. II. 17.
Jud. 13. Rev. XIV. 11. XIX. 3. XX. 10.
How then could Dr. C. say, that it is commonly if not always used in the
sacred pages, to signify an age or dispensation only? and that this is almost
the perpetual use of it?

BUT if (...) used absolutely did generally signify a mere temporary duration;
it would not thence follow, that it has the same restricted signification, when
governed by the preposition (...). It is never applied to future punishment,
but in this construction. In the whole New Testament, it is used in this
construction, sixty-one times, in six of which it is applied to future
punishment. In this construction it is found in all the texts mentioned in the
last marginal note, except Acts XV. 18. Ephesians. III. 11, 21. Once in 1 Timothy I. 17,
and 2 Pet. III. 18.

I have been thus particular in noting all the texs, in which (...) occurs in
the New Testament, that the reader may examine them and judge for himself,
whether I have given a just representation of the use of that word by the
inspired writers.


That in all the remaining fifty-five it is used in the endless sense, I appeal
to the reader. If in those fifty-five instances it be used in the endless
sense; this surely is a ground of strong presumption, that in the six
instances, in which it is applied to future punishment, it is used in the same
sense.

THE adjective (...) is still more unfavourable to Dr. C's system, than the
substantive (...). It is found in seventy-one places in the whole New
Testament; sixty-six, beside the five in which Dr. C. allows it is applied to
future punishment. The places are, Matt. XIX. 16, 29. XXV. 46. Mark X. 17.30.
Luke X. 25. XVI. 9. XVIII. 18, 30. John III. 15, 16, 36. IV. 14, 36. V. 24, 39.
VI. 27, 40, 47, 54, 68. X. 28. XII. 25, 50. XVII. 2.3. Acts XIII. 46, 48. Romans
II. 7. V. 21. VI. 22, 23. XVI. 25, 26. 2 Cor. IV. 17, 18. V. 1. Gal. VI. 8. 2 Thessalonians. II. 16. 1 Timothy I. 16. VI. 12, 16, 19. 2 Timothy I. 9. II. 10. Tit. I. 2,
twice. III. 7. Philem. 15. Heb. V. 9. VI. 2. IX. 12, 14, 15. XIII. 20. 1 Pet.
V. 10. 2 Pet. I. 11. 1 John I. 2. II. 25. III. 15. V. 11, 13, 20. Jud. 7, 21.
Rev. XIV. 6. -- The five texts in which Dr. C. allows (...) to be applied to
future punishment are, Matt. XVIII. 8. XXV. 41, 46. Mark III. 29. 2 Thessalonians. I.
9. To which is to be added, Jude 7.
In every one of the sixty-six instances, except two, 2 Timothy I. 9; and Tit. I.
2; it may, to say the least, be understood in the endless sense. If beside the
two instances just mentioned, Romans XVI. 25. Philem. 15. Heb. VI. 2; and Jude 7,
should be pleaded, which I think are all that any universalist will pretend do
contain a limited sense; it may be observed concerning Romans XVI. 25, that (...)
may, with at least as great truth and propriety, be rendered mystery kept
secret during the eternal or unlimited past ages, or from eternity, as, mystery
kept secret since the world began. -- The literal construction of Philem. 15,
16, is, That thou might receive him eternal, no longer as a servant, but
above a servant, a brother; or more briefly thus; That thou might receive
him as an eternal brother. That Onesimus was, in the endless sense, become an
eternal brother to Philemon, and that as such he ought to be received by
Philemon, cannot be disputed, provided they both were, as the apostle supposed
them to be, real Christians. -- The final judgment intended in Heb. VI. 2, may
with the same propriety be called an endless judgment, because it refers to an
endless duration to follow; as it may be called the judgment of an age or
dispensation, because it refers to an age or dispensation which shall then have
been past. -- As to the fire suffered by the Sodomites, if the text mean the
fire of hell, then Jude 7, is to be added to the five texts, in which it is
acknowledged (...) refers to future punishment. If it mean the fire in which
they and their city were consumed in this world, it can be called eternal, or
(...), with respect to the effect only: and to say that this effect is to last
for a limited time only, is the same as to say, that the Sodomites are finally
to be saved; which is to beg the grand question.

AS to 2 Timothy I. 9, and Tit. I. 2, without insisting on what has been observed
in page 249, 250, if it should be granted, that in these two instances (...) is
used in a limited sense, I conceive no injury would result to the doctrine for
which I plead. It will not be disputed that the words eternal and everlasting
in our language, are sometimes used in a limited sense: and perhaps no book
written in the English language, especially written by so many different
authors, and at such distant times, as the New Testament, can be found, in
which the word eternal is used seventy times, and not twice at least in the
limited sense.

AS the proper meaning of the word (...) is so much insisted on by Dr. C. and
as he triumphs in the idea, that it is almost perpetually, by the sacred
writers, used in the limited sense, I must beg the patience of the reader,
while I descend to the consideration of the particular texts, in which it
occurs. In forty-four of the forementioned sixty-six texts, (...) is applied to
the future life of the righteous, and therefore is used in the endless sense.
If this be not allowed, it will follow, that there is no promise, no security
of an endless life to the righteous, or to any of mankind, and of course
universal salvation must be given up; as shall be more particularly shown
presently. In Luke XVI. 9, it is applied to the celestial habitations of the
righteous: in 2 Cor. IV. 17, to the future glory of the righteous: in 2 Cor. V.
1, to their house in heaven: in 2 Thessalonians. II. 16, to their consolation: in 2 Timothy II. 10, to their future glory: in Heb. V. 9. to their salvation: in Heb.
IX. 15, to their future inheritance. That in these seven instances it is used
in the endless sense, will doubtless be granted, by all those who allow this to
be the sense of it in the preceding forty-four. In Feb. IX. 12, it is applied
to the redemption of Christ: in Heb. XIII. 20, to the covenant of grace: in
Rev. XIV. 6, to the gospel. That in these three instances, it is used in the
endless sense, it is presumed, there can be no dispute among Christians. The
sense is still more determinate, when it is applied to the Deity or his
perfections, as it is to God himself, in Romans XVI. 9: to the divine power, in 2 Timothy VI, 16: to the divine glory, in 1 Pet. V. 10: to the Holy Ghost, in Heb.
IX. 14 -- In 2 Cor. IV. 18, it is applied to things unseen, as opposed to
things seen: and to suppose, that in this instance it means the duration of an
age or dispensation only, would destroy all opposition between things seen and
things unseen; because many of the former continue for an nge or dispensation,
as well as the latter. The bare writing of this passage, so as to express a
limited duration, sufficiently confutes that sense: thus, The things which are
seen, are temporal; but the things which are unseen, continue for an age or
dispensation. -- In 2 Pet. I. 11, (...), is applied to the kingdom of Christ. I
am aware, that the believers in Dr. C's book, will hold, that in this instance,
it is used in the limited sense, because according to that book, the kingdom of
Christ is of mere temporary continuance. To assert this however is a mere
begging of a question in dispute. That this kingdom is not of mere temporary
continuance, some reasons have been urged to show. See Chap. XII. P. 234, etc.
How forceable those reasons are, is submitted to the reader. -- Now these
texts, together with 2 Timothy I. 9. Tit. I. 2. Romans XVI. 25. Philem. 15. Heb. VI.
2, and Jude 7, which were before considered, make up the whole sixty-six.

FOR the truth of this account of the use of (...) in the New Testament, I
appeal to all who are acquainted with the Greek testament, or are capable of
examining it. And if (...) be used seventy one times in the whole; sixty-six
times beside those instances, in which it is allowed to be applied to future
punishment: and if in all those sixty-six instances, except two, it certainly
mean, or at least may fairly and most naturally be understood to mean, an
endless duration; if in all, except six, it must necessarily be understood in
the endless sense; what are we hence naturally, and may I not say, necessarily,
led to conclude, concerning those instances, in which it is applied to the
punishment of the wicked? Doubtless that in those instances too it is used in
the endless sense.

BUT what are we to think of Dr. C's saying, that this word is, in the sacred
pages, most frequently and almost perpetually, used in the limited sense? With
all his parade of Greek learning, and of a thorough acquaintance with the Greek
testament, was he in reality so little acquainted with it, as to fall into such
an egregious mistake? If it should be here pleaded in defense of Dr. C. that he
suposed (...) to be used in the limited sense, in all those instances in which
it is applied to the future life of the righteous; and that on this
supposition, it is almost perpetually used in the limited sense: it may be
observed, that Dr. C. did indeed suppose this; and he might as well have
supposed, that the same word applied to future punishment is used in the
limited sense. This latter supposition would have been no more a begging of the
question than the former. But of this more presently.

DR. C. P. 272.
thinks it is evident from the very texts that are brought to prove the strict
eternity of hell torments, that they contain no such doctrine. This proposition
is supported by the following considerations -- That in two texts the word
everlasting is applied to the fire of hell, not to the punishment or misery of
the wicked -- That fire in its own nature tends to an end, and will by the laws
of nature necessarily in time come to an end -- That fire powerfully tends to
bring on a dissolution of those bodies that are cast into it.

1. THAT the word everlasting is applied, in two texts, to the fire, not to the
punishment, of hell; hence the Doctor infers, in words which he quotes with
approbation from Nichol Scot, that though the fire be without end, it will not
follow, that every individual subject, which is cast into it, must be so too.
P. 272.
Did the Doctor then believe, that some of the subjects of hellfire will not
exist without end, but will be annihilated? This is to give up the salvation of
all men. -- Besides; that the fire of hell will be kept up without end, and
therefore eternal ages after all the subjects shall be either annihilated or
delivered out of it, is a mere conjecture, unsupported by any evidence from
scripture or reason. As well might the Doctor have said, The saints will indeed
be received to everlasting habitations; the habitations will be strictly
without end; but the saints will, after a while, be all either annihilated or
sent to hell. -- What if the word everlasting be in two instances applied to
the fire of hell? In other instances it is applied to the punishment, to the
destruction, to the smoke of the torment, and to the torment itself of the
damned, Rev. XX. 10, "And" [they] shall be tormented, day and night, forever
and ever. And if, when applied to the fire, it prove that to be without end,
doubtless when applied to the punishment, to the destruction, to the torment,
it equally proves them to be without end.

2. THAT fire as such naturally tends to an end, and will, in time, by the laws
of nature, actually come to an end. P. 273.
-- This, like many other of Dr. C's arguments, if it prove any thing, proves
too much, and therefore really proves nothing. It depends on this very false
principle* that whatever, according to the laws of nature, established in this
world, would, without an immediate divine interposition, come to an end, will
certainly come to an end in the future world. Now according to this principle,
all the bodies of both sinners and saints, in the future world, as well as
this, will be dissolved. Nay, as their souls too are constantly upholden in
existence by the agency of God, and would in their own nature immediately cease
to exist, were it not for that continued agency; it follows, according to the
principle now under consideration, that all the souls of both sinners and
saints will actually come to an end, in the future world. But as this
consequence will be rejected, and as it will be granted, that the souls of all
men will, by the agency of God, be upholden without end; so the same agency
will be sufficient, to continue the fire of hell without end; and that whether
it be material fire or not. If it be not material fire, it does not, in its own
nature, more tend to an end, than the souls of men, or the faculties of those
souls. If it be material fire, still it may, as was just now observed, be
perpetuated to an absolute eternity.

IF this argument from the tendency of fire to an end, be of any force, it will
overthrow Dr. C's scheme, equally as the contrary. For it is equally the
tendency of all the fire, of which we have any experience, to come to an end,
in a short time, as to come to an end at all. No fire in this world will,
without new supplies of fuel, last for ages of ages, or even for one age. But
with a proper supply of fuel, any fire may be kept up without end. If therefore
we are to conclude, that the fire of hell will come to an end, because the fire
of which we have knowledge, will without a new and constant supply of fuel,
come to an end; we are also to conclude, that the fire of hell will come to an
end, before the expiration of one age. -- Indeed God can make the fire of hell
last for an age: and he can with equal ease make it last without end. Nay, he
can make our common fire last without end. The same power which shall make our
bodies immortal, can make our common fire strictly eternal. To this end the
nature of that fire needs no greater alteration, than the nature of our bodies
needs, to render them immortal.

THE Doctor informs P. 274.
us, that he sees not but an age, dispensation or period, for the continuance
of this fire, will very well answer the full import of the word (...),
everlasting; especially, if we suppose this age to last till the fire has
accomplished the end, for which it was enkindled. -- But it is not allowed by
the opponents of the Doctor, that the fire will ever have accomplished the end,
for which it was enkindled: and to argue on that supposition, is to take for
granted, what is as much in dispute, as any subject of this whole controversy.
-- He adds, The words concerning Sodom and Gomorrah, They are set forth for an
example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, import no more than this,
that this fire lasted till it had accomplished the design of heaven, in the
destruction of those cities, for a standing example of the divine vengeance Let
it be remembered, that Dr. C. is a bitter enemy to vindictive punishment.
to after ages. And the fire of hell is doubtless called everlasting for the
like reason. According to this then, the word everlasting, etc, applied to
future punishment, gives no evidence, that that punishment is to last longer,
than the time, during which the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were in consuming,
or longer than one day: and the flood of Noah, as it lasted till it had
accomplished the design of heaven in the destruction of the old world, for a
standing public example of the divine vengeance to after ages, was an eternal
flood: The deaths of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, of Nadab and Abihu, of Zimri and
Cosbi, etc, etc, were for the same reasons eternal deaths. -- But how is this
sense of everlasting consistent with that for which Dr. C. abundantly contends,
that it signifies the duration of an age? And if "the fire of hell be doubtless
called everlasting," in the former sense, how does it appear, that it ever is,
or that it can consistently be, called everlasting in the latter sense?

3. Fire powerfully tends to bring on a solution of continuity, in those
bodies, that are cast into it; therefore the punishment of hell is not endless.
P. 276.
So fire tends to bring on a dissolution of the human body in a very short
time, in one hour, or in a much shorter time: therefore the punishment of hell
will not last for ages of ages, or for one age, or even for one day. This
argument is just as conclusive, as that now quoted from Dr. C. He who can make
an human body endure the fire of hell for an age, can make it endure the same
fire, for an endless succession of ages. Therefore though fire does powerfully
tend to bring on a dissolution of those bodies, which are cast into it, it by
no means thence follows, either that such dissolution will be effected in the
wicked; or that their torment will ever come to an end.

The Doctor proceeds P. 277.
to argue, that future punishment will not be endless, because the wicked are
not said to live always in torment without dying; or that their bodies shall be
immortal, or incorruptible, or indissoluble: but that they shall reap
corruption, be destroyed, perish, undergo death. On this passage it may be
remarked,

1. THAT by dying, corruption, destruction, perishing, the second death, he
evidently means something different from torment; as he sets those terms in
opposition to torment or misery. Yet he tells us in the very same page, that
the second death, which wicked men shall pass through, and their being cast
into the lake of fire, mean -- one and the same thing. In other parts of his
book, he declares, that everlasting destruction evidently means misery, P. 224.
-- that the being cast into the furnace of fire, where there shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth, means the same thing, in the sacred dialect, with the
second death, P. 210.
-- that the scripture expresses going through the torments of hell, by being
hurt of the second death. P. 337.


2. IF by death, destruction, etc, Dr. C. mean any thing different from the
torment of the damned, it seems he must mean, either annihilation, or a
dissolution of the connection of the souls and bodies of the damned, and their
transition from the state, in which they are to be immediately after this life,
to the next succeeding state. If he mean the former, it is indeed opposed to
their endless misery, and equally opposed to their final salvation. If he mean
a transition of the damned to some other state, this is no proof against
endless misery; because the Doctor himself supposes, that the damned, or some
of them at least, will pass through several succeeding states of misery. And
let them pass through ever so many succeeding states, there is no evidence
arising from this bare transition, that they will ever be saved. So that let
the Doctor mean, in this case, what he will, by death, destruction, etc, those
words are either not at all opposed to the endless misery of the wicked, or
they are equally opposed to their endless happiness. Whether they do mean
annihilation or not, has been already considered in Chap. V. The truth
undoubtedly is, what Dr. C. himself abundantly holds, though in writing this
passage, he seems to have forgotten it; that the death, destruction,
corruption, second death of the damned, is their misery or torment, the smoke
of which shall ascend forever and ever, and in which in Rev. XX. 10, they are
expressly said to be tormented forever and ever.

3. IF the express words The wicked shall always live in torment, without
dying, be not written in scripture, yet it is there written, that they shall go
into everlasting punishment; that the smoke of their torment shall ascend
forever and ever, that they shall be tormented forever and ever, etc. In Rev.
XX. 10, it is said, The devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and they shall
be tormented day and night forever and ever; (...), in the plural number. Now
so long as a person is tormented, he lives in torment without dying: and to be
tormented forever and ever, is to live always in torment without dying. What
right then had Dr. C. to say, that the wicked are not said to live always in
torment without dying? And if the very words just quoted from Dr. C. had been
inserted in the sacred volume, they might have been explained away as easily as
the expressions just now quoted from scripture, and as the many other
declarations of endless torment which are there to be found. It might have been
said, The wicked, while such, shall indeed always live in torment; but no
sooner shall they repent and become righteous, than they shall be delivered
from their torment, into endless bliss. The righteous are no more in the very
words said to be immortal in happiness, than the wicked are said to be immortal
in misery; and shall we therefore deny, that they are to be immortal in
happiness? If it had been said, that the wicked shall be incorruptible or
indissoluble in misery, it might have been pleaded, with as much plausibility,
as attends many of Dr. C's pleas, that this meant, that while they are in
misery, they are incorruptible, etc, not that they shall without end remain in
misery.

THE Doctor tells us, P. 279.
that the texts which join (...), everlasting, with the misery of the wicked,
are very few in comparison with those, which join with it a dissolution,
destruction, or death. That this observation may be at all to the purpose, it
ought to be shown -- 1. That destruction, death, etc, as applied in scripture
to the damned, are inconsistent with their endless misery, and are not at the
same time, equally inconsistent with their final salvation. -- 2. That whenever
there is a seeming inconsistency between several passages of scripture, and to
relieve the difficulty, we are necessitated to understand some of them in a
figurative sense; we are to determine, that the truth is according to the
literal tenor of the greater number, and that the minority, as in popular
assemblies, is always to give way to the majority, and complaisantly submit to
a figurative construction.

A VIEW has now been taken of Dr. C's arguments to prove, that (...) eternity
and (...), eternal, do not in the sacred writings properly mean an endless
duration. Concerning the validity of those arguments, it is the province of the
reader to judge.

WE are next to attend to the Doctor's answer to the argument drawn from the
circumstance, that the same word in scripture is used to express the duration
of the misery of the wicked, as is used to express the duration of the
happiness of the righteous, and that in the same text; as Mat. XXV. 46; "These
shall go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life."

THE Doctor's first answer to this argument is, that the state next succeeding
the present, is not final, either with respect to the wicked or the righteous:
and therefore the word eternal, even when applied to the life of the righteous,
means not an endless duration. P. 282.
For this hypothesis he gives no new reasons, but refers us to what he had said
before, which we have already considered, P. 234, etc.
and the sum of which is, that Christ's kingdom is not to continue without end,
but is at last to be delivered up to the Father; that the reward promised in
scripture to the righteous is to be bestowed upon them in this kingdom of
Christ; that that reward therefore cannot be without end. -- In opposition to
this, it has been shown, that the scriptures abundantly assure us, that the
kingdom of Christ is to be without end; and that whatever is said in scripture
concerning Christ's resignation of the kingdom to the Father, must be
understood in a consistency with the endless duration of Christ's kingdom: and
an attempt was made, to show in what sense of resigning the kingdom, a
consistency can be preserved.

FURTHER; the idea now advanced by Dr. C. cannot be admitted, in a consistency
either with the scriptures, nor with Dr. C. himself.

1. Not with the scriptures. For if Mat. XXV. 46, and the many other texts,
which promise eternal life to the righteous, do not promise them an endless
life and happiness, there is no promise of such happiness to the righteous in
all the scripture: and with at least as much plausibility, as the Doctor evades
the force of Mat. XXV. 46; may the force of any text be evaded, which can be
brought to prove the endless life of the righteous. Let us consider those,
which the Doctor supposes determine the future life and happiness of the
righteous to be endless. P. 286.
Luke XX. 36; "Neither can they die any more." This may be evaded two ways; it
may be said to mean no more, than that they shall not die during the
continuance of Christ's kingdom; and the original happily favors this
construction. (...). Neither can they die as yet; their death will be deferred
till the end of Christ's kingdom. -- It may also be evaded thus, If they cannot
die any more they may live in misery. -- 1 Cor. IX. 25; But we an incorruptible
crown. True, the crown may be incorruptible indeed! but the possessor may be
very corruptible: as Dr. C. supposes the fire of hell may be endless, though
the wicked shall all be delivered out of it in time. -- And when the bodies of
the saints are said to be raised incorruptible, to put on incorruption,
immortality, etc, this may mean indeed, that they shall exist and live, but not
that they shall be happy without end. -- We receiving a kingdom, which cannot
be moved, Heb. XII. 28; the kingdom may indeed be immovable; yet a great part
of the subjects may be removed. -- 1 Pet. I. 4; He has begotten us -- to an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away. All this may be
true concerning the inheritance, yet all the heirs from among men, of that
inheritance, may be removed from the possession of it, and in that sense, may
fade away. -- Rev. II. 11; He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second
death. He may however be hurt of the third, fourth or fifth death. -- Chap.
XXI. 4; God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death. Here also I avail myself of the original: it may be literally
rendered, The death shall not be as yet. -- 1 Thessalonians. IV. 17; So shall we be
ever with the Lord. The word ever, (...), properly signifies not endlessly, but
constantly, continually, uninterruptedly. In this sense it is manifestly used
in every other instance in the New Testament. Nor is it in any instance, beside
this 1 Thessalonians. IV. 17, applied at all to the future state. Therefore 1 Thessalonians.
IV. 17, means no more, than that the saints, while they are in heaven, shall be
uninterruptedly with Christ; as John XII. 8, means, that while we are in the
world, we uninterruptedly have the poor with us.

THUS by admitting Dr. C's sense of Mat. XXV. ^6, we erase from the scriptures
every promise of endless life and happiness to the righteous, and overthrow the
gospel. -- Indeed Dr. C. expressly holds, that there is no promise in the
gospel of endless happiness to any man; how consistently with himself, the
reader will judge. P. 222.
The reward promised, under the administration of Christ's kingdom, in the
present state, in order to persuade men to become his good and faithful
subjects, is not the final happiness God intends to bestow upon them; but the
happiness of that state, which intervenes between the resurrection and God's
being all in all. Yet P. 286, etc.
he quotes the texts remarked on in the last paragraph, and says they
determine, that the happiness of the righteous is to be endless: and were not
those texts supposed by Dr. C. to be promises, given under the administration
of Christ's kingdom, in this present state, in order to persuade men to become
his good and faithful subjects?

2. NOR is Dr. C's construction of Matt. XXV. 46, any more consistent with his
own scheme, than it is with the Bible. His whole scheme supposes, that all men
will be finally happy: and he believed that the doctrine of final happiness is
taught in scripture. He professes to ground his whole book immediately on
scripture. But if there be no promise in scripture, of endless happiness, as is
implied in his construction of Matt. XXV. 46; and as he expressly holds, in
page 222; his whole scheme falls to the ground.

THAT Dr. C. does in other parts of his book, hold that there are promises of
endless happiness, does not relieve the matter. To be inconsistent and to
contradict one's self, clears up no difficulty. Who is answerable for that
inconsistence, I need not inform the reader. It is manifest, the Doctor was
driven into this inconsistence, by the pressure of the argument from Matt. XXV.
46, That the punishment of the wicked is of the same duration with the
happiness of the righteous, because in the very same sentence it is said, The
wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the righteous into
everlasting life.

IF there be no promise in scripture, of final happiness, then all those texts
from which the Doctor argues universal salvation, are altogether impertinent,
and prove nothing to the purpose for which they are brought. A promise is an
assurance of the bestowment of some future good. If therefore, Romans V. 12, etc,
Chap. VIII. 19, etc, 1 Cor. XV. 24, etc, etc, be no promises of endless
happiness, they afford no assurance nor evidence, that all will be finally
saved.

IN the same manner in which Dr. C. restricts Matt. XXV. 46, to a limited
duration, may every text from which he argues universal salvation, be
restricted. If the life promised in the last quoted text, be a limited life; a
life to be enjoyed before the kingdom is delivered up to the Father; what
reason can be given why, in Romans V. 18, "The free gift came upon all men to
justification of life," the life promised is not the same, and of the same
limited duration? -- If life for a limited duration only be promised in Matt.
XXV. 46; then the destruction of death for a limited duration only, is of
course all that is promised in the same text. And if the destruction of death
for a limited duration only be all that is promised in Matt. XXV. 46; how does
it appear, that a destruction of death for any more than a limited duration, is
promised in 1 Cor. XV. 26, "the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death?"
-- And how strange is it, that Dr. C. should from Romans VIII. 21, The creature
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of God, argue the certain salvation of all men, when he himself
holds, that the glorious liberty promised the children of God, does not mean
final salvation.

THE Doctor's second answer to the argument from Matt. XXV. 46, is founded on
the supposition, that the next is the final state with respect to both the
righteous and the P. 282.
wicked. P. 283.
-- If the next state of the wicked be final, the Doctor abundantly declares,
that all men will not be saved. P. 11.
-- If the next state is a state of punishment not intended for the cure of the
patients themselves, -- it is impossible all men should be finally saved. P.
282.
If -- the wicked are sent to hell as so many absolute incurables, the second
death ought to be considered as that which will put an end to their existence,
both in soul and body. Thus this second answer of Dr. C, wholly depends on the
supposition, that the wicked are to be annihilated; and to evade the argument
from Mat. XXV. 46, to prove endless punishment, he is necessitated to adopt the
scheme of annihilation, and thus to give up his whole system of universal
salvation.

THE Doctor gives us three reasons to show, that even on the supposition, that
the next is the final state, it will not follow, from the endless happiness of
the righteous, that the wicked will suffer endless misery. The first reason is,
That the word everlasting, (...), when applied to the righteous, is mostly
joined with the word life: whereas this word, when applied to the wicked, is
never connected with their life, but always with the fire, or with their
damnation, punishment or destruction. P. 284.
-- Now this observation is wholly impertinent, on any other supposition, than
that the wicked are to be annihilated: for Dr. C. himself makes this
observation, supposing that the next state of the wicked will be final. And if
it be final, the wicked must be without end in that state, which is allowed by
all to be a state of misery; or they must not exist at all. -- Thus still the
Doctor is obliged to give up his favorite scheme of the salvation of all men.

HIS second reason is, that it perfectly falls in with our natural notions of
the infinite benevolence of the Deity, that he should reward the righteous with
endless life; but not that he should punish the wicked with endless misery. P.
285.
But our notions of the benevolence of the Deity, are to be conformed to divine
revelation; and only when they are conformed to that standard, are they right.
And to suppose, that the endless misery of those, who live and die in
wickedness, is not agreeable to scriptural representations of the benevolence
of the Deity, is a mere begging of the question. -- This subject has already
been largely considered in Chap. VIII.

THE Doctor's last reason is, That we are naturally and obviously led to
interpret (...), everlasting, when joined with the happiness of the righteous,
in the endless sense, from other texts which determine this to be its meaning.
-- "This" adds the Doctor, I call a decisive answer to this branch of the
objection, upon supposition, that the next is the final state of man. P. 287,
288.
Now all those his determinate texts have been already considered in page 262,
etc; and in view of the observations there made, the reader will judge, whether
those texts do any more decisively, than the word (...), everlasting, prove the
future happiness of the righteous, to be without end.

TO confirm his construction of Matt. XXV. 46, Dr. C. mentions two texts in
which he supposes the word (...), everlasting, is in the same sentence used
both in the limited and endless sense. One is Romans XVI. 25, 26; According to
the mystery which was kept secret [(...)] since the world began -- but is now
made manifest -- according to the commandment [(...)] of the everlasting God.
Concerning this text it was before observed, that (...) is perfectly capable of
the endless sense. The mystery was kept secret from all eternity, or during the
eternal ages which preceded creation; or through the eternity a part ante, as
some call it. So that this text answers not the Doctor's purpose. -- The other
text produced by the Doctor, is Tit. I. 2, In hope [(...)] of eternal life,
which God that cannot lie, promised [(...)] before the world began. On this
text, it has been observed, P. 249.
that there is no absolute certainty, that it means a limited duration. But
supposing that this indeed is an instance to the Doctor's purpose: when it
shall be made as evident from the very nature of the case, or from any other
source of evidence, that the wicked cannot be punished without end, as it is,
that God could not give a promise before eternity; doubtless we shall all give
up the Doctrine of endless punishment.

AT length we come to the Doctor's criticism on the expression forever and
ever. -- He seems to suppose, that expression in scripture does not refer to
the future punishment of all the wicked, but only of the worshippers of the
beast, and to a certain "rabble rout of men," as he calls them. Be this as it
may, it equally overthrows the Doctor's scheme, as if it ever so confessedly
referred to the punishment of all the wicked. -- But on the supposition, that
forever and ever refers to the punishment of the wicked in common, the Doctor
thinks that that phrase is obviously capable of being understood of a limited
duration. P. 295.
His reasons are, That (...) in the singular number almost perpetually
signifies an age, or a limited duration, P. 295.
-- That though this word in the plural is to be met with in several places in
the Septuagint, yet in them all it signifies a limited duration, P. 296.
-- In like manner the plural of (...) is most commonly, if not always, used,
in the New Testament, to point out a limited duration; P. 297.
That (...) is applied in Rev. XI. 15, to the kingdom of Christ, and therefore
must mean a limited duration; P. 298.
-- That (...), and (...) are always in the Septuagint, to be understood in the
limited sense. P. 301.


1. A(...) in the singular number almost perpetually signifies a limited
duration. -- Answer: It is by no means granted, that (...) in the singular
almost perpetually signifies a limited duration; especially when governed by
the preposition (...). In p. 250, etc, the use of (...), in the New Testament,
was traced, both in the singular and plural, and it was found, that it is much
more frequently used in the endless, than in the limited sense. If the use of
the singular number only be traced, in even this number it is still most
frequently used in the endless sense, as the learned reader may see, by
examining the texts, in which it is used in the Greek Testament, all which have
been already noted. Dr. C's assertion therefore, that it almost perpetually
signifies a limited duration, is a mere assertion, and stands for nothing until
it shall be proved: and to make a mere assertion a ground of an important
consequence, is not warrantable by the laws of reasoning and philosophy.

BUT if the assertion were ever so true, the consequence, which Dr. C. thence
draws, would by no means follow. -- If (...) in the singular did almost
perpetually signify a limited duration, it would not follow, that (...) too
signifies a limited duration. Language is not made metaphysically by
philosophers, but by the vulgar, without metaphysical reasoning: and the
meaning of particular phrases is wholly determined by use, not by metaphysical
reasoning on the natural force of the words. If therefore use have determined
(...) to mean generally or universally an endless duration, this is enough to
settle the present question, let (...) mean in the singular what it may.

OR if we must reason metaphysically on this subject, it may be asserted, that
(...) is no absurd or unintelligible mode of expressing an endless duration. If
(...) signify an age, and the phrases just mentioned be rendered, the age of
the ages and the ages of the ages, the strictest philosophy will justify those
phrases, as applied to eternity. We have no idea of eternity, but as an endless
succession of ages. Therefore, that age, those ages, or that duration, which
comprehends all those successive ages, is a proper eternity. The Doctor
undertakes to reason metaphysically on this subject, P. 297, 298.
and observes, that a duration for eternities of eternities, is a very uncouth
mode of expression. -- But it is not more uncouth, than the expression of An
eternity added to an eternity, or an eternity and an eternity. Yet this is the
strict analysis of forever and ever, an expression rendered abundantly proper
by use.

ONE thing more ought to be observed, that (...), whether in the singular or
plural, governed by the preposition (...), invariably in the New Testament,
signifies an endless duration. But in the phrase in question, (...) it is
governed by that preposition.

2. THAT though (...), the plural, is met with in several places in the
Septuagint, yet in them all it signifies a limited duration. P. 296.
-- Ans. 1. It does not appear, that (...) in the Septuagint always signifies a
limited duration; nor is it used in this sense in all the instances, which Dr.
C. produces to prove, that it always means a limited duration: as Psalm. CXLV.
13. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: (...). Dan. II. 44; In the days of
these kings, the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom -- and it shall stand
forever, (...). Though the Doctor endeavors to prove, that in these texts a
limited duration must be intended, because in 1 Cor. XV. 28, Christ is
represented as delivering up his kingdom to the Father; yet it is at least as
clearly proved by Luke I. 33, "Of his kingdom there is no end," and the other
texts before quoted, P. 235, etc.
that the texts now in question are to be taken in the endless sense. --
Besides, how does it appear, that Psalm. CXLV. 13, refers to the kingdom of
Christ, as distinguished from the kingdom of the Father? And the kingdom of the
Father Dr. C. allows, is without end.

THERE are other texts, in which (...) seems beyond dispute to be used in the
endless sense; as Psalm. LXXVII. 7. Will the Lord cast off forever, (...)? and
will he be favorable no more? The latter expression explains the former to
mean an endless duration. The next verses further confirm this idea. -- Dan.
IV. 34; I praised and honored him, that lives forever, (...). Chap. VI. 26;
For he is the living God, and steadfast forever, (...). If (...) be not in these
instances used in the endless sense, it is in vain to search for instances, in
which it is used in that sense; and it may be presumed, that it is incapable of
any application, by which it shall appear to be used in that sense.

ANS. 2. But if it were ever so true, that (...) is never used in the
Septuagint, but in a limited sense; it by no means thence follows, that (...)
is in general, or at all, in the New Testament, used in a limited sense.

3. In like manner the plural of (...), is commonly, if not always, used in the
New Testament to point out a limited duration. P. 297.
The answers to this argument are the very same, with those given to the
preceding. -- (1) The plural of (...), in the New Testament, even when it is
not redoubled, is not commonly, much less always, used to point out a limited
duration; but is generally used to point out an endless duration, as the reader
may see by the texts in which it occurs, all which are noted in the margin. In
the endless sense, Mat. VI. 18. Luke I. 33. Romans I. 25. IX. 5. XI. 36. XVI. 27.
2 Cor. XI^ ^1. Ephesians. III. 11, 21. 1 Timothy I. 17, and Heb. XIII. 8. -- In the
limited sense, 1 Cor. II. 7. X. 11. Ephesians. II. 7. Heb. I. 2. IX. 26. XI. 3. -- In
Ephesians. III. 9. and Col. I. 26, it is capable of either sense.
Dr. C. quotes Luke I. 33, He shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, as
an instance, that (...) means a limited duration. But if he had quoted the
whole verse, the latter part would have effectually confuted his sense of the
former part. The words are, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. -- (2) If
(...) by itself did commonly point out a limited duration, it would not follow,
that the same limited sense belongs to (...).

4. (...) is applied to the kingdom of Christ, in Rev. XI. 15; and therefore
must mean a limited duration. P. 298.
-- Answer: The application of that phrase to the kingdom of Christ, is no
proof at all, that it is ever used in the limited sense: because it appears by
Luke I. 33, Dan. VII. 14, Isai. IX. 7, and more largely by what was said, page
235, etc, that Christ's kingdom is without end.

5. The phrases (...), and (...) are always in the Septuagint, to be understood
in the limited sense. P. 301.


Answer 1. IT is by no means a conceded point, that those phrases in the
Septuagint are always to be understood in a limited sense. The contrary appears
even from the instances quoted by Dr. C. to prove that they are used in the
limited sense; as Psalm. CXIX. 44, So shall I keep thy law continually forever
and ever. Psalm. CXLV. 2, "I will praise thy name forever and ever." To suppose,
that these texts contain no more, than a professed intention of the psalmist,
to obey and to praise God, as long as he should live in this world, is as
arbitrary a supposition, as to suppose, that when the scriptures speak of God
as living forever and ever, they mean no more, than that God will live as long
as men live in this world.

Answer 2. BUT if those phrases in the Septuagint did ever so certainly mean a
limited duration, it would not follow, that also the very different phrase
(...) in the New Testament, means a limited duration. The truth is, this last
phrase is not to be found in the Septuagint, though it frequently occurs in the
New Testament. Be it so therefore, that those phrases in the Septuagint, mean a
limited duration; is it not very singular argumentation, thence to infer, that
a very different phrase found in the New Testament, means a limited duration
too? This is just as if Dr. C. had argued, that because the word lion in the
Septuagint means a four-footed beast, therefore the word man in the New
Testament means a four-footed beast too.

THE Doctor P. 303.
holds, that it is of no significancy, that this phrase is sometimes applied to
God: because, if from this application merely, we argue the absolute eternity
of God; we may argue the absolute eternity of the land of Canaan, and of the
successive generations of men, from the application to them, of the same or an
equivalent phrase. -- But the same phrase is never applied, either to the land
of Canaan, or to the successive generations of men: and whatever other phrase
is applied to them, is by that very application proved not to be equivalent:
Because we have no other possible way to know, that any phrase is equivalent,
than by its application to those subjects alone, which are of equal duration
with those, to which alone the phrase in question is applied. -- The Doctor
proceeds; Reason assures us, that the duration of God will have no end -- for
this cause, not from the force of this phrase, we interpret it when applied to
God, as meaning a duration without end. But is not the eternity of God revealed
in scripture, as well as known by reason? If so, where and in what words is it
expressed? Let any more determinate expression of it be pointed out in the
scriptures. If the divine eternity be clearly revealed in scripture, and this
phrase be as determinately expressive of it, as any in the bible, doubtless it
determines the future punishment of the wicked also, to be without end, because
it is repeatedly applied to that.

FINALLY, the Doctor observes, P. 304.
That it is as certain, that the phrase (...), ought to be construed for ages
of ages, as that the wicked in the resurrection state, will not be
incorruptible, but shall die a second time. That the wicked shall reap
corruption, and shall suffer the second death, is not in the least inconsistent
with their endless misery, unless corruption and the second death mean either
annihilation or final happiness. If they mean the same with the destruction of
the wicked, they mean misery, as Doctor C. himself allows; P. 224.
and no man will say, that the declarations of scripture, that the wicked shall
reap misery, or suffer misery, are a proof, that that misery is not endless. Or
if corruption and the second death mean a transition from the resurrection
state, to the next succeeding state, if any such there be, still that
succeeding state, or the final state of the wicked, may be a state of misery.
But if corruption and the second death mean annihilation, they overthrow the
salvation of all men. Is it not therefore surprising, that Dr. C. should over
and over again, insist on an argument, as fully demonstrative of his scheme,
which argument either wholly overthrows his scheme, or is utterly impertinent
to the subject?

ON the whole, it is left with the reader to determine, whether the reasons
offered by Dr. C. prove, that (...) means a limited duration. -- That the
reader may judge concerning the true force of that expression, every place, in
which it is used by the inspired writers, is noted in the margin. Gal. I. 5.
Phil. IV. 20. 1 Timothy I. 17. 2 Timothy IV. 18. Heb. XIII. 21. 1 Pet. IV. 11. V. 11.
Rev. I. 6, 18. IV. 9, 10. V. 13, 14. VII. 12. X. 6. XI. 15. XIV. 11. XV. 7.
XLX. 3. XX. 10. XXII. 5.


NEXT occurs Dr. C's answer to the argument from Mark IX. 43; The fire that
never shall be quenched; where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. -- The Doctor's answer consists of these particulars -- That the fire
of hell may never be quenched; yet the wicked may not live in it endlessly P.
311.
-- That in hell, or while the wicked are in the next state of existence, their
worm indeed shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched; but their
torment shall be continued during their existence in that state. Ibid.
-- As to the first observation, That the fire of hell may never be quenched,
though the wicked shall be delivered out of it in time, by either salvation or
annihilation; it has been observed to be a mere wild conjecture, and probably
would never have been thought of, had not the scheme been in distress, and must
be relieved by some means of other. Other remarks have been made on this
conjecture, to which I refer the reader. -- Nor does the latter observation,
especially as connected with the former, appear to be more rational or
pertinent. According to these two observations, the sense of Mark IX. 43, 44,
is merely this; It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having
two hands, to go into the fire which never shall be quenched, though thou
may soon be delivered out of it; and in which while thou continuest, thy
torments will not cease. But where is the evidence of the truth of this
proposition? How does it appear to be better for a man to cut off his right
hand, and be forever after maimed, than to go into a fire which is indeed
endless, and in which while he continues, he will be uneasy, and even feel
torment; though he may not continue in it two minutes or two seconds? Who would
not choose to suffer even a very painful torment, for a few seconds, or
minutes, rather than to lose an hand or an eye? Thus the sense which Dr. C.
puts on Mark IX. 43, etc. utterly frustrates the manifest design of our Lord,
which was in that passage to exhibit a most powerful motive to the greatest
self-denial. But according to the Doctor's construction, the passage contains
no powerful motive to self-denial, or any thing else.

Besides; is it not flat and insipid, to tell a man, that he shall go into a
fire which never shall be quenched, though he may be immediately taken out
again? -- Yet this is the sense which Dr. C. puts on those words of our
Savior! But how is it to the purpose? or how does it concern any man, if he be
not in the fire of hell, that that fire shall never be quenched? -- Suppose a
man is to be burnt at the stake. It would be a matter of indifference to him,
whether the fire, in which he should be put to death, be continued burning for
five hundred years, after his death, or be extinguished immediately: and to
tell him by way of threatening, that that fire shall be kept up five hundred
years after his death; or to threaten a criminal who is about to be executed on
the gallows, that the gallows on which he shall die, shall stand a thousand
years after his execution; would be perfect impertinence.

DOCTOR C. seems to insist much on this, That in Mark IX. 43, etc, a reference
is had to the punishment of those whose bodies were either burnt in the valley
of Hinnom, or permitted to lie upon the ground, to be fed upon by worms. But it
does not thence follow, as Dr. C. supposes, that as the fire of the valley of
Hinnom went out, when the bodies were consumed, and the worm died, when the
bodies were eaten up; so the fire and worm of hell shall cease. The sense may
be, that as those bodies in the valley Hinnom, were consumed by fire and worms,
which after a while ceased; so the wicked in hell shall be tormented by fire
and worms, which shall not cease. -- Indeed this is expressly asserted: and as
Mr. Hopkins justly observes. It cannot be granted, that our Savior, by those
words, Where their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched, means a worm
that dies, and a fire that is quenched very soon. For this would be to
suppose, he means directly contrary to what he says. Future state of those who
die in their sins.


THE Doctor argues against endless punishment from the smallness of the number
of those who are saved in the next state. P. 322.
That "only a few of mankind" should be saved finally, and "the greater part
eternally perish" he thinks not reconcilable with the great mercy of the
Christian dispensation; or with the glad tidings of great joy, and the divine
good will celebrated at the birth of our Savior. This argument is built on the
supposition, that it would not be dishonorary to Christ, that a minority of
mankind be lost. But this would be equally inconsistent with Dr. C's scheme, as
that a majority be lost. This argument, as it grants that some will not be
saved, gives up the grand question, and disputes concerning the number only,
which is to be saved. But this is no subject of dispute in this controversy.

IS it then no instance of great and glorious mercy, to institute a scheme, by
which salvation may be offered to every creature; By which whosoever will, may
take the water of life freely, and no man shall perish, but in consequence of
his own voluntary rejection of that institution? Is not the certain information
of this institution indeed glad tidings of great joy to all people? Is not the
institution a clear proof of the abundant good will of God to men, even though
sinners, through their voluntary opposition, obtain no good by it? It certainly
is, if we may believe Dr. C. for it is a maxim with him, that we must not judge
of the divine goodness, by the actual good, which we see produced, but must
take into view the tendency of the divine administration, etc, see the
quotations made page 139.

THE Doctor says, It is incredible, that God should constitute his Son the
Savior of men, and the bulk of them be finally damned. P. 323.
But why is it incredible? Is it not an undertaking worthy of Christ, in a way
most honorary to God, to open a door of mercy and salvation to all mankind,
though by the wicked and ungrateful rejection of Christ by the majority, a
minority only will actually be saved? If it be not credible, that God should
constitute his son the savior of men, and "the bulk" of them be finally
damned, is it credible, that Christ should be constituted the savior, and a
bare majority of mankind be saved? If not, how large must the majority be?

AS to the observation, That it is a gross reflection on the savior, whose
proper business it is, to destroy the works of the devil, and rescue mankind
out of his hands; to suppose, that the devil should finally get the better of
Christ, by effecting the everlasting damnation of the greater part of men; Ibid.
there are some particulars in it, which want explanation. First; what is meant
by destroying the works of the devil? If this mean to abolish all sin, and all
the misery consequent on sin to any of the human race; it is not granted, that
this is the proper business of our Savior, nor is this the proper meaning of
the original in 1 John III. 8, the text to which Dr. C. refers. The verb is
(...), dissolve, take to pieces, and thus prevent the ill effect of the works
of the devil. But if destroying the works of the devil mean, to defeat and to
prevent the ill consequences of those works, so that no final damage shall
thence arise to the interest of God's kingdom, or of the universe; it is
granted, that this is the proper business of Christ. But it is not granted, but
that this maybe effected, without the salvation of all men. -- Again, what is
meant by "the devil's getting the better of Christ?" This doubtless means, that
he defeats Christ more or less, as to some object of his mediatorial
undertaking. But Dr. C. has no more made it appear, that the final salvation of
only a part, and a small part of the human race, implies such a defeat; or that
it was not the original intention of Christ to save a small part only; than he
has made it appear, that it was the intention of Christ to save all men.

Dr. C. seems not to have reflected, while he was urging this argument, that it
equally militates against his own last resort, annihilation. For if an end be
put to the existence, both in soul and body, of all who die impenitent, as the
Doctor allows will be the case, if universal salvation be not true; P. 282.
then on his principles, the devil will not be vanquished by Christ; the works
of the devil will not be destroyed, but he will get the better of Christ, by
effecting the everlasting destruction of the greater part of those whom Christ
came from heaven to save. P. 324.
-- So that when this objection shall be answered, so far as it lies against
Dr. C's last resort, doubtless an answer will be supplied to those who believe
in endless misery.

After all, it is not an article of my faith, that only a small part of the
human race will be finally saved. But my faith in this particular is not built
on abstract reasonings from the divine goodness and the mission of Christ. That
divine goodness which suffered all the apostate angels to perish finally, might
have suffered all, or a greater part of the apostate race of men, to perish in
like manner. My faith is built on several representations and prophecies of
scripture, particularly concerning the millennium, and the general and long
prevalence of virtue and piety in that period. Therefore in this view, the
foundation of the objection from the smallness of the number saved, is taken
away.

CHAP. XV. In which are considered Dr: C's answers to the arguments drawn from
what is said concerning Judas, Mark XIV. 21; -- from the unpardonable sin; --
and from the tendency of the doctrine of universal salvation to licentiousness.
THE Doctor answers to the argument from Mark XIV. 21, Woe to that man by whom
the Son of Man is betrayed. Good were it for that man, if he had never been
born; That perhaps it may be a proverbial expression, not literally true; P.
329.
-- That if the literal sense were the most reasonable, considering this text
by itself; yet considering the many passages brought by Dr. C. which declare
the final salvation of all men, we must not understand this passage in the
literal sense, as in that case we shall set the scripture at variance with
itself; P. 330.
-- That the real meaning of this passage may be prophetical, as if our Lord
had said, The man who shall betray me shall practically declare, that in his
apprehension, it were good had he not been brought into being. P. 331.
-- As to the first of these answers, it is a mere unsupported conjecture, and
therefore is to be set down for nothing. -- As to the second, it is not allowed
that the Doctor has produced any one passage of scripture which declares the
final salvation of all men: but this in view of what has been said on the
passages produced by the Doctor, is submitted to the reader. -- As the Doctor
contends that this passage cannot be understood in the literal sense, without
setting the scripture at variance with itself; so it is contended by the
advocates for endless punishment, that it can be understood in the literal
sense, without setting the scripture at variance with itself in the least
degree; and that the general tenor of the scripture points out the literal
sense to be the true sense. -- As to Dr. C's third answer, it is, in the first
place, a mere unsupported conjecture: secondly, it may be noticed, that it is
manifest, that the text pronounces the proper woe or curse, which should fall on
the man who should betray our Lord. The Son of Man indeed goes, as it is
written of him; but woe to that man, by whom the Son of Man is betrayed: good
were it for that man, if he had never been born. -- But according to Dr. C. all
the curse which this text denounces, is such a weariness of life and impatience
of existence, as has sometimes befallen even true saints; as in the instance of
Job. And is it credible that this was the proper and full curse of betraying
the Lord of life and glory? Or that if this be but a very small part of the
curse of that abominable wickedness, our Lord would have mentioned it in such a
manner, as naturally to communicate the idea, that it is the proper and full
curse of it?

AFTER all the ingenuity of Dr. C. and other universalists, in torturing this
passage to a meaning consistent with their scheme; it remains a plain, direct,
and positive testimony against it.

NEXT follows Dr. C's* answer to the argument from what is said concerning the
sin against the Holy Ghost, Matt. XII. 32; Whosoever speaks against the Holy
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the
world to come. Mark III. 29; He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost
has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation. Luke XII. 10,
Unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.

THE Doctor's first answer to this argument is taken from Grotius -- he tells
us that Grotius looks upon the words as an Hebraism intended to signify, not so
much the pardonableness of some sins, and the unpardonableness of others; as
the greater difficulty of obtaining pardon for blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, than for any other blasphemy. It is wholly immaterial whether the words
were intended to signify not so much the unpardonableness of some sins. If they
were intended to signify at all the unpardonableness of some sins, that is
sufficient for the present purpose. So that both Dr. C. and his favorite
author Grotius, virtually concede all that is demanded in this instance.

CONCERNING this construction of Grotius, which is but a mere conjecture,
brought in to help over an argument which crowds hardly on Dr. C's scheme; the
Doctor says, Whoever goes about to prove, that there is no truth in it, will
perhaps find, that he has undertaken a very hard task. The same may be said of
any man, who should undertake to prove, that there are not a dozen primary
planets belonging to the solar system; or who should undertake to disprove any
one of a thousand other conjectures.

AFTER all, the Doctor does not depend much on this construction of Grotius,
and proceeds to give us his own sense of the passages above quoted; which is,
That it is indeed true, that the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is absolutely
unpardonable; P. 334.
that the divine law shall take its course on those who are guilty of that
blasphemy, and no intervening pardon will prevent the full execution of the
threatened penalty on them; and forgiveness strictly and literally speaking
will not be granted to them; P. 336.
yet that they will be finally saved, and admitted to heaven, after they shall
have suffered the full penalty threatened in the law. -- On this idea of Dr. C.
some remarks have been already made in Chapter I. Nor can it escape the notice
of the attentive reader, that it implies, that some men are saved, not only
without forgiveness; without the exercise of divine grace, in the scriptural
sense of grace; without any aid from the merit or atonement of Christ; and
therefore not on the account, on the ground, or for the reason of Christ's
obedience and death; P. 20.
but wholly on the footing of the law. But the idea that any of mankind are to
be saved without forgiveness, is wholly foreign from the scriptures, nor can it
be pointed out to be contained in any part of scripture. Every chapter of the
gospel is inconsistent with it; to refer to particular texts would be endless
and needless. -- And what divine grace is there exercised in the salvation of
one, who has by suffering the whole threatened penalty of the law, made full
satisfaction for his own sins? -- There is manifestly no more grace in saving
such a man, than there is in saving one who has never sinned. Nor is he who has
suffered the full penalty of the law, saved on account of the death or
obedience of Christ. On the account of Christ's obedience or death he is
released from no punishment: and to suppose, that God has not goodness enough,
without an atonement, to take a creature to heaven, who in the eye of the law
is perfectly innocent, is a supposition utterly inconsistent with the divine
goodness. -- Lastly, he who is saved in consequence of suffering the whole
penalty threatened in the law, is saved on the foot of law. Yet it is utterly
and abundantly denied by Dr. C. to be possible, that any sinner should be saved
on the foot of law.

IN view of these observations, the reader will judge, whether Dr. C's
construction of the passages, which speak of the sin against the Holy Ghost, be
admissible: and whether those passages and the argument deduced from them, do
not remain in full force against universal salvation.

WE come at length to Dr. C's answer to the last argument of those in the
opposite scheme which he considers, which is drawn from the tendency of Dr. C's
system to licentiousness and vice.

ON this the Doctor observes; To disprove the final salvation of all men, it
must be plainly shown, that this doctrine does naturally and directly tend to
encourage men in vicious practice. P. 341.
In this it is implicitly granted, that if the doctrine of universal salvation
do indeed naturally and directly tend to encourage men to persist in vicious
practice, it is not true. On this we may join issue with him. That that
doctrine does comparatively encourage men to persist in vice, will appear
perhaps from the following considerations. -- It will not be denied that if
there were no punishment threatened to the wicked, it would naturally and
directly encourage them to persist in vice. This is granted by Dr. C. -- Had we
attempted P. 342.
to introduce mankind universally into a state of happiness, upon their leaving
this world, whatever their moral conduct had been in it, the argument, that Dr.
C's scheme tends to licentiousness, would then have held strong. But if the
argument holds strong, provided there be no future punishment, it holds
proportionably, if that punishment be very small and far less than is deserved
by the wicked; and especially if at the same time that punishment be suited to
their personal good. Now that the future punishment of the wicked is, on Dr.
C's scheme, very small, compared with what it is on the opposite scheme, is
manifest at first sight; it is infinitely less. And that it is far less, nay
infinitely less than the wicked deserve, is manifest by what Doctor C. as well
as his oponents, allows, that all who are saved, are saved by unbounded grace.
Therefore, if the damned be finally saved, as they are saved by unbounded
grace, they are punished infinitely less than they deserve. Also, that
according to Dr. C's scheme, the wicked are to be punished with a disciplinary
punishment suited to the good of the subjects, is manifest from his whole book.
-- Now that this punishment of the wicked does comparatively encourage vice,
may be illustrated by an example. It is generally agreed that murder deserves
death. But suppose a law should be made, by which no murderer should be
punished with death, or with any other punishment to be continued longer, than
till he should repent. Would not such a law as this, compared with the law as
it now stands, naturally and directly tend to encourage murder? I need not make
the application.

DOCTOR C. seems to think that his doctrine of future punishment even more
powerfully restrains from sin, than the doctrine of endless punishment, because
his doctrine is more credible to men in general. But are we to inquire what is
most likely or most easy to be believed by men in general, to determine what is
most likely to restrain from sin or to be the real truth of God? Then certainly
the doctrines of the divine character and mission of Christ, of his miracles,
resurrection, ascension, etc, etc, in short the doctrines of christianity in
general, are not so likely to restrain men from sin as the doctrines of mere
natural religion. Or if it be said that those doctrines are capable of such
proof, as will satisfy and convince all candid inquirers; the same is said of
the doctrine of endless punishment.

I HAVE now finished my reply to Dr. C's answers to the arguments in favor of
endless punishment; and having before considered his arguments in favor of his
own scheme; I shall proceed to some arguments in confirmation of the doctrine
of endless punishment.

CHAP. XVI. In which some direct arguments are proposed, to prove the endless
punishment of the wicked.
I AM sensible that my book is already protracted to a considerable length.
Therefore to relieve the patience of the reader, I shall endeavor to crowd
this part into as narrow a compass as possible. Indeed if the answers already
given to the objections to endless punishment, be sufficient, the less needs be
said in way of direct proof.

THE various texts always brought in discourses on this subject, come now with
full force; in proof of this doctrine. As Matt. XVIII. 8; It is better for thee
to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet, to
be cast into everlasting fire. Chap. XXV. 41; Then shall he say unto them on
the left hand, depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for
the devil and his angels. Verse 46th; These shall go away into everlasthing
punishment. 2 Thessalonians. I. 9; Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power. 2 Pet. II. 17; To
whom the mist of darkness is reserved forever. Jude 13: To whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness forever. Rev. XIV. 10, 11; And he shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of
the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascends up forever and ever. Chap.
XIX. 3; And again they said, Alleluia: and her smoke rose up forever and ever.
Chap. XX. 10; And the devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and [they] shall be
tormented day and night, forever and ever.

THE evations of these texts have been particularly considered, and it is
hoped, sufficiently answered.

THE Greek words used in these texts are, (...) and (...). From an inspection
of every text in which these words and phrases are used in the New Testament,
it has been found, with regard to the first, that quite contrary to Dr. C's
account, it is almost perpetually, i. e. in the proportion of 66 to 2, used in
the endless sense; setting aside the places in which it is applied to the
punishment of the wicked. With regard to the other two phrases, it has been
found, that they are without exception used in the endless sense. Nor does the
Greek language furnish any word more determinately expressive of endless
duration: and notwithstanding what Dr. C. says to the contrary, it appears that
they do as properly and determinately express an endless duration, as the
English words eternal and eternity. If therefore these words be explained away
to mean a mere temporary duration, it is impossible that any words be used,
which would not suffer the same treatment from the same hands.

THE texts concerning the sin against the Holy Ghost still remain a clear proof
of endless punishment. They are Matt. XII. 31, 32; The blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven unto men -- Whosoever speaks against the
Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world neither in the
world to come. Mark III. 29: He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost,
has never forgiveness; but is in danger of eternal damnation. Luke XII. 10;
Unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.

SO long as the gospel rejects every idea of the salvation of men without
forgiveness, so long will these texts confute the salvation of all men.

TO these I may add the following texts; 1 John V. 16; If any man see his
brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him
life, for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death. I do not say
that he shall pray for it. So that we are not to pray for those who sin unto
death. Why not? evidently because their salvation is impossible. If their
salvation be possible, I presume no sufficient reason can be given, why we
should not pray for it. If it should be said that we are not to pray that the
salvation of such should be immediately accomplished, but that it may be
accomplished in due time: the answer is at hand, that we are not at liberty to
pray that any man may be saved out of due time; and in this sense we are
prohibited to pray for the salvation of any man.

Heb. VI. 4 -- 6; For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if
they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance. Since it is
impossible to renew such to repentance, it is according to Dr. C. as well as
the scipture, impossible that they be saved. Of like import is Chapter X. 26,
27; For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. If there remain no more or no longer a sacrifice for sins; then
neither will the man whose character is here described, be able by his own
sufferings to make a sacrifice of satisfaction for his sins, nor will the
sacrifice of Christ be longer of any avail to him. And if the judgment and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, remain for him; he must
suffer them without a possibility of escape, either by the sacrifice of Christ
or in consequence of his own sufferings.

THE woe denounced by Christ on Judas also seems to remain a demonstrative proof
of endless punishment. Matt. XXVI. 24, and Mark XIV. 21; Woe to that man by whom
the Son of Man is betrayed: good were it for that man if he had never been
born. Let Judas suffer a temporary misery of ever so great duration, it must be
infinitely less than an endless duration of happiness. So that if Judas were
finally to enjoy endless happiness, he would be an infinite gainer by his
existence, let the duration of his previous misery be what it might. It was
therefore on the supposition of his final salvation, not only good, but
infinitely good, that he had been born: which is a direct contradiction to the
declaration of our Savior.

IN connection with this passage, I shall introduce the following; Luke VI. 24;
Woe unto you that are rich: for ye have received your consolation. On the
supposition of the salvation of all men, the rich do by no means receive in
this life their consolation; but they are to receive infinitely the greatest
consolation in the future life. -- Psalm XVII. 14; From men of the world, who
have their portion in this life; Plainly implying that they are to have no
portion in the future life. Luke XVI. 25; Son, remember that thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things, If all shall be saved, the rich and the men of
the world in no other sense have their portion in this life, than the rest of
men. -- They have some good things in this world, but infinitely the greatest
part of their happiness is to be enjoyed in the world to come, and what they
enjoy here, is nothing in comparison with what they are to enjoy hereafter.
More than this, cannot be said of any man.

MARK IX. 43 -- 49; If thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee,
to enter into life maimed, than having two hands, to go into hell, into the
fire that never shall be quenched: where their worm dies not, and the fire is
not quenched. And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter halt into life, than having two feet, to be cast into hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched; where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to
enter into the kingdom of God, with one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast
into hellfire: where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Mat.
III. 12; Whose fan is in his hand, and he shall thoroughly purge his floor; and
gather his wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire.

John III. 36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.
If all are to be saved, then all will see life and enjoy it. Should it be said,
that the meaning of this text is barely, that he that believes not, shall not
see life, while he remains an unbeliever; it may be observed, that this sense
of the text will admit the idea, that unbelievers may all become believers, at
death, or at some future time in life; as it holds forth no more, than that a
man while an unbeliever, shall not be admitted to life; and says nothing but
that all unbelievers may become believers in this life, or at death; and
therefore may attain to life and salvation in heaven, just as soon as those,
who are now believers. But can any man bring himself to believe, that this text
was not designed to teach us, but that unbelievers will attain to the life and
salvation of heaven as soon as believers? If that be the true sense, this text
teaches us no more concerning unbelievers, than is true concerning all saints
in this state of imperfection. It may on this supposition be said, with equal
truth, and in the same sense, that no imperfect saint shall see life, as that
no unbeliever shall see life. It is plain, that this text was meant to exhibit
some privilege on the believer above the unbeliever. But if the construction,
now under consideration, be the true one, and universal salvation be true, what
is that privilege? The believer has the promise of an endless life; so has the
unbeliever in common with all mankind. The believer cannot perhaps be admitted
to the inheritance of that promise, within less than ten or twenty years.
Within the same time the unbeliever may be admitted to the same inheritance,
whether he be admitted to it at death, or in consequence of some discipline in
hell, by which he is led to repentance and faith. The believer has the present
comfort of anticipating his future happiness; there is on the plan of universal
salvation, abundant foundation for the same anticipation to the unbeliever. It
is true, the unbeliever is not yet prepared for the possession of heavenly
happiness: neither is the believer during his present imperfection.

LUKE XVI. 26; And besides all this, between us and you, there is a great gulf
fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can
they pass to us, that would come from thence. Mat. VI. 15; If ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Chap.
XXIII. 34, 35; And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors,
till he should pay all that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly
Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his
brother their trespasses. Heb. VI. 8; That which bears thorns and briers, is
rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned. -- How is the
end of any man to be burned, if all shall finally be saved? Luke XIV. 24; For I
say unto you, that none of those men who were bidden, shall taste of my supper.
Chap. XIII. 25, 26, 27; When once the master of the house is risen up, and has
shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and he shall answer and say unto you, I know
you not, whence you are -- I tell you, I know you not, whence you are, depart
from me, all ye workers of iniquity. -- Rev. XXII. 11, 12; He that is unjust,
let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and
he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him
be holy still. And behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give to
every man according as his work shall be. -- These last words, with verse 10th,
determine this text to refer to the general judgment. -- The words of the tenth
verse are, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book; for the time is
at hand. But a period ages of ages after the general judgment cannot be said to
come quickly, and to be at hand.

IF to these texts it should be said, that they mean no more, than that they
cannot as yet be saved, though they will be saved in proper time; I answer, (1)
That there is no appearance in the texts themselves, of such a sense; (2) That
if that were the true sense, they would mean no more, than might be said,
mutatis mutandis, of all real saints, who are not about to die immediately; (3)
That that sense would imply, either that the future punishment of the wicked is
a mere wholesome discipline, or that those who die impenitent do not deserve
endless punishment. If they pass the great gulf as soon as they repent, their
punishment is a mere wholesome discipline: but that it is not a mere wholesome
discipline, I have endeavored to show in Chap. II. and III. If they suffer the
full punishment, which they deserve, and then come out, they are saved without
forgiveness, and they never deserved an endless punishment, the contrary to
which I have endeavored to prove in Chap. VI. To those chapters I beg leave to
refer the reader, for what might be said here in further answer to this
objection. -- If because the damned cannot pass the great gulf at present, it
be said, There is a great gulf fixed, so that they cannot pass thence to
heaven, then because a saint is not about to die at present, it might with
propriety be said, there is a great gulf fixed between him and heaven, so that
he cannot pass it. -- If those scriptural expressions, "Let him be unjust
still," -- Great gulf fixed, so that they cannot pass, -- "Depart, I know you
not," "Shall not taste of my supper," -- etc, mean no more, than that they
shall remain unjust etc, for the present: why may not the following expressions
-- Shall not come into condemnation, -- "Are justified from all things," -- Is
passed from death unto life -- etc, mean no more, than that the saints shall
not come into condemnation for the present, or for some time to come? -- Are
for the present justified from all things? Is for the present passed from death
unto life?

REV. III. 5; He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment;
and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life; but I will confess
his name before my Father, and before his angels. Does not this text plainly
hold forth, that the names of all who do not overcome, shall be blotted out of
the book of life; and that Christ will not confess their names before the
Father, and before his angels? Chap. XIII, 8; And all that dwell upon the earth
shall worship him, whose names are written in the book of life of the Lamb,
slain from the foundation of the world. Chap. XXI. 27; And there shall in no
wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works
abomination, or makes a lie; but they which are written in the Lamb's book of
life. Psalm. LXIX. 27, 28; Add iniquity to their iniquity, and let them not come
into thy righteousness. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and
not be written with the righteous. Now will any be saved, whose names are not
written in the Lamb's book of life? In the quotation from Rev. XXI. 27, it is
expressly asserted, that no one who defiles, works abomination, or makes a
lie, shall enter the heavenly city; but they only who are written in the Lamb's
book of life. Therefore not only will not all men be saved, as some will be
excluded the heavenly city; but some men have not their names written in the
Lamb's book of life, and this is a further evidence, that all will not be saved.

IT is said, that sinners shall not stand in the congregation of the righteous,
(Psalm. 1. 5,) and the representation in the parables of our Lord, is, that
after the general judgment, the tares and chaff shall be no more mixed with the
wheat; nor the good with the bad fish. Nor is there any intimation that the
tares or the chaff will become wheat, or the bad putrid fish become good; but
the contrary is plainly implied in the parables themselves. Besides, the
judgment is said to be eternal, (...), Which word, I hope, from what has been
already discovered in the investigation of its true sense, I have a right to
consider as used in the endless sense.
doubtless with respect to the endless and unchangeable consequences. But if
the judgment be strictly eternal with respect to its consequences, the
punishment of the damned will be without end.

THE parables before mentioned further prove endless punishment, as they
represent, that the bad fish are cast away; that the tares and chaff are burnt
up. How is this consistent with their final salvation and happiness?

ALL those texts which declare, that those who die impenitent shall perish,
shall be cast away, shall be rejected, be destroyed be lost, etc, disprove
universal salvation; as 1 Cor. I. 18; The preaching of the cross is to them
that perish, foolishness; but unto us who are saved, it is the power of God. 2
Pet. II. 12; These shall utterly perish in their own corruption. Luke IX. 25;
For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lost himself, or
be cast away. Heb. VI. 8; "That which bears thorns and briers is rejected." 2
Cor. IV. 3; If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. 2 Thessalonians. I.
8; Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction. Mat. XXI. 44; On
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder; etc. etc. Now with what
truth or propriety can those be said to perish, be cast away, be rejected,
destroyed, lost; who are all finally saved? Perdition, destruction, etc, are
ever in scripture set in opposition to salvation, and are represented to be
inconsistent with it. But where is the opposition, if those who perish, be
saved too?

ACTS III. 21; Whom the heaven must receive until the times of the restitution
of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets
since the world began. This text which has been often quoted as a proof of
universal salvation, is, I conceive, a clear proof of the contrary. The heaven
will receive and retain our Lord Jesus Christ, until the time shall come when
all those things shall be restored, which God, by the mouths of all his
prophets, has declared, (...), shall be restored, which things doubtless
comprehend all things which ever shall be restored. But our Lord Jesus Christ
will not be retained in heaven longer than till the general judgment. After
that time therefore, nothing will be restored. But it is granted on all hands,
that after that time the wicked will be in misery. Therefore they shall never
be recovered from that misery.

2 Pet. III. 9; The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count
slackness) but is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, also has been quoted to prove
universal salvation. It is however impertinent to that purpose, but upon the
supposition that the word perish means endless perdition. Not even any
universalist will say, that God is unwilling that those who die in impenitence
should perish for a while, until they are brought to repentance, or until they
shall have suffered the just punishment of their sins. But if perish in this
passage mean endless perdition, it doubtless means the same in all those texts
in which the wicked are positively said to perish, as 1. Cor. I. 18, For the
preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness.

LUKE XX. 35; But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world,
and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage. --
Some then will not obtain that world, and therefore will not be saved. John
XVII. 9; I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou
have given me, for they are thine. But are any to be saved, for whom our Lord
does not make intercession? Heb. XII. 15; Looking diligently lest any man fail
of the grace of God. Some then will fail of that grace.

PROVE. I. 26 -- 29; I also will laugh at your at your calamity and mock when
your fear comes: when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction
comes as a whirlwind: when distress and anguish come upon you. Then shall they
call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early but they shall
not find me. If God shall never answer their calls, and they shall never find
God; they will never be saved. -- Psalm CXII. 10; "The desire of the wicked
shall perish." -- Job VIII. 13, 14; The hypocrite's hope shall perish: whose
hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider's web. -- Prove. X. 28;
The expectation of the wicked shall perish. Chap. XI. 7; When a wicked man
dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men perishes.
Chap. XXIX. 1; He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy. If all men are to be saved, the hope and
expectation of the wicked are not cut off, do not perish, in any other sense
than that in which the hope and expectation of the righteous perish and are cut
off. The wicked may expect to obtain happiness before they are sufficiently
disciplined, or before a certain period. So may the righteous expect to make
their transition to heaven before it will come. This expectation of both will
be cut off. But the expectation which the wicked have of final happiness, will
never according to Dr. C's system, be cut off. Nor, according to the same
system, can it be true, that the wicked shall be destroyed without remedy. --
Prove. XIV. 32; the wicked is driven away in his wickedness; but the righteous
has hope in his death. But according to the universal system, the wicked has
in his death as real and well founded a hope as the hope of the righteous. Job
XI. 20, "Their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost." Chap. XXVII. 8;
For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes
away his soul? Phil. III. 19; Whose end is destruction. But if all men be
finally saved, the end of no man is destruction. Heb. VI. 8; Whose end is to be
burned. -- 2 Cor. XI. 15; Whose end is according to their works. This is said
of the ministers of satan, whose works are certainly evil. Their end therefore
being according to their works must be evil too. How then can they be FINALLY
saved? If it should be said, that these texts do not mean the last end of the
wicked; this would be a mere assertion. As well might we say that Romans VI. 22;
Ye have your fruit unto holiness and the end everlasting life, means not the
last end of the righteous.

THE scripture represents, that at the end of this world, all things are
brought to an end. 1 Pet. IV. 7; "But the end of all things is at hand," (...).
Surely this cannot mean that the end of all things will take place after ages
of ages to succeed the end of this world. A period so distant is never in
scripture said to be at hand; nor could this with propriety, be said of such a
period. -- Matt. XXIV. 14; This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all
the world, for a witness to all nations: and then, (...), shall the end come.
-- But when all things shall have come to their end, they will be in a fixed,
unalterable state, and after that, there can be no passing from hell to heaven.
Nor can there be any such passing after Christ shall have delivered up the
kingdom to the Father. To this Dr. C. agrees. But I have already given my
reasons for believing that Christ will deliver up the kingdom to the Father, at
the end of this world; and for believing that 1 Cor. XV. 24, must be understood
in this sense, and that according to Dr. C's explanation of that text, it
cannot be reconciled with Matt. XIII. 40 -- 44, and other passages of scripture.

2 COR. VI. 2; Behold now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of
salvation. Heb. III. 7; To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. But if the greater part of mankind shall be saved out of hell, and the
means of repentance in hell be far more conducive to the end, than the best
means used in this world, it should have been said, In the future state is the
accepted time, and in hell will be the day of salvation.

2 COR. IV. 18; The things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which
are not seen, are eternal. If all the unseen things of the future state be
eternal, the punishment of the damned is eternal. And eternal, (...), must in
this instance mean endless: otherwise all opposition with regard to duration,
between things seen, and things unseen, is lost; and things unseen are as truly
temporal, as things seen. At most, on Dr. C's principle of construing
scripture; the apostle's proposition comes to this merely: The things which are
seen, are temporal, but the things which are unseen are to continue for an age.
But this is true of many present seen things.

THE promises of the gospel in general afford an argument in favor of endless
punishment. -- Rev. II. 11; He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second
death. I presume all will grant, that this promise implies, that all who do not
overcome, shall be hurt of the second death. Therefore, by parity of reason,
when it is promised in the same chapter, To him that overcomes, I will give to
eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God; it
implies, that those who do not overcome, shall never eat of that tree, To him
that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a
white stone, etc, implies, that he who does not overcome, shall never eat of
the hidden manna, shall never receive the white stone, etc. Him that overcomes
will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out,
implies, that he who does not overcome, shall not be a pillar in the temple of
God. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, implies,
that he who does not overcome, shall never sit in Christ's throne. These I give
as a specimen only of the promises, and of the argument which they afford.

FINALLY, if all shall be saved, why have not Christ, and those who wrote by
the inspiration of his spirit, been explicit in the matter? Why have they used
so many expressions, which in the literal sense assert the contrary doctrine?
and which apparently obscure the truth, and blind the eyes of the readers of
the New Testament? Especially, if, as Dr. C. holds, universal salvation be so
glorious to God, the main subject of the gospel, and so necessary to vindicate
the divine character? Surely this of all doctrines ought to have been
indisputably revealed, and not one hint given to the contrary.

BESIDES these arguments drawn directly from texts of scripture; I shall
mention one drawn from the general nature of the gospel, or from the particular
doctrines of the gospel, acknowledged by both parties in this controversy.

THOSE who die impenitent, deserve an endless punishment. The proof of this
has been attempted, Chap. VI. It is briefly this: If endless punishment be not
the penalty threatened in the law, and justly deserved by the sinner, no
account can possibly be given of the penalty of the law. It cannot be the
temporary punishment actually suffered by the damned; because then the damned
would be finally saved without forgiveness. It cannot be a temporary punishment
of less duration, than that which is suffered by the damned; because on that
supposition the damned are punished more than they deserve. It cannot be a
temporary punishment of longer duration, than that which the scriptures
abundantly declare the damned shall suffer; because no such punishment is
threatened in the law, or in any part of scripture. It must therefore be an
endless punishment. -- This endless punishment threatened in the law, is not
annihilation, but endless misery; because if it were annihilation, none of the
damned, on supposition, that they are all finally saved, will be punished with
the curse of the law, or which is the same, with the punishment which they
justly deserve. But both the scripture and Dr. C. abundantly hold, that the
damned will be punished as much as they deserve, as has been shown Chap. III.
But for the full proof, that the punishment of hell is not annihilation, I must
refer the reader to Chap. V. If the endless punishment threatened in the law,
and deserved by the wicked, be not annihilation, it must be endless misery. But
whatever punishment the wicked justly deserve, they will in fact suffer; they
will have to pay the uttermost farthing; they will suffer judgment without
mercy. Therefore, they will suffer not only an endless punishment, but an
endless misery, or torment.

THE same argument is a little differently stated thus; Dr. C. allows, that if
the punishment of the damned be intended to satisfy justice, it is impossible
all men should be saved. P. 11.
He also holds abundantly, that it is impossible, that any sinner should be
justified or saved "on the foot of law." He equally holds this with regard to
the moral law, "the law written in men's hearts," "the natural law," and the
law is promulged in the gospel by Jesus "Christ and his apostles," as with
regard to the "Mosaic law." See 12 sermon. P. 4, etc.
He also holds, that the law of God is a perfect rule of righteousness. Now if
it be impossible that any sinner be justified by the moral law, then every
sinner is, and must be condemned by it, and from that condemnation he can never
be acquitted by the law. If it be impossible that any sinner be saved by that
law, then on the footing of that law, every sinner must be excluded from
salvation.

BUT this law is "a perfect rule of righteousness." Therefore perfect
righteousness, or strict distributive justice, will never admit of the
salvation of any sinner; but every sinner justly deserves to be endlessly
excluded from salvation. -- Again, a punishment which satisfies justice, is one
which is perfectly just and deserved by the sinner. Therefore, if the sinner be
punished according to his desert, he can never be saved. -- But both the
scriptures and Dr. C. hold, that the damned will be punished according to their
deserts; therefore they will never be saved.

CONCLUSION.
I HAVE now finished a work which has been attended with considerable labor to
me, and with some to the reader who has perused the whole. I am sensible that
controversial writers often misunderstand each other, and therefore often spend
their own time and labor, and the time of their readers for naught. I have
been aware of the danger of this, and have endeavored to my utmost to avoid
it: how successfully, must be submitted. I have often wished for an opportunity
of conversation with some sensible and thorough believer in Dr. C's scheme,
that I might obtain explanation of some things, to me unaccountable. But I have
not been favored with such an opportunity. I have endeavored to meet the
Doctor's chief arguments, and not to carp at particulars which are of no
importance to the scheme, and have not designedly shunned any argument which
appeared to me to be important, and not implied in other arguments particularly
noticed. I hope that whoever shall undertake the confutation of what is now
offered to the public, will treat it with the same candor. In a work of this
length, and on a subject of such intricacy, it would be strange indeed if there
were not some slips which would give advantage to an antagonist; yet those
slips may not affect the main question. If any man shall write to point out
such errata, it will hardly be worth while for me to trouble either myself or
the world with a reply. But if any gentleman will heartily point out the
fallacy of the main arguments, on which I have rested what I fully believe to
be truth; however I may be affected by it, I doubt not but that the public will
have the candor ingenuously to acknowledge it. If on the contrary his reply
shall consist chiefly of declamation and warm addresses to the passions and
imaginations of mankind, pathetical and frightful representations of the
torments of the damned, interlarded with sarcastic fleers and other essays at
wit; I doubt not the same candid public will properly notice it, and draw an
inference not very favorable to the cause which is to be supported by such
auxillaries. Such artifices are unworthy of theologians, philosophers and any
inquirers after truth. -- I hope whoever undertakes a reply, will tell us what
punishment sin justly deserves; what is the penalty of the moral law; or that
curse of the law from which Christ has redeemed us. Dr. C. explains Gal. III,
10, to mean the curse of the moral law, or the law under which all men are; 12
Sermons, p. 13.
I hope he will further inform us whether all men shall be saved in the way of
forgiveness. If they be, he will reconcile that mode of the salvation of all
men with those declarations of scripture which assert, that the wicked shall be
punished according to their works, shall have judgment without mercy, and shall
pay the uttermost farthing. If it shall be his opinion, that the damned will be
punished according to their demerits, and then be saved without forgiveness, it
is to be hoped he will reconcile this idea with the whole New Testament, which
every where represents, that all who are saved, are saved in the way of
forgiveness. If he shall hold, that (...), eternal, (...), forever, and (...),
forever and ever, generally in the scripture mean a limited duration, let him
point out the instances of that use of them, that they may be compared with
those instances in which they are used in the endless sense. -- But I need not
enumerate the various particulars, which ought to be minutely and distinctly
considered, in a candid and judicious discussion of this important question.

I HAVE no apprehension, that the doctrine of endless punishment will suffer at
all by a thorough discussion. In the course of the disquisition many may be
perverted to fatal error; yet the final result will be the more clear
elucidation of the truth. However many may run to and fro, yet knowledge shall
be increased.

FINALLY, if any man, after a careful perusal of what has been, or may be
offered, on both sides of this important question, shall be in doubt on which
side the truth lies; it will certainly be most prudent and safe for him to act
as he would, if he fully believed endless punishment; it will be most prudent
and safe for him to yield a cordial compliance with the gospel, in repentance,
faith and obedience. Then he will be safe on either supposition. But if he
trust to the flattering doctrine, that all are finally to be saved, and in this
presumption shall neglect the gospel, its invitations and requirements; and it
shall finally prove, that that doctrine is a mere imagination of men; alas! he
is lost; irrecoverably lost: while those who receive the gospel with "the
obedience of faith," shall through the blood of atonement, have right to the
tree of life, and shall enter in through the gates into the City.

APPENDIX, Containing remarks on several authors.
I. REMARKS on Bishop Newton's Dissertation on the final State and Condition of
Men, contained in Vol. VI. of his works, page 325, etc.

N. B. In page 24 this dissertation was referred to, as quoted in the Monthly
Review. The reason was, I had not then seen the Dissertation itself.

THE Bishop held, that all the damned will be punished according to their
demerits; as may appear by the following passages: -- There will be different
degrees of happiness or misery, in proportion to their different conduct and
behavior in this world. As nothing is juster and more equitable in itself, so
nothing is clearer and more demonstrable from scripture. Shall not the judge of
all the earth do right, in every single instance, as well as in the general
account? It is not only agreeable to the first principles of reason, but may
also be confirmed by the most express testimonies of revelation. P. 344.
-- Our Savior threateneth different punishments to the wicked, as he
promises different rewards to the righteous, greater or less, according to the
nature and qualities of their actions. P. 347.
It is evident then and undeniable, that every man shall receive his own reward
or punishment, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Ibid.
It must be then admitted, that God has threatened everlasting misery to the
wicked, as plainly and positively as he has promised everlasting happiness to
the righteous. He has fairly set before us life and death, blessing and
cursing, eternal happiness as well as everlasting misery, the one to balance
the other. Is there any injustice in this? Are not the terms and conditions
equal? And if men will choose cursing rather than blessing, and voluntarily
incur everlasting misery, when they might as easily attain eternal happiness,
whom have they to complain of, or whom can they arraign of unequal proceeding
but themselves? (Ezekiel. XVIII. 29.) Are not my ways equal? Are not your ways
unequal, says the Lord? You cannot then complain of injustice, for the rewards
and punishments are equal: and it was really necessary, that these rewards and
punishments should be everlasting. P. 356.
-- Would any thing less than everlasting rewards and punishments be sufficient
to encourage the good, to deter the bad, and secure obedience to the divine
commands? P: 357.
-- How then can you complain, that God is an arbitrary governor, and annexeth
greater penalties* to his laws than are necessary. -- You cannot then complain,
that the sanction of eternal penalties is unreasonable, for you see plainly,
that it is no more than is absolutely necessary. But possibly you may think,
though it may be necessary in the government of this world for such things to
be denounced by God, and believed by man, yet there may not be the like
necessity for inflicting them in the world to come: God is not obliged to
execute his threatenings, as he is to make good his promises. But why is he not
obliged to perform the one as well as the other? His threatenings are never,
like those of men, made rashly, never founded in passion or caprice, that it
should be better not to execute, than execute them. -- If God will not execute
as well as threaten, why does he threaten at all? -- Is it not more suitable to
the character of a God of truth, and becoming the simplicity and sincerity of a
divine revelation, to declare the truth, and nothing but the truth, and leave
it to work upon men as it can, rather than denounce in the most solemn manner
what was never intended, and never shall come to pass, and so endeavor to
alarm them with false fears, and to work upon them with false persuasions,
which have nothing to answer them? P. 357, 358.
-- God must be just as well as merciful. He can never exercise one of his
attributes so as to clash or interfere with another. P. 388


ON these quotations it may be remarked, that the Bishop plainly held, that
endless misery is threatened; for he always uses the word everlasting in the
endless sense, and believed this to be the scriptural sense of it, when applied
to future punishment. See P. 355.
He also rejected the doctrine of annihilation. See P. 349.
Now then his opinion was either, that endless misery is unconditionally
threatened to all who die impenitent; or that it is threatened to them on
condition of their continued impenitence in the future world. If it be
threatened unconditionally, it follows, (1) That endless misery is the just
punishment of the sins committed in this life. For who will pretend, that God
has made a law, which contains an unjust penalty? This would be equally
inconsistent with the divine moral rectitude, as to make a law containing
unjust or unreasonable precepts; or to execute the unjust penalty. But if this
were the opinion of the Bishop, to be consistent he must have given up the
doctrine of universal salvation, to establish which he wrote his Dissertation.
For he not only declares in the passages already quoted, that God must be just
as well as merciful, and can never exercise one of his attributes so as to
interfere with another; and that his threatenings are never like those of men,
made rashly, never founded in passion or caprice, that it should be better not
to execute, than execute them; P. 358.
but P. 382.
according to Mat. V. 26, and XVIII. 34, he acknowledges, that the damned shall
pay the uttermost farthing, and all that is due. -- (2) It will follow, that
sin is an infinite evil. Certainly that moral evil which deserves an infinite
natural evil to be inflicted by way of punishment, is an infinitely
ill-deserving moral evil; this is plain by the very terms: and a moral evil,
which is infinitely ill-deserving, is all that is meant by the infinite evil of
sin. Yet this sentiment he reprobates in the strongest terms.

BUT if those who die impenitent be threatened with endless misery, on
condition of their continued impenitence only; then a mere salutary discipline
is all the punishment which any sinner deserves according to strict justice.
The law is the rule of righteousness; the penalty of that is adequate to the
demand of justice; and if the penalty of that be an endless punishment unless
the sinner shall repent, the penalty in reality is so much punishment only as
shall lead the sinner to repentance; and this salutary and necessary discipline
is the whole penalty or curse of the law.

THAT this was really the opinion of the Bishop may appear from the following
expressions: If God will not execute as well as threaten, why does he threaten
at all? It must be said, to reclaim a sinner; and it is allowed that if the
sinner be reclaimed, the end is obtained, and the threatening is voided of
course. P. 358.
-- Several of the fathers conceived the fire of hell to be a purging as well
as a penal fire -- But this penal purging fire is very different from the
purgatory of the church of Rome; for that is not once mentioned in scripture,
but this is often repeated. P. 379.
-- If the offender be corrected and reformed, the first end is fully answered,
and the punishment should cease of course. If he still remain incorrigible, it
is fitting that the punishment should be continued and increased, till it have
the due effect. P. 365.
-- It is just, and wise, and good, and even merciful, to correct a sinner as
long as he deserves correction, to chastise him into a sense of his guilt, to
whip and scourge him, as I may say, out of his faults. Ibid.
-- If they will not repent, why should he not execute upon them the
threatenings which they have despised? -- This is the only means of escaping,
there is none other condition or reservation. P. 359.
-- This I conceive to be the true notion of the eternity of rewards and
punishments. Righteousness will be forever happy and glorified, wickedness will
be forever miserable and tormented. But if righteousness should should become
wickedness, and wickedness should become righteousness -- with the change of
their nature, their state and condition would be changed too. Ibid.


BUT where in all the scriptures is any such condition mentioned in the account
of future punishment? It is not said depart ye cursed into fire which shall be
everlasting unless ye repent: These shall go away into punishment which shall
be everlasting unless they repent: Their worm shall not die unless they repent:
They cannot pass the great gulf unless they repent: The smoke of their torment
shall ascend up forever and ever, unless they repent. -- And to say that the
meaning of the scripture is thus conditional, is to assert without any proof or
evidence: nor does the Bishop pretend to produce any.

THE Bishop argues universal salvation in this manner, He would have all men to
be saved; and whence then arises the obstruction to his good will and
pleasure, or how comes it to pass, that his gracious purposes are ever
defeated? P. 367.
-- So it may be said, God is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, and now commands all men every where to repent. It
is the will of God that all mankind should repent now this very day. Yet all
mankind do not repent this very day. Whence then arises the obstruction to his
good will and pleasure, or how comes it to pass that his gracious purposes are
defeated?

"NOTHING," says the Bishop, is more contrariant to the divine nature and
attributes, than for God to bestow existence on any beings, whose destiny he
foreknows must terminate in wretchedness without recovery. Ibid.
The truth of this proposition depends on the following principle, That it is
not, nor can be, in any case, consistent with the general good implying the
glory of God, that a sinner should be miserable without end. For if God foresee
that the endless misery of a man will be subservient to the general good; there
is nothing contrariant to the divine nature, to bestow existence upon him,
though he foreknow that he will sin, that he will deserve endless misery, and
that his destiny will terminate in wretchedness without recovery.

WE find that there are in fact temporary miseries in the world. On what
principle can these be reconciled with the divine attributes? If it be
answered, on the sole principle, that they will issue in the personal good of
the patients; the reply is, (1.) That this will be fact wants proof. It is by
no means evident, that God aims at the personal good of every individual in all
his dispensations, however distressing; it is not evident that the inhabitants
of the old world, of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. are more happy in the whole of
their existence, than if they had lived and died like other men. -- (2.)
Especially it is not evident, that all the sin and wickedness which any man
commits will finally make him a more happy man, than he would have been, if he
had committed no sin. If God may without a view to promote the personal good of
a man, permit him to fall into sin, why may he not without a view to the same
object, punish him for that sin? To say that God could not consistently with
the moral agency of the man, prevent his falling into sin, will infer that God
cannot consistently with the moral agency of the man, certainly and infallibly
lead him to repentance. -- (3.) The principle now under consideration implies
that there is not now nor ever has been in the universe, any thing which on the
whole is a real evil to any man considered in his individual capacity: that no
man ever was or ever will be the subject of any curse, or any calamity which
any man, with a view to his own happiness only, should wish to avoid.

OR if temporary calamities be reconciled with the divine attributes on this
principle, that they are subservient to the general good; on the same principle
we reconcile with the divine attributes, the endless misery of the damned. --
This whole argument depends on the supposition, that the final misery of any
sinner cannot (...) subservient to the general good. To take this for granted
is intolerable.

AS we have seen, it is a fundamental principle with the Bishop, that such a
punishment as is sufficient to lead a sinner to repentance, is all which is
threatened in scripture. This then is the penalty or curse of the divine law:
this is the utmost which strict justice will admit: and he on this supposition
justly asserts, that some time or other satisfaction may be made, the debt of
sin may be discharged, and the sinner himself released out of prison. P. 382.
-- This is utterly inconsistent with the salvation of the damned in the way of
forgiveness. Yet his texts to prove universal salvation, imply salvation in the
way of forgiveness only. After quoting Exodus XXXIV. 6, 7; The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, he
adds, But how can such attributes consist with a system of irrevocable
vengeance for thousands, transgressions never to be forgiven, etc? To which I
answer, They can just as well consist with such a system, as with Bishop
Newton's system, which implies that the damned suffer all that they deserve;
for what is this but irrevocable vengeance to the highest decree? And surely
the transgressions of those who suffer such a punishment are never forgiven.

IT is absurd therefore for him to argue from grace, compassion, the divine
readiness to forgive, etc. And equally absurd to argue as he does from the
merits of Christ -- For do they obtain any relief by Christ, who themselves
suffer the whole penalty of the law, and thus make satisfaction for the;r own
sins? Yet he abundantly holds the salvation of all men by the merits of Christ:
as in the following passages out of many: It is the declared end and purpose of
our blessed Savior's coming into the world, to recover and to redeem lost
mankind. -- How often is he styled the Savior of the World in the full extent
and meaning of the words? P. 382.
-- His very enemies are reconciled to God by the merit and sufferings of his
beloved Son. P. 383.
-- He only requires us to exert our best endeavors, and the merits of our
Savior will atone for the rest. P. 387.


TO suppose that a man's happiness or misery to all eternity should absolutely
and unchangeably be fixed by the uncertain behavior of a few years in this
life, is a supposition even more unreasonable and unnatural, than that a man's
mind and manners should be completely formed in his cradle, and his whole
future fortune and condition should depend upon his infancy; infancy being much
greater in proportion to the few years of this life, than the whole of this
life to eternity. P. 361.
-- The same might be said, if the time of man's probation were ever so long,
but limited. Thus; To suppose that a man's happiness or misery to all eternity
should be unchangeably fixed by the uncertain behavior of millions of millions
of ages, is a supposition even more unreasonable, than that a man's mind and
manners should be completely formed in his cradle, and his whole future fortune
and condition should depend upon his infancy; infancy being much greater in
proportion to the few years of this life, than millions of millions of ages to
eternity.

"NOR could even his" [God's] justice for short-lived transgressions inflict
everlasting punishment. P. 368.
-- But how long-lived must the transgressions be, that justice may consent to
inflict for them everlasting punishments? Let them be ever so long-lived,
provided they are limited, they are still infinitely short-lived in comparison
with an everlasting duration. And will it be said that the transgression must
be as long-lived as the punishment, and that justice will not admit that the
punishment of any transgression be of longer continuance, than the
transgression was in the perpetration?

WHAT glory to God, to see a number of his creatures plunged in the depth of
misery? What good will toward men, to consign so many of them to everlasting
punishments? P. 382.
It is doubtless glory to God, that they be plunged into the depth of misery,
if both they deserve it, and it be subservient to the good of the universe: and
the gospel is a revelation of divine good will toward men, though many of them
reject the infinite grace and eternal salvation exhibited in that revelation,
and by this and their other sins justly deserve and finally bring on themselves
everlasting punishment.

II. A few remarks on James Relly's Treatise on Union.

HE seems to hold, that all mankind were from eternity so united to Christ,
that he and they make properly one whole or complex person. But it is extremely
difficult to determine with precision what his ideas were. I shall therefore
make several quotations from him, and subjoin such remarks as appear pertinent.
It does not appear how God -- could punish sin upon Christ, without the
concurrence of righteousness and truth: nor can this concurrence be proved,
without union between Christ and those, for whom he endured the cross --
because contrary to truth, which declares, that every man shall die for his
own sin. P. 3.
-- Such an union between Christ and his church, as gives him the right of
redemption, and brings him under that character, which is obnoxious to
punishment, is absolutely necessary. Ibid.
-- Without the consideration of union, where is the justice of charging the
black rebellion and crying guilt of man, upon the pure and spotless head of
Jesus. P. 4.
Sin is -- a crime -- only atoned for -- by the death, yea, the eternal death
of the sinner: which justice must inflict before it can be properly satisfied;
nor can it possibly admit of a surety here; because it can only punish him,
whom it first finds guilty; and not by reckoning him, to be what he is not,
according to human quibbles, but according to, artless, reasonable, divine
equity; which can only declare such guilty, on whom the fault is found, and can
only find the fault on such who have committed it. We only committed the fault;
upon us only can it be found. Therefore, without such an union between Christ
and us, as exposes us in his person, to judgment and condemnation, the harmony
of the divine perfections does not appear in the things which he suffered,
because contrary to truth and justice. P. 4.
He largely illustrates this union between Christ and his church, by the union
between the head and members in the natural body, and adds, The union and
harmony of the body renders it equitable to punish and chastise the whole body
in one member, for its offense in another. Because if one member suffer, all
the members suffer with it. As the union of the body makes it equitable to
punish the head, for the offense of the other members; with like equity do the
members participate with the head, in all its honors and glory. Thus the
crowning of the head, crowns the whole man, and every member partakes of the
honor.

THESE quotations may serve to give an idea of the union between Christ and
mankind, for which Mr. Relly pleads. I now proceed to the following remarks.

1. IT appears by the foregoing quotations, that Relly held such an union
between Christ and his church, that he upon the ground of justice became liable
to punishment on account of their sins. Otherwise the sufferings of Christ were
both unjust and contrary to truth: unjust, as he did not deserve them, contrary
to truth as the divine declaration is "The soul that sins shall die." -- But
if this be true, if Christ was liable to punishment on the ground of justice,
distributive justice; then Christ deserved death as much as the sinner. In his
sufferings the Father did but treat him according to his own character and
conduct: he did but cause him to eat the fruit of his own ways and to be filled
with his own devices: and no more thanks or praise are due to Christ on account
of his sufferings, than are due to the damned sinner, on account of his
enduring the pains of hell. -- Beside; how contrary is this to the scripture!
That declares, that Christ suffered the just for the unjust; that he was holy,
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners; That he did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth. -- Now if Christ was a "character obnoxious to
punishment" on the foot of distributive justice, he was very far from being
just, and from being holy, harmless, undefiled; he did sin, and guile was found
in his mouth. Indeed this is no more than Relly asserts in the above
quotations, when he says, that justice can only punish him whom it finds
guilty; not by reckoning him what he is not, but according to artless divine
equity, which can only find the fault on such as have committed it. Therefore,
according to this, Christ as one with sinners, committed the fault, and
therefore deservedly suffered for it.

IF it should be granted, that Christ did not himself commit the fault or sin,
for which he suffered, but that by a wise, sovereign, divine constitution, to
which he himself fully consented, he suffered for the sins of others; this
would be to give up all, and to acknowledge, that Christ did not suffer for sin
on the footing of distributive justice.

2. IT appears by the same quotations, that Relly was not of the opinion, that
Christ suffered in consequence of the imputation of sin to him, or because he
was the surety of his church: but on the ground of his proper union with men.
This appears by these words: Sin is a crime only atoned for by death, which
justice must inflict; nor can it possibly admit of a surety here: because it
can only punish him whom it first finds guilty: and not by reckoning him to be
what he is not. Yet he holds P. 41.
that Christ suffered on the sole ground of imputation. His words are, The
doctrine of union, which represents Jesus suffering under the character of the
sinner, does not suppose him such in his own particular person; nay strongly
witnesses the contrary, and respects him only thus by such an imputation as is
just and true. -- If then the sufferings of Christ do not suppose him to be a
sinner "in his own particular person;" how can this be reconciled with what is
quoted above from page 3d, in which he argues, that unless Christ be one with
those for whom he died, his sufferings cannot be reconciled with the scripture,
which declares that every man shall die for his own sin? Or with what is quoted
from page 4th which declares, that justice does not admit of a surety, or of
reckoning Christ to be what he is not?

3. IT further appears by the same quotations, that Relly considers Christ and
mankind, as one, in the same sense that the head and members in the natural
body are one. If this be so, then we are no more indebted to Christ for our
redemption, than a man's hands are indebted to his head for inventing means for
his livelihood; or his head is indebted to his hands for applying those means.

4. IT also appears, that on this plan Christ is now suffering, and will
without end suffer, an eternal death. Observe the quotation from page 4th, Sin
is a crime only atoned for by the death, yea the eternal death of the sinner;
which justice must inflict, before it can be properly satisfied: nor can it
possibly admit of a surety here; because it can only punish him whom it first
finds guilty; and not by reckoning him to be what he is not, according to human
quibbles, but according to divine equity, which can only declare such guilty on
whom the fault is found, and can only find the fault on such who have committed
it. These expressions manifestly declare, (1) That Christ is a sinner, and
committed the sin or fault for which he suffered, and that not by imputation
and as the surety of his people, but really and literally. -- (2) That sin can
be atoned for by the suffering of eternal death only. This and this only will
properly satisfy justice. -- (3) That therefore, as Christ is the propitiation
for our sins, he is now, and will without end, be suffering eternal death.

BUT I need not trouble the reader with any further remarks on such wild and
confused mysticism; such horrid doctrine.

III. Remarks on M. Petitpierre's Thoughts on the Divine Goodness, relative to
the government of moral agents, particularly displayed in future rewards and
punishments.

THIS author is a Swiss, who was a clergyman in his own country; but falling
into universalism, was censured and deposed. -- After this he went to London,
where he published the book which is now the subject of remark. It first
appeared in French, and was published in English in 1788.

IF I mistake not, the fundamental principles of this book are these two, --
That the sinner on the footing of strict justice, deserves no other punishment,
than that which is necessary to lead him to repentance and prepare him for
happiness -- That the happiness of every individual creature is necessary to
the greatest happiness of the general system.

IN page 24th, of the preceding work, a quotation or two was made to show, that
the first of the two propositions now mentioned, is a principle of this author.
To those quotations a great part of his book may be added to show the same; but
I shall add the following sentences only. -- The Deity being infinitely just,
will inflict on the wicked just and equitable punishments; punishments exactly
proportioned both in degree and duration, to the nature and extent of their
crimes. P. 91.
-- The second rule which divine justice follows in the dispensation of
punishment, is, to employ rigor only so much, and so long, as shall be
necessary to the destruction of sin, and the conversion of the sinner. P. 102.
-- The third rule of divine justice in the dispensations of sufferings,
ininforms us, when the Supreme Being ceases punishment; i. e. when the sinner
repents. P. 110.
-- We have established a principle whence to form consistent ideas of the
justice and severity of God, who punishes the wicked that he might bless them
in turning them every one from their iniquities P. 137.
-- Infinite justice adapts with the most perfect and minute detail, the
respective suitableness of his dealing to our moral state, and consequently to
our wants, throughout the whole of our existence. P. 76.


ON these quotations it may be remarked,

1. THAT according to this plan, the most exact and rigorous justice, divine
justice, infinite justice, admits that a sinner be made to suffer till he
repents, and no further. Such a punishment as this, is exactly proportioned
both in degree and duration, to the nature and extent of the crimes of the
sinner. This then is the utmost which the divine law will admit: this is the
true curse of the divine law; even that curse from which Christ has redeemed
us.

2. THIS punishment inflicted on any sinner, utterly precludes all pardon,
forgiveness and mercy. How is he forgiven, who suffers to the utmost extent of
justice? How is any sparing mercy exercised toward him, on whom the curse of
the law is fully executed? -- Yet M. Petitpierre constantly holds, that the
salvation of sinners is effected in the way of mercy, pardon and forgiveness.
Thus, speaking of the divine goodness, he says, P. 6.
Are men miserable? It is termed that infinite compassion he has for their
wretchedness. -- But when by a sincere repentance they turn from their
iniquity, then it is his clemency, his pardon, his mercy, and his grace, that
is extended to them. -- How striking, how awful, and at the same time how
merciful, are the representations of future torments! P. 109.
-- He will constantly pardon, and receive into favor the sincerely penitent
offender. Repentance appeases divine anger and disarms its justice, because it
accomplishes the end infinite goodness has in view, even when arrayed in the
awful majesty of avenging justice; which was severe, because the moral state of
the sinner required such discipline; and which when that state is reversed by
conversion -- will have nothing to bestow suitable to it, but the delightful
manifestations of mercy and forgiveness. It seems then, that not only is
justice satisfied by the repentance of the sinner; but justice, even the awful
majesty of avenging justice, will bestow mercy and forgiveness. But how
forgiveness can be an act of justice, and especially an act of avenging
justice, remains to be explained.

3. THE punishment now under consideration, is utterly inconsistent with
redemption by Christ. How are they redeemed or delivered from the curse of the
law, who in their own persons suffer that curse? And if Christ should deliver
them from it, he would deprive them of an inestimable benefit.

4. IF infinite justice adapts with the most perfect and minute detail, the
respective suitableness of his dealings to our moral state, and consequently to
our wants, throughout the whole of our existence; then what is goodness? and
how is it distinguished from justice? What more kind and favorable than this
can goodness, the divine goodness, infinite and incomprehensible goodness, do
for us? According to this definition of infinite justice, the institutions,
promises and scheme of the gospel, nay the unspeakable gift of Christ himself,
are mere communications of justice, and not of goodness and grace: and
according to the same definition there never has been, and never can be, any
benefit granted by the Deity to any of his creatures, which is any more than a
fruit of mere justice, and which may be withholden consistently with justice:
and all that God ever has done, and ever will or can do, for the happiness of
his creatures, is barely sufficient to save his character from a well grounded
charge of injustice.

BUT I mean not to dwell on this subject: I do but hint these particular's. It
would be an infinite labor to point out the endless absurdities of this scheme
of justice and punishment. I have considered the point more largely in Chap.
II, to which I beg leave to refer the reader.

THE other fundamental principle of this book is, That the happiness of every
individual creature is necessary to the greatest happiness of the system. This
idea is expressed in various passages, particularly in the following, It is
impossible the Divine Being should ever dispense any evil in this world, or in
the world to come; which is not even to the individuals an actual exercise of
perfect goodness. P. 220.


AND that this is necessarily implied in the scheme of this author, and of all
others who argue universal salvation from the divine perfections, without
respect to the atonement, must be manifest upon the slightest reflection.
Goodness will always seek the greatest good or happiness of intelligent beings.
And that the happiness of the system is a greater good than the happiness of
any individual or individuals of that system, is a self evident proposition.
Therefore goodness will never seek the happiness of any individuals, so as to
diminish the happiness of the system: for this would be not to seek the
advancement of happiness on the whole, but the diminution of it. If therefore
the divine goodness seeks the final happiness of every intelligent creature, it
must be because the happiness of every creature promotes and is necessary to
secure the greatest happiness of the system. If it be not necessary to the
greatest happiness of the system, it is no object to goodness.

CONCERNING this principle the following strictures are suggested:

1. THE truth of it is by no means evident. -- Indeed M Petitpierre supposes
the absurdity of the contrary position to be exceedingly clear, and therefore
indulges himself in the following ardent effusion: Can we suppose that
intelligent creatures capable by their nature of perfection and felicity, would
be unable to attain to this glorious destination, unless at the same time a
number of intelligent beings existed in eternal misery? Among creatures of the
same nature, thence capable of the same happiness; must a part be made happy at
the expense of a considerable portion devoted to endless misery and despair?
Cannot a Being infinitely perfect and happy communicate beatitude to his
intelligent offspring, on other and more favorable terms? Can he not be to
some the inexhaustible source of happiness; unless he is to others the
never-failing source of misery? But let us cease to heap contradiction on
contradiction, horror upon horror, and end this disagreeable discussion. -- M.
P -- rre did not reflect, that if this passage contain any argument, it is
equally forcible against the evils which in fact take place in this world, as
against the punishments of the future: and that the passage may be retorted
thus; Can we suppose that intelligent creatures capable by nature of peace,
liberty, and all the enjoyments of human society, would be unable to attain to
this excellent destination, unless at the same time a number of intelligent
beings were rendered miserable by fines, confiscations, ignominy, prisons,
chains, stripes and the gallows? Among creatures of the same nature, thence
capable of the same happiness; must a part be made safe and happy at the
expense of a considerable portion devoted to misery and despair, in the ways
just mentioned? Cannot a being infinitely perfect and happy communicate
beatitude to his intelligent offspring on other and more favorable terms? Can
he not be to some the source of peace, safety, liberty and happiness; unless he
be to others the source of misery? But let us cease to heap contradiction on
contradiction, horror upon horror, and end this disagreeable discussion.

TO say that God can convert the wicked, and without endless imprisonment and
punishment, prevent the mischief which they would do to the system, affords no
satisfaction. So God can convert the wicked in this world, and prevent all the
mischief which they do here. The question is not, what God has power to do, but
what he will in fact do; and what he may see fit to permit others to do.

M. P -- rre proceeds to argue against the possibility, that the misery of some
intelligent creatures should be necessary to the happiness of the rest, and
urges that instead of this, it would subvert their happiness; because the
inhabitants of heaven are so full of benevolence and compassion, that they
cannot be happy, while numbers of their fellow creatures are miserable; and
especially because it must be still more painful to them, to know that the
eternal sufferings of those their fellow creatures, were necessary to their own
happiness. P. 215, etc.
-- But these observations are no more reconcilable with fact and with
experience, than those which I just now quoted from the same author. Are the
best of men in this world, so compassionate, that they cannot be happy so long
as thieves and robbers are confined in workhouses and prisons, and murderers
die on gibbets? And do they disdain to enjoy their lives, their liberty, their
peace and their property, unless they can be secured in the possession of them,
on terms less ignominious and painful to some of their fellow creatures?

SUCH are the arguments by which M. P -- rre endeavors to prove, that the
misery of some men cannot be necessary to the greatest good of the system. If
these arguments be not convincing, it is in vain to expect convincing evidence
of the proposition now under consideration, from M. P -- rre.

2. THE reader has doutless taken notice that the proposition now under
consideration implies, not only that endless misery, but any temporary calamity
cannot be inflicted on an individual, consistently with the good of the whole,
unless that temporary calamity be subservient to his personal good. Observe the
words quoted above, It is impossible the Divine Being should ever dispense any
evil in this world or in the world to come, which is not even to the
individuals, an act of perfect goodness. -- Then all evils and calamities which
have ever existed, or do exist, or ever will exist, in this world, as well as
the future, are no real evils, no curse to the patients themselves; but they
are all so many benefits and blessings to them. The destruction of the old
world, of Sodom, etc, were real blessings to the patients personally. But how
does this appear? They certainly did not in this world operate for the good of
the patients; and how does it appear, that they will operate for their good in
the future world? To assert this without assigning a reason, is impertinent. --
Beside; on this hypothesis, there is no such thing as any curse either in this
world or the future; and there is no difference between a curse and a blessing.
What then shall we make of the scriptures, which speak abundantly of curses,
and constantly distinguish between curses and blessings?

3. THIS, which I have called the second fundamental principle of this author,
is in reality not distinct from the first. -- If the good or happiness of the
system require the happiness of every individual, it surely cannot require the
misery of any individual: and if it do not require his misery, it is not
consistent with justice, that he should be made miserable by punishment; or it
is not consistent with justice that he be punished any further than is
subservient to his own personal happiness. -- No punishment is consistent with
justice, which in view of the criminal alone, without respect to a substitute,
or an atonement, the public good does not require.

SO that the whole system of this author depends on this single principle, That
it is not consistent with justice, to punish a sinner any further, than is
subservient to his own personal good: and this principle, as I have endeavored
to show in Chap. II, and VIII, really comes to this, Whether sin be a moral
evil. Moral evil is in its own nature odious, and justly the object of divine
disapprobation, and of the manifestation of disapprobation, whether such
manifestation of disapprobation be subservient to the personal good of the
sinner or not. But the manifestation of divine disapprobation is punishment.
Therefore moral evil may justly be punished, whether such punishment be
subservient to the personal good of the sinner or not. But as sin according to
the principle now under consideration, cannot be justly punished any further
than is subservient to the personal good of the sinner, of course it is no
moral evil.

AGAIN; moral evil in its own nature impairs the good of the moral system.
Therefore God as a friend to that system, must necessarily, and may justly
disapprove it, and manifest his disapprobation, though it may not tend to the
personal good of the sinner. But this manifestation of divine disapprobation is
punishment, and just punishment. But sin, according to the principle now under
consideration, cannot justly be thus punished. Therefore sin is not, according
to this principle, a moral evil.

IF therefore M. P -- rre believe, that sin is a moral evil, and in its own
nature deserves the divine abhorrence, he must, to be consistent, give up his
whole system of universal salvation.

AS the book now before us is a later publication than Dr. Chauncy's; and as
the Doctor's book, which at its first appearance was so highly extolled for
deep learning and demonstrative reasoning, did not convert the world; the
zealots for universalism have been lavish of their encomiums on this work of
Petitpierre, and as it seems, have great expectations from it. However, it
requires no spirit of prophecy to foresee, that this book will not effect more
numerous conversions, than that of Dr. C. The author has a good talent at
declamation; and those who are already persuaded of the truth of his system,
may be much comforted by his pathetic representations of the divine goodness
and universal happiness. But those who are doubtful, and wish to see a
consistent system established on the broad basis of reason and revelation, will
doubtless find themselves necessitated to prosecute their inquiries further,
than M. Petitpierre will lead them.

FINIS.
SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
NEW HAMPSHIRE.
REV. Joseph Buckminster, Portsmouth. Joshua Baley, Esquire. Hopkinton. Richard
Bartlett, Esquire. Pembroke. Mr. Samuel Bowl, Portsmouth. Rev. Jacob Crane,
Hopkinton, 6 books. John Crane, Esquire. Pittsfield. Col. Jonathan Crane, Hampton
Falls. Major Isaac Chandler, Hopkinton. Aaron Greely, Esquire. do. Mr. Peter Green,
Physician, Concord. Capt. Gibson, Hencker. Mr. John Jewet, Hopkinton. Rev.
Ebenezer Hazeltine, Epsom. Deacon Abel Kimbal, Hopkinton. Mr. Jonathan Kimbal,
Concord. Rev. Samuel Langdon, D. D. Hampton Falls. Rev. Levi Lankton, Alstead.
Rev. James Miltimore, Stratham. Mr. Daniel Merril, Student, Dartmouth College.
Mr. Elisha Mosely, do. do. Lieut. Morse, Hopkinton. Rev. John C. Ogden, Rector
of Queen's Chap. Portsm. Mr. George Osborn, Printer, Portsmouth. Mr. Bulkley
Olcott, Charlestown. His Excellency John Pickering, Esquire. Portsmouth. Deacon
Samuel Penhallow, do. Rev. William Pickle, Bedford. Mr. Christopher Paige, A.
M. Hopkinton. Hon. John Sullivan, Durham. Rev. Isaac Smith, Gilmantown. Col.
Stickney, Concord. Mr. Peter Sanborn, A. R. Kingston. Mr. John Sherburn,
Portsmouth. Mr. Daniel Shephard, Student, Dartmouth College. Lieut. Ezekiel
Smith, Hencker, 6 books. Deacon Nathan Sergeant, Hopkinton. Rev. Elihu Thayer,
Kingston. Hon. Ebenezer Webster, Esquire. Salisbury. Rev. Samuel Wood, Bosewain.
Mr. Josiah White, Pittsfield. Mr. Azel Washbourn, Randolph, in Vermont.
MASSACHUSETT'S.
Rev. Joseph Appleton, Brookfield. Rev. Solomon Aiken, Dracutt. Rev. David
Avery, V. D. M. Wrentham. Moses Ashley, Esquire. Stockbridge. Mr. N. Austin,
Charlestown. Mr. Simeon Allen, Sturbridge. Rev. Daniel Breck, V. D. M.
Topsfield. Rev. John Bradford, Roxbury. Rev. Josiah Blodget, Greenwich. Rev.
James Briggs, Cummington. Rev. Joseph Badger, Blandford. John Bisco, Esquire.
Spencer. Joseph Browning, Esquire. Brimfield. Deacon Elisha Bradley, Stockbridge.
Capt. Offin Boardman, Newbury-Port. Mr. Jacob Boardman, Merchant, do. Mr.
Edmund Bartlett, do. 6 books. Mr. William Bartlett, do. Mr. Moses Brown,
Merchant, do. Mr. John Brown, Holland. Mr. Nathanael Balch, Boston. Mr. Caleb
Blake, A. B. Wrentham. Mr. Jeremiah Bumstead, Boston. Mr. David Basset, Ware.
Rev. Jacob Catlin, New Marlborough. Rev. Daniel Collins, Lanesborough Richard
Carry, Esquire. Charlestown. Parker Cleaveland, Esquire. Newbury-Port. Nehemiah
Cleaveland, Esquire. Topsfield. Deacon Joseph Cutler, Brookfield. Capt. Greenleaf
Clark, Newbury-Port. Capt. John Coombs, do. Mr. Joshua Crosby, Hardwick, 6
books. Mr. William Coombs, merchant, Newbury-Port. Mr. David Coffin, merchant,
do. Mr. Reuben Cotton, Greenwich. Mr. Nathan Church, Newbury-Port. Mr. Gershom
Cutler, Boston. Mr. Hezekiah Clark, physician, Lanesborough. Mr. William
Caldwell, Newbury-Port. Hon. Thomas Dawes, Esquire. Boston. Mr. John Deming, do.
Mr. Richard Devens, Charlestown. Mr. Lucius Doolittle, physician, Hardwick. Mr.
Asa Dana, Holland. Mr. Timothy Dickenson, A. M. Amherst. Rev. Nathanael Emmons,
Franklin, 6 books. Rev. Joseph Eckley, Boston. Capt. Daniel Egery, Hardwick.
Rev. James Freeman, Boston, 2 books. Rev. Jonathan French, Andover. Rev. Elisha
Fish, Upton, 2 books. Rev. Amaziah Frost, Milford, 2 books. Rev. Elijah Fitch,
Hopkinton. Rev. Isaac Foster, Great Barrington. Rev. Daniel Foster, N.
Braintree. Rev. Elisha Fish, Windsor. Deacon M. French, Braintree. Mr. Andrew
Frathingham, merchant, Newbury-Port. Mr. John Fitz, do. Mr. Robert Fowl, A. B.
do. Mr. Robert Field. Greenwich. Mr. Daniel Farrington, A. B. Wrentham. Mr.
Zebediah Farnham, Newbury-Port. Mr. Daniel Fay, Jun. Hardwick. Hon. Moses Gill,
Esquire. Boston. Hon. N. Gorham, Esquire. Charlestown. Rev. Thomas Gair, A. M. Boston.
Deacon Richard Gridley, do. Mr. Abel Greenleaf, merchant, Newbury-Port. Major
Joseph Gould, Topsfield. Rev. Samuel Hopkins, Hadley. Rev. Thomas Holt,
Hardwick, 3 books. Rev. Enoch Hale, West-Hampton. Rev. William Hooper, Berwick.
William Hyslop, Esquire. Brooklyn. Mr. Daniel Horton, Newbury-Port, 6 books. Mr.
Benjamin Herrod, Merchant, do. Capt. Joseph Hale, do. Mr. Joseph Hale,
Hardwick. Mr. Justus Hull, Baptist preacher, Hoosuck. Mr. Thomas Hinckley,
Merchant, Brimfield. Mr. John Hamilton, Pelham. Mr. Jos. Hurd, Charlestown. Mr.
Silvanus How, Greenwich. Mr. Jesse Haven, Holliston. Mr. David Ingersoll, Lee.
Mr. James Jewet, Merchant, Newbury-Port. Rev. David Kellogg, Framingham.
Nathanael Kingsley, Esquire. Becket. Maj. Martin Kingsley, Hardwick. Mr. Jos.
Kettel, Charlestown. Mr. Benjamin Keeler, Lanesborough. Rev. John Lathrop, D.
D. Boston. Deacon I. Larkin, Charlestown. Mr. Robert Long, Schoolmaster,
Newbury-Port. Mr. Joseph Long, do. do. Mr. Phineas Lyman, Hadley. Capt. Alfred
Lion, Holland. Rev. Samuel Monson, Lenox. Deacon Jonathan Mason, Boston. Deacon
Patrick M'Mullen, Pelham. Mr. John Mycall, Printer, Newbury-Port. Mr. Jonathan
Morse, do. Mr. Thomas Moor, A. B. Sterling. Mr. Daniel Matthews, New Braintree.
Capt. James Mcllen, Holliston. Mr. James Mann, A. M. Wrentham. Mr. Abraham
Noyes, Trader, Newbury-Port. Capt. William Noyes, do. Mr. Silas Noyes,
Merchant, do. Deacon Stephen Nash, Stockbridge. Capt. Nathanael Newell,
Newbury-Port. Mr. Richard S. Noyes, do. Mr. Bishop Norton, Schoolmaster, do.
Mr. John Nazro, Merchant, Worcester. Mr. Asa Newton, Belchertown, Hon. Oliver
Phelps, Granville. Rev. David Perry, Richmond. Rev. Joseph Pope, Spencer. Rev.
Elijah Parish, Newbury. Rev. John Porter, Bridgewater. Eleazer Porter, Esquire.
Hadley. Mr. Nicholas Pike, A. B. and A. A. S. Newbury-Port. Mr. Enoch Plummer,
jun. Trader, do. Elder Jeremy Pearson, do. Deacon Aaron Phipps, Holliston.
Capt. James Paige, Hardwick. Deacon Nathanael Paige, do. Capt. Timothy Paige,
do. Mr. Paul Paige, do. Mr. Reed Paige, A. B. do. Mr. Winslow Paige, do. Mr.
Oliver Partridge, Physician, Stockbridge. Mr. Richard Pike, merchant,
Newbury-Port. Mr. Jonathan Pearson, do. Mr. Samuel Pilsbury, do. Mr. Enoch
Pond, A. M. Wrentham. Mr. William Paige, Ware. Mr. Ephraim Perkins, Becket. Mr.
Elijah Phelps, Lanesborough. Mr. Moses Paige, Hardwick. Deacon William Paige,
do. Capt. Seth Pierce, do. Rev. Ezra Reeve, Holland. Rev. John Robinson,
Westborough. Mr. Augustus Regan, Newbury-Port. Mr. Jesse Remington, Abington.
Mr. Ebenezer Rich, Greenwich. Hon. Theodore Sedgwick, Representative in
Congress, Stockbridge. Rev. David Sanford, Medway, 12 books. Rev. Samuel
Stillman, D. D. Boston, 6 books. Rev. Josiah Spalding, Worthington, 6 books.
Rev. Samuel Spring, Newbury-Port. Rev. Jonathan Strong, Braintree. Rev.
Hezekiah Smith, Haverhill. Rev. Seth Swift, Williamstown. John Sweetser, Esquire.
Boston. John Stone, Esquire. Holliston. Samuel Savage, Esquire. Charlestown. Edmund
Sawyer, Esquire. Newbury-Port, 6 books. Ashbel Strong, Esquire. Pittsfield. Col.
Jonathan Smith, Lanesborough. Deacon John Simpkins, Boston. Deacon Richard
Smith, Newbury-Port. Deacon Nehemiah Stebbins, Greenwich. Capt. Simon Stone,
do. Deacon Ebenezer Stratton, Williamstown. Lieut. Andrew Squier, Lanesborough.
Mr. Erastus Sergeant, A. M. Physician, Stockbridge. Mr. Edmund Swain,
Newbury-Port. Mr. Asa Sheldon, New-Marlborough. Mr. Benjamin Skinner,
Williamstown. Mr. Oliver Smith, Hadley. Mr. Joseph Shed, Boston. Hon. George
Thacher, Repres. in Congress. Rev. Peter Thacher, Boston. Rev. David Tappan,
Newbury. Elder, Enoch Titcomb, Newbury-Port. Deacon Thomas Thompson, do. Mr.
Michael Titcomb, do. Mr. Israel Trask, Physician, Brimfield. Mr. Gideon
Thompson, Physician, Lee, 12 books. Mr. John Tirrell, Lanesborough. Rev.
Nehemiah Williams, Brimfield. Rev. Samuel Whitman, Goshen, 6 books. Rev.
Stephen West, Stockbridge. Rev. Ephraim Ward, Brookfield. Rev. Payson
Williston, East-Hampton. Samuel Ware, jun. Esquire. Conway. Gideon Wheeler, Esquire.
Lanesborough. Deacon David Wallis, Holland. Major Genesis Jonathan Warner,
Hardwick. Mr. Jonathan Warner, jun. do. Mr. Prince West, Lee, 6 books. Mr.
Thomas Wallis, physician, Holland. Mr. Samuel Whitwell, Boston. Mr. Daniel
Waldo, merchant, Worcester. Mr. D. Wood, Jun. Charlestown.
Subscribers not returned in season to be inserted in their proper places in
the preceding catalogue.
The Hon. Caleb Strong, Esquire. Senator of the United States, Northampton. Rev.
Solomon Williams, do. Samuel Henshaw, Esquire. do. Mr. Ebenezer Hunt, physician do.
Mr. Levi Sheppard, physician, do. Mr. Jacob Parsons, do. Mr. Joseph Clark, do.
Rev. Jonathan Judd, Southampton.
RHODE ISLAND.
Hon. Jabez Bowen, Esquire. late Deputy Governor of the State of Rhode Island,
Providence. Lemuel Baley, Esquire. Tiverton. Nicholas Brown, Esquire. merchant,
Providence. Moses Brown, Esquire. do. Mr. George Benson, merchant, do. Hon. John
Foster, Esquire. do. Theodore Foster, Esquire. do. Mr. Abel Flint, Tutor of R. I.
College, do. Rev. Enos Hitchcock, D. D. do. Rev. Samuel Hopkins, Newport.
Joseph Martin, Esquire. Providence. Rev. William Patten, Newport. Rev. Mase
Shepard, Little Compton. Adam Simmons, Esquire. do.
CONNECTICUT.
Rev. Jason Atwater, Branford. Rev. Samuel Austin, New Haven. David Ambler,
Esquire. Bethlem. Mr. Oliver Air, A. B. Franklin. Mr. Abishai Alden, Stafford. Mr.
Gideon Allen, New Fairfield. Mr. Levi Austin, Canaan. Rev. T. Wells Bray, N.
Guilford. Rev. Charles Backus, Summers, 6 books. Rev. Joshua Belden,
Wethersfield. Rev. Matthias Burnet, Norwalk. Rev. Joel Bordwell, Kent. Rev.
Daniel Brinsmade, Washington. Isaac Beers, Esquire. New Haven. Thaddeus Betts, Esquire.
Norwalk. Barnabas Bidwell, Esquire. Tutor, Yale College. Mr. Chandler Bartlet,
Lebanon. Mr. Barzillai Beckwith, East-Haddam. Capt. Abel Burritt, merchant,
New Haven. Mr. Elisha Beebe. Canaan. Mr. Asahel Beebe, do. Mr. William Battle,
merchant, Torringford. Mr. David Brown, Ashford. Mr. Martin Bull, Farmington.
Mr. Patrick Butler, Lebanon. Mr. Daniel Bulkley, merchant, East-Haddam. Deacon
Nathanael Benedict, Norwalk. Jonah Clark, Esquire. Branford. Mr. Daniel Crocker, A.
M. Cand. for the min. New Haven. Capt. Henry Child, Woodstock. Benjamin
Chaplin, Esquire. Mansfield. Capt. William Cone, East-Haddam. Capt. Jonah Cone,
East-Haddam. Deacon Ebenezer Cowles, Meriden. Mr. Isaac Cowles, Physician,
Hanwinton. Mr. Merwin Clark, Farmington. Mr. Jabez Chapman, Ellington. Mr.
Aaron Cook, Wallingford. Rev. Jeremiah Day, Washington. John Davenport, Esquire.
Stamford. Mr. John Davenport. Mr. Gordon Dorrance, Hampton. Mr. Joshua Downer,
physician, Preston. Mr. Russel Dutton, East-Haddam. Capt. Amasa Dutton, do.
Rev. Zebulon Ely, Lebanon, 4 books. Rev. Samuel Eells, North-Branford. Daniel
Elsworth, Esquire. Ellington. Mr. Gurdon Elsworth. do. Rev. Daniel Farrand, Canaan.
Rev. Nathan Fenn, Berlin. Rev. John Foot, Cheshire, 6 books. Col. Thomas Fitch,
Attorney at Law, Norwalk. Mr. Ebenezer Fitch, Tutor, Yale College. Rev. Elijah
Gridley, Mansfield, 6 books. Rev. Nathanael Gaylord, Hartland. Mr. Joseph
Galpin, Berlin. Mr. Elijah Gridley, A. M. Farmington. Mr. Joseph Griggs, Union.
Col. William Gould, Physician, Branford. Rev. Levi Heart, Preston, 6 books. Rev.
Rufus Hawley, Northington. Rev. William Hotchkiss, Saybrook. Nathan Hale, Esquire.
Canaan. Asahel Huntington, Esquire. Norwich. Col. Noadiah Hooker, Farmington. Capt.
Eliphalet Holmes, East-Haddam. Capt. Samuel Heart, Berlin. Capt. Ithamar Harvy,
East-Haddam. Capt. Ebenezer Holmes, do. Deacon James Hough, Meriden. Lieut.
Amos Hosford, Berlin. Mr. John Hall, Ellington. Mr. David Hale, A. M. Coventry.
Mr. Jared Hinckley, Lebanon. Mr. James Hatch. Mr. Seth Higby, Baptist Minister,
Weston. Mr. Dyer T. Hinckley, A. M. Lebanon. Mr. Ebenezer Huggins, merchant,
New Haven. Mr. Alvan Hyde A. B. Franklin. Deacon Levi Ives, New Haven. Timothy
Jones, Esquire. do. Mr. James Judd, Farmington. Mr. Jared Jones, Branford. Mr.
Alfred Johnson, Candidate for the ministry. Capt. Nathanael B. Johnson,
Meriden. Rev. Walter King, Chelsea, 6 books. Rev. Aaron Kin, V. D. M. Groton.
Col. John Keys, Windham. Mr. Ebenezer Kingsbury, Coventry. Mr. Ezekiel Kelsy,
Berlin. Rev. Mark Leavenworth, Waterbury. Rev. William Lockwood, Milford.
William Lyman, East-Haddam. Lynde Lord, Esquire. Sheriff of Litchfield county.
Capt. Samuel Lee, Guilford, 6 boooks. Lieut. Phineas Lewis, Farmington. Mr.
Elijah Lion, Woodstock. Mr. Eliphalet Lockwood, merchant, Norwalk. Mr. Elijah
Loveland, Berlin. Rev. Justus Mitchell, Canaan, 6 books. Rev. Jehu Minor,
South-Britain, 6 books. Rev. Samuel John Mills, Torringford, 2 books. Rev. Noah
Merwin, Washington. Major Edward Mott, Preston. Jedediah Morse, Esquire. Woodstock.
Mrs. Mehitabel Morse, New Haven. Capt. John Mix, do, Capt. Reuben Marcy,
Ashford. Mr. William Fowler Miller, A. B. Farmington. Mr. John Morgan, Preston.
Rev. Samuel Not, V. D. M. Franklin, 6 books. Mr. Roger Newton, jun. Tutor,
Yale College. Rev. Allen Olcott, Farmington. Rev. Nathan Perkins, Hartford.
Rev. Joshua Perry, Hampden. Rev. Timothy Pitkin, Farmington. Rev. Micaiah
Porter, V. D. M. Voluntown, 6 books. James Potter, Esquire. New Fairfield. Oliver
Parmelee, Esquire. Bethlem. Major Nathan Peter's, Attorney at law. Preston. Deacon
Noah Porter, Farmington. Mr. Edward Porter, do. Rev. William Robinson,
Southington. Rev. Medad Rogers, New-Fairfield. Rev. Noadiah Russel, Thompson.
Rev. Ammi Ruhamah Robins, Norfolk. Rev. Robert Robbins, Colchester. Roger
Riley, Esquire. Berlin. Mr. Henry A. Rowland, Windsor. Mr. William F. Rowland, do.
Mr. Justus Rose, N. Branford. Mr. Joel Rice, Meriden. Mr. William Robinson,
Preston. Ammi Rogers. Student, Yale College. Hon. Roger Sherman, Esquire. Repres.
in Cong. New Haven. Hon. Jonathan Sturges, do. Fairfield, 6 books. Hon. Joseph
Spencer, Esquire. East Haddam. Rev. Ezra Styles, L.L.D. D.D. President of Yale C.
Rev. John Smalley, Berlin. Rev. Cyprian Strong, Chatham. Rev. Nathan Strong,
Hartford. Rev, Timothy Stone, Lebanon. Rev. Peter Starr, Warren. Mr. Sylvester
Sage, A.B. Cand. f. the ministry, Berlin. Mr. Caleb Street, merchant,
Wallingford. Mr. Titus Street, merchant, New Haven. Mr. William St. John,
merchant, Norwalk. Mr. Samuel Smith, Farmington. Lieut. Elisha Strong, do. Hon.
John Treadwell, do. Rev. Benjamin Trumbull, North-Haven, 2 books. Rev. Lemuel
Tyler, Preston. Rev. Jonathan Todd, Guilford. Rev. David Tullar, Derby. Rev.
Martin Tullar, Milford. Mr. Samuel G. Tracy, Preston. Mr. William Townsend,
Colchester. Rev. Joseph Vail, East-Haddam. Rev. John Willard, Meriden. Miss
Nabby Watson, New-Hartford. William Williams, Esquire. Stonington. Rev. Sam. Wales,
D. D. Profess. of Divinity in Yale Col. Solomon Wales, Esquire. Union. Solomon
Whitman, Esquire. Farmington. Mr. Stephen Williams, Branford. Mr. Chapman Warner,
Lyme. Mr. Elizur Wright, Canaan. Mr. Ezra Woodworth, A. B. Lebanon. Capt.
William Witter, Preston.
STATE of NEW YORK.
Rev. Thomas Beveridge, Minister of the Associate Congregation, Cambridge,
Albany county. Mr. David Schuyler Bogart, Student of Columbia College. Rev.
Abner Benedict, New Lebanon. Mr. Samuel Campbell, bookseller, New York, 14
books. Mr. Matthias Crane, Hatter, do. Mr. Cornelius Davis, Master of the
Afric. Free Sch. do. Mr. Daniel Hitchcock, House Carpenter, do. Mr. Robert
Hodge, bookseller, do. 14 books. Rev. Benjamin Judd, Poundridge. Mr. John
Johnson, Student, Columbia College. Mr. Henry Johnson, Teacher of the Eng.
Lang. N. York. Rev. John Livingston, D. D. do. Mr. Thomas Vail, do. Mr. Abraham
Vangelder, do. Mr. William W. Wolsey, do.
NEW JERSEY.
Mrs. Margaret Berrien, Rocky Hill. Mr. Joseph Brewster, Physician, Deerfield,
Cumb. coun. Rev. Mathias Cazier, Orange Dale. Mr. Abijah Davis, Student in
Divinity, Deerfield. Miss Hannah Fox, Burlington county. Rev. Oliver Heart, A.
M. Pastor of the Bap. Chapter Hopewell. Mr. Isaac Harris, Physician, Pittsgrove.
Rev. Joseph Grover, Hanover. Rev. Jonathan Jarman, Cohansey. Rev. Robert
Kelsay, Pastor of the Bap. Church, do. Andrew Law, Nathan Leek, Esquire. Deerfield,
C. c. Recompense Leek, do. do. Mr. David Lore, Cumberland county. Mr. David
Mood, Deerfield, Cumberland c. Mr. John Royal, Cohansey. Mr. Philip Shepard,
do. Mr. Isaac Shepard, do. Mr. John Siffin, do. Isaac Wheaton, Esquire. Cumberland
county. Rev. Peter Wilson, Bordentown.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Rev. Robert Annan, A. M. Philadelphia. Rev. John Anderson, Memb. of the Assoc.
Presb. Penns. Robert Aitken, Printer, Philadelphia, 2 books. Major William
Alexander, Carlisle. John Agnew, Esquire. do. John Allen, mason do. Mr. Charles
Bovard, do. Mr. William Blair, do. Mrs Eliza Bankson, Philadelphia. John Creigh
Esquire. merchant, Carlisle. Miss Susanna Cheesman, Philadelphia. Rev. James
Clarkson, Minister of the Associate Congregation, of Gweenstown, in York
county. Rev. Joseph Clarkson, Philadelphia. Mr. Robert Campbell, bookseller,
Philadelphia. Mr. Matthew Carey, Printer, do. 30 books. Mr. Daniel Cornog,
Great Valley, 6 books. Mr. Stephen Duncan, merchant. Carlisle. Mr. David Denny,
Stud, in Divin. Dickins. Col. do. Thomas Duncan. Esquire. Attorney at Law. do. Rev.
George Duffield, D. D. Philadelphia. Mr. Matthew Duncan. Mr. Thomas Dobson,
bookseller, Philadelphia. Mr. Campbell Dick, merchant, Mr. Samuel Davis,
Hatter, Philadelphia. Rev. John Ewing, D. D. Provost of the Univer. of Penns.
Mr. Silas Engles, House Carpenter. John Fulton, Esquire. East Nottingham, Chester
county. Rev. John E. Finley, Past. of the Cong. of Faggs-manor. Mr. John
Fairbairn, Philadelphia. Mr. Samuel Gray, merchant, Carlisle, Mr. Andrew Gwin,
do. Mr. Isaac Greer, Stud. in Divin. Dickinson College, do. Mr. Joseph S.
Galbraith, do. do. do. Mr. Joseph Givin, merchant, do. Rev. David Goodwillie,
Member of the Associate Presbytery. Mr. John Gemmel, A. M. Student in Divinity.
Mr. John Hughes, merchant, Carlisle. Mr. Silas Hough, Bucks county. John
Jordan, Esquire. Carlisle. Mr. Joseph Junkin, East Pennr. Mr. William Innes,
Brewer, Philadelphia. Mr. Thomas Johnstone, Pequea, Lancaster county, Mr.
George Kline, Printer, Carlisle. Mr. James Lamberton, merchant, do. Mr. Samuel
Leacock, Philadelphia. Charles Leeper, Esquire. do. Mr. John Montgomery, merchant,
do. Mr. Robert Miller, do. Mr. John Miller, merchant, do. Mr. John Morrison,
tobacconist, do. Mr. Samuel A. M'Coskry, practitioner of physic, do. Mr. James
M'Lain, jun. Stud. in Divin. Dick. Col. do. Mr. Samuel M'Lane, Breeches-maker
and Glover, Phil. Joseph Magossin, Esquire. Mr. John M'Culloh, Spruce-street,
Philadelphia. Mr. James Moyes, Sailmaker, do. Mr. Richard Mosely, Carpenter,
do. Mr. John M'Allister, cane and whipmaker, market-st. do. Mr. James Muir, in
Sheets. Rev. William Marshall, Min. of the Scots Presbyterian Chur.
Philadelphia, 6 books. Mr. John M'Culloch, Printer, Philadelphia, 12 copies.
Mr. Thomas Napier, Planemaker, Philadelphia. Rev. Charles Nisbet, D. D. Prin.
of Dick. Col. Carlisle. Mr. William Petrikin, tailor, do. Mr. Hugh Patten, do.
Col. Samuel Postlethwaite, do. Mr. John Pardon, merchant, Philadelphia. Mr.
Robert Patton, do. 6 books. Mr. James Ross, Prof. of Lang. in Dick. Col.
Carlisle. Mr. William Rynolds, Farmer, Pequea, Lancaster coun. Mr. Henry Rice,
bookseller, Philadelphia. Rev. William Rogers, A. M. Professor of English and
Oratory, in the College of Philadelphia. Benjamin Rush, M. D. Profess. of
Chemistry, do. Mr. Sallows Shewel, merchant, do. Mr. Thomas Shields, Goldsmith,
do. Mr. James Short, storekeeper, borough of York. Mr. Conrad Shutz,
Philadelphia. Mr. Matthew Sinclair, Stud. in Div. Dick. Col. Carlisle. Mr.
William Speer, do. do. Mr. Nathanael Randolph Snowden, do. do. Ephraim Steel,
Esquire. merchant, do. Mr. Robert Smith, merchant, Philadelphia. Rev. James Sproat,
D. D. do. Mr. Jedediah Snowden, do. Rev. John Smith, Middle Octorara, 6 books.
Mrs. Isabel Stevenson, Philadelphia. Mrs. Van Solingen, do. Mr. Peter Stewart,
do. 18 books. Mr. Samuel Tate, schoolmaster, Carlisle. Mr. T. Trenchard,
Philadelphia, 6 books. Mr. Archibald Tate, Marsh-Creek, York County. Capt.
Joseph Tatem, Philadelphia. Mr. John Wray, merchant, Carlisle. Mr. Moses
Williamson, do do. Mr. Nathanael Weakley, do. do. Mr. Hugh Wilson, do. do. Mr.
William Watts, Buck's County. Rev. Archibald White, member of the Associate
Presbytery of Pensylvania. Alexander Wright, Esquire. Washington County. Mr. John
Wilson, merchant. Mr. W. Young, Bookseller, Philadelphia, 100 books. Mr. John
Young, Sudent in Divinity, Dickenson College, Carlisle. Mr. Joseph Young,
coppersmith, Carlisle. Mr. John Yeoman, merchant.
DELAWARE.
Rev. Thomas Ainger, Wilmington. Mr. John Darragh, merchant. Vincent
Loockerman, Esquire.
SOUTH CAROLINA.
Mr. George Airs, Christ's-Church Parish. Mr. William Airs. Mr. Thomas
Barksdale, Christ's-Church Parish. Mr. Clement O. Brown, do. Mr. Samuel Beach.
Mr. Samuel Baldwin. Mr. Thomas Bennet. Mr. Gal. Capers, Christ's-Church Parish.
Mr. Peter Darr. do. Mr. Edward Darrelt. Mr. J. Edwards. Mr. Lewis Fogart. Mr.
James Fisher. Mr. J. Heart, St. Thomas. Mr. William Hamlin, Christ's-Church. Mr.
James Hibben, do. Rev. William Hollinshead, Charleston. Hon. Richard Hutson,
do. Mr. Thomas Jones, Mr. Isaac Stockton Keith. Mr. Joseph Legare,
Christ's-Church Parish. Mr. Isaac Legare, do. Mr. Nathan Legare. Mrs. Ann
Legare. Mr. Stephen Lawrence. Rev. Daniel M'Calla, A. M. Past. of the Ind. Chapter
Chapter Chapter P. Mr. Daniel M'Calla. Mr. Thomas Martin. Rev. Henry Purcel, D. D.
Rector of St. Michael's Charlest. Mr. Thomas Player, Christ's-Church Parish.
Hon. David Ramsay, M. D. Charleston. Mr. Joseph Hall Ramsay. Mr. William Scott,
jun. Christ's-Church Parish. Mr. Thomas Scott, do. Mr. Thomas Screven, St.
Thomas. Mr. Josiah Smith. Mr. George Smith. Mr. William Stevens. Mr. Joshua
Toomer, Christ's-Church Parish. Mr. James H. Thomson, A. M. Charleston, 6
books. Mr. Elias Vanderhont. Mr. John Webb. Mr. William Wilkie. Mr. Rd.
Withers. Mr. Eliab Wingood.
GEORGIA.
Mr. John Bankston. Wilkes. Mr. Samuel Blackburn, A. B, do. 6 books. Edward
Butler, Esquire. do. Mr. John Black, do. Mr. Peter Bonds, do. 6 books. Mr. Lewis
Barret do. 6 books. Nathanael Coats, Esquire. do. John Darracoot, Esquire. do. 6 books.
Gideon Dowse, Esquire. Newport. Mr. John Hendly, sen. Wilkes, 6 books. Mr. John
Hendly, jun. do. 6 books. Lyman Hall, Esquire. Savannah. Rev. Abiel Holmes, Midway.
David Hillhouse, Esquire. Wilkes, 6 books. Mr. Howel Jarrett, do. Mr. Morice Kain,
do. Mr. Gracy Little, do. Major John Lindsey, do. 4 books. Mr. William Langham,
do. 6 books. David Merrewether, Esquire. do. 6 books. Mr. Richard Milliar, do. 4
books. Mr. Harrison Musgrave, do. 6 books. James Marks, Esquire. do. 6 books. Mr.
Thomas Quarterman, Newport. Capt. William Quarterman, do. Mr. William Strong,
Wilkes, 4 books. Mr. Frederic Simms, merchant, do. 6 books. Mr. Isaac Staunton,
do. 6 books. Mr. John Townsend do. Mr. Jacob Thresh, do. 2 books. William
Terrill, Esquire. do. Mr. Thomas Terrill, do. Rev. Sanders Walker, do. 6 books.
Rev. Jeremiah Walker, do. Capt. Richard Worsham, do. James Williams, Esquire.
attorney, do. Mr. John Wingfield, jun. 6 books.
ERRATA.
Page 22, line 9, thretened, read threatened. Page 24. line 9, reasoning, read
remark. Page 26, line 32, than, read then. Page 37, line 27, despised, read
despised. Page 39, line 38, read of the infinite, etc. Page 41, line 27, read
meritorious. Page 52, line 20, where, read were. Page 53, in the margin, Tes.
read These. Page 62, line 29, draw, read drawn. Page 63, line 22, pomote, read
promote. Page 105, line 33, II. read 2. Page 132, ult. servent, read fervent.
Page 170, line 36, o read of. Page 171, line 17,? read;. Page 234, line 12, of,
read or. Page 235, line 33, repeatedly, read greatly. Page 238, line 33, dele
they. Page 250, line 33, forever, read for ever. Page 274, line 7, read of
Hinnom.
Several less important errata, the correction of which will naturally occur to
the reader, appeared not to require a place in this table.

PRINTING AND BOOK-BINDING, In their various Branches are neatly executed by
ABEL MORSE, in State-Street, NEW HAVEN: WHO HAS FOR SALE,
DOCTOR Gordon's History of the American War, The Congressional Register, An
Essay on Punctuation, Pike's Arithmetic, Gib on the Covenants. Newton's
Religious Letters, Scott's Lessons in Elocution, History of Sanford and Merton,
Esop's Fables, Fables for the Ladies, Paradise-Lost, Economy of human Life,
Father's Legacy, Psalm Books, Watts' and Hart's Hymns, The Triumphs of Temper,
Search after Happiness, a pastoral Drama, as it was performed by some young
Ladies in Bristol, Ela: or the Delusions of the Heart, The complete Letter
Writer, The History of Gibraltar, The Messiah, Peter Pindar. Spelling-Books of
different kinds, A great variety of Children's Books, with A large Assortment
of Superfine imported Writing Paper, Account Books of all kinds, Blank books
and Blanks of every kind, A variety of Latin Books, etc.
Also, now preparing for the Press,
The History of the United States in America, from the time of their first
settlement by the English, to the year 1790, in five volumes, by a Citizen of
Philadelphia. A Compendium of American Geography, with an Appendix, containing
a concise geographical description of all other parts of the globe: -- Designed
particularly for the use of schools in the United States, and well adapted to
the capacities of youth; compiled by a Citizen of Philadelphia, who has an
extensive knowledge in geographical science, and is solicitous to facilitate
the improvement of youth. Also, a School Reading-Book, in two parts; the first
part containing reading lessons methodized for classes; and the second part a
collection of the most eminent declamatory pieces; compiled by an Instructor of
eminence.
N. B. Said MORSE dresses his own leather, attends to every part of his
business himself, is emulous to excel in his profession, and the public may
depend upon being served by him with the utmost punctuality. -- Country
produce, or clean Cotton and Linen Rags and Sheeps Pelts will be taken in
payment for any of the above Articles.


