MEMOIRS OF THE BLOOMSGROVE FAMILY. In a Series of LETTERS to a respectable
CITIZEN of PHILADELPHIA. Containing SENTIMENTS on a MODE of DOMESTIC EDUCATION,
Suited to the present State of SOCIETY, GOVERNMENT, and MANNERS, in the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA: AND ON The DIGNITY and IMPORTANCE of the FEMALE CHARACTER.
INTERSPERSED With a Variety of interesting ANECDOTES.

BY ENOS HITCHCOCK, D. D.

VOL. I.

Printed at Boston, BY THOMAS AND ANDREWS, At FAUST's STATUE, No. 45, NEWBURY
STREET. MDCCXC.

TO Mrs. Washington.
Madam,
If I had in view any of the usual objects of Dedications, I might enumerate
accomplishments, generally admired, which justice would permit -- but delicacy
would forbid me to apply.

Permit me, Madam, to felicitate you, on your elevation to the high rank which
you hold in this rising Empire; and to assure you that, with your illustrious
consort, you bear an unrivalled sway in the hearts of a grateful country.

It must add much to the happiness of your present situation, that your
example, being more generally known, will have a more general influence in
forming the female character.

The influence of the female character, over the manners of civilized society,
is a circumstance that exhibits female education in a point of light extremely
interesting. On this consideration, may I not flatter myself that the subject
of these Memoirs will apologize for having solicited the indulgence of so
elevated a patroness.

To those reasons, for requesting the sanction of your name, which may give
effect to the general purpose of this publication, permit me to add, the

Personal esteem and respect, With which I am, Madam, Your obedient servant,
The Author.
PROVIDENCE, March 20, 1790.
TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR THE FIRST VOLUME.
LETTER I. INTRODUCTORY. Page 13 LETTER II. General observations preparatory to
the subject. Page 18 LETTER III. The principles of domestic society. Page 22
LETTER IV. Description of the situation, house, garden, river, etc. Page 28
LETTER V. Of the parents of Mr. and Mrs. Bloomsgrove. Page 34 LETTER VI. Of
their education, marriage, character, and happiness. Page 36 LETTER VII. On
domestic union -- causes of discord -- how to preserve harmony. Anecdote of a
French lady. Page 40 LETTER VIII. Osander and Rosella -- their education
commences -- harmony between parents necessary to education. Page 46 LETTER IX.
A general account of their plan of proceeding. Page 55 LETTER X. Their piety --
its influence on domestic happiness. Page 66 LETTER XI. An ancient story
proposed. Page 70 LETTER XII. The story -- prosperity connected with piety.
Page 71 LETTER XIII. Of Mrs. Bloomsgrove -- nurses her children -- the physical
effect of nursing on health, beauty, and disposition -- power of sympathy. Page
76 LETTER XIV. Importance of the first seven years to education -- this period
falls to the lot of mothers. Page 82 LETTER XV. Air, exercise, and cleanliness,
the stamina of health. Page 85 LETTER XVI. An incident in the play ground -- a
prudent mother. Page 91 LETTER XVII. Plainness and simplicity in their diet and
drink. Page 95 LETTER XVIII. They were not confined to set meals, nor
restrained from ripe fruit. Page 97 LETTER XIX. The garden. Page 101 LETTER XX.
Of the knowledge gained in the first seven years -- its influence on the temper
and disposition. Page 103 LETTER XXI. Mrs. Bloomsgrove teaches her children
self command -- guards them against fear of thunder, darkness, spirits --
instance of the fatal effects of frightful stories and surprises. Page 105
LETTER XXII. Against rashness. Anecdote of a little girl. Page 112 LETTER
XXIII. A rencounter in the garden -- an accommodation -- revenge cured -- Fanny
arrives. Page 116 LETTER XXIV. Of imitation -- its power -- its danger -- its
usefulness -- stronger in females than in the other sex. Page 124 LETTER XXV.
Review of the first period. Page 132 LETTER XXVI. The second stage of education
commences -- desire to be independent, natural and useful -- taught to help
themselves. Anecdotes. Page 137 LETTER XXVII. Industry -- invent their own
toys. Anecdote. Page 143 LETTER XXVIII. Moderation in desires -- story of
Roderico. Page 151 LETTER XXIX. Benevolence -- an example of it. Page 158
LETTER XXX. Continued -- how to excite benevolence -- instances of it.
Anecdotes. An affecting story. Page 164 LETTER XXXI. Gratitude, a natural
sentiment -- how cherished. Page 175 LETTER XXXII. Story of a grateful Turk.
Page 178 LETTER XXXIII. Confidence in their children -- its use. Page 195
LETTER XXXIV. Curiosity, natural -- an useful engine of improvement ^how
managed. Page 202 LETTER XXXV. Cruelty, the offspring of m^^^anagement --
sympathy, natural -- how ^^erished. Page 206 LETTER XXXVI. Restraint -- early
disciplined to it -- natural defects should not be secreted. Anecdotes. Page
214 LETTER XXXVII. The subject continued -- instances. Page 220 LETTER XXXVIII.
Rewards and punishments -- how conducted. Page 227 LETTER XXXIX. Trained to a
voluntary confession of their faults. Anecdotes. Page 231 LETTER XL. Ideas of
property appear early -- directed. Page 236 LETTER XLI. Rozella enters her
teens. The death of her grandmother. Page 238 LETTER XLII. The third stage of
education commences. Nephew introduced into the family. Page 245 LETTER XLIII.
Predominant passions watched over and directed. Anecdotes. Page 257 LETTER
XLIV. Candor, natural -- how cultivated. Anecdote. Page 260 LETTER XLV. Taught
to regard men in proportion to the good they do, not according to their
external appearance. Anecdote. A Roman speech. Page 263 LETTER XL^I. Their
minds elevated by a suitableness in education. Anecdotes. Page 267 LETTER
XLVII. Angry passions -- how restrained. Anecdotes. Page 275 LETTER XLVIII.
Justice -- importance of teaching it in childhood. Story of Cyrus. Page 280
LETTER XLIX. Truth -- how cherished. Anecdotes. Page 285 LETTER L. Fidelity --
taught to be faithful and punctual to engagements. A modern story. Page 290
DOMESTIC MEMOIRS.
LETTER I.
I AM honored, my dear sir, by the correspondence with which you favor me; and
gratified, by the friendly manner in which you write to one, who can lay no
other claim to your friendship, than that which arises from your benevolence.
While your observations, on the principles of society and government,
entertain, they improve the mind. There is a pleasure, in finding the
sentiments of others accord with our own; and mutual advantage may arise, by an
interchange of ideas, while glowing friendship becomes more ardent and more
pure: there is a luxury in friendly intercourse, unknown to vulgar minds; nor
can the vicious ever taste its purest delights.

THE sincerity of your friendship, I have never doubted; but am not so ready to
ensure you against an imputation, on the soundness of your judgment, in the
pressing request you make, for my "sentiments on a mode of domestic education,
suited to the present state of society, government and manners in this
country." The subject is important; it involves all the best interests of
society, of families, and of individuals: but it has been the subject of so
much disquisition; so many treatises have been written, and so many plans laid
before the world which promised success; that it may be deemed exhausted, and
drained of all materials for fabricating a new system, or even for adding to,
or imimproving upon, the old. Education, however, like an inexhaustible
fountain, may be drawn upon perpetually, without being drained: secret springs
will remain in this extensive and complicated science; and succeeding
generations will explore their hidden channels, and greatly accelerate the
improvement of the human mind, the progress of virtue, and happiness of the
world: it is an art, a science, on which our being, virtue and happiness so
much depend, that it must ever be an object of anxious attention, with
thoughtful and affectionate parents.

HITHERTO, education has been so conducted as to contract the powers of the
mind, by directing the current of intelligence in a narrow channel: the object
of it has been to teach WHAT TO THINK, rather than HOW TO THINK. The end of
education, is, to unfold the latent powers of the human mind, direct them to
suitable objects, and strengthen them by exercise: it is the art of preparing
children for the duties of life. The difficulty in giving a system of education
would be comparatively small, if there was a general similarity in the
circumstances of men: but these being various, their situations and views vary
with them, and occasion many exceptions to general principles, or rules.

IN order to conduct the business properly, it is necessary to distinguish
accurately, the exceptions arising from particular cases; and, which lead us to
depart from general principles. Here assistance is most needed; and here it is
most likely to fail: for the cases are so numerous and complicated, that they
fall not within the compass of imagination to conceive, nor of human skill to
arrange.

THERE are, indeed, general exceptions and variations, which may be
distinguished with greater precision, and less difficulty: those which arise
from difference in climate, mode of government, and general circumstances of
society. The systems of education written in Europe, are too local to be
transferred to America: they are generally designed for a style of life,
different from that, which it is necessary for the inhabitants of the United
States to adopt: they do not reach our circumstances, and are not suited to the
genius of our government. We have already suffered much by too great an avidity
for British customs and manners: it is now time to become independent in our
maxims, principles of education, dress, and manners, as we are in our laws and
government. To promote this kind of independence, for which the late revolution
opens a glorious theater, shall be my humble attempt, in the sequel.

YOU will be so good, as to make my respectful compliments to Mrs. --, who, you
inform me, is about to place her daughter at the female academy: the design, I
think, is laudable* for I am confident she ^^ll continue to exercise her in
those domestic employments, which will be useful in every condition and period
of life. Much has been said on female education; and much remains to be said on
that subject, and on the dignity and importance of the female character. I
hope, in the course of these memoirs, to contribute something toward rescuing
this gem from the state in which the pride or inattention of man has too long
kept it; and without which all attempts to improve the mode of education will
be vain.

IN my next, I will offer you some thoughts preparatory to the object in view;
and, in the mean time, must solicit your candor: for it will not be in my power
to observe rigid order, in the course of epistolary writing, on a subject which
involves so great a variety of transactions.

I am, etc.

LETTER II.
I FELICITATE you, most sincerely, my dear Sir, on this auspicious day, March
4th, 1789, commencement of the federal government.
which exhibits to the world a government, founded in the empire of reason; a
constitution, which, established in equality and justice, secures the rights of
individuals, and promises the greatest happiness that can be derived from human
institutions; committed to gentlemen of tried abilities and integrity, with
those at the head of the system, whose fame for patriotism and valor will live
while the rights of men are dear to them; and whose virtuous example will not
fail of an happy influence on public opinions, customs and manners.

ENCOURAGED by these auspicious circumstances, I shall proceed to some
considerations preparatory to my design, with this unpleasant assurance, after
all that can be said, that the subject will not be comprehended by some, and
will be unattended to by many: carelessness and ignorance will be the fault of
many parents, and the ruin of many children. To address instruction to the
infant mind, and to conduct that period of education, which may be called the
season of impressions, so as to favor the main design of it, requires much
prudence and application.

IN America, children are generally reared up in a domestic state, and by their
parents: few are put to nurse; fewer still committed to the care of private
tutors. In general they are to be brought forward by the fostering hand of
education, in those little distinct societies which usually consist of parents,
children and servants; all of whom have a reciprocal influence upon each other:
here the first dawn of mental, as well as animal life commences. In this mixed
society, the mind is to receive its first tints; the models from which it takes
first impressions, sen^^ments, and maxims, are always present* in this
situation, education is to be carried on through the several stages of infancy,
childhood, and youth, unto mature age. Here the sparks of genius are fanned or
extinguished; the disposition, like the flowing current, takes its course; and
habits are formed, which are carried into life.

NOT only the order and tranquillity of the domestic state; but of society,
depend on what passes here.

THOSE who are accustomed, in their youth, to the restraints of domestic
discipline, will invariably make peaceable and worthy members of society: their
habits are suited to the government of the commonwealth, to whose laws they
will cheerfully yield obedience: and that parent who leaves a family of
children, early trained to knowledge and virtue, bequeaths to his country an
inestimable legacy. But, if the heart is not formed to virtuous principles,
while under the tutelage of parents, they will remain strangers to virtue and
order: accustomed to the unrestrained indulgence of passion at ho^e, they will
not patiently submit to the restraints of government abroad. From such
undis^^^lined members, arise domestic animosities, discord between neighbors,
opposition to lawful authority, and disturbances in society: (...) orde^ that
passions, so pregnant with mischief, be restrained, and the public ^^^^^uillity
preserved, it is necessary that ^ proper system of domestic education be
established. -- What that method is, which promises most success, remains a
question: but it is necessary that all maxims should be brought to the test of
experiment.

FACTS are, not only stubborn things, but afford the most instructive lessons;
and, though they do not always show us the reason of things, yet they show us
things themselves. To elucidate the subject, in question, most effectually, I
will present you with a domestic portrait, taken from the life; which will have
all the advantage of instruction, and force of example. As the family, whose
memoirs I shall essay to write, afforded one of the most pleasing pictures in
human life; so it is my real wish, that the portrait may not do them injustice:
but to delineate every feature, and give the finer touches of native
expression, would require an abler artist than

Your humble Servant, etc.

LETTER III.
BEFORE I name the family I have in view, it may not be amiss to inquire into
the nature of domestic society, and the obligations which reciprocally bind
each to the other. As they live together in the most compact manner, in these
distinct societies, their mutual happiness, as well as the progress of
education, depends on what passes there. It is necessary, therefore, to
consider the principles, on which this miniature of society and government is
founded; and to become acquainted with the rights and duties of the several
departments of it. A more full illustration of this will take place in the
progress of the business before us.

WHEN the great Parent of the Universe brought Eve to the father of mankind, he
doubtless had the happiness of both parties equally in view; and to perfect
their condition as social beings, united them in the nearest compact for life.
Why, then, are not the married more generally happy? Because their hearts do
not beat in unison; they have separate pleasures, opposite dispositions; and
from trifling differences, which prudence should lead them to accommodate,
proceed coldness and reserve: feuds and animosities succeed; domestic enjoyment
is forever banished; and, the once peaceful dwelling, is turned into a scene of
perpetual hostilities.

IT is, therefore, indispensably necessary for persons, who are about to unite
in these sacred bonds, to consider in what respect they are qualified to render
mutual esteem lasting, and the married state happy. Riches and beauty may, for
a while, strengthen the tie; and good sense render it more permanent: but
mutual felicity cannot be secure, without a similarity of temper and
disposition, a reciprocity of affection and sentiment; a "thought meeting
thought," a "will preventing will." Parental affection can only have a genuine
and permanent existence, where there is a union of hearts. "The passions of
those who may be differently united, are, it is true, owing to the principles
of nature; but misdirected, or violently forced into unfortunate circumstances.
They are, like sparks of heavenly fire, designed to animate and bless; but
falling on improper materials, they waste or injure the property of mankind."
Parental affection, in minds united by low interests, by ambition or intrigue,
but not congenial, may be tender sometimes, but not uniform in its operations.

THIS affection, virtuously founded, having the complicated charm and
enchantment of that undefinable union which blends excellent minds, is among
the most glowing in all nature; and leads parents to regard a child's interest
in preference to their own. On this affection, is founded that parental
authority, which, in its nature, is absolute: but great prudence is requisite
in the exercise of it: the seat of this empire, should be in the affections,
and not over the person.

TO the mother, nature has committed a most important trust; the education of
girls wholly, and of boys, until they become proper subjects for the regular
discipline of the father; on whom the wisdom of God, and the consent of all
ages, have devolved the protection and government of this little community. He
is formed by nature for the arduous business of providing for his household;
and he is worse than an infidel who neglects it. His social connection, conjugal
ties, and parental affection, combine to dispose and excite him to seek and
promote the good of the whole.

THE calls of depraved appetite, have sometimes precipitated worthless men into
gratifications inconsistent with their income; and led them to neglect their
families. The most fatal consequences have followed from such conduct: the
minds of children left uncultivated, with examples of vice continually before
them, have grown up, like those evil weeds that infest the neglected soil, and
become the pest of society. Some, indeed, under all these disadvantages, have,
by the strength of genius, and the goodness of their disposition, gained their
proper rank in the world; but many have fallen among the splendid ruins of
human nature, and been forever lost to the world.

BUT no man of reflection, or of benevolence, will thus abandon those he has
chosen for his inmates, or whom nature has committed to his care. He will
uniformly exemplify before them, whatever he would have them practice; and
study to promote the ease and convenience of all his household. He will never
appear as an arbitrary ruler over them; but as an affectionate and benevolent
patron. Influenced by the gentle spirit of Christianity, he will banish from
his breast all moroseness and peevishness which would embitter his own life,
and render his family unhappy. Inspired with a soft and cheerful temper, the
mildness and equity of his government will meet every expression of filial
affection, and respect in return.

HOW pleasing the scene! -- a good man assisting with soft language of conjugal
affection, the cares of his dear partner; parental fondness swimming in his
eyes; gentle and kind to his servants; doing a thousand offices of tenderness,
which endear him to his little flock; and smiling on all around. This, surely,
is the abode of tranquillity; content and cheerfulness are their inmates! Here,
the rudiments of knowledge and virtue are first planted. Here, under the
nurturing beams of domestic education, the mind, like the opening blossom, is
gradually expanding and maturing, until it yields solid and delicious fruit. --
Of this, the family to which I promised to introduce you, affords a pleasing
specimen.

LETTER IV.
ON the margin of one of those large and beautiful rivers which intersect the
great continent of North America, and, winding its way through a vast extent of
territory, empties into the Atlantic ocean, stood the ancient Bloomsgrove
mansion; more distinguished by the virtues of its inhabitants, than the
magnificence of its appearance. Indeed, it would be impossible to do justice to
its owners, or fully to describe the felicity of this domestic retreat. I shall
only aim at some leading traits of their domestic history. If, by doing this in
a plain, simple narration of facts, with such incidental remarks and hints on
domestic education as shall occur, I excite either envy or emulation, I shall
conclude the portrait has some merit: for the shafts of envy are always
directed upward, and emulation presupposes something worthy of imitation.

PERMIT me, sir, to conduct you into this enchanting mansion, where dwell the
happy pair, whose hearts are inseparably joined in conjugal affection. To
attempt a description of their situation and enjoyments, by allusions to
magnificent buildings, splendid equipage, and a numerous train of servile
attendants, would be to lessen their merit, and degrade their elevation of
mind. To give a romantic picture of the beauty and pleasantness of this
healthful situation, would be doing injustice to that which is real.

NATURE had done every thing that could be wished, to make it susceptible of
the improvement of art, the embellishments of taste, and the culturing hand of
industry -- qualities which remarkably united in the possessors of this
delectable spot. Under the auspices of such advantages, what will not the
imagination figure to itself, of beauty, elegance, and taste? How is the eye
allured away through opening prospects, where it meets a variety of pleasing
objects! Now surveying the slow, but majestic movement of the river, which
flows down in lengthening sweep and loses itself behind yonder hills; affording
a variety of landscapes, which arrest the attention and excite the philosophic
speculation! Then, wrapped away to shady groves and spreading lawns, where mingle
in romantic concert, the hoarse echo of the distant cascade and the soft
response of the purling stream. But we need not the aid of the imagination to
enrich or decorate the scene: real enjoyments can receive no accession from the
regions of fancy.

SITUATED on the summit of the rising ground, which ascends from the western
bank, and falling south, the commodious, and decently elegant mansion,
commanded an extensive and beautifully variegated prospect. On this favored
spot, the rosy morn first shed its placid rays; and soft zephyrs breathed
health to its inhabitants.

"Along her banks, see distant villas spread,
Here waves the corn -- and there extends the mead;
Here sounds the murmurs of the gurgling rills;
There bleat the flocks upon the verdant hills."
THE lowing herd, the prating fowl, and tuneful birds, all conspire to enliven
the rural scene. The garden, interspresed with trees, bending with delicious
fruit, invites to walk; the cooling arbor, to sit in social glee and inhale the
fresh fragrance which arises from the floweret's bloom; and, while the eye was
pleased with the beauty and variety, the taste was gratified by the vegetable
productions of this spacious garden.

"Fair opes the lawn -- the fertile fields extend,
The kindly shower from smiling heaven descends;
The skies drop fatness -- on the blooming vale;
From flowery groves ambrosial sweets exhale."
THE society, of this enlightened and amiable pair, invited many a visiter,
both from the country and the city. Here, all of every class, met a polite and
hospitable reception. Persons of the several learned professions, found
entertainment in their society, and improved by an acquaintance with them: and
men of different religious persuasions, forgetting distinction of sect, united
in friendly sort, and, warmed with social fire, partook the liberal joy.

BUT, you ask, whence sprang these paragons of domestic virtue and happiness?
what parents were so happy as to give them birth? Be not too curious, my
friend; in my next I will give all the information necessary to our purpose.
Apropos -- of curiosity; there is a strange propensity in many to inquire into
the dark and inexplicable part of subjects; which are always least useful. This
disposition leads them to doubt upon every subject, and cavil at every
proposition. I am sorry to say, our friend -- is verging upon this skepticism:
He scarcely believes any thing, because he cannot comprehend every thing. Shall
we reject the light because our organs of vision are not fitted to see objects
in the dark?

P. S. I WILL advertise you of one circumstance which cannot attend these
memoirs, and which would be necessary to recommend them to vain and empty
minds; but with the wise and considerate, would avail nothing. They cannot
gratify the ear with pompous titles; nor dazzle the eye with gilded sceneries.
They cannot accommodate you with the disquisitions of philosophy or logic; but
may amuse you with a variety of childish matter. I shall not introduce you into
palaces, courts, or parks; nor, into the company of MY LORD, or MY LADY; but,
in the plain style of republicanism, to an acquaintance with Mr. and Mrs. --,
who dwell in houses, made for covering and convenience; where, if you should
not be served with so many dainties for the palate, you will have wholesome
food for the mind.

LETTER V.
NOT far distant, westward, stands an inland town of respectable size. In the
region of this settlement, lived the worthy parents of Mr. and Mrs.
Bloomsgrove: the one a magistrate of great integrity, and activity in the
discharge of his office. He was literally "a terror to evil doers and a praise
to those who did well." The other, though a gentleman of public education, was
a FARMER of great industry, economy, and virtue; equally famed for generosity
and beneficence. Both were patrons of the poor; promoters of knowledge and
useful arts among all classes of people. They were, especially, attentive to
the establishment of schools for the benefit of the children of the poor as
well as the rich; and by these means, learning was generally diffused; the
youth were not only preserved from the destructive effects of idleness and
ignorance, but trained to knowledge, industry, and virtuous habits.

THE houses of these worthy gentlemen, presented an interesting picture of
order and decorum: the education of their children had been an object of
constant attention; and the effects of it amply rewarded all their endeavors.

IT, fortunately, happened that the eldest child of one of those families was a
daughter; that of the other a son: their education was similar, as it respected
the principles of virtue, or the economy of life. They were sent abroad to
complete their education, and give a polish to their manners; but were not kept
abroad so long as to lose their knowledge, or relish for domestic concerns; or
to acquire a false taste, or romantic ideas. An early cultivation of the moral
qualities of the heart, and a taste for acquiring useful knowledge, seasonably
infused, afforded them a balance against the seductions of vice and the
illusions of fancy. -- I am agreeably interrupted by the arrival of your friend
--, whose tarry in this town will be so short, that he will scarcely give me
opportunity to show him how much I honor your letter of introduction.

AS the post goes in a few minutes, I have only time to assure you of the
esteem and affection with which

I am, etc.

LETTER VI.
THE similarity in their age and education, formed a congeniality of temper and
sentiment, on which rest mutual esteem and confidence: their hearts beat in
unison, and accorded to every thing benevolent and good. They inherited the
good qualities of their parents, and improved on their virtues. Their habits
being fixed on the same principles and by similar causes, they conceived an
early attachment to each other; which, being founded on mutual esteem, grew by
degrees into an ardent affection, and was followed by their marriage on the
evening of the 27th of October, in the year --. Now had the rolling seasons
crowned the expectations of the husbandman, and amply rewarded all his toil:
prolific nature had poured a profusion of her delicious fruits into the lap of
industry, gladdening every heart with a portion of her goods. Such was the
flattering season of their nuptials -- joy sparkled in every eye, at beholding
the union of the happy pair; in whom they anticipated the virtues of their
excellent ancestors.

THEY were not disappointed in their expectations: like the opening flower,
that gradually unfolds to the sun, their virtues expanded on every occasion,
and came forth to view. The incidents of life, fell in train, so as to strike
out the latent qualities of the heart, and produce great and worthy actions.
Education too often contracts the affections to the narrow circle of kindred
and family connexions: but this is a degree of selfishness unknown to generous
minds. But, theirs had been conducted on so liberal a plan, that, while they
were attached to their connexions, their genial influence extended to all
around them.

EDUCATION, properly managed, has reference to every relation in life: it
teaches to think and act on a large scale; and to discharge the duties of every
relation and circumstance in life with fidelity. The transition, of a well
educated person, from filial piety to conjugal affection and parental
tenderness; to kind master, or mistress; to good neighbor, faithful friend,
obedient subject, and good member of society; is natural and easy. Into all
these shapes, will that philanthrophy, which such an education inspires,
transform itself, as occasion requires. Indeed, love, like the law of
attraction, operates more forcibly upon those who are nearly allied to us by
the ties of nature, than those at a distance, or those with whom we have no
connection. This is a very happy circumstance in the constitution of things;
otherwise our social affections would be lost amidst the multiplicity of
objects, without being able to fix on any. These affections are now directed
first to those, with whom, on all accounts, we are under the stronges^
obligations to live in h^^mony: from these, they extend to remoter circles;
still expanding to all mankind.

NOT only their friends and neighbors, but others at a distance from this
region of hospitality, felt the effects of their beneficence. Here, the child
of want and distress never sued for relief in vain; no^ was insult or
unkindness ever added to affliction. Here, the widow's heart was made to sing
for joy; and the blessing of many ready to perish came upon them. The light of
their domestic virtues increased with their years, and with the increase of
their fortune. Industry and her handmaid, economy, added to the sources of
beneficence; and the accessions of wealth were considered as fresh obligations
to charity.

MR. Bloomsgrove would have been happy to have confined himself to his farm and
domestic concerns; but his talents were too conspicuous to pass long unnoticed.
He early discovered marks of brilliant genius; and showed he had a soul formed
for noble deeds. The public good demanded the exertion of his talents: he
yielded to the solicitations of his friends; and served his country, in various
departments, with great dignity and reputation.

BUT, as domestic enjoyments were his peculiar delight, (and this is the
particular trait of his character, with which we are at present concerned) he
returned, with eagerness, from the noise and bustle of public, to the calmer
scenes, of domestic life. Here, he was always sure to meet a friendly reception
from his amiable wife, and the two children which kind heaven had committed to
his care.

LETTER VII.
THE love of domestic retirement, for which Mr. Bloomsgrove was remarkable, and
the open hearted reception he always met from his family, show the importance
of mutual attentions and assiduities to please in domestic society: and afford
a monitory lecture to those husbands and wives, who treat each other with
neglect and indifference; or, do not study to render themselves mutually
agreeable.

A FRENCH lady, who, by her conduct toward her husband, had driven him to seek
enjoyment abroad, makes the following curious declaration. "Yes, unhappy I am;
I know all my follies, all my caprices; I have passed fourteen years, without
reflecting one moment on the advantages, which might have resulted from making
a friend of my husband. It is scarce eighteen months since I began to think
about it; since which time I have seen with other eyes; or, to express myself
better, have observed him, listened to him; and have learned, with
inexpressible surprise, that if I had not loved him before, it was merely from
inattention, and because I was taken up with other things."

OF all the wretched conditions, to which man is liable to be reduced, none are
so much to be dreaded, as that of having, for enemies, those of his own house:
other causes of disquietude, he may escape; but with these he is destined to
live in an intimacy, which must make him perpetually miserable. That, which
should be his secure retreat from vexations abroad, is become the principal
source of uneasiness. But, as long as a man's house affords him a sanctuary
from the disappointments and vexations of the world, he will retire to it, as
to a castle of defense and security, against the inroads of all his foes. Of
all the animosities to which the human passions expose us, those of a domestic
nature are most to be dreaded, because they wound the tenderest feelings of
human nature. It has been justly observed, "there are two things that affect
the heart of every ingenuous man most deeply, viz. good natured and generous
offices from those, to whom we have been injurious; and an ill natured, unkind
treatment from those to whom we have been kind and affectionate. As to the
former, we can bear their hatred, because we have deserved it; but we cannot
bear their love, it quite confounds and overcomes us: and as to the latter, it
is certain we can endure the utmost rancor and malice of others, better than
the least coldness and indifference from those, whom we have made it our
constant endeavor to please."

WHATEVER comes from our nearest friends, as an expression of love, we receive
as a substantial obligation; and feel the most delicate touches of pleasure
from the smiles of friendship: but neglect and unkindness, from nearest
friends, blast every joy, and give the most sensible pain. To be always sure of
that frank and cheerful reception at home, of which Mr. Bloomsgrove never
failed; to be united with those, to whom we may discharge the fullness of the
soul, unburden our cares, and share our joys, must be an unfailing source of
domestic peace and pleasure: for sorrow, like a stream, grows weaker by being
divided; and joy, like light, increases and brightens by being communicated.

MR. Bloomsgrove, ever studious of the happiness of his family, was careful to
carry more of those attentions and civilities into his own house, which he
observed abroad, than is usual. There would be little occasion for domestic
strife, if men were as solicitous to please at home as they are, when abroad.
Whatever our domestic character may be, we choose to appear in the most
favorable light before the public: On the public theater, we appear in the most
advantageous attitude; we wish the esteem of others, and endeavor to gain their
respect by our dress, attentions, and address. Behind the scene, we are in a
dishabille: here our true character appears: our domestic behavior is the
proper test of our virtue and good nature; for our good or ill breeding is
chiefly seen abroad; our good or ill nature at home.

IN a family, there are continual opportunities for those little acts of
civility and good humor, which, though trifling in themselves, are great in
their consequences. As a little spark kindles a great fire, so virtues of the
first magnitude spring from these small beginnings. Our benevolence is seldom
called into exercise by any great event, which gives us opportunity to make a
brilliant display of it: but in a domestic state, occasions are often
occurring; and, it is in a daily and uninterrupted discharge of the common
offices of life, by saying many obliging things, and, if possible, doing more,
that the habits of it become fixed and established. On the other hand, by
indulging an occasional fit of ill humor, we prepare the way for another; and
so for an habitual sourness of temper: and by harboring a spirit of
contradiction, we cherish a temper that degrades the character of man; disturbs
the common peace, and destroys domestic enjoyment.

IT should be considered, that many weaknesses and imperfections attend us:
that the fairest characters are not spotless. Subjected alike to infirmities,
we should exercise mutual lenity and forbearance; and construe all doubtful
actions in the most favorable point of light. It is a truth, I believe,
verified by common observation; that those who have the most foibles and faults
of their own, are most impatient with those of others: they are soonest
provoked and hardest to be reclaimed. But he, who desires the candor of others
toward himself, must learn to exercise the same gentle spirit toward them.

IF you recollect that domestic education is carried on by example as well as
instruction, you will at once see that harmony between the heads of the family
is necessary; and, therefore, that these observations are not out of place.

LETTER VIII.
IN a family, where the heads acted in concert, as if informed by one soul;
adopting each other's cares, uniting their friendly beams, and jointly
promoting the common happiness; the education of children was comparatively
light and easy. Such was the advantage enjoyed in the Bloomsgrove family. No
sooner was the important trust of children committed to them, than they
consulted upon the best method of educating their charge. They found it was in
vain to read the systems of education then extant: little else could be
collected from them, than general principles for preserving health, and
teaching them letters, and figures. They were suited to a distant meridian; and
had reference, either to the management of the children of nobility, or to the
public education of young gentlemen destined to one or other of the learned
professions. None of them extended to the culture of the heart, Lord Kaimes is
the first, among the numerous writers on education, who considers the culture
of the heart as the chief branch of it.
and that domestic education which lays the foundation of virtue, and is most
useful in training children to order.

KNOWLEDGE may be acquired at schools and under preceptors; but virtuous
principles are of incomparably more worth than mere science. The culture of the
heart, and exercising children to virtuous habits, falls chiefly to parents,
and especially, to mothers. Avoiding, therefore, the track marked out in any
system, they had recourse to the intimations of nature; to the state of
society, government, and manners in their own country. They considered
education as an apprenticeship for the employments of life; and that to be
qualified for those employments, was an object of the highest importance: that,
to prepare them to discharge the offices of good husbands and wives; good
parents; dutiful children; affectionate relations and friends; useful members
of communities; and benevolent citizens of the world; was the province, and the
indispensable duty of parents. The principles of these duties are similar in
all men; and the measures to be taken with all children, to render them moral
agents, are similar. Those which were adopted in the Bloomsgrove family, were
proved to be most judicious by the success which accompanied them.

THEY considered, that the qualifications necessary to render domestic
connexions happy, were, a heart susceptible of deep impressions; a mind
possessed of a lively discernment of merit; a sense of honor, and delicacy of
moral taste, which would prevent their sacrificing to appetite, what should be
yielded only to affectionate tenderness and friendship; an attachment to truth
and fidelity; with a fortitude so strong and firm, as would carry them through
every toil and danger, rather than violate deliberate engagements. They were
convinced that an education which had these important objects in view, could
not be conducted so much by precept, as by exercises alluding to those
situations.

"THE use and abuse of power; the union of real tenderness and judgment; the
difference of genuine prudence or a desire of happiness, and the passions of
avarice or ambition; the wisdom and goodness requisite in conducting a family
to be a blessing, and not a nuisance or a curse: these cannot come by chance;
the mind is apt to revolt, if enjoined with severity to adopt them; and the
likely method to obtain our purpose, is by numerous and judicious experiments,
blended with the incidents of our family, and calculated to produce conviction
and habit.

"THE duties and obligations of children; of brothers and sisters; of friends;
of magistrates and subjects; and of men to each other in all variations of
situation, climate, and government: -- these are incumbent on all men, and the
business of education should be, not merely to furnish the memory with
arbitrary maxims, but to qualify us for them, by occurrences and incidents."
Thus reasoned Mr. Bloomsgrove. And this is the method pointed out by reason,
philosophy, and the common usage, in particular cases: youth, for instance,
when qualifying for any particular occupation or employment, are not taught the
art by dry lesson or precepts; but are, for a long time, exercised in the
practical branches of the employment to which they are destined.

AS the moral character grows out of the intellectual, so it is necessary that
the desire of knowledge be directed and stimulated; and that curiosity be
guided to proper objects of inquiry, but never checked by severity, or
perverted by indiscretion: in the former case, an important faculty will be
disappointed in its exertions; in the latter, habits of credulity and
superstition may become fixed, which cannot be removed; and in both cases,
infantile improvements will be obstructed.

IT has been ingeniously observed that, "the great and general qualities, which
constitute all the virtues we can practice, are few, simple, and to be taught
in the early years of infancy. These are, attention to the names, properties,
and relations of things; and a desire thoroughly to understand them: the use of
knowledge in providing for our wants, conferring benefits, and doing services:
and the necessary effects of reciprocal benefits, in producing attachments or
affections; the the general ingredients of all the virtues."

IN this respect the parents of Osander and Rozella (for so we shall call them)
followed Rousseau's maxim, but not his method; they were constantly pouring
instruction into their minds. His Emile is not to be taught any thing until
twelve years of age, and yet he spends his whole time in giving him useful
lessons; assisting the growing genius, and communicating the materials which
his own experience had collected. Though he is to learn nothing from books or
schools, yet he is to have the benefit of all the knowledge with which a whole
life, of study and observation, had furnished a learned preceptor. -- He must
be a blockhead indeed who does not improve in such a school!

BUT every man, to whom the care of children is committed, is not a Rousseau,
nor is every child an Emilius or a Sophia: neither are we aerial beings, that
we should subsist on sentimental diet: application to labor, or some kind of
employment, is NECESSARY for most people, and PROPER for all. It is
humiliating, I confess, that we are obliged to spend so great a part of time in
procuring the means of supplying the perpetual wants of a body we must soon
throw away: but, degrading as it may seem, it is unavoidable; and it is the
more necessary, as the organs of this corruptible mass, are the only vehicles
of the intelligence within. To keep those organs in repair is one part of
education. Attention to this, and to the discharge of the social offices, will
be an effectual bar against parents having their children always in their
sight: and it is impossible to say what impressions they may receive from the
object then before them.

WE must take children as they are, endued with a variety of humors,
dispositions, and propensities; and endeavor to make them what we wish them to
be; consider the circumstances which actually surround them, and not figure to
ourselves an imaginary situation, in which we might suppose education could be
carried on to advantage. Fine spun theories may amuse the vivid imagination;
but, it is practice only that makes perfect; and vain are all the hopes of
theory, when unsupported by experiment* Whoever will be at the pains to cast
his eye on the world, and observe the d^fference which marks the characters of
men, and trace this difference up to its source, will at once see the
importance and advantage of a regular education from infancy.

THE success of education depends on the steps which are taken in the early
stage of life, before any bad impressions are made. Numerous are the avenues to
the human heart. Easy of access, and unveiled by disguise, it admits the images
which first offer themselves; and these images are not easily effaced. Too
early an attention, therefore, cannot be paid to the case of those helpless
creatures who are committed to the mercy of parents, unconscious of their own
condition, and of the effect the impressions then made will have upon their
future character and happiness. Fully convinced of this, the parents of Osander
and Rozella adopted measures of treatment accordingly; as we shall go on to
relate in our next.

LETTER IX.
AGREEABLY to your request, my dear sir, I will now give you an epitome of
their method of proceeding with the two promising children: and then follow
them step by step through the several stages of education from birth to mature
age.

AS parents are to be the models, upon which children are to form their temper
and manners, so they should understand what they would have their children
acquainted with; and be themselves what they wish their children to be. In
their parents, Osander and Rozella saw the fair form of virtue in its most
pleasing attitude: their example acted in concert with their counsel, and
seldom failed of its proper effect. They were careful to acquire an entire
authority over their children, which they continued to exercise without
severity, or having recourse to any violence. The propriety of this step will
appear, if we consider that reason, in children, is feeble even after i^ ^egins
to exert itself, and that parental authority is the substitute which nature has
provided for the period of impressions: -- "and, as no work of God is left
imperfect, children are directed by instinct to obey their parents; and if they
be not unkindly treated, their obedience is not only voluntary, but
affectionate. This is not a picture of imagination: every one who has given
attention to the infant state, will bear witness, that a child clings to its
mother, and is fonder of her than of all the world besides. By this admirable
plan, children who have but little reason, are commonly better governed, than
adult persons who possess a considerable share of it; the former are entirely
obsequious to the reason of another; the latter, not always to their own." From
the mild and gentle, but firm and steady exercise of this authority, many other
advantages flow, besides that instruction which may be more easily conveyed to
the mind. It is an excellent preparative for social life; and for that self
command, which we have occasion frequently to exercise through every part of
life.

THERE is a false tenderness, which prevents many parents from exercising that
authority over their children which their humors require, lest it should give
them pain: but they consider not that they are sacrificing the happiness of
their offspring, in the future part of life, to save themselves a few moments
present pain. But such parents do not obtain the end they aim at: for the
humors and caprices of children increase by indulgence: and, being tolerated in
children, they become their own tormentors, and deprive their parents of that
quiet and peace which they did not choose to have disturbed by seasonably
correcting their childish error.

IT was the happy lot of these children to be under the direction of wise and
virtuous parents, who corrected their errors by removing their causes: and by
observing and adjusting their little deviations in season, put it into their
power to enjoy a much greater degree of happiness than others; "while the
essential principles of future excellence were taking root in their minds."
Sensible of all these advantages, they failed not to allure their children to
obedience, by all those endearing methods which render it as agreeable as it is
useful.

THIS foundation being well laid, no effort was wanting to erect the
superstructure. They were careful to remove all bad examples from their sight:
and consequently, were cautious whom they admitted into their family. The
assiduity of parents, to educate their children, will be lost without an
attention to this circumstance: the advice and example of a subtle and vicious
servant will do more toward deluding children to devious courses, than all the
counsel and remonstrance of parents can do to the contrary.

THESE obstructions to domestic education being out of the way; and the
parental authority established, they taught their children a right deportment
to themselves; to each other; and to all other members of the family; and
exercised them in the practical branches of the duties they taught. They were
habituated, from infancy, to observe the sabbath as a day devoted to God, and
serious purposes; and to attend public worship, as the best school of good
manners, as well as the nursery of religious principles. They were not only
taught the principles of benevolence and charity to men; of tenderness and
compassion to insects and animals, but trained to practice upon those
principles. Their curiosity was directed to proper objects, and generally
gratified. As they advanced in years, their parents endeavored to lead their
minds up to God; to view him as a being who had no beginning, and will have no
end; possessed of all power; perfectly wise, and infinitely good: as a being
who is every where present, and never changes his nature, or disposition; who
governs all things, and is peculiarly pleased with the pious and good.

AS soon as they were capable of distinguishing between virtue and vice, the
latter was presented to the mind in all its odious colors; the former, in the
most pleasing light. Truth and integrity, being essential to every good
character, and the foundation of every other virtue, they were careful to
represent fraud, falsehood, and deceit in all their deformities: and they had
the pleasure of noticing an instance of frankness in Osander, at the age of
twelve, which did him honor; while it afforded his parents the most heartfelt
satisfaction. At a neighbor's, on a visit with his mamma and sister, he
happened to remain in the house while the company were walking in the garden:
being alone, he began to play with a tennis ball which he had in his pocket: it
accidentally fell upon a pile of china cups, and, by oversetting them, broke a
number: but, as he was alone in the room, and had not been missed by the
company, he was not in danger of being suspected; but his generous soul
disdained to have others suffer for his faults: he frankly informed his mamma
of the accident, and desired her to inform Mrs. --, the lady of the house, lest
some person should be wrongfully accused. Sensible that a mind so open and
candid would be exposed to the seductions of the vicious, unless guarded by the
principles, and exercised in the habits of virtue, they carried a watchful eye
over his increasing years.

IN the progress of these memoirs, we shall have occasion to speak of several
instances of frankness and generosity in Rozella: at present I shall only
observe, that she had great sensibility; was possessed of a mild temper, and,
for a child, had a good understanding: a little pertness, however, appeared
sometimes. This gave her mamma great uneasiness, especially as it had
discovered itself in a few instances, by a degree of imperiousness toward
servants; for Mrs. Bloomsgrove entertained a most delicate sense of the rights
of human nature; and the greatest tenderness toward servants, and all persons
of inferior circumstances. To check every degree of this temper, which, though
common with children, is extremely disgusting in adult people, she employed her
constant efforts: and i^ order to render them successful, she kept her little
daughter much under her own eye; and, by steady management, in time, cured her
of the disease.

A CHILD possessed of this temper to a high degree, will make itself amends for
a temporary restraint and submission, in the presence of the parent, by being
perverse to servants and impertinent to playmates, when out of sight. The more
submissive it is when only occasionally with the parent, the more untractable
it will be with others: and then, instead of being cured of one vice, it
becomes guilty of another. The mildness which the child shows in the parent's
presence, is only the effect of submission, or temporary restraint, and in time
will become hypocrisy and deceit. It is necessary, therefore, the parental eye
be over it until reason, time, and habit, shall have wrought the cure, by
giving a new current to the disposition.

MRS. Bloomsgrove early gave a check to the passion for dress which appears in
females, by representing to her the folly of a gaudy dress, and the greater
neatness of a plain modest apparel. The female mind is often rendered vain by a
profusion of external ornaments in childhood. Another instance of the prudent
management of Mr. and Mrs. Bloomsgrove, was, their patiently waiting the
progress of nature, to mature their children for the stage of action. Parents
who have been ambitious of pushing their children forward sooner than nature
had prepared the way, have had reason to regret their folly: children, brought
forward to public view before the judgment has had opportunity to form,
frequently mortify their parents by indiscretions, from which those are saved
who wait the progress, and follow the intimations of nature.

AS every part of the human character is formed by habit, and habit by
practical exercises, they wisely determined to accustom their children to
diligence and industry; with such intervals of amusement, as were necessary for
health, cheerfulness, and vigor. Their amusements, too, were so contrived, as
to six habits of industry and promote the knowledge of business, suited to
their respective sex: our young master is furnished with a little spade and
other tools suited to his age, that he may cultivate a spot in the garden for
himself; in dressing this he vies with the gardener. While he is thus amusing
himself, he is acquiring habits of industry and some knowledge of agriculture.

ROZELLA, besides making and dressing her doll, and other female amusements,
was furnished with a little bed in the garden; this she dressed with her own
hand, which vied with the lily in whiteness: she often visited her flowery; and
watched, with increasing delight, the opening tulip, the expanding rose, the
blushing violet, the unfading amaranth, and the various flowers which adorned
her knot. This amusement combined exercise and industry, while it contributed
to health, which bloomed in her prominent cheeks.

ALL amusements, kept within proper bounds, contribute to promote the design of
education; for such is the connection between bodily organs and intellectual
operations, that the vigor of the latter depends on the tone of the former. But
when they can be so contrived, as to effect these purposes, and exercise
children in useful habits also, it must be a combination worthy of the
attention of parents and preceptors.

ADIEU, my dear sir; I have given you the outlines of a portrait, which I shall
endeavor to fill up as I have leisure.

LETTER X.
ALREADY has it been observed, and sure I am you will not contest the truth of
it, that first impressions are deepest and most durable; and that the happiness
of human life, depends much on the manner of our entering on the great theater
of the world. It is equally true, that the prosperity of the domestic state is
determined by the manner of its commencement: a full conviction of our entire
dependence on the providence of God; a determination to discharge all the
relative duties of life, as a dictate of nature and a duty of moral obligation,
are qualities requisite to the security of domestic enjoyment.

THOSE who have neither tried this expedient, nor attended to the connection
between the natural and moral world; nor to the influence of piety on outward
prosperity, and especially on our domestic condition, may laugh at the idea.
But do not those very persons wish to seek their safety under the banner of
religion, as the only sanctuary in times of trouble; as the only source of
comfort under the disappointments of life? Impious men can look up to no
protector in the time of trouble, while good men commit themselves, with trust
and hope, to the care of heaven. "The human mind, naturally feeble, is made to
feel all its own weakness by the measure of adversity. Dejected with evils
which overpower its strength, it relies no longer on itself. It casts every
where around a wishing, exploring eye, for some shelter to screen, some power
to uphold it; and if, when abandoned by the world, it can find nothing to which
it can fly in the room of the world, its state is truly forlorn. Now whither
should the vicious, in this situation, turn for aid? After having contended
with the streams of adverse fortune till their spirits are exhausted, gladly
would they retreat at last to the sanctuary of religion."

THIS provides a source of comfort for the mind in the gloomy shades of
solitude, or the painful hour of adversity; the distress of sickness, or the
infirmities of age. In those periods and conditions, when dejection and horror
oppress and affright the vicious, the man of piety enjoys composure of mind: he
has within himself a resource, which, though it may be interrupted, can never
fail him; and, indeed, it is often the case, that as the world lowers and
darkens before him, the light that is within him grows brighter; his hopes
renew their strength; his desires rise to nobler objects; his religion
transports him into regions new and boundless, where the most enchanting
prospects open to view; and the surrounding objects are suited to alleviate the
burdens of life, to scatter its gloom, and inspire the heart with joy ineffable.

THE early habits of piety had produced the happiest effects upon the temper
and disposition of Mr. Bloomsgrove, and his amiable consort, and qualified them
in the best manner for the part they had to act in domestic life. These habits
restrain those passions which are the principal occasion of discord, and
meliorate the temper, while they elevate the mind above low attachment and
sordid gratifications. Piety unites in one point of view, the smiling aspect,
both of the powers above and the objects below. It reflects a sunshine from
heaven upon the prosperity of the world. Where the heads of families are thus
holden together by the ties of religion, the gentle influence of it will be
felt through every branch of the family. The voice of peace, the simple song of
cheerfulness and content, will be heard in that dwelling.

OF so much consequence it is, that we lay the foundation of domestic
prosperity and happiness, deep and firm. I have therefore dwelt the longer upon
this, which was a distinguishing part of the character of those whose domestic
memoirs I am giving.

LETTER XI.
THE following story of an amiable youth, who, on embarking upon the theater of
life, committed himself to the care, guidance, and protection of divine
providence, I think worthy a place in these memoirs.

THE fact (for it is not a fiction) is recorded on the faithful pages of
ancient authentic history. He was encouraged by a dream, which seemed to
portend great future prosperity to himself, and the family he was about to
form. It had such an effect on his mind, that he immediately resolved never to
forsake that being who had appeared, at so early a period, to favor his
domesticating views; -- for you will observe, he was going in quest of a wise;
-- but, that he would acknowledge him in all his ways. Apropos -- our worthy
friend -- has found a companion nearer home. I cannot forbear to mention it in
this place, as you will feel so deeply interested in the event. Yes, believe
me, my friend, he is this very evening to call the lovely Eliza, HIS.

ADIEU -- I am this moment called to the celebration of the nuptials. If I have
time, I will add a line after my return.

P. S. IT is done: they are no longer twain, but one flesh: a more pleasing
sight perhaps you never saw: the fair Eliza blushing consent to the most solemn
vows; while a pleasing confusion added new graces to her glowing bridegroom.
They have a most flattering prospect before them. His uncommon industry, and
her knowledge of domestic economy, qualify them in the best manner for living;
and promise fair to make them prosperous and happy.

LETTER XII.
I AM no visionary; nor do I believe in that mystical divinity which finds a
spiritual meaning for every remarkable incident. Yet I see no difficulty in
admitting, that an all pervading spirit can communicate his mind to men, by
means, of which we can have no conception. I cannot conceive any difficulty in
the Father of our spirits having access to our mind in such a manner, as, by a
vision or dream, to stamp upon it things necessary for our information or
encouragement; and that too by such images, as cannot fail to express their
meaning. Of this kind is the justly celebrated dream to which I alluded, and
which makes a distinguished figure in the most ancient writings.

I RELATE it with the more pleasure in this place, because those writings were
the delightful study of Mr. Bloomsgrove; and he seems to have copied his maxims
from the sentiments which the dream inspired.

IN the ages of simplicity, when rural occupations, and domestic cares and
pleasures, divided the time and attention of mankind; a pious youth, as ancient
story tells, undertook, in obedience to a parent's command, a long journey to
seek a damsel worthy his espousal. The custom of his father's house required,
that all marriage alliances should be formed with some collateral branch of his
family. The venerable father, fearing lest so promising a youth should be
tempted to form a dishonorable alliance with the tawny daughters of the land,
where they then dwelt; hastens his son away to seek a wife among the daughters
of his kindred. The piety of the rather interposes its influence, to prevent
him from a marriage, where it might have a dangerous tendency on his morals.

THE journey is long and tedious, through a dreary wilderness, where are no
accommodations to refresh the weary traveller, except those which provident
nature furnishes. But a young man, pursuing the dictates of duty, is always the
object of divine patronage; he is never alone. The ever present spirit of
wisdom and love is with him, in the hurry of traveling; in the silence and
slumbers of the night; in the noise of the town, or the solitude of the desert.
This ever present and indulgent spirit accompanied our young adventurer, in his
long and lonely journey. It fell out on a day as he traveled, that he reached
a little village, where he determined to lodge, it being about sunset. Whether
there was no public inn for the accommodation of travelers, or whether from
prudential motives, and according to the simplicity of the age, he chose it,
does not appear: but, by the sequel, it seems he lodged in the field; where he
took a stone for his pillow and laid himself down to sleep. But his imagination
is awake. While soft slumbers sooth all his cares, and hovering angels guard
his bed, his active mind is impressed with the figure of a ladder, of such
amazing length, that while one end rested on the earth, the other reached the
very heavens and lost itself among the clouds.

ON this visionary ladder, those benevolent agents who are supposed to be
always attendant on good men, seemed to be constantly ascending and descending:
this indicated that a constant intercourse was preserved between heaven and
earth; and showed him the favorable influence of piety, in procuring the
blessing of heaven upon him, in his individual and domestic state; for he
particularly observed that the Lord stood above it. From this elevated station,
the great Parent of all is represented as addressing the amiable youth, in
language of paternal affection, assuring him of his favor and protection; that
his present enterprise should be successful; and prosperity crown his future
days.

SO clear was the vision, so audible the voice, that he awoke from sleep in a
pleasing astonishment. And, pouring out the grateful and pious effusions of his
soul, he made a solemn vow of fidelity to him, who had appeared to patronize
him in his pursuit; that he would set up his BETHEL, daily pour incense on his
domestic altar; and never cease to call on the name of the Lord: -- nor were
these transactions the illusions of fancy. In the future part of life, the
whole was realized, and he lived to bestow his benedictions on his children's
children. So much does the happiness of life depend on the manner in which we
first set out; the connexions we form, and the habits we contract. If we
associate ourselves with the virtuous, and especially in the great article of
marriage; if we acquire habits of sobriety and goodness, we may hope that
gentle gales of prosperity will waft us over life's varying surface, and safely
land us on its utmost verge: or should not our days be crowned with outward
prosperity, we have still the means of domestic tranquillity, and a resource
within ourselves which never fails.

LETTER XIII.
FROM the short account already given of Mrs. Bloomsgrove, you will easily
believe, that in every part of life, she was able to discharge the duties of it
with propriety. It would detract from the superior beauties of her mind, to say
any thing of the elegance of her person. She is now a wife, with all the charms
of the conjugal relation; a mother, with all the tenderness of maternal
affection. The dignity of her deportment inspired all about her with respect:
the mildness of her temper secured her the most cordial affection of all her
acquaintance. In Mrs. Bloomsgrove, modesty happily united with understanding;
dignity, with humility; and cheerfulness, with religion.

SHE was well qualified to carry into effect, the design she early formed, of
giving sustenance, as well as instruction, to her tender offspring. This was a
resolution propitious to the education of her children; for the foundation of
it is laid at the breast: there, the future temper and disposition commences:
and this, by reaction, has its influence in producing health, beauty, and
cheerfulness; and greatly facilitates the cultivation of moral qualities.

OF all the animals, of which we have any knowledge, man enters into life in
the most helpless condition; and is, for a longer term than any, dependent on
the care of others. But the God of nature, who always provides means for the
support of the most helpless creatures, has, by an admirable contrivance,
implanted, in the breast of parents, an instinctive principle, which prompts
them to the care and preservation of their feeble offspring. This principle is
connatural to the parent. It is not the effect of reasoning; nor can it easily
be eradicated from the human heart.

SOFT and gentle, it operates, in the mother, in a manner perfectly suited to
that kind of duty which the first stage of life requires. In the father, it
prevails in a way suited to the succeeding stages of childhood and youth. It
pushes him to great exertions in providing for the support of his children, and
in training them up for usefulness in life. By this instinct, providence has
founded in nature, a sufficient balance against the fatigues and anxieties of
nurturing their young. The soft and tender passions of the mother; the strong
and robust affections of the father, wonderfully prepare them for the important
task which nature has devolved upon them.

THAT education commences with our being, and that the nurse is our first
preceptress, were maxims upon which Mrs. Bloomsgrove uniformly practiced: and
they are as indubitably true, as they are important. What prudent mother then
will trust the commencement of the education of her child in the hands of a
mercenary nurse; and suffer one, who knows little more than how to yield
nourishment to an infant, to be the first preceptress of her son? If we trace
education up to its source, we shall find that the quality of food fixes the
state of the constitution; that the temper is affected by the same cause, and
by the situation in which the infant is first placed; that the objects with
which the eyes of an infant are most conversant, have their influence also on
the body and mind. These will have a lasting effect on the muscles of the face;
and therefore, go into the determination of its beauty; on the cheerfulness of
the mind, and goodness of the disposition; and consequently, have their share
in fixing the after propensities to virtue and vice.

THE same reason which Lord Kaimes assigns, that a female should banish all
dismal thoughts, and preserve herself as calm and cheerful as possible, during
her progressive state, holds equally good in the nursing period, viz. Agreeable
impressions may be made on an infant mind: and, if agreeable, by consequence,
disagreeable ones may be made also. It is then by no means a matter of
indifference, what kind of objects, or countenances, are presented to children;
or what management they receive; for the impressions, the habit will be lasting.

I WAS a firm believer in the doctrine of sympathies, and antipathies, till
Doctor Moore wrote so learnedly against it: nor am I an infidel yet. He has
convinced me that ingenious reasonings may be employed against it, but not of
its falsity. Facts are stubborn things. I knew a child, maimed exactly in
imitation of a servant, who was frequently before the eyes of its mother,
during the time of her advancement; even his bones were distorted and out of
place. This, and numberless other instances of a like nature, I think, prove
the truth of the doctrine, be the cause of these phenomena what they may. The
little Osander and Rozella, enjoyed whatever advantages arose from an agreeable
assemblage of objects; and came forward into life, with the blessings of
health, genius, and good temper: circumstances, which contributed not a little
to their enjoyment and usefulness in the world.

IN America there are comparatively few mothers so unnatural, as, of choice, to
put their children out to nurse. Some, indeed, there are, who do this from a
love of ease, or a fancied superiority to the drudgery of giving sustenance to
their helpless offspring, to whom they have given existence. It should be
considered, that the obligations between parent and child, are reciprocal; and
if neglected by the former, it can hardly be expected that they will be
fulfilled by the latter. It was well observed by Rousseau, that the child
should love its mother before it is sensible of it as a duty. If the voice of
nature is not strengthened by habit and cultivation, it will be silenced in its
infancy, and the heart will perish, if I may so express myself, before it is
born.

LETTER XIV.
THE sentiments, contained in my last, were familiar to Mrs. Bloomsgrove. She
had too much goodness of heart, to omit any circumstance of duty. Impelled by
motives of duty and maternal affection, she sacrificed every personal
consideration to the care of her helpless charge. Retired from the gay world,
and all the pleasures it offers, she studied her own health with more attention
than common, that she might communicate to it the best means of support and
health. In the midst of her family and friends, she is seen with her playful
infant, smiling in her arms. Beautiful and interesting was the sight, to behold
her thus fulfilling the first duties of nature. For what she now does for her
child, who does not so much as know her, proves what she will be capable of
doing one day for him, when she enjoys the happiness of being beloved by him,
and when she has assured to herself more right to his tenderness.

THE first seven years of life are a period, of much greater importance, in the
business of education, than is generally imagined. Within this period are laid,
the foundation of health; the temperament of the body, on which depend the
passions and affections of the heart. On this foundation is to rise the fabric
of virtue and excellence. So great a part of the management of children,
through this stage of it, falls to the lot of mothers, that, during its
continuance, I shall have but little occasion to speak of Mr. Bloomsgrove.
Happy in the entire confidence of her husband, and enjoying all his aid and
influence, she took charge of the infant days of the children; and being a lady
of great judgment, she adopted a system of her own, and pursued it with
persevering steadiness.

OSANDER was born the twenty fourth day of September following their marriage;
and Rozella, about two years after him. The difference in their ages was so
little, that the same manner of treatment, allowing for difference of sex, soon
answered for both.

IN my next I will give you some account of her method with them.

N. B. THE want of method in training up children, may be assigned as a
principal reason of the well meant endeavors of so many proving abortive.
Parents are often governed more by their feelings than their judgment. The
exercise of such capricious government soon falls into contempt: instruction is
thrown away, because counteracted by example; and all the good ends of domestic
education, lost, through indiscretion. After all our best systems, we are
imperfect creatures: this, however, proves the necessity of them; that in our
worst humor, we may have the assistance of that model which was the effect of
cooler judgment.

LETTER XV.
TRUE, sir -- "Life and organization never can result from a blind concourse of
atoms; nor will the chemist, with all his art in compounds, ever find sensation
and thought at the bottom of his crucible." But, by a seasonable attention to
those curiously organized bodies, which the Creator has given us, we find,
both thought and sensation, may be rendered more quick and active, than they
otherwise would be. We are mechanical beings; and, after all our boast of
reason, we are influenced, through life, by mechanical powers. In the first stages
of life, we are governed by no other principles. Reason has little or no share
in the direction of our actions, till we have passed several years under the
government of instinct.

THIS was the term, in which Mrs. Bloomsgrove attended to the formation of her
children's constitution, and to give a right direction to all the instinctive
powers and principles of nature. Mrs. G --, you know, was forever humoring and
fondling her children; by which means their constitutions are ruined. Pale and
wan, they appear but half animated; and are doomed to drag out a life of
weakness and disease, without genius, vivacity, or powers of self enjoyment.
But Mrs. Bloomsgrove, sensible that "a sound mind, in a sound body," was a
blessing in the first rank of life; and that these are connected together,
first turned her attention to their health. Cleanliness, air, and exercise, she
considered as the stamina of health, and therefore let them play in the open
air. She was less fearful of cold than heat, and had them temperately clad both
summer and winter: by varying their dress but little, with the seasons, she
preserved a regular temperament of the body. This idea she probably received
from Mr. Lock, who tells of persons in England, who wear the same clothes
summer and winter, without any inconvenience, or more sense of cold than
others. I am acquainted with those in America who practice the same; and never
put on a loose coat but in foul weather, who appear to suffer less from the
cold, than those who are loaded with garments.

THIS depends on use: our faces are naturally as susceptible of cold, or heat,
as any part of the body; it is only by habit, that they harden, and become
capable of enduring either.

THE Scythian philosopher gave a proper account of this matter, in his answer
to the Athenian, who inquired how he could go naked in frost and snow? How,
said the Scythian, can you endure your face exposed to the sharp air? "My face
is used to it," said the Athenian. "Think me all face," replied the Scythian.

MR. Lock recommends that children should lie without a cap at night, as soon
they are able to run about without one by day; and assigns this reason for it.
"Nothing more exposes to headachs, colds, catarrhs, coughs, and several other
diseases, than keeping the head warm." For the same reason, I should suppose
the child ought never to have a cap on its head. By exposing it to the air, it
gathers strength; the solids become more tense, and act more vigorously, in
propelling the circulating fluids. All the parts being more active, they repel
many dangers to which they would otherwise be exposed; the business of
thinking, reflecting, and reasoning, will be carried on with greater activity
and vigor.

CERTAIN it is, that health prevails more in cottages than in palaces; and, no
doubt, the organs of the body are in better order for mental operations. To
what cause can we ascribe this, but to its being fed and clothed in a more
plain and simple manner; and more exposed to air and exercise? Osander and
Rozella, have a bloom of health, and a sprightliness of mind, which distinguish
them from most other children, of their age and condition.

MRS. Bloomsgrove, observing that the children of a poor neighbor were seldom
troubled with colds and coughs, which often attended those of a wealthy family
in the same neighborhood; reasoned thus with herself: "those poor children
acquire a hardiness from the necessity of having their feet frequently wet,
being always badly s^od; while the others never fail to take cold when, by
accident, they wet theirs. To such accidents all children, male and female, are
sometimes exposed. And, besides, when the feet are not inured to a little
hardiness, they suffer much from the tenderness, they acquire, by too much
warmth."

THUS reasoned this excellent mother; and as she determined not to be governed
by false tenderness, or the indiscreet practice of others, in the education of
her children; she was induced, from her own observation on its advantages to
other children, to inure here is to feel alternately wet and dry, both summer and
winter. Even the little Rozella, is suffered to wet her feet, while at play on
the green in the back yard; where runs a murmuring rill, conducted from a
distant fountain. The rose and the lily bloom on their cheeks, while they slide
on the ice, which this little current affords in the winter; till their feet
become wet with the snow which melts upon them. The tender mother is pained at
the sight. She has almost forgotten the period of such amusements, and shivers
with the cold which she thinks they endure. A struggle between maternal
tenderness, and more solid judgment, ensues. She is about to call them in; but
they play on the snow and ice, without appearing to have the sensation of cold.
"Their own feelings, said Mrs. Bloomsgrove, are the best standard for them; why
should I call them in on account of the cold, since they seem not to perceive
it?" Her judgment prevails: they divert themselves until fatigued, or it is
time to call them in to dinner: -- They are not suffered to go to the fire, but
are kept in motion, until the balance is well restored, and they are in a
proper temperament to be at rest.

LETTER XVI.
ON a day, when the declining sun had tinged the mountain tops with its milder
rays, and reddening skies invited the tuneful choir to serenade the groves,
with the faint lays of their evening song; these happy parents were invited, by
the serenity that followed the shower, to the gravel walk. At the instant of
their return, a little affair happened in the verdant back yard, which, were it
not for its consequences, would not be worth relating; but on account of those,
deserves our notice. To this place the little brother and sister had been
allured, by the same causes which induced their parents to walk; the shower had
swollen the rivulet beyond its usual size; they wish to see it overflow its
banks. Accordingly, they set about stopping its course with such materials as
they can collect. They ply with vigor, and seem just ready to accomplish their
design, when, lo! an unforeseen accident damps the rising joy; so precarious
are all our prospects, all our enjoyments!

THE little Rozella, now about three or four years old, is deep laden with
materials; and, in attempting to deposit them to the best advantage -- O! dire
to relate -- she plunges headlong into the overflowing current. The parents,
who had just returned, and were viewing the playful scene, ran to her relief,
not much alarmed, indeed, from the depth of water. On this occasion Mrs.
Bloomsgrove showed a great degree of self command; a necessary attainment for
those who have the care of children! she caught her little daughter in her
arms, and pleasantly said, "The ducks paddle in the water, therefore Rozella is
a little duck." Rozella took hold of her frock, and held it out, crying -- Her
mamma looked at it, and, smiling, said, "What, my dear, did you like to have
wet your new frock? come, let us go and dry it." The surprise subsides: the
child ceases crying, and soon begins to smile. A frown, on this occasion, would
have broken her little heart, without the least possible advantage. Mrs.
Bloomsgrove availed herself of the opportunity to wash them both, in the same
water in which they had been at play; and found it salutary, in abating an
eruptive complaint which attended them. By repeating the same, she soon found
the complaint entirely removed. Convinced of the utility of the practice, she
continued it, at short intervals; but frequently washed their heads and feet in
cold water, through all the seasons. She was often heard to say, after her
children were grown up, she believed scarce any thing had contributed so much
to remove little complaints; to prevent great ones; and to consolidate their
constitution, as this practice.

THE open air, where it can be enjoyed, undoubtedly, is far preferable to any
house for children to divert themselves in; for, by degrees, they habituate
themselves to those vicissitudes of weather, to which they will be exposed all
their days. Their bodies will be of little use to them, in this variable
climate, if they cannot endure those changes; nor can they enjoy life, unless
prepared for them by early habits. The only objection Mrs. Bloomsgrove has to
open air, is the danger of tarnishing her daughter's fair complexion. Against
this she guards as effectually as she can; and the green plot serves, in a
great measure, as a preventive: and she considered that health, and
sprightliness, which are no less ornamental to the sex, than a fair complexion,
and which are promoted by those means, as a full compensation for the risk she
ran.

N. B. THE pamphlet on female education came safe to hand; it contains many
excellent observations on that subject: and though some parts of it may be
condemned by the gay, and inconsiderate; yet I will venture to say, the maxims
it offers are more suited to the state of society, and government in this
country, than the practice of those who explode them.

LETTER XVII.
PLAINNESS and simplicity, in food and drink, were the maxims which governed
Mrs. Bloomsgrove in the management of her children. Milk, and farinaceous food,
are most suitable for them. Custom has a great effect; and the palate may be
formed to almost any thing; but, it by no means follows, that the stomach can
safely receive every thing to which the palate may be reconciled. It was the
opinion of the great Mr. Lock, that most of the diseases in England were to be
imputed to eating too much meat, and too little bread. He therefore advises to
avoid giving children any meat till they are two, or three years old. He
supposes "they would breed their teeth with much less danger, be freer from
disease, while they are little, and lay the foundation of an healthy and strong
constitution much surer, if they were not crammed so much as they are, by fond
mothers and foolish servants, and were kept wholly from flesh the first three
or four years of their lives!"

AS the palate may be formed to any thing, so it was prudent in Mrs.
Bloomsgrove, who received the entire approbation of her husband therein, to
confine her children to a simple, unoffending diet. Butter, oily substances,
gross meats, or any heavy bodies, such as high seasonings consist of, oppress
the stomach, heat and vitiate the blood, and bring on unnatural drought,
langor, and drowsiness; and therefore, are improper for children. This
unnatural drought will only be increased by drinking; for it is certain that
frequent drinking creates drought. This has led writers, on education, to
caution parents against suffering children to have recourse, too frequently, to
any kind of liquor. Drink is often given children to silence their crying; and
whenever they see others drink, it excites an inclination to the same in
themselves; and, if gratified, will induce a dangerous habit. The
abovementioned writer says, that he once lived in a house where, to appease a
froward child, drink was given to it, as often as it cried; so that it was
constantly drinking; and though the child could not speak, it drank more in
twenty four hours than he did. A person may be guilty of intemperance in the
use of cold water as well as of ardent spirits.

LETTER XVIII.
"THE experience of ages shows, that food should be plain, nutritive, and in
plenty; and that the intervals of meals should not be distant, or formal, with
children, whose constitutions digest rapidly. Food should be given, merely to
satisfy hunger."

IN imitation of Augustus, who, when he was the greatest monarch on earth,
tells us he took a bit of dry bread in his chariot, Osander ate little else
than bread, milk, roots and vegetables, until near five years old. He was not
confined to set meals, but ate when he was hungry, and drank when he was dry;
unless those appetites appeared to be the effect of caprice, or were excited by
seeing others eat; for children are imitative beings. In that case, he is tried
with a piece of dry bread or fair water; if the appetite be not strong enough
for these, it is a false one. By this simple, temperate manner of living, he
acquired all the strength, sprightliness, and agility, of the young Romans, who
were fed in the same way, and were remarkable for strength and activity.

NATURE is the best directress in those cases; and it is safest following her
dictates. The habit of eating at a particular hour, when we rise into a family
state, becomes convenient: business, company, and the order of society, render
it unavoidable; but it cannot be necessary that children should be compelled to
eat then, or to suspend eating at other times. When the habit is contracted,
the child will feel the cravings of appetite at the stated periods; and will
indulge merely from habit, or to gratify an imaginary want. The consequences
will be, a depression of spirits, ill humor, and fretfulness.

ALTHOUGH Osander is permitted to sit at table at the age of five, yet he is not
often helped to any meat, and seldom wishes for any; much less does he ever ask
for this or that, as fancy may dictate; as is the manner of some children, who
are made perfect epicures at ten years old. And as to Rozella, tho, like the
Spartan misses, she is bred up to some degree of hardiness, yet she can scarce
be prevailed upon to taste meat till she is six or seven years old; but she is
as plump as a partridge, and fresh as a rose.

IN the article of fruit, with which the garden abounded, they were indulged,
with very little restriction, except that the fruit be ripe. In a situation
like theirs, it would be impossible to lay a restraint without creating a
temptation to violate orders, and giving encouragement to rapacity. The same
observation holds good of all market towns, where children's coppers will
procure fruit without the parents' knowledge.

TO prohibit their use of it, or even to attempt to restrain it, would only
make them ravenous after that for which they would never hanker, if laid open
to them at will. And, besides, the rotation of summer fruit is admirably
suited, to correct the blood and juices, and afford a balance against the
excessive heat of that season. The vegetable acid serves as a powerful
antiscorbutic, while the rich pulp nourishes animal nature; and if children at
any time overdo a little, they will find by experience the necessity of more
caution for the future.

LETTER XIX.
MY Mercury is on the wing, and admits not my continuing the subject: -- but,
while he is adjusting some little matters, I snatch a moment to take a turn
with you in the garden. Large and commodious, it contains every kind of
delicious fruit, together with roots and vegetables for the use of the family;
I may add, of many a poor family also in the neighboring village, who share the
bounty of its owner. This is a lively emblem of Mr. Bloomsgrove! who always
blends the useful and agreeable in a happy manner. In the midst of this garden,
is a spacious walk: trees and flowers, on either side, afford an assemblage of
agreeable objects as we pass. At the yonder end, is an arbor which has an air
of elegant simplicity, and affords a cool retreat from the heat of the sun. The
woodbine, interspersed among its sashes, makes a beautiful appearance, and
dazzles the eye with an infinity of reflections, which glitter among the
leaves. The seats are so entwined with savin, as to have the appearance of a
green sofa. On either side is a fish pond, with a bathing font at the end,
constantly supplied with fresh water from beneath a distant rock. As the
principal walk runs in a vermicular direction, and all the others in a similar
manner, they do not intersect each other at right angles; but in every
direction are cut into segments of circles. This is imitating nature: for she
no where, in any of her works, exhibits a right angle; and it affords a
romantic appearance. By this contrivance the foliage has much more benefit from
the air, than if they were in direct lines. As you enter the gate, your eye
follows the slow winding course, and surveys, partly through the trees, the bowery
at the other end, which has a fine effect upon the imagination. But, I must
clip her wings, and bid you adieu.

LETTER XX.
THE period, of which we now speak, is not a season for the acquisition of much
understanding. But I will venture to say, in the first seven years of our life,
we gain more knowledge, than in the same term, during any other part of life.
Children are so inquisitive concerning the names, properties and relations of
things, that there are but few objects, with which we generally become
acquainted, but fall within the limits of a child's knowledge. We afterward
view them in a different manner, because we have more understanding of their
properties; we become more able to investigate the causes, and trace the
effects of natural objects; for children acquire their knowledge, by perception
only; but men gain understanding by reasoning, comparison, and deduction. After
all our mighty boast of understanding, it is but a poor pittance compared with
the knowledge we get by perception: and mankind, in general, are influenced
more in their sentiments and manners, through life, by the latter, than by the
former. Tho chil^ren cannot form syllogisms, or make a set of arguments, ye^
they do something very similar, and which has a like effect on their actions. A
child, at the breast, will be pleased, or displeased, affrighted, or soothed,
by tracing the lineaments of its mother's, or nurse's, passions in the face.

THIS you will call a mechanical influence on the infant passions: be it so:
who does not see the effect this will have on the temper, and future character
of the child? Before it can understand the meaning of any word, it will be
greatly affected by the tone of voice; by harmony and discord. Parents should
therefore take care, what sounds are familiar to their children; should be
mindful of the language they use in their presence. Children know more than
people are generally aware of. The disposition is now forming: the little plant
of reason is now in embryo; these should be guarded against noxious vapors,
and cherished with prudent culture. As they are now molded they will continue.

"Children like tender osiers take the bow;
And as they first are fashioned, always grow." --
Watts. LETTER XXI.
THAT children should be taught to submit to necessity, that is, to bear any
unavoidable pain, with patience, is not only right, but the most useful lesson
in life. It will be to little purpose, however, to tell a child, in a fit of
the colic, that it is unavoidable; painful necessity already convinces him of
that. It is the little asperities of life, the cross events, the
disappointments we meet with, and our inability to gratify our wishes, that
irritate the passions, and call for the exercise of moderation and patience.
Happy would it be for children, if parents were more generally possessed of
this quality. Precept would then have its influence, and more powerful example
would not fail to persuade. The passions of the heart are latent qualities,
which lie concealed till some occurrence strikes them out; as the property of
heat in certain bodies does not appear until brought forth by collision; and
although these passions will always be excited by those objects, or occurrences
which make the collision, their effect may be so directed and limited, as to
^^^duce the happiest consequences. To do this effectually, requires judgment,
attention, and vigilance. This is the most difficult, and, at the same time,
the most important part of education: for on the regulation of our passions,
depend our own comfort and the happiness of those about us; our progress in
virtue, and the discharge of all those duties we owe to God, our fellow
creatures, and ourselves.

TO the honor of Mrs. Bloomsgrove, it must be said, that she managed this
critical part of education with wisdom and prudence. Though soft and gentle in
her manners, and mild in her government, yet she has irritable qualities, and a
temper susceptible of emotion. This is often put to the test among children;
but judgment is the pole star which guides her. She well knew the importance of
showing her children that she could command her own passions, and submit to
unavoidable evils; in order to train them to so useful an exercise as that of
self command. This is a task which requires great exertion. Parents must often
do violence to themselves, and frequently stifle their real feelings.

OSANDER and Rozella, like other children, are born with the various passions
and propensities of human nature. They see some of the servants fearful, when
it thunders, and run to their mamma, in a fright, for shelter: she appears
cheerful, and pleasantly says, "The sun will shine clearly, and the birds will
sing prettily, after this." Whatever might be her feelings, on the occasion, it
was very prudent to appear cheerful, and improve the cause of their alarm to so
agreeable an end. The least appearance of timidity, in her, would have
confirmed their fears, and deeply impressed their minds; for they think "papa
and mamma know every thing." Afterward, when a thunder gust is rising, she
calls them to her own room, which is in the southeast corner of the house, and
looking through a lattice formed of honeysuckle, commands a most beautifully
variegated prospect; and "When to the startled eye the sudden glance
Appears far south, eruptive through the cloud;
And following slower, in explosion vast,
The thunder raises his tremendous voice,"
Mrs. Bloomsgrove, with the aid of her husband, if he is at home, amuses the
children with the various beauties that offer themselves to view, and with such
entertaining stories as arise in her mind. The habit of doing this rendered
them quite fearless of thunder, and the reasons she used to assign to them, in
order to excite their fortitude, had a happy effect in confirming her own.

WHATEVER objects affright them, unless they are such as should warn them of
real danger, she reconciles them to, by rendering them familiar: this is done
by degrees, with a great deal of management, and with an air of pleasantry. No
stories of ghosts and hobgoblins have ever yet reached their ears, nor ever
will, if the vigilance of their parents can prevent the evil. Mrs. Bloomsgrove
once caught a young woman, who had lately come into the house, telling some
wonderful story to the children: she concluded, by their attention, that it
partook of the mavelous; and immediately called her to her own room, as if to
do something, where she lectured her upon the folly and danger of alarming the
apprehensions of children with bugbear stories; and assured her, that if she
ever did the like again, she must immediately quit the house. Great care is
requisite to guard children against the follies of servants: they are generally
fond of mavelous things, and children are pleased with the same, because they
have not reason to balance those passions which are excited by them. Many
people suffer, through life, with the fear which the imprudence of nurses and
servants early impressed on them, by rehearsing stories of ghosts, witches,
apparitions, and the like.

OSANDER and Rozella have no more fear from those chimerical inhabitants of
darkness, than we have from those of the planet Herschel: their ignorance is
their protection against all such fairy beings. Having no knowledge of them,
they go to bed in the dark, with less fear than most others do with a candle;
they say their prayers; repeat their evening hymns, and fall asleep, with as
little apprehension of danger, as if in their mother's arms.

NOTHING could have been more directly in point -- A friend, who, this moment,
has called on me, informs me of the death of an unfortunate youth about
eighteen years of age. A more promising child perhaps never blessed a mother's
arms, until twelve years old; when a servant, who had made him extremely timid,
by relating stories of ghosts and apparitions, came suddenly upon him in the
dusk of an evening, in an attitude, in which he had represented their
appearance. Seeing by the help of the dim light, from a pale glimmering candle,
at a distance, as he supposed, one of those infernal agents whose image had so
often been presented to his mind, the shock was too great for nature to sustain
-- He fainted instantly -- He fell -- Every effort was used to recover him. At
length, he seemed to awake, bu^ in the greatest fright imaginable -- He fell
into convulsion fits, which deprived him of all rational exercises, and reduced
him, alternately, to the state of a madman and an idiot. He could never be left
without one to guard him, and in the night was, for years, confined in a cage;
this morning, breaking loose from his confinement, he ran to a pond near by,
and plunging into it, was drowned before he could be recovered, tho closely
pursued. Thus ended the life of an only son, the hope of his parents, by the
folly and imprudence of a servant; who, in vain, lamented the miseries he
brought upon them.

LETTER XXII.
A VARIETY of cares and attentions occupy the mind, and divide the time of wise
and prudent mothers. Delightful task! to rear the tender thought,
To teach the young idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh instruction over the mind,
To breathe the enlivening spirit, and to fix
The generous purpose in the glowing breast.
THOMPSON.
It is theirs, not only, to feed them with salutary diet, and watch for their
personal safety; but to cherish the principles, and exercise them in the
practice, of gratitude to benefactors, love of truth, justice, beneficence, and
whatever qualities are requisite to render them amiable, useful, and happy in
life. If this attention is wisely employed, it will not fail to produce every
virtue necessary to the human character: but an injudicious management will
generate the opposite vices; ingratitude, selfishness, falsehood, cruelty,
revenge: these are not the offsprings of nature, but of mismanagement in
childhood; and entail mischiefs which no future care can prevent or remedy.

MRS. Bloomsgrove guards her children against rashness, by suffering them to
experience the inconvenience of it, when very young. Rozella, pleased with the
luster of a candl^, cries for it: she is permitted to handle it, and to burn
her finger a little: she never wishes for so dangerous a bauble again. If
Osander cries for a shining knife, i^ is given him; but craftily drawn so as to
^t his finger: he feels the inconvenience of the glittering thing, and
willingly gives it up; nor does he soon forget the danger attending it.

CHILDREN brought up together, in the affectionate manner they were, have few
differences; but the most perfect education will not wholly prevent these. The
idea of property, and sense of personal rights, take place very early in the
mind. Interferences of interest, or of passions, will produce contentions; and
these, complaints: but so prudent a mother will rarely indulge children, in
coming to her with complaints one against the other. To allow of this, on every
trifling occasion, would be to encourage a complaining disposition. To receive,
and decide on, their controversies, unless some real injury is done, would have
a tendency to excite enmity between them. She makes light of their complaints
against each other, telling them that such trifles are not worth minding; but
privately admonishes the aggressor. If Rozella catches up her brother's top and
runs away with it, and complaint is made, or her mamma sees the playful trick,
she is told to restore it and never to take any thing that does not belong to
her -- "How would you like to have Osander get the pieces of china out of your
baby house, or the flowers from your knot in the garden? and besides, a top is
not a pretty thing for girls to play with." If he, at any time, invades her
property, the same useful lesson is taught him. By these means they are
learning to feel the force of that social rule of conduct, "DO AS YE WOULD BE
DONE UNTO," before they understand any thing of its origin or extent.

EVERY action, that had the appearance of revenge, was treated with such marks
of disapprobation, as to convince the child both of the impropriety and
inconvenience of it. They were taught the most pleasing kind of revenge, doing
good to the injurious, etc. by little stories suited to their capacities, and
which illustrated the subject in the best manner. A little affray happened
between the children one day, which, for the many useful lessons it produced,
deserves to be related. But on account of the length of the story, I will
reserve it till my next.

P. S. A RECENT instance, of the attention which children sometimes pay to what
is said by their parents, deserves notice; and, lest it should escape me, I
will give it you here; for it shows that parents should never be off their
guard in talking before their children. "A lady said, before one of her little
girls who seemed not to hear, that Mrs. --, a neighbor of theirs, was an
agreeable woman, when she had not a drop in her eye. Soon afterward this same
lady was on a visit to the little girl's mamma: the child looked at her with
uncommon attention: the lady observing it, says -- "Why do you look so
earnestly at me, my dear?" The little innocent replied -- "I am looking to see
if there is any drop in your eye."

LETTER XXIII.
IT happened one day, as Rozella was running in one of the cross walks in the
garden, she stumbled over the handle of Osander's hoe, which he had heedlessly
left in the way. She fell upon his bed, and broke down a favorite vine, which
he had nourished with more than ordinary care. He came into the garden just as
she had arisen, and stood looking at the vine she had unfortunately broken.
Osander seeing what she had done, and not knowing by what means, in the first
sally of passion, ran to her knot and pulled up by the roots the most beautiful
tulip she had in all her flowery. Grievous complaints from both sides go up to
their mamma; for she is the arbitress in all their childish disputes. Both are
plaintiffs, both defendants. She hears them patiently, speaks kindly to both;
and dismisses them for the present, telling them to go wash their faces, for
they had been crying, and to ask Caspina, the maid, for a piece of bread.

TAKING them separately, she inquired into the affair: as Rozella was the
first, in the seeming transgression, she was summoned first. It appeared, on
examination, to be an accident in which she came very near losing one of her
eyes. She sobs, and was very much troubled, to think she had hurt her brother's
vine, and offers to replace it with some of her sweet brier. She is dimissed
with a caution to be more careful in future, and a charge always to love her
little brother. Sweet innocence sat on her little brow, and with a low courtesy
said, "thank you, mamma," and went out.

OSANDER was then called: he appears guilty. Such is the different effect of
actions voluntary, and those which are unavoidable. Washing in cold water had
stilled the tumult of his passions; eating with his sister had opened all the
avenues to the heart: he felt the force of conviction, and owned the fault. He
said he would never hurt his sister's things any more; that he intended only to
pull off the tulip, and the whole came up by the roots: but he would replace it
with his double pink holyoke, and that when her cousin Fanny came, they should
both pick as many of his strawberries as they pleased; and that the next time
his sister fell down, he would run and help her up, instead of hurting her
flower bed.

SELF CONVICTION is the best foundation for amendment. The action was
revengeful, and deserved punishment; and the prudent mother put him into a way
to inflict it on himself. She gravely said, "My dear, I am glad you see your
error. I only wish you had seen it before you committed it; because revenge is
the worst thing in the world: for the future, you must think what you are going
to do, before you do it; and never do wrong to others if they have done so to
you. But your sister did not design you an injury; and besides, she had like to
have lost one of her eyes in the fall." The mention of this quite overcame him.
He burst into a flood of tears, saying, "what would my poor little sister have
done, if she had lost one of her eyes?" Every circumstance helped to prepare
the way for useful lessons, and generous actions. Rozella, being called in, her
brother catches her round the neck, and, kissing her, calls her his dear little
sister; is sorry he spoiled her beautiful tulip; laments the danger, she had
been in, of losing one of her eyes; offers her any thing, every thing in his
garden; and, above all, promises to be kind to her always. The little generous
creature declined all his offers except the last; and says, "that is worth more
than an hundred tulips, and she does not desire any thing else."

EVERY thing being now calm and serene, and the children more affectionate than
ever; the happy mother sees new beauties in them, and is delighted with their
prattle and playful tricks. While the mother is thus enjoying domestic
pleasures, the father, who had been attending the judicial court at --, returns
to partake in the happy fruits of his wife's prudent management, without
knowing what had passed. He enjoys the cheerfulness of his wife, and the
prattle of the children, "Conversing with your sprightly boys,
Your eyes have spoke a mother's joys!
With what delight I Have heard you quote,
Their sayings in imperfect note!
I grant in body and in mind,
Nature appears profusely kind;
Trust not to that; act you your part,
Imprint just morals in their heart:
Impartially their talents scan,
It Is education forms the man." --
GAY.
who hang around him, till the clock strikes seven, then bidding their papa and
mamma good night, they go to bed in more harmony and cheerfulness than ever.

AFTER they were gone, Mrs. Bloomsgrove related the whole affair to her
husband, with all the circumstances of her management, and the effect it had
upon their minds; of which he had just been a witness. Perhaps a wife never
appeared with more dignity or amiableness in the eyes of her husband, than she
did on this occasion. He highly applauded the measures she had taken. He saw,
at once, the mechanical effect of cold water to moderate the passions; and the
influence which the act of eating together had in producing harmony of
affection. He dwelt largely on the vast advantage of the prudent care and wise
management of a mother to young children; and bestowed many encomiums upon her,
and declared himself extremely happy in having a wife so competent to the
business of educating the objects of their mutual affections. Ye affectionate
husbands, who are blessed with wives who nurse the infancy, and guard the
childhood of your offspring, consider their painful task, the variety and
difficulty attending it; and never cease to alleviate their condition by
tenderness, and reward their goodness by applause! Mrs. Bloomsgrove has a mind
superior to vanity; and could enjoy no pleasure from applause, unless conscious
of having endeavored to discharge her duty. The cool approbation of Mr.
Bloomsgrove, however, could not fail of affording her sensible pleasure: this
she expressed by a modest reply, becoming the delicacy of her sex, and the
affection of a wife to the best of husbands.

WHILE the full orbed moon, which guides the benighted traveller, ascended our
hemisphere, and silvered every object around; these happy parents beguiled the
lapsing hours in pleasing conversation about their little son and daughter.
Osander was now about eight, and began to exhibit some marks of brilliant
genius. Rozella had just entered her seventh year, with a form and disposition
flattering to the views of an affectionate mother. They were now so far
advanced, as to require the joint aid of a father to raise the superstructure,
the foundation of which their mother's care had laid. He cheerfully offers to
lend every assistance in his power, in bringing forward the fruit to
perfection, the early buds of which she had so tenderly cherished. They were
anticipating the pleasure they should one day derive from a persevering care in
the right management of their children, when a loud rap at the door called
their attention from the subject, and introduced a Miss --, who is to bear a
part in the future memoirs of this family.

THE subject has beguiled me into a still later hour in relating it; and the
iron register of time remands me to rest.

LETTER XXIV.
IMITATION is a very powerful spring of action in human nature, especially in
children. In females, it operates more strongly than in our sex: they are quick
to discern the peculiarities of female conduct, and directly catch the manners
of their own sex. This proneness to imitation, strengthens in proportion as the
manners and amusements of others come within our reach: small children will,
therefore, be more likely to imitate those older than themselves, than grown
people. Although older children will descend to partake in the amusements of
younger, rather than be left alone, yet this is contrary to nature: she always
directs us to imitate those above us. On this account, great advantage may be
made of this imitative propensity, in the progress of education.

I CANNOT go on to relate the circumstances, relative to the new comer into the
family, before I mention some of the dangerous tendencies of this imitative
propensity, and some of its uses. Children often catch a broken dialect from
those older than themselves, of which it requires great pains to break them. It
is observed, that those children who are brought up in the West Indies,
surrounded with Negroes, have a kind of mongrel, Anglo-Africano dialect. The
same ill effect is produced, by speaking to them in a broken inarticulate
language, or, what is called babytalk. This ought never to be permitted; but
the most plain, full, and distinct sounds should be employed in speaking to
children. Another bad effect which may arise from this propensity, is, that
boys and girls, being constantly together in a family, will slide into an
imitation of each others manners; tho nature dictates different manners and
amusements to them. "A boy educated with girls of his own age, will imitate
their manners and become effeminate; but it is more common to see a girl
imitate the manners of the boys with whom she is educated." The consequences
are more injurious in the latter case than in the former; for the manners will
react upon the mind, and have their influence in moulding that: but the effect
of any improper stamp, from this quarter, will be much more easily effaced from
boys than girls; they are more abroad, and conversant with a greater variety of
objects, which have a tendency to efface any unfavorable impression.

IT was on account of this imitative proneness, and the advantages to be
derived from it, that Mrs. Bloomsgrove conceived a with to procure a female
companion for her little daughter, whose education had been such as would
afford a good model for imitation; and of such an age, as not to have lost all
relish for amusements suited to that of Rozella. This would be securing to her
all the pleasures of company and amusement at home, and afford a constant
stimulus to improvement, without the disadvantage of bad examples among other
children. Nothing has a better tendency to elevate the mind, than to place
those images before it, which, tho above our reach at present, yet appear not
too far distant to encourage our hope of soon attaining the same excellence.
This wish she communicated to her husband, who was soon going to --, where
lived a distant relation of Mrs. Bloomsgrove, who had four daughters and two
sons. She was the widow of a merchant of great integrity, who lived in the
metropolis, where the widening river mingles its waters with those of the
Atlantic ocean. His children had, therefore, enjoyed every advantage for the
refinements of education; nor had they been neglected, as is too often the
case, in the more substantial qualities. His circumstances had been much
reduced by losses at sea: and about this time the misfortunes of the family
were completed. The dwelling house in which he lived, took fire, and
communicated the flame to an adjoining store: it being dry, and a high wind at
southeast, the fire raged to such a degree, as to baffle every effort to check
its progress. In the space of an hour, he saw his buildings, with most of his
effects, consumed to ashes. A circumstance much more distressful to his family
was, he overheated himself by violent exertions to rescue his property from the
devouring flames, which threw him into a fever, of which he died in about ten
days, amidst the inexpressible grief and lamentations of a most affectionate
wife, and six children; the youngest of whom, FANNY, was about thirteen.
Circumstanced as they now were, the proposals from Mrs. Bloomsgrove were very
agreeable. Fanny, was to be prepared for her departure as soon as possible, and
to be conveyed under the protection of her youngest brother, a youth of about
twenty, who was remarkable for his kindness and attention to his sisters.

FANNY unites that delicacy, sensibility, and generosity of mind, to a fair
form and graceful manners, which never fail to attract the notice and secure
the esteem of all her acquaintance. Being the youngest of four sensible and
amiable sisters, she had derived great advantage from the information they had
acquired, and from the dignity of their manners. This luster, she is now
invited to reflect down upon the little Rozella, as a kind of preceptive
companion. She was expected about this time, which had excited the solicitude
of Osander and Rozella, to have their little gardens in the best order, at her
arrival; and this, probably, was the cause or their great agitation, occasioned
by the adventure in the garden. This palliates Osander's criminality a little,
for he had not discovered any marks of a revengeful temper before, having never
been taught it, in childhood, by having the floor beaten, because "IT HURT
BABY." Nothing can be more ill judged, than this method of teaching children to
retaliate injuries, before they understand the meaning of the word.

IT was not long after they had retired to rest, when Fanny arrived, with her
brother. The servant, who went to the door, at the loud rap, I mentioned
before, ran, in an ecstacy of joy, to tell his mistress of Miss Fanny's
arrival; and would immediately have gone, and awoke Rozella, that she might
partake of the joy, but she prevented him. There can scarcely be a surer
evidence of a good master and mistress, than the pleasure which a servant
expresses at those domestic occurrences, in which he can have no other
interest, than the pleasure which they receive.

FANNY met a most cordial reception from her new patrons. They desired her to
consider herself perfectly at home, and to look upon them as her papa and
mamma; as such they assured her they would act. The usual inquiries being made
after the health of the family, and having taken some refreshment, she was
shown to her apartment, being much fatigued with her journey. In the morning,
Caspina went, much earlier than usual, to awake Rozella, and communicate the
joyful tidings of her cousin's arrival. She was in raptures with the account;
and having never yet seen her cousin, could hardly wait till she rose, without
flying into her arms. But, being early accustomed to a restraint on her
passions, and submission to government, she was composed, without difficulty,
to wait her cousin's hour, tho a late one.

THEIR first meeting was such, as might naturally be expected from children
circumstanced as they were; nor was Osander an unconcerned spectator of the
delightful scene; but entered deeply into the spirit of it. He felt the more
sensible pleasure on the occasion, as he should soon have an opportunity to
show her his garden; and to lead her and his sister to his strawberry bank.
Fanny is soon made acquainted with the articles of furniture in Rozella's play
house, and the several kinds of flowers which adorn her garden. As soon as
breakfast was over, Osander invited them into the garden; showed his cousin all
the curiosities; and led them to the bank where the strawberries hung in
clusters, and in all their perfection. He very prettily invited them both to
come there and eat strawberries, whenever it should be agreeable to them. The
hour having arrived, he bade them good bye, saying, "I must go to school."

IN my next I will return from this digression, and entertain you with some new
matter.

LETTER XXV.
TO avoid confusion of objects and ideas, I proposed dividing the season of
education into three periods, and assigning to each, those exercises suited to
develop the native powers of the mind, and draw forth, under proper
cultivation, the principles and affections of the heart. The first period, through
which we have seen these children conducted, is naturally and principally the
season of impressions; but not wholly exclusive of sentiments, opinions, or
principles. The faculty of comparing those impressions, and the desires they
occasion, are of early birth: tho not strictly coeval with impressions and
sensibility, yet they closely attend their steps.

IT will, therefore, be impossible to avoid recurring to the first period for
the commencement of the culture of many virtues, the practice of which more
properly belongs to the subsequent periods. If we take a review of what has
passed in the first stage, we shall see the effect, which the impressions of it
are likely to have upon the future periods of education. From facts, children
pass to general maxims; their impressions are assorted into classes; and from
comparing the effects of outward objects on their sensibility, they acquire
principles, or the art of reasoning. "Children are perverted in their mother's
arms: they acquire dispositions, principles, or characters, very difficult to
remove, as early as the art of walking. The disposition, humor, and temper,
which have been formed early, under injudicious or bad management, are called,
emphatically, by the scriptures, "the law of sin" in the habit, or
constitution."

THE inference has been justly drawn from the experience of an ingenious
writer, that it is a truth, susceptible of demonstration, that the present
method of education should be inverted; and children be led from facts to
sentiments, maxims, or principles; not from principles or sentiments to facts.
He affirms that he had greater difficulties, even in the first period of
education, with the rudiments of bad principles and passions, or the
commencement of bad habits, than he should have had with the whole education of
children, delivered to him with the usual innocence, or ignorance, of infancy;
and he goes on to observe --

"THE capacity, as well as character of a man, depends greatly on the passions
of infancy; particularly on early associations, or early habits. This truth
escapes common observers; because it depends on a number of minute
circumstances, which appear separately insignificant. When these circumstances
are combined in their effects, they become important in morals; but continuing
unconnected in the imaginations of parents, opportunities of regulating or
correcting them are lost. They are so numerous, that they affect the
constitution and mind of a child in methods so various, that persons not
accustomed to the art of investigation or reasoning, suspend all judgment and
direction, until minute dispositions have assorted themselves into principles
and habits, or have impressed an indelible character on the mind. This effect
takes place, in some children early; in others, late. I have known the
character completely fixed in nine or ten years.

ERROR and negligence, respecting the ingredients of passions or habits, in the
first period of education, are constant alloys to the excellence afterward
acquired. Injudicious indulgence, carelessness, or severity, fixes in our
constitution ill health and bad temper, which mark the body or countenance with
deformity, and render the mind incapable of great acquisitions, either of
science or happiness. The knowledge we possess, is often like liquor poured
into distempered vessels. Hence the astonishing inequalities of modern
characters. Minds and figures cast in heavenly moulds, actuated by the passions
of fiends; great acquisitions in science, dishonored by mean habits; or the
best principles of morality, associated with the worst vices. These
contradictions are so familiar, that we seldom expect in our acquaintance,
general uniformity or consistency of character. We say, with candid compassion,
of one, that he has great wisdom or learning; but is licentious or immoral in
his private conduct: of another, that he is conscientious in the principles and
forms of religion; but he is unhappy in his temper, deceitful in his
professions, or oppressive in his transactions. Such is the influence of
habits; and such the importance of early management of the passions.

LETTER XXVI.
THE children have now arrived at that age, which is generally considered as
the second stage in their education. I have dwelt the longer on that period,
which, to many, appears of little use in the business of education, and for
that reason: it is the most favorable season for moral culture, and may be
improved in such a manner, as greatly to facilitate instruction in letters, and
progress in arts. If the foundation be not well laid, the superstructure will
totter and fall to the ground. Children are, at first, in a state of entire
dependence; they are helpless, and passive in every thing: but it does not
follow, that they should remain so forever, or be kept in that condition beyond
the natural period, by the habits of education. Nature prompts them to pant for
independence, and to help themselves as soon as they have power; but education,
especially among the wealthy, often checks these efforts of nature, and keeps
them dependent, and helpless all their days. Unaccustomed to exert their power,
at an early period, and being always waited upon, they find themselves in the
condition of the indolent and helpless nobleman, who, having never been taught
to dress himself, was obliged to lie in bed, flat upon his back, "like a turtle
on an alderman's kitchen table, until a servant came to dress him*"

INDOLENCE, incapacity for vigorous exertion, and dullness of apprehension, are
the effects of furnishing children with every thing they want, without any
thought, or action of their own. Our health, activity, and usefulness in the
world, depend on the powers of exertion being braced up, by early habits of
action. Exercise is as requisite to produce strength and agility of body, as
application to study, is to enlarge and invigorate the powers of the mind. The
following picturesque account of the indolence of young people in England, born
heirs to great estates, I think, reflects great dishonor upon parents, however
wealthy they may be.

"IF there is any characteristic peculiar to the young people of fashion, of
the present age, it is their laziness, or extreme unwillingness to attend to
any thing that can give them the least disquietude; without any degree of which
they would fain enjoy all the luxuries of life, in contradiction to the
dispositions of providence, and the nature of things. They would have great
estates without management, great expenses without accounts, and great families
without discipline, or economy; in short they are fit only to be inhabitants of
Lubberland, where, as the child's geography informs us, men lie upon their
backs with their mouths open, and it rains fat pigs ready roasted."

IT is to be regretted that any thing similar to this should ever have crept
into America; where an estate, however large, seldom passes beyond a third
generation; because that generation is brought up in indolence, and indulged in
extravagant expenses. While the rich keep possession of their estates, they are
as liable to accidents as other men, which require vigilance to foresee,
exertion to guard against, or invention to extricate themselves from. "The sons
of Princes, said Carneades the philosopher, learn nothing to purpose, but to
ride the great horse; in other exercises every one bends to them; but a great
horse will throw the son of a King with no more remorse than the son of a
cobbler."

I BELIEVE you were well acquainted with Mr. --, when he was in flourishing
circumstances, and with the manner in which his family was managed: the
children must never help themselves to any thing which required the least
labor; this would make the boys servile and the girls indelicate. I have heard
of their saying that they never so much as helped themselves to the water with
which they washed their face and hands: if a servant was not at liberty to get
it for them, they would either wait till he was, or go unwashed for the day:
indolence and inertness grew up with them. Too lazy to attend to any business,
and wholly destitute of economy, they soon squandered away their ample
patrimony; and were reduced to extreme poverty, without the knowledge, or
powers of exertion, necessary to remedy their circumstances. In this helpless
and distressful situation, their only boast was, that they never had done any
work in their lives: and in them was literally verified the old adage, "He that
will not work shall not eat." Having dragged out a life of inactivity, not of
enjoyment; and reduced to extreme poverty, they sunk under the weight of
infirmity, contracted by indolence, and mingled with the common mass of inert
matter.

APROPOS. -- Of washing the face, hands, and teeth, as soon as we are up in the
morning, besides the cleanliness of it, many advantages arise from the
practice. It contributes to health by giving a stimulus to the blood, both by
the action it requires, and the application of cold water to the surface; and
by washing the mouth and throat, and rubbing the teeth with a stiff brush, a
quantity of morbid matter, which has collected during the course of the night,
and would soon become fetid, is removed; the enamel of the teeth is preserved
from the destructive influence of this corrosive substance; and the breath
spared from its noxious effluvia. The brush ought indeed always to be used
after eating. In France and England, great care is taken to preserve the teeth
of children; and hence it is you rarely see a French or an English person,
especially a lady, who has not an excellent set of teeth; and it is generally
agreed that no one feature of the face contributes so much to its beauty, as
clean sound teeth.

I THINK the method you have adopted with your children, of dipping their heads
frequently into cold water, and rubbing their teeth with a little cream of
tartar, an excellent one; and doubt not they will derive great advantage from
so rational a practice.

LETTER XXVII.
MR. Bloomsgrove was a man of sufficient property to have kept a servant to
attend each of his children: but, apprized of the dangerous effects of such a
measure, and convinced that industry is the surest guard against vice, and the
best means of securing health and the powers of enjoyment; he early habituated
them to it. It sometimes happens that mothers cannot bear to see their children
making efforts to do any thing which can be done, or procured for them. But,
happy for Osander and Rozella, their mamma always encouraged them in exercising
their invention to make their own play things. No toys were purchased for them,
as is common among most wealthy parents. The purchase of these has a
disagreeable effect on the mind. They are of no consequence any longer than
they have the appearance of novelty; familiarity soon destroys the pleasure, or
breeds disgust: others must be procured, or the mind will not rest at ease: if
procured, the desire of novelty is increased, and the power of enjoyment
diminished; for enjoyment depends much on our own exertions. That which we
acquire at the expense of some labor, we value; and we enjoy, with peculiar
relish, the fruits of our own invention and industry.

GREAT advantages arose to those children from their being left to invent
amusements for themselves, and make their own toys. By this happy contrivance,
their invention was put upon the stretch to form schemes for amusement, and
construct machines for play: this inured them to think and recollect for
themselves; and it brought into exercise, all those powers which are of
constant use in the common affairs of life. While invention was employed in
devising, action was necessary to carry into effect whatever they had planned;
this induced the habits of activity and industry.

I HAVE before observed, that they were furnished with such opportunities and
means of amusement, as had a tendency to encourage and promote these habits, by
a privilege in the garden. Osander cannot, indeed, make his tools; but at the
age of nine, he can dig up his ground in the garden and dress it; for on these
conditions he holds it. He can make his own bow and arrows. His marbles are of
his own construction. His ball, top, sled, and whatever serves for amusement,
are the effect of his own handicraft, with very little assistance. These he
continued to enjoy without being cloyed, or wishing for any others; because he
was first employed in making, and then in using them.

ROZELLA cannot dig her garden, this would be too masculine an employment for a
little girl; but she can pull out the weeds and keep the bed clean. She can
dress and undress her doll; and carry it through all the ceremonies of giving and
receiving visits. She nurses, instructs, and corrects it; and is never tired of
the business, because it gives her exercise; and she enjoys the fruit of her
own labor. Children are naturally active; and if this stimulus is kept alive by
proper inducements to industry, they will never languish for want of
occupation, nor will their amusements become insipid by familiarity.
Consequences most fatal to their improvement, and future usefulness, may be
expected, when they can find neither employment nor amusement.

AS idleness is the inlet to almost every vice, with young people, so a habit
of sauntering, when children, has been the ruin of many a hopeful genius.
Idleness too has an ill effect on the temper: for want of exercise and
employment to fix and engage the attention, children, as well as adult persons,
grow out of humor, and become peevish.

OUR little master and his sister are in no danger of being soured on this
account; or of becoming rusty for want of action: between the employments
committed to them, and their own industry in inventing and making things for
amusement, they find no idle hours. Children love employment; but cannot bear
long confinement: their greatest pleasures would soon become irksome, if
imposed as a task. Application and relaxation should, therefore, so divide
their time, as to make both a pleasure. Nothing should be assigned children
under the idea of a task, because the very idea is disgusting.

THEY should be fired with a spirit of emulation to equal, or excel others; and
their industry, should be made to carry its own reward with it; or, at least,
held so near to view, as never to lose its influence.

OSANDER never thinks much of what he has to get by heart, or to translate;
because it is cheerfully proposed to him as something which will be beneficial
to himself; and will make him find out something he did not know before: he has
not so much given him to get, but he may easily attain it within the time; and
that time is not so long, as to make him restless by confinement. Rozella is so
accustomed to order and regularity, as to go, with equal facility, to her book,
her work, or her play.

SUCH are the effects of industry, that while the industrious grow rich, the
rich, without it, grow poor. The following anecdote is a striking proof of this
truth. "A gentleman having an estate in land, of two hundred pounds yearly,
kept the whole in his hands. Finding that this did not answer, he was forced to
sell half to pay his debts, and let the remainder to a tenant for one and
twenty years. Toward the end of the lease, the tenant asked the landlord, if
he would part with his land -- "Prithee, tell me," says the landlord, "how it
could be, that I could not live upon twice as much, being my own, and yet that
you, having but half, and paying rent for it, have been able in twenty one
years to buy it?" "Sir," said the farmer, "when any thing was to be done, you
said, go and do it; but I always said, come let us go and do it; and so not
only saw my business done, but assisted." The expedience of fixing habits of
industry in youth, will be evident, if we consider, that it is by diligence,
the family of the poor is supported, and the mechanic contributes to the
convenience of others, or finds his own subsistence. In trade and commerce,
fortunes are acquired, or enjoyments diversified, by diligence. It is by
diligence, the patriot obtains distinction; the student acquires knowledge; and
man assumes the honorable character of profound wisdom, or extensive
benevolence. The vulgar apprehension of genius is like the vulgar doctrine of
predestination: the elect, in both cases, are generally worthless; they imagine
themselves entitled by favor, to advantages, which others must obtain by
industry." But the truth is, industry is not only a handmaid of virtue, but the
high road to every kind of eminence.

IN order to make the activity of youth become a habit of industry, it is
necessary to direct it to permanent objects: if the young mind is distracted by
a variety of trifles, children will proceed at random; and will be determined
to become useful, or otherwise, as circumstances, or the people with whom they
associate, happen to point the way.

FAMILIAR stories, suited to explain and encourage the particular virtues he
would recommend to his children, were thought by Mr. Bloomsgrove to have a
great effect upon their minds: with these he used often to amuse them,
accompanying them with interesting remarks suitable to their age.

LETTER XXVIII.
THE following story, which served profitably to amuse a vacant hour, shows the
folly of great eagerness after wealth, and, at the same time, holds up to view
the best reasons for industry. "At a time, when a spirit raged among many
people, for going to South America in quest of golden ore; Roderico had a mind
to go among the rest, to seek his fortune. This inclination he communicated to
Don Juan, an older brother, to whom he promised an equal share of his riches,
if he would go with him. This brother being of a more cool and moderate spirit,
endeavored to dissuade Roderico from an enterprise, in which he would be
exposed to great danger, with greater uncertainty of success. Finding him fully
bent on going, Don Juan agreed to accompany him; declining, at the same time,
to accept any part of the riches he might acquire. Roderico sold all he had;
and bought a vessel suitable for the business, with necessary utensils for the
design, and embarked with his friends and fellow adventurers, Rizzio, Alphonso,
and others, who were inspired with the like ardor for becoming rich without
labor. Don Juan took on board only some tools for husbandry; a few camels, with
harness for labor; some sheep, corn, and seeds of various kinds of vegetables.

"THIS appeared a strange kind of cargo to the seekers of gold. -- 'Papa,' said
Osander, 'is it not better to have gold, than ploughs and sheep, and so have to
work hard?' -- 'Stay a little, my dear,' said Mr. Bloomsgrove, 'and hear the
story out.' They arrived at South America, after some difficulty from contrary
winds, and a leaky vessel. No sooner had they landed, than Roderico, with his
companions, prepared to go in search of gold. Don Juan told his brother he
would tarry near the shore until his return. They quite ridiculed his weakness,
in staying to till the land in a country where gold abounded. Roderico
harangued his men upon the occasion, and reproached his brother's weakness in
diverting himself with such trifling concerns. They all applauded Roderico's
spirit, except one old Spaniard, who expressed some doubts whether Don Juan
would appear so unwise, in the end, as they now thought him to be. Taking their
leave of him, they traveled day after day, through forests, over mountains, through
vales, and over swift rivers. They were not to be discouraged however by any
difficulties. They tried several places without success. At last, after having
traveled many days, sometimes scorched with the intense heat of the sun, and
at others drenched with violent showers of rain, they found a quantity of ore.
Here they labored incessantly until their provisions were exhausted. But the
ore was so plenty, that they could not think of quitting the ground. They fed
on the roots and berries, which they could find. -- 'Oh, papa,' exclaimed
Rozella, 'I wish I had some of those good berries: but could not those poor
folks get any thing else to eat? I wish they had some of our good dinner' 'Yes,
my dear,' continued he -- they caught a few birds and some squirrels; but after
they began to melt and refine the ore, they could not find any more of these;
and they continued so long, that roots and berries became very scarce. Their
labor was so hard and the famine so severe, that several of the company died,
and the rest with difficulty returned to the place where they had left Don
Juan, and carried with ^^em the gold, which they had acquired, at the expense
of so much pain, and with the loss of several lives.

"DON Juan had employed all this time in cultivating a fine spot of interval,
which he had pitched upon for that purpose; and which, by the assistance of the
laborers he carried with him, had now produced an ample crop of potatoes and
other things suitable to the climate, and necessary to support life. His sheep
had brought lambs, and all were in excellent order. He had caught and dried a
great quantity of fish; so that he had a plenty of provision. He received his
brother very kindly; and inquired how he had succeeded. Roderico informed him,
that they had succeeded well in getting gold; but that they were almost
starved, and that several of their companions had perished from want and
hardship. He requested his brother, to furnish them with some provision
immediately, as they had subsisted several days only on the bark and roots of
trees. Don Juan very deliberately reminded him of their first agreement, not to
interfere with each other's gains. But added, if he had a mind to buy the
fruits of his industry, he could supply some present relief, but not otherwise.

"THIS seemed unkind in a brother. But they must either starve with their gold
in hand, or part with it to procure provisions at a most exorbitant price. So
that their gold was soon gone in procuring the bare necessaries of life. When
Roderico and his company had been obliged to give his brother all the gold they
had acquired, through so many miseries, Don Juan proposed returning to their
native country, from which they had been absent a considerable time. But
Roderico was so highly offended with his brother, for his conduct, which
appeared so cruel, that he declared he would never more go home with a brother
who could use him so ill. Upon this Don Juan embraced him affectionately and
said -- 'And do you really suppose, my dear brother, that I intend to deprive
you of the fruits of your arduous and dangerous undertaking? -- No: sooner may
I cease to reap the fruits of my own industry; and the earth refuse me my daily
bread, than I should be guilty of such a piece of conduct. I only wished to
correct your impetuous thirst for riches, and to show you that industry was the
sure road to acquire the means of supplying the calls of nature; and that he
who had exhausted all his strength in accumulating gold might pine with want.
You see that all your gold would not have saved you from perishing, had it not
been for my foresight and industry. Here, my brother, take your gold; and go
with me to visit our native land, and dear friends; and let them see that you
have acquired wisdom as well as gold.' The astonished Roderico acknowledged the
superior wisdom, generosity, and goodness of his brother, and declared 'that he
now found, from his own experience, that industry was better than gold; and
that he would endeavor to show his friends, on his return, that the wisdom he
had learnt from his brother, was of more real value to him, than all the gold
he had acquired.'

"EMBRACING his brother in a most cordial manner, he begged him to accept half
of his riches; but he positively refused, saying -- 'He that can raise food
enough to maintain himself, can never be in want of gold.' Then bidding adieu
to several of the people, who chose to tarry longer, they set sail for their
native country, where, after a favorable voyage, they safely arrived, to the
great joy of their numerous friends, and to their mutual satisfaction."

LETTER XXIX.
THE habits of industry not only afford a secure guard against vice, but
prepare the way for the practice of every virtue. Of all the virtues which
dignify human nature, and distinguish the characters of men, benevolence may be
considered as the capital. This amiable quality does not stand in opposition to
self love, but is an expansion of it. Selfishness is opposite to benevolence.
This is the root of most of those evils and miseries which societies
experience. It regards ourselves to the exclusion of others; and is a desire of
possessing, or having dominion over more, than we have need of, without any
regard to others. This is an evil weed that should be rooted out, or rather
prevented by the careful hand of education; and the opposite virtue, a
readiness to impart to others, should be nourished with equal care. Among other
little anecdotes, by which Mrs. Bloomsgrove endeavored to cherish a benevolent
disposition in the children when young, was the following.

"A mouse, by accident, coming under the paw of a lion, begged hard for life,
urging that clemency was the fairest attribute of power. The lion generously
set it at liberty. The mouse afterward observing the lion entangled in the
toils of the hunter, flew to his assistance, gnawing the net to pieces, and set
him free. Hence an useful lesson: neglect no opportunity of doing good; for
even the lowest may happen to be useful to the highest."

IF we had been intended to be wholly selfish, human life would have been much
shorter than it is; for all corporeal pleasures, even the most delightful,
presently lose their relish; are followed with satiety, and disgust; and can
only be preserved by a change of objects; and, even these, soon lose their
charms, and novelty itself loses the power of pleasing. It is quite otherwise
with benevolence. This, like the well nerved arm, gathers strength by exercise.
The oftener we repeat generous actions, the more shall we be inclined to do
them; and our pleasure in doing good will increase in the same proportion. The
satisfaction it affords is not allayed, even by age, which allays every other
enjoyment. The body may decay, but the pleasure of doing good, when habitual,
continues the same even to the last moment of life.

A QUALITY, productive of so many honorable and lasting effects, cannot be
cultivated, in the young mind, with too much care and attention. Children,
early inspired with the benevolent affections, will be superior to the
prevalence of selfish gratifications. They will be respectful to superiors;
kind to their companions; civil and complaisant to inferiors; charitable to the
poor; compassionate to the distressed, and ready to assist all in their power;
even where there is no prospect of reward, but the satisfaction of doing good.

THIS is very beautifully illustrated, and recommended to universal practice by
an ancient parable, which Mrs. Bloomsgrove used to repeat to the children with
peculiar pleasure, as it inculcated that disinterested undiscriminating
benevolence which regarded not, either nation or religious distinctions in its
exertions to do good, and was congenial to her heart. "A traveller, bound from
Jerusalem to Jericho, fell into the hands of a band of robbers; who wounded him
in a most barbarous manner, leaving him half dead. Two persons of note, from
whom might be expected every expression of benevolence, traveling the same
road, saw him. 'Mamma,' cries the tender hearted Rozella, 'did they not take
care of the poor man?' -- 'No, my dear,' continued she; 'they passed by on the
other side of the way, and did not show him the least pity.' 'If I had been
there,' interrupted Osander (for she allowed them to interrupt her by
questions, or observations of their own; when rehearsing to them) 'I would have
given him all my money.' -- 'Very well, my dear, you should always be ready to
do good with what you have, and pity those you cannot relieve.' The poor man
lay sometime bleeding and weltering in his own gore, without any one to hear
his groans, and pity his wretched condition. At last there came along a man, of
a different nation and religion from the wounded man: he was not a man of great
reputation in the world, and never had an opportunity to show the full extent
of his benevolence. But such an opportunity now offered, and he emb^^ced it
with pleasure. No sooner did he behold the tragical scene, but his indignation
rose against the perpetrators of it, and, touched with commiseration, he flew
to the relief of the unfortunate stranger; and, without inquiring who, or what
he was, whether he belonged to Jerusalem or Jericho, he instantly administered
necessary relief, pouring the oil and wine into his wound, which he had
provided for his own use, on the way; set him on his own beast, and carried
him'to an inn, where he might be better accommodated; paid the host a sum of
money for the present, which, tho small, was all he could possibly spare from
his own necessary uses; and became responsible for whatever charges might arise
in the course of his entire recovery.

"THIS was genuine benevolence! Here was the friend that loves at all times,
and the brother born for adversity! Go and do likewise, was the injunction,
with which the prince of love and good will to men concluded the recital of the
above transaction -- That is, imitate the example of this worthy man, in doing
good as you have opportunity and ability; and never inquire whether a man is of
your kindred, country, or nation, If he stands in need of assistance."

TEACH your children, my dear sir, to practice upon this divinely benevolent
scheme; and they will be the delight of their parents, blessings to their
friends, and the objects of universal esteem.

LETTER XXX.
IF ever the heart of parents had reason to expand with joy, at beholding the
good influence of instruction and example upon their children; Mr. and Mrs.
Bloomsgrove had the utmost reason to rejoice in the growth of the benevolent
affections in theirs. The principles of benevolence had been early inculcated,
by a variety of maxims and actions suited to their age. The little plant had
been nourished with great care, was constantly cherished by exercise, and
supported by their own example. Nothing could have given them more pleasure,
than to see their youthful hearts dilating with this generous quality. Instead
of laying out their money for toys or sweetmeats, as most other children did,
they kept it to give to poor people, who frequented this hospitable dwelling;
or to assist indigent families, in the neighborhood: these they were permitted
to visit, accompanied by Fanny; in whom Mrs. Bloomsgrove placed so much
confidence, that Rozella was committed to her care in those excursions.

THOSE families were very fond of their young visitants; for they used to carry
something for their relief, or to gratify their children. Osander, who would
sometimes play unlucky tricks, threw stones at a pigeon, which the children of
one of those families had tamed, and killed it, while Fanny and Rozella were in
the house, distributing the things they had brought for their comfort. As soon
as the children knew that their pigeon was killed, there was great lamentation
about it. Their mother endeavored to pacify them, telling them, "if it was
Osander who had committed the crime (for he had absconded) he did not do it
intentionally, and she did not doubt but he would give them another, for she
never knew him injure the poor, or any body else indeed." The mother's harangue
prevailed; the children were quieted. Fanny and Rozella, who expressed much
sorrow for what had happened, and shed many tears with the poor children, took
leave, saying, they would acquaint his papa; and they did not doubt he would
make him give them another. When they reached home, they found Osander very
pensive, for he had not yet ventured to tell what he had done, tho it had been
his practice frankly to confess, when he had committed any mischief; and his
mamma did not choose to question him, lest he should be tempted to utter a
falsehood. The whole affair was disclosed on their return. His mamma
remonstrated against such conduct, and especially, in not confessing it to her,
when he first came home. She directed him to take two of his best pullets, and
go immediately, and make satisfaction for the damage he had done. He cheerfully
embraced the terms of peace with them, and by that means found peace in his own
mind. He begged his mamma to give him some biscuit and cheese to carry for the
children. Being thus equipped with the necessary means of a treaty of peace and
friendship, he soon reached the spot, and settled every thing to mutual
satisfaction.

THE pleasure of doing good, is the noblest reward which generous minds can
receive from beneficent actions: this is a reward, which time cannot change,
rust corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. With this sense then, should
the young mind be inspired; and, by this consideration, it should be exercised
in acts of beneficence. I cannot but think that Mr. Locke's plan, for making
children charitable, has a greater tendency to make them selfish and covetous,
than to inspire true benevolence and generosity. Speaking of liberality, in the
use of what they possess, and of rooting out the opposite prinple,
covetousness, he says --

"THIS should be encouraged by great commendation and credit, and constantly
taking care, that the child loses nothing by his liberality. Let all the
instances he gives of such freeness, be always repaid with interest; and let
him sensibly perceive that the kindness, he shows to others, is no ill
husbandry for himself; but that it brings a return of kindness, both from those
who receive it and those who look on." -- Sect. 110. But if all men acted upon
this principle, what must have been the fate of the unfortunate man who lay
wounded, helpless, and alone in the dreary pass between Jerusalem and Jericho?
Habitual good actions, prompted only by the prospect of gain, will, like
untimely fruit, drop off when no longer nourished by such hopes; and the secret
alms will cease to rise as a memorial of heartfelt benevolence before God.

THE following method has been proposed, by Lord Kaimes, to habituate children
to a humane and generous disposition. "Give to each of your children, a small
sum for charity. Let them account to you for the disposal; and to the child,
who has made the most judicious distribution, give double the sum, to be laid
out in the same way," Certain it is, that such actions deserve great applause;
and it is as certain, that a benevolent disposition may be increased by
repeating them. Compassion and tenderness should be so cherished in children,
as that they will part without reluctance with their own property, even that of
which they were very fond, to relieve the distressed. "The Earl of Elgin
permitted his two sons, in their hours of play, to associate with the boys in
the neighborhood, which he thought better, than to have them exposed to be
corrupted at home by his servants, filling them with notions of their rank and
quality. One day, the two boys being called to dinner, a young lad, their
companion, said, 'I'll wait till you return, as there is no dinner at home for
me.' Have you no money to buy it? 'No.' 'Papa, says the eldest, what was the
price of the silver buckles you gave me?' 'Five shillings.' 'Let me have the
money, and I Will give you the buckles.' It was done accordingly. The Earl,
inquiring privately, found that the money had been given to the lad. The
buckles were returned, and the boy was highly commended for being so kind to
his companions."

THE following instance of generosity, no less deserves notice: One day, as
Osander was going with Fanny and his little sister, on one of their charitable
excursions to see a poor family; passing through an extensive vale, they came to
an hazel copse, where they found one of the children picking some raspberries.
As they approached him, he began to cry: they asked what he cried for; he told
them that his mamma, his brother, and one of his sisters, were very sick and
had nothing to eat. They accompanied him to the house, or rather the hut; and,
to their great surprise, they found the two children sick in a little open
place, with very little to refresh, or cover them; and their mother scarce able
to do any thing for them, or for herself; and her husband gone abroad to hard
labor, in order to get something for them, but could not be at home till night.
Struck with the appearance of poverty and distress in this dreary abode, the
visitants could afford them but little aid, at this time, except their
sympathetic tears, of which they were very liberal. They hasten home, that they
may relate the melancholy tale; and procure some effectual means of relief.
They all speak as one; and each is eager to be foremost in telling what they
had seen, and in offering some of their own things for the relief of this poor
family. Fanny, Osander, and Rozella, all declare that they are willing to part
with any of their things, if they may go and carry them.

LIBERALITY appeared so blended with sympathy in this triplicate of almoners,
whose only strife was to excel each other in acts of generosity, that it drew
tears of joy from Mrs. Bloomsgrove's eyes, while her heart glowed with
compassion for the poor and distressed. That the ardor of their benevolent
feelings might not be damped, and that they might experience the pleasure of
their own actions, she permitted them to carry some of their own clothing and
bed furniture, assuring them that they did well, but that they must not expect
her to replace them again: they all declare, with one voice, that they did not
wish it. A servant was dispatched, to be the carrier of the goods, with some
jellies, pottage, and such other things as Mrs. Bloomsgrove thought most
suitable for them. Never was charity bestowed more opportunely, or with a
better grace; nor received with more apparent gratitude. The offering was made
with as much avidity as it could be received; and it would have been difficult
from appearances, to say, who were most blessed, the giver or the receivers.

AMONG the many pictures of distress presented to their minds, in order to
excite compassion, and keep alive the benevolent affections, the following
deserves notice*

"THE minister of a country village was called to officiate in a cottage which
was situated on a lonely common. As it was the midst of winter, and the floods
were out, it was absolutely necessary to wade, through the lower room, to a
ladder, which served instead of stairs. The chamber (and it was the only one)
was so low, that he could not stand upright in it; there was one window which
admitted the air as freely as the light, for the rags which had been stuffed
into the broken panes were now taken out to contribute to the covering of a
newborn infant. In a dark corner of the room stood a small bedstead without
furniture, and on it lay the dead mother, who had just expired in labor for
want of proper assistance.

"THE father was sitting on a little stool by the fire place, tho there was no
fire, and endeavoring to keep the infant warm in his bosom; five of the seven
children, half naked, were asking their father for a piece of bread, while a
fine boy, of about three years old, was standing by his mother at the bedside,
crying, as he was wont to do, 'Take me, take me, mammy.' 'Mammy is asleep,'
said one of his sisters, with cheeks bedewed with tears; 'Mammy is asleep,
Johnny; go play with the baby on daddy's knee.'

"THE father took him upon his knee, and his grief which had hitherto kept him
dumb, and in a state of temporary insensibility, burst out in a torrent of
tears, and relieved his heart which seemed ready to break. 'Don't cry, pray
don't cry,' said the eldest boy, 'the nurse is coming up stairs with a two
penny loaf in her hand, and mammy will wake presently, and I will carry her the
largest piece.' Upon this, an old woman crooked with age, and clothed in
tatters, came hobbling on her little stick into the room, and after heaving a
groan, calmly sat down and dressed the child in its rags; then divided the loaf
as far as it would go. Some relief was soon sent by those to whom the old woman
had applied. And afterward a little contribution was raised by the
interposition of the clergyman, who would scarcely have believed the affair,
had he not have been an eye witness to it."

LETTER XXXI.
GRATITUDE is a virtue nearly allied to benevolence; they grow in the same
soil; and both indicate generosity and docility of mind. Gratitude is a
sentiment natural to man. But, like all other native qualities, must be
cherished and brought on to perfection, or it will decay; and, by
mismanagement, may be destroyed. Nothing is more natural than to love those who
do us service; and a child, when it begins to perceive the benefit of your
care, will soon be sensible of the obligation; and you can by this means
acquire an authority over his heart which cannot be shaken. "Ingratitude, says
Rousseau, would be more rare, if benefits upon usury were less common. The
heart of man is self interested, but never ungrateful; and the obliged are less
to be charged with ingratitude, than their benefactors with self interest. If
you sell me your favors, let us settle the price; but if you pretend to give,
and afterward expect to make terms with me, you are guilty of fraud; it is
their being given gratis which render them inestimable." A benefit which has
the good of the receiver in view, and does not appear to be designed for the
emolument of the benefactor, seldom fails to inspire gratitude.

IT is difficult to explain this virtue and the obligations of it to children.
But the period of life, in which our young master and his sister are at this
time, does not require much reasoning; but familiarity to illustrate by some
happy allusions, or instances, wherein they can see the operation of the virtue
that is recommended. The habits of a grateful temper may be laid in childhood,
by always watching over the actions of children, and making them careful to
return the favors they receive from one another, at least by acknowledgments.
Mr. Bloomsgrove, being a very domestic man, spent many of his leisure hours in
the little circle of his family; always accommodating his conversation to their
capacity; and relating the instructive anecdotes which he met with, for their
amusement and instruction. On the evening after they had relieved the poor
family mentioned in my last, he returned from --, where he had been to decide a
cause of great magnitude: they informed him of the whole affair; and begged him
to let Sancho, a man servant, go down in the morning and carry them some more
things; "for, say they, the poor woman was very thankful for what we carried
her." "So she ought to be, said he; and you, my dear, should be thankful that
it was in your power to relieve her; and it may be in here is one day or other to
do as great a kindness to you, and if her gratitude is sincere, she will gladly
embrace the opportunity." They were surprised that he should think it possible
that so great a change could ever take place. "I have in this magazine which I
this day received from London, said he, a most extraordinary instance of
gratitude, which I will read to you." He then read, to his listening and
astonished audience, a story which I will forward to you by the next post.

LETTER XXXII.
"A VENETIAN ship having taken a number of the Turks prisoners, sold them,
according to their barbarous custom, to different persons in the ciry. One of
those slaves, named Ibraim, lived near the house of a Venetian merchant who was
very rich, and had but one son, a lad of about twelve. As he had occasion
frequently to pass Ibraim, he would stop and look very earnestly at him. Ibraim
observing in the lad an appearance of benevolence and tenderness, was greatly
pleased with him, and sought to have his company more frequently. The lad took
such a fancy to the slave, that he renewed his visits much oftener than he had
done, and brought him presents for his relief and comfort. But tho Ibraim
appeared always to be pleased with the innocent caresses of his young friend,
yet he observed Ibraim was very sorrowful sometimes; and even shed tears.
Afflicted by the repeated appearance of grief and sorrow of heart, he at length
requested his father to make Ibraim happy if it was in his power.

"THE father, pleased with this instance of generosity in his son, determined
to see the Turk himself, and inquire into the cause of his sadness. The next
day he went to see him, and looking at him for some time, was struck with the
mildness and honesty of his countenance. He at length said to him, 'Art thou
Ibraim, of whose courtesy and gentleness my little son has spoken to me?' 'I am
the unfortunate Ibraim, who have been now three years a captive: during that
space of time this youth is the only human being that seems to have felt any
compassion for my sufferings; I must confess therefore he is the only object to
which I am attached in this barbarous country; and night and morning I pray
that power, who is equally the God of the Turks and Christians, to grant him
every blessing he deserves, and to preserve him from all the miseries I
suffer.' 'Indeed, Ibraim,' said the merchant, 'he is much obliged to you, although
from his present circumstances, he does not appear much exposed to danger. Tell
me in what I can assist you? for my son informs me that he often finds you in
sorrow and tears.' 'And is it strange,' said the Turk, 'that I should pine in
silence and be the prey of continual regret and sorrow, who am bereft of my
liberty, the noblest gift of heaven?' 'And yet how many thousands of our
nation,' said the Venetian, 'do you retain in chains?' 'I have never been
guilty of the inhuman practice of enslaving my fellow creatures,' replied the
Turk; 'I have never increased my property by despoiling the Venetian merchants
of theirs; for the cruelty of my countrymen I am not accountable, more than you
are for the barbarity of yours.' -- A swelling tear started from his eye, and
bedewed his manly cheek. -- Recollecting himself immediately, and smiting
gently on his breast, he bowed with reverence, and said, 'God is good, and man
must submit to his decrees.' Affected with this appearance of manly fortitude,
the merchant said, 'Ibraim, I pity your sufferings, and perhaps I may be able
to relieve you. What would you do to regain your liberty?' 'I would,' said he,
'meet every pain and danger that can appal the heart of man.' 'The means of
your deliverance,' said the merchant, 'are certain, without so great a trial. I
have in this city an inveterate enemy who has offered me every insult and
injury that malice could invent; but he is as brave as he is haughty, and I
have never dared resent them as they have deserved. Here, Ibraim, is the
instrument of your deliverance; take this dagger; and when night has drawn her
sable curtain over the city, go with me, avenge me of mine adversary, and you
shall be free.'

"INDIGNANT at the idea of being an assassin, he rejected the proposal with
disdain; and raising his fettered arm as high as his chain would admit of, he
swore by the mighty prophet, Mahomet, 'that he would not stoop to so vile a
deed, to purchase the freedom of all his race.' The Venetian left him, adding,
quite deliberately, 'You will think better of this perhaps by the next time I
visit you.'

"RETURNING the next day with his son, he accosted Ibraim mildly, telling him,
that tho he rejected his proposal before, he doubted not but he might now be
convinced. 'Insult not the miserable,' interrupted Ibraim warmly, 'with
proposals more shocking than the chains I wear. Know, Christian, that if thy
religion permits such deeds, every true Mohammedan views them with indignation.
From this moment therefore let us break off all intercourse, and be forever
strangers to each other.' -- 'No,' answered the merchant, embracing Ibraim,
'let us be more strongly united than ever! -- Pardon me this unnecessary trial
of thy virtue. Mazzarino has a soul as averse to deeds of treachery and blood
as Ibraim himself. From this moment, generous man, thou art free: thy ransom is
already paid, with no other obligation than that of remembering the affection
of this thy young and faithful friend; and perhaps, hereafter, when thou see
an unhappy Christian groaning in Turkish fetters, thy generosity may make thee
think of Venice.'

"LANGUAGE cannot paint the ecstacy of joy and gratitude, which Ibraim felt at
intelligence so agreeable, but unexpected. It is unnecessary to repeat the many
and warm expressions of gratitude, which he uttered as soon as the first tide
of joy had so abated as to give him utterance. He was set free that very day,
and Mazzarino put him on board a vessel bound to one of the Grecian Islands,
bade him an affectionate adieu, putting a purse of gold into his hands to bear
his expenses, and wishing him every blessing. Their prayers and benedictions
were mutual; for Ibraim regretted the separation from such a friend, whose
disinterested goodness had set him at liberty, and with tears and prayers bade
him a long farewell.

"ABOUT six months after this an accident took place, which had well nigh
deprived the Venetian merchant of all his hopes. Early in the morning of one of
their Saint's days, while the family were locked in profound sleep, the house
had taken fire, which had made a gradual progress, and nearly involved the
whole in flame, before it was discovered. Scarce had the merchant been apprized
of his danger in time to escape the awful conflagration; and no sooner had he
escaped with the servants who awoke him, than he inquired for his son. What a
tumult of agony and despair rent his breast, when informed that, in the general
consternation, he had been forgotten, and was now alone in an upper room? He
would have rushed headlong into the flames in a fruitless search for his son,
had not his servants restrained him. He offered half his estate to the intrepid
man who would undertake the dangerous attempt of saving his son. Tempted by the
greatness of the reward, ladders were immediately raised and several daring
spirits made the attempt, but were forced back by the violence of the flames.
Upon the battlements of the house, the unhappy youth now appeared, with
extended arms, imploring aid, and seemed devoted to inevitable destruction. The
father, beholding the imploring son, and the certain fate that awaited him,
sunk under the weight of the dreadful prospect, and became totally insensible.
In this moment of dreadful suspense, a man rushing through the crowd, with a
countenance indicating the most determined resolution, ascended a ladder, and
was soon enveloped in a cloud of smoke. Lost to all appearance, the gazing
multitude below supposed he must perish in the flames. What then must have been
their astonishment, when they beheld him issuing forth with the lad in his
arms, and descend the ladder, to revive the heart of an almost expiring parent?
Or what must have been his feelings, when he recovered his senses, at beholding
in his own arms the darling of his heart, whom he had given up for lost? --
Tenderly embracing his son, he earnestly inquired for the man who dared risk
his own life to save his son. They showed him a man of noble stature, but
meanly clad, covered with smoke and scorched with heat, and all as one declared
he was the intrepid adventurer who had saved his son.

"MAZZARINO, presenting him a purse of gold, requested his acceptance of that
till he could make good his promise, which should be done the next day. 'No,'
replied the stranger, 'I do not sell my blood. The pleasure of saving your son
is a reward greater than all your riches could give.' 'Generous man!' cried the
merchant, 'thy voice, sure, is not strange to me! -- It is' -- 'Yes,' exclaimed
the son, throwing himself into the arms of his deliverer -- 'it is my Ibraim!'
Nothing could exceed the astonishment and gratitude of Mazzarino, to behold the
deliverer of his son in the person of Ibraim. Taking his benefactor with him to
another house of his, in a different part of the city, he inquired how he came
into slavery a second time, and why he had not made him acquainted with his
condition. 'That captivity which has given me an opportunity of showing that I
was not altogether undeserving thy kindness, and of preserving that dear youth,
I shall ever reckon amongst the happiest events of my life,' replied the
generous Turk. 'But,' continued he, 'I will relate you the whole affair.

'I BELIEVE you never were made acquainted with the circumstance of my aged
father being a sharer with me in my captivity. Taken together by your galleys,
we were sold to different masters. Those tears of sorrow, which so attracted
the notice of your generous little son, were shed on account of the hard fate
of my aged sire; and no sooner was I set free by your unexampled bounty, than I
went in search of the Christian who had made him a slave. Having found him, I
offered myself in his stead, that he might go back and let his declining sun
set calm and serene in his own country and amidst the tender care of
surrounding friends. At length I prevailed on the Christian, by adding the
purse of gold your bounty had supplied me with, to permit my father to go back
in the vessel which was intended for me, without acquainting him with the means
of his freedom. Since that time I have continued here, a willing slave, to pay
the debt of nature and of gratitude.'

"IBRAIM ceased -- The Venetian expressed great astonishment at such elevation
of mind; and pressed him to accept the offer of half his estate, and to spend
the remainder of his days in Venice. Ibraim assured his friend, that what he
had done was nothing more than the obligations of gratitude and friendship
required; and therefore he must decline accepting any further recompense than
that of reflecting that he was not ungrateful. The merchant, solicitous to make
some returns worthy of so much greatness of soul, once more purchased his
freedom, and freighted a ship on purpose to send him back to his own country.
Most affectionately did he and his son embrace their deliverer, and
accompanying him to the ship, they once more bade a last adieu, remaining on
the shore until the ship lost itself under the horizon, and sending forward
their ardent prayers for a safe and prosperous voyage.

"MANY years having now elapsed, during which time no intelligence had been
received of Ibraim, the young Mazzarino had grown up, and become the most
accomplished, amiable youth of his age and rank. Having some business in a
maritime town at some distance, which required dispatch in getting thither, he
embarked, with his father, on board a Venetian vessel going to that place. The
winds favored their views; they had gained more than half their voyage, with a
fine prospect of securing their whole passage, when a Turkish corsair was
suddenly discovered bearing down upon them; from which they soon found it would
be impossible to escape. Fear and consternation seized the greater part of the
crew, and they soon gave all over for lost. But the young Mazzarino, drawing
his sword, reproached them for their cowardice; and, by his manly courage and
speeches, roused them to defend their liberties by one great effort. The
corsair approached in awful silence, till within reach of the Venetian ship,
when on a sudden the very heavens were rent by the noise of the artillery, and
the whole atmosphere wrapped in smoke. Thrice did the Turks essay, with horrid
shouts, to board the Venetian ship: as often were they repelled by the well
timed firmness of young Mazzarino and the crew inspired by his courage. Having
lost many of their men, and seeing no prospect of carrying their point, they,
the Turks, began to draw off; and would have left the Venetians to pursue their
voyage, had not two other ships of their own nation, that instant, made their
appearance, bearing down toward them with great swiftness. Upon their near
approach, the Venetians, seeing no possibility of escape, and that resistance
would be madness, gave the sign for surrendering the ship, and soon saw
themselves deprived of liberty, and loaded with irons. In this situation were
they carried to Tunis, where they were brought forth and exposed in the public
market to be sold for slaves. One after another of their companions were picked
out, according to their strength and vigor, and sold to different masters. A
Turk of uncommon dignity in his figure and manners, at length came toward the
captives, and surveying them with compassion and tenderness, applied to the
captain for young Mazzarino, and inquired the price of this captive. The
captain set a much higher price upon him, than he had done upon any of the
others. The gentleman, a little surprised at the exorbitant sum, asked the
reason of this great distinction. The captain replied that he had animated the
Christians to the desperate resistance they had made; and had been the occasion
of most of the damage they had sustained; and he was now determined to make him
repay some of it, or he would gratify his revenge by seeing him drudge for life
in his victorious galley. All this time had the young Mazzarino fixed his eyes
in a dumb silence on the ground; and now lifting them up, beheld, in the person
who was talking with the captain, the manly and open countenance of Ibraim.
Mazzarino cried out, 'Oh! my friend Ibraim.' No less astonished was the Turk,
to find in the person of the captive his former companion and friend. He
embraced him with the transports of a parent who unexpectedly recovers a long
lost child. But when Ibraim found that his Venetian benefactor and deliverer
was among the captives, he could no longer restrain the violence of his
feelings: he burst into a flood of sorrow for the misfortune of his friend: but
recovering himself, exclaimed, with uplifted hands, 'blessed be that providence
which has made me the instrument of safety to my ancient benefactor.' Being
informed where he should find him, he instantly repaired to the part of the
market where Mazzarino stood waiting his fate in manly, but silent despair.
They were immediately known to each other. Their first interview was obstructed
by the fullness of their joy. As soon as he was able, the Turk hailed him,
friend, benefactor, and by every endearing name which friendship and gratitude
could inspire; ordered his chains instantly to be taken off, and conducted them
both to his own magnificent house in the city.

"AFTER some preliminary conversation upon their mutual fortunes, by which they
were again brought to see each other in their present condition, Ibraim
informed them, that soon after their goodness had restored him to his own
country, he accepted a command in the Turkish armies; and that having the good
fortune to distinguish himself upon several occasions, he had gradually been
promoted, through various offices, to the dignity of Bashaw of Tunis. 'Since I
have enjoyed this post,' added he, 'there is nothing which I find in it so
agreeable, as the power it gives me of alleviating the misfortunes of those
unhappy Christians who are taken prisoners by our corsairs. Whenever a ship
arrives, which brings with it any of those sufferers, I constantly visit the
markets, and redeem a certain number of captives, whom I restore to liberty:
and gracious Allah has shown that he approves of these faint endeavors to
discharge the sacred duties of gratitude for my own redemption, by putting it
in my power to serve the best and dearest of men.'

"AFTER having passed about ten days in the house of Ibraim in a most agreeable
manner, Mazzarino and his son were embarked on board of a ship bound to Venice.
Ibraim dismissed them with great reluctance, but with many embraces; and
ordered a chosen party of his own guards to conduct them on board their vessel.
Their joy was greatly increased, when, on their arrival at the ship, they found
that the generosity of Ibraim had not been confined to themselves, but that the
ship which had been taken, with all the crew, were redeemed, and restored to
freedom. Mazzarino and his son embarked, and, after a prosperous voyage,
arrived safely in their own country, where they lived many years respected and
esteemed, continually mindful of the vicissitudes of life, and attentive to
discharge their duties to their fellow creatures."

LETTER XXXIII.
CAN you, my friend, after being feasted with such great and excellent virtues,
relish the language of childhood, and be pleased with the relations of
infantile transactions? If not, I fear you will not give the following letter a
cordial reception. But you should recollect, that childhood is the period in
which the foundation of the greatest virtues is laid. It is, then, as necessary
to cultivate the first principles of them in the young mind, as to cherish the
seed that is deposited in the earth in order to ensure a future harvest: and,
like the seed which contains all the shades that expand in the flower, children
are possessed of all the qualities of men and women in miniature: to expand
these is the business of education.

A CIRCUMSTANCE in the management of their domestic concerns, in the
Bloomsgrove family, which I think worthy of notice in this place, is the
confidence they reposed in the children. The voice of undoubted friendship has
a great influence over the human heart. When parents have, by their prudent
management with their children, convinced them that their good has been the
object of all their care, even of the punishments they have inflicted, so as to
cherish the natural spark of gratitude, they may venture to make them their
confidents, both of secrets and of their interest. A greater inducement to
fidelity, either in children or servants, can hardly be conceived of, than to
be thought trust worthy. It lays hold of the best affections of human nature,
the generous and grateful feelings; and gains an ascendency over the mind which
an exertion of authority could not effect; and will afford an effectual
security against betraying the trust reposed.

IT is necessary, however, always to proportion the magnitude of the trust to
the age and fortitude of the child; otherwise it will corrupt the little heart,
which it was designed to fortify. Things committed to children in confidence,
which are in their nature a strong temptation, will only teach them artful
evasions; for they will comply with the temptation, and then rack their
invention to prevent the discovery, or to apologize for the transgression. A
child must be trained to fidelity by slow and gentle steps; and by a habit of
being faithful in trifling concerns when young, it will be able to keep a
secret; or be faithful to any trust, at seven or eight years old, which one of
fourteen would betray, who had never been accustomed to confidence. Let the
first commission to a child be small, and of such a nature as may easily be
kept: approve the faithfulness, and encourage it by suitable rewards: increase
by degrees, the trust; and let the accomplishment of it always be commended,
and rewarded with still greater confidence.

AT a breach of trust, in either of the children, Mrs. Bloomsgrove expresses
much surprise and indignation: she declines trusting the faithless child again,
until, by a due course of discipline, it is sufficiently humbled; but takes
care not to mortify it too long. She lets the delinquent see that she still
confides in its resolution and integrity. She appears to forget the former
failure; but keeps it alive in the child's mind, by more frequently calling it
to account, without any apparent concern about its fidelity. When, by repeated
trial, the habit of fidelity is well fixed, and a good degree of self command
acquired, you may venture almost any thing in such hands. It is proper to
approve and appear highly pleased with the good conduct of children, especially
their fidelity; but not to praise them too highly, because it is an act of
indispensable obligation; and if too much praised, the child may become more
eager after applause, than desirous of meriting esteem and approbation; to the
pleasures of which they should be early accustomed.

OSANDER, at the age of five, was allowed to go into the garden, and pick up
the cherries which had fallen, provided he meddled not with the white currants;
and sometimes he was sent to gather a few of both, but charged not to eat any
of either, until the gentleman who had called to see his papa was refreshed.
Being one day detected in transgressing the conditions, he was not suffered to
go into the garden all that day, nor to eat any fruit from it. At eight years
old, he was entrusted with a small sum of money, which he was told to keep,
until a person to whom it was due, should call for it, and it was enjoined upon
him to remember, that this confidence was placed in him, because he had been
honest in other cases, and it was not doubted but he would be so in the
present. The money was accordingly delivered up, at call, in about five days:
greater sums were afterward committed to his care, and continued a longer
time; until he might be entrusted with any sum. When he goes abroad, the hour
is given him for returning; if he abuses the liberty he enjoys, it is taken
from him for a time.

ROZELLA was permitted to go to her mamma's closet as soon as she was big
enough to turn a key. She is told to take a piece of rusk for herself, and to
bring the cheesecakes for the company; she is faithful; but she has been
accustomed to this restraint by being tried in smaller things. At eight years
old she never thought of touching any forbidden fruit. Indeed, she appears to
prefer her mamma's approbation to every other pleasure. Girls are holden much
more strongly by those ties than boys, if we may judge by comparison between
these two; for Osander more frequently betrays the trust reposed in him, than
his sister, tho it is a rare thing in either of them. The principle being early
implanted, and the habits of fidelity being cherished with great care, they
were never shaken afterward. Fanny improved by her care of Rozella, who was
committed to her as a valuable deposit. The care of Rozella's clothes was given
to her; sometimes she was directed to instruct her in reading and work;
frequently, to assist in dressing and undressing. The vulgar observation, that
women are not able to keep a secret, has no foundation in nature; but must be
wholly ascribed to their not being inured to it when young. They are naturally
voluble, have a sprightly imagination, and an easy flow of words: for the sake
of exercising such agreeable talents, which they find command attention, they
may inadvertently divulge a secret. But if early accustomed to restraint, and
to the habit of making their mind the secure deposit of a secret, there can be
no doubt that it might be as perfectly safe with them, as with our sex.

LETTER XXXIV.
CURIOSITY is that propensity to acquire knowledge, which leads children to
inquire the names, properties, and relations of things; to refer appearances to
causes; to sort ideas, and distinguish truth. This desire of knowledge operates
powerfully in children, and is a most useful engine of improvement. To
stimulate and direct this affection, "which seems to be created by the affinity
of external objects and the senses affected by them," is an early and necessary
branch of education. It was, therefore, a maxim with these parents to indulge
their children in asking questions for information; and to encourage the
exertion of this faculty by proper answers. To check these inquiries by
severity, or pervert them by false, or evasive answers, would be to stint a
natural plant, which requires culture in order to bring it to perfection.
Children should be answered according to their capacity; nor should their ardor
to become acquainted with things be damped, by laughing at their simple
questions. This would discourage them from asking again, lest their question
should be an improper one. By kindly attending to their questions, and giving
them plain intelligible answers, their minds will be constantly enlarging; the
answer to one question will suggest to them another, and help their invention;
at the same time it will add to their stock of knowledge.

BY neglecting this means of information, they will be encouraged in negligence
and inattention. By receiving evasive or deceitful answers, to get rid of the
trouble of giving them the information they seek, art, dissimulation, and
falsehood will be cherished. The great curiosity of children appears in their
fondness for stories; and the use which may be made of this appetite, appears
from the deep impressions which idle and groundless stories of ghosts and
apparitions, make on the mind. Impressions favorable to virtue may be made with
equal ease, by familiar stories founded on fact, and suited to promote any of
the virtues. Those pictures of real characters; of virtues to be imitated, and
vices to be avoided, are to be viewed as the best sources of instruction and
entertainment to children.

MRS. Bloomsgrove used to select a number of the most striking pictures of
virtue and vice from the sacred history, which she dressed up in language
suited to the capacities of the children: these, they committed to memory and
repeated to her, both for lessons of virtue, and for the sake of improvement in
the art of speaking. In this she imitated Cornelia, the mother of the Roman
Gracchi, who owed to her instruction that elocution by which the greatest
effects were produced.

AT the age of twelve, Osander could not conceive of a greater pleasure, or
entertainment, than to hear his mamma relate the history of Joseph with its
various circumstances. While the little bosom of Rozella heaves with grief for
his fate, and the falling tear bedews her rosy cheek; Osander's heart swells
with indignation at the cruelty of his brothers, and melts at the generous
treatment he afterward showed them when in distress; and Fanny's gentle spirit
cannot withhold the tear of sympathy on the occasion.

BY this single story, the love of benevolence, justice, and fraternal
kindness; and indignation against their opposites, are awakened in every
breast. A desire to imitate the one and avoid the other, glows in their hearts,
while the relation goes on. Accustomed to have those passions excited by such
pictures presented to the mind, they became fixed and permanent qualities. I
know many mothers who take great pains to instruct their children in the
knowledge of the scriptures, and to impress their minds with a reverence for
them, by similar methods. By these means they are presented with the best
models of virtue; which is always a pleasing mode of instruction, and excites
at the same time a love of imitation: and as long as the curiosity is
gratified, instruction will go on with rapidity, and the heart will be beguiled
to virtue, and the affections directed to their proper objects.

LETTER XXXV.
"IN the nature of some individuals, says Lord Kaimes, there is a disposition
to cruelty. Strong symptoms of it appear in childhood, during which period
there is nothing hid. It is not uncommon in a child, after caressing its
favorite puppy, to kick and beat it; or after stroking a sparrow, to pull off
its head. I have seen a little girl, after spending hours in dressing her doll,
throw it out of the window in a sudden fit. This disease is not easily cured,
because, like the king's evil, it is kept secret: I know of no cure so
effectual, as to inure a child of this temper, to objects of pity and concern.
Such objects frequently presented, and at proper times, may give a turn to the
distemper, and make it yield to humanity. Such fits of cruelty, however, are
far from being general. There are many children, who having no malice in their
composition, are invariably kind to their favorites, and charitable to persons
in want."

NOTWITHSTANDING this appearance of cruelty in some children, and a small
degree of it in most, yet sympathy is a native affection, which, for its
strength, may be ranked with the first class of human propensities. It is not
only a strong but a pleasing affection, and requires to be cherished with
particular attention; for without this care it may be destroyed. There is in
children a curiosity to see animals slain, and a pleasure in triumphing over
their agonies, which has a most dangerous tendency upon the fine feelings of
human nature. The spasms which are brought on the expiring animal, by the
approach of death, afford them sport, not because it feels pain, but because of
the novelty of the scene. They have no idea of those emotions having any
connection with pain. They see the relentless executioner put his knife to the
throat of an innocent lamb with as little concern, as a lady does her needle
into a piece of gauze; and have, when quite young, no more idea of pain in one
case than in the other. Horrid lesson of cruelty to the young and tender mind!
How easy and natural for children to transfer this into their own practice by
tormenting the little animals and insects, which fall into their hands? This,
by a habit of hardiness, becomes cruelty to their mates.

THE cruel disposition, or detestable character, of Domitian, had been formed
by his favorite amusement of killing flies.

SOME have supposed that cruelty is the effect of the use of flesh. This
sentiment is founded on a supposed difference, in this respect, between those
nations who use it, and those who do not.

THE use of this substantial diet may probably be assigned as the physical
cause of strength and robustness of constitution; but this is not incompatible
with tenderness. The custom of suffering children to see those scen^s, when
very young; their hearing frequent conversation on the subject of bloodshed,
and soon reading histories of war and carnage; and finding the greatest
murderers of mankind have more renown than their greatest benefactors, will
furnish a sufficient reason, without seeking for any physical cause, I may
venture to affirm, that sympathy is natural to man; and that cruelty is, in
general, a disposition created by improper management, derived from example,
and confirmed by habit.

OSANDER, when a child, was kept from those sights which have a tendency to
brutalize the mind. He was not suffered to read the history of battles, where
the agreeableness of the narrative would render the slaughter a pleasing scene;
and, as history is principally occupied with such relations, he read very
little of it, until his judgment was considerably matured. By sometimes seeing
objects of human distress, and frequently making the little excursions already
mentioned among the poor of the neighborhood, his sympathy was kept alive and
rendered more sensible. Rozella, who was all sympathy, at about seven years of
age, was riding with her mamma, and unfortunately they passed a farmer's yard,
just as he was in the act of killing a lamb. Affrighted at the sight, she said,
"Mamma, what is that man doing with that poor little lamb?" "He is going, my
dear, to kill it, to eat, I suppose." The reply was rather inadvertent; for
till now Rozella had never connected the idea of eating meat with the
destruction of the animal. It was the subject of conversation all the way home,
and it was a long time before the impression was so effaced, as that she would
taste it again.

SHE was permitted to have a bird, or a squirrel; and her brother to have a
dog; only on condition that they would take care of them, and not let them
suffer for want, or by abuse. When they failed in a proper care and tenderness
for them, they were reproved for being so unkind, and the animal taken away.
They were never suffered to kill insects for sport. They did not, however,
carry humanity to the ridiculous extreme, which is related of Bellarmine, a
Romish saint, who is said patiently to have suffered fleas and other vermin to
prey upon him; saying, "We shall have a heaven to reward us for our sufferings;
but these poor creatures have only the enjoyment of the present life." Insects
which usually suffer death, for their presumption in invading the houses of
mortals, their mamma taught them to sweep out at the door, saying, "It is an
innocent creature, my dear, do not hurt it; is not the world wide enough for
you both?"

BY these lessons, joined to he own example, she taught them tenderness toward
every thing that has life. That tender feeling toward other's sufferings,
which, in its several degrees, extends itself to other animals of creation,
from our fellow creature to the lowest reptile, is a quality infinitely
superior to all the embellishments of the most refined education. The knowledge
and practice of this is a most useful part of domestic instruction.

IT has been remarked, I believe with great propriety, that young people, early
corrupted, and addicted to debauchery, are inhuman and cruel. The heat of their
constitution renders them impatient, vindictive, and impetuous: their
imagination, engrossed by one particular object, rejects every other: they have
neither tenderness nor pity, and would sacrifice father, mother, and all the
world, to the most trifling gratification. On the contrary, a youth, educated
in simplicity and innocence, is inclined to the tender passions by the first
impulse of nature. His sympathetic heart feels the sufferings of his fellow
creatures: it leaps with joy at the unexpected sight of a beloved companion. He
is sensible of shame, for giving displeasure; of regret, for having offended.
Compassion, clemency, and generosity, mark the sensibility of his heart, and
produce the happiest effects in society.

THE early regulation of this affection in the youthful breast of our little
master and his sist^^, greatly facilitated that of another, equally important
in domestic education, and which comes next in course.

LETTER XXXVI.
IT was a maxim with these worthy parents, that in every stage of domestic
education, children should be disciplined to restrain their appetites and
desires. They thought, therefore, that they could not begin too early to check
the desire which children have for gewgaws and toys, and to accustom them to
restraint and self command. In order to do this effectually, it is necessary to
preserve that lively sensibility, and those sympathetic affections, of which I
spoke, in my last. The heart in which this delicate sense is kept alive, will
not be unyielding to restraint and self denial.

IN a world like this, and with passions like ours, what can be more useful and
necessary, than the power of restraining our appetites? The objects of sense
which surround us on every side, are suited to awaken desire, and desire pushes
us on to gratification; but this cannot always be attained. The preservation of
health and of tranquillity often forbid it, when in our power. And this is our
situation throughout life. Not a day passes, but we find occasion to abridge
our desires, to deny ourselves some gratification, and submit to some
inconvenience. To acquire an early habit of restraint must, therefore, be
useful to us, as long as we are conversant with those objects.

THIS command over ourselves will become easy by custom; and it will not be
difficult to graft it on children, where proper authority has been supported.
Parents are the natural guardians of their children, and their reason should be
employed to control, restrain, and direct the appetites of childhood. Impelled
by these, while reason, like the body, is feeble, they would gratify them to
their injury, and by a habit of indulgence, would grow up with impetuous and
dangerous propensities. Restraint should never be laid merely to display
authority, but from the necessity of the case, and to habituate the child to
submission.

TO cross children, in things perfectly indifferent, has the appearance of
capriciousness, and tend to chase and sour their minds. Restraints, where they
are indispensable, should be so laid, as rather to call off the mind from the
object, than to prohibit the enjoyment. To maintain that entire control over
the appetites of children, which is the parent's prerogative, so as not to
induce dissimulation on the one hand, nor disaffection on the other, is a
critical point. When the parent, or the preceptor, becomes a tyrant, and the
child a slave, there is an end of all education.

IN laying restraints, therefore, some regard must be had to the particular
constitution of children. Those of a feeble, or slender make, require more
indulgence, in their food, exercise, and in the punishments which are found
necessary, than those of a firm, robust habit of body. To pamper these with
delicacies, merely to gratify appetite; to excuse them from exercise, lest it
should fatigue them; or, to screen them from just and necessary punishment,
through softness and lenity, is the direct way to ruin both health and morals. In
both these respects, many a fine child* has been ruined by imprudent
management. Instances are not wanting to show, that the same effect may be
produced from an opposite cause. Roughness and severity with those, whose
languid spirits and feeble habit required that they should be fostered in the
arms of pity and indulgence, have so depressed them, that they could not gain
their proper rank in society, nor hold up their heads in the face of the world.

THESE are extremes equally dangerous, and which require great caution; for
that which would be lenity to the former, may be severity with the latter.
Parents, sometimes, show great partiality, among their children, on account of
their outward form. While the beauty of the one procures a fond indulgence, the
deformity, or even the plainness, of another, exposes to slights and neglect.
This is a species of conduct no less cruel in the parent, than destructive to
the children. In one it cherishes the seeds of vanity and insolence; in the
other, of melancholy and discouragement. An opposite treatment ought to be
adopted, by showing peculiar tenderness to the unfortunate.

IF children have natural defects, no pains should be taken to secret them.
Such attempts would be teaching them dissimulation, and would often expose them
to the painful jokes of their mates, and the sneerings of others. "Philopemen,
the greatest General of his age, was a man of mean appearance. He went, by
invitation, to a dinner, in his camp dress, without a single attendant. Being
taken for one of the General's servants, he was ordered to the kitchen to cut
logs for the fire. His friend, the landlord, seeing him in his waistcoat at
that work, says, "Bless me, General, what are you doing here?" "I am paying for
my bad looks," replied the General."

"THE duchess of Burgundy, when she was very young, seeing an officer at
supper who was extremely ugly, was very loud in her ridicule of his person.
'Madam, said the King (Louis the fourteenth) to her, I think him one of the
handsomest men in my kingdom, for he is one of the bravest." That was a good
maxim of Voltaire, who relates the story -- "Never ridicule personal defects."

AND on the other hand, peculiar care should be taken to guard against the ill
effects, which too early an idea of their superior external accomplishments, is
apt to produce in young people. If they are endued by nature with any striking
advantages above others, it will not be possible to conceal it from them. The
flattering voice of praise will too easily catch the ear and inspire vanity.
The growth of this pernicious weed should be watched with jealousy, and checked
with care.

LETTER XXXVII.
I WILL now return to the restraints and self command, to which children should
be early accustomed, and to the gentle manner in which Osander and Rozella were
taught this lesson. All reasonable desires were gratified with cheerfulness;
unreasonable or improper requests were denied without any apparent concern.
Children, when very young, will perceive the parent's uneasiness, if refused
with doubt and hesitation; and will derive encouragement from that state of
suspense, to renew their request. Children have great sagacity in this respect.
They watch the parent's eyes, and observe the tone of voice; and fail not to
make the best advantage of any irresolution which they discover. If the request
is of such a nature, that it cannot be granted, they refuse it with a pleasant,
but firm tone. They say, in a sedate manner, without any apparent concern, "You
ask, my dear, for that which is not proper: you cannot have it." The child is
no longer restless, when convinced of the impossibility of obtaining the object
of its wishes.

I WAS present, several years ago, at the following scene -- An elderly lady
had the charge of a boy about twelve years old. He was a very active,
enterprising lad, and glowed with ambition. A number of youth, older than
himself, were going to have a riding match: they invited him to be of their
party. He applied for permission, and was refused. He urged the request with a
variety of arguments, and they were all obviated by stronger reasons. He still
pursued the suit, with increasing vehemence. The danger of it was represented
to him: he was told that a young lad had been thrown from a horse, and had
broken his arm. It all availed nothing, but to make him the more earnest. He
was then positively prohibited saying another word about it. The interdict was
so peremptory, that it left no hopes of success, and he went away as apparently
satisfied as if his request had been granted.

TO clip the wings of fancy, and teach the romantic desires to submit to the
reason of others in childhood, is a discipline most useful through every stage of
life. It prepares the child to be put under the conduct of its own reason, to
bear crosses and disappointments, and to submit to the authority of conscience
and of the magistrate. A young person, accustomed from infancy to restraint,
will find no great difficulty in submitting to the dictates of his own
conscience; and, by a habit of resisting his desires, will be able to evade the
force of any temptation. But if, as Mr. Lock observes, "the child must have
grapes, or sugar plumbs, when he has a mind to them; when grown up, must he not
have his desires satisfied too, to whatever vices they may lead him? He who is
not used to submit his will to the reason of others, while he is young, will
scarce hearken, or submit to his own reason, when he is of an age to make use
of it."

IT is a mistake, fatal to education, which many have made, that children are
happy in proportion as their wishes are gratified. I believe the reverse to be
true. We find, that, in manhood, an unrestrained gratification of appetites is
so far from satisfying, that they increase and gather strength by indulgence.
"If, said Seneca, you seek to make one rich, study not to increase his stores,
but to diminish his desires." To Alexander, the fruit of all his conquests was
tears; and whoever goes about to gratify intemperate wishes, will labor to as
little purpose, as he who should attempt to fill a sieve with water. If you
would satisfy the appetites of children, regulate them by your reason, and
direct them by your prudence, allowing for their age. They acquire a habit of
longing after trifles, by false indulgence. Many estates have been squandered
away on appetites, which were created by early indulgence; and become
headstrong, by repeated gratification. To indulge irregular fancies, in
creatures destitute of reason, must be destructive to self command; without
which there can be no virtue.

I ONCE was acquainted with a lady, whose parents had never laid any restraint
on her passions or appetites in childhood, but yielded to every idle fancy,
until, on a bright evening, she took it into her head to cry for the moon. The
only reason that it was not granted, was the want of power in the parents. This
fact they acknowledged after she grew up; and they had reason to regret their
folly on account of the peevish, restless disposition which it had created; and
she found this world a very inhospitable region for one, who could not submit
to the conditions of living in it; for meeting perpetually with objects to
excite the fancy, and create desires, without the power of gratifying them all,
or of bearing the disappointment of any, you will easily believe she could not
be very happy.

MRS. Bloomsgrove was an affectionate mother, but not less faithful than
affectionate. She showed the most expressive tenderness to her children when
sick; and ever indulged their desires in health, as far as, in her judgment,
was proper. They were allowed to come to their parents with a respectful
freedom, to make known their wants; but not to express their idle or
extravagant wishes. Osander does not, like master Dickie, "cry to ride up to
table on the sirloin of roast beef." Nor does Rozella cry for the moon; but
they ask for any thing they need without reserve. Before they could speak, they
were taught, by signs expressive of disapprobation, to cease crying, or craving
any thing which they might not have: they were disciplined to restraint when
large enough to sit at table, and to see a thing without wanting it. They were
never hungry because they saw others eat, as is common with children of
ungoverned appetites. At a plentiful table, like Mr. Bloomsgrove's, their
palates might easily have been made restless and insatiable; but accustomed, as
they were, to restraint, they never wanted something else in preference to what
was given them. They generally dined on one dish, and appeared perfectly
satisfied at relinquishing all the rest. If they saw, at any time, children
furnished with toys and gewgaws, and expressed any desire for the like, their
parents would speak to them with great indifference of those things, as of no
kind of value. These fine things, said Mrs. Bloomsgrove, to her little
daughter, may do for children who have no better qualities; but what a figure
does a girl of twelve or thirteen years old make with fine feathers on a head
that is destitute of knowledge? If you acquire the latter, you have less need
of the former; and besides, if children do not behave well, their finery only
makes them appear the worse; and those who are good will not need gay things to
recommend them: every body will esteem and love them without those ornaments.

I CANNOT close this, without observing to you the vast advantage to be derived
from this habitual restraint, in point of government. Accustomed to govern
themselves, correction becomes a strange work; each yields to order without
perceiving the exercise of any authority, and seems perfectly free in an
unconditional passive obedience. Hence spring peace and harmony as from their
native soil.

LETTER XXXVIII.
IT is with families, as with states; they have been too busy with laws, and
too remiss in education. They contrive methods to punish, not to prevent
crimes. But the Bloomsgrove family affords an exception from this general
observation. The necessity of punishment was almost precluded by their mode of
domestic management. We cannot, therefore, draw many examples from it on this
head.

I AM convinced, from the success of their domestic discipline, that the usual
mode of government should be inverted; and the passion, fear, which is commonly
the first, become the last passion addressed by parental authority. Like the
ULTIMA RATIO REGUM, this should be the last reasoning of parents.

ON this subject my friend -- writes me, that, from his own experience, he has
found it as necessary to reward his children for good, as to punish them for
bad actions; that rewards are of immense consequence in stimulating them to
industry, virtue, and good manners, "I was led," says he, "to adopt this
practice, by contemplating the principles of action, in men, by which God
governs his rational creatures." He goes on to explode corporal corrections,
and to recommend solitude, with darkness, as the most effectual punishment that
can be contrived for them. This he has used successfully in his own family for
many years. The duration of the confinement, and the disagreeable circumstances
that are connected with it, are proportioned to the faults which are committed.

TOO much, he adds, cannot be said in favor of solitude, as the means of
reformation, which should be the only end of all punishment. Men are wicked
only from inattention, or want of thinking. Inspiration, therefore, calls on
them to "CONSIDER THEIR WAYS."

THE most severe punishments, which human laws inflict, are light, compared
with that of letting a man's conscience loose upon himself, in solitude.
Company, conversation, and even business, are the opiates of the spirit of God
in the human heart. For this reason, a bad man should be left in confinement
for sometime, without any thing to employ his hands about. Every thought should
recoil wholly upon himself; and he cannot be delivered to a more severe
tormentor.

"THERE is, says Lord Kaimes, no branch of discipline that ought to be
exercised with more caution, than the distribution of rewards and punishments.
If money, a fine coat, or what pleases the palate, be the reward promised; is
it not the ready way to foment avarice, vanity, or luxury? Praise is an
efficacious reward, or which even children are fond; and when properly applied,
it never ^^ils to produce good behavior. Punishment requires still more
caution; as it ought to be proportioned to the temper of the pupil, as well as
to the nature of the fault. I cannot recollect a fault that req^i^es corporal
punishment but obstinacy, which is inherent in some persons. Lying, I think,
may be corrected, or rather prevented, by proper management: my reason for it
is, that it is not inherent in our nature, but forced upon a child by harsh
treatment. Any fault, except obstinacy, that a child can be guilty of, may be
repressed by shame and disgrace, which sink deep into the heart of children, as
well as of men and women. To keep children in awe, by the fear of corporal
punishment, will put them upon hiding their faults, instead of correcting them."

IT was a maxim with Solomon, that "he who spares the rod ruins his child."
Government must at all hazards be supported; for no consequences are to be
feared, even from the severest exercise of government, equal to those which may
be apprehended from the neglect of it. But in a family consisting of several
children, there is almost as great a variety of dispositions, all of which it
is necessary to meet with rewards or punishments suited to influence them. This
will probably make as great a variety in the modes of application.

LETTER XXXIX.
I BELIEVE it is a maxim with physicians, that preventives are the best
expedients. If you can, by any means, accustom your children to acknowledge
their faults, it will lessen their number, and it will preclude the necessity
of punishment. This is the only case in which I think auricular confession
meritorious. This, tho a difficult part of education, is an important one, and
may be effected by beginning early with them, and letting them find that a
candid acknowledgement always procures absolution. The finest sensibility
should be cherished in the young heart, with regard to right and wrong. This
can be effected only by appearing hurt and grieved, not angry, at their faults.
If you are angry with a child for its faults and rave at it, you excite the
same passion in the child; and the same passion in opposite bodies, like the
repellent power in matter, drives them from each other. But soften the heart by
grief, and you will attract the child to you; and its faults will become such
burdens, that it cannot retain them. Rozella broke a china saucer of her
mamma's best set: the accident was known only to herself; she hid the pieces to
prevent discovery, but felt very unhappy, and could find no relief but in a
frank confession. Her mamma says, "Your fault, my dear, lay in attempting to
conceal what you had done; but your confessing it of your own accord, deserves
more praise, than either the breaking, or concealing it deserves blame." A
frown, on this occasion, would have been death to those tender and generous
feelings, and have driven her to dissembling on a like occasion in future.

WHAT, but harshness and severity, can obstruct the confidence which affection
to parents naturally leads children to place in them? Will children confess
their faults, unless they can feel assured that an hone^^ confession will save
them from punishment? Will they not rather dissemble, and do any thing to avoid
a discovery, which involves in it the consequences of a crime?

AMONG the various ways of training the children to confess their faults, the
following appeared to Mrs. Bloomsgrove to be the most successful. Returning
home, after a visit of a week or two, she put each of her children to say, what
good had been done by the other; and what ill itself had done. The former
endeared them to one another, the latter restrained them from committing
faults. These articles she made the subject of conversation; and endeavored to
ripen their understanding, by showing them what was right and what was wrong in
their conduct. But she was careful to provide a trusty person, to inform her of
any fault that had been concealed. In that case she would say to the child,
"Surely, my dear, you have a bad memory, did you not do so and so?" The child
thinks it in vain to attempt hiding of it; for, "Mamma knows every thing."
Stern authority is suitable only for the obstinate and petulant; but advice and
remonstrance will be a better corrector of other faults. Children may often be
put into a way of correcting their own faults, or of voluntarily confessing
them. "A young girl, aged eleven, having accidentally hurt her finger, showed
some degree of impatience. The governess, having in vain endeavored to shame
her out of it, left the room with a reproachful look, saying, that she could
not bear to see such concern for a trifle. In less than an hour, she received a
billet from her pupil, acknowledging her misbehavior, and entreating to be
forgiven. The young lady owes much of this pliancy of temper to an affectionate
mother, whose high station has not made her relax from attending to the
education of her children, with a degree of prudence and sagacity, that would
give luster to a person much inferior in rank."

STUBBORNNESS will be scarcely known, where a proper authority has been
maintained from the beginning; but will soon appear in some children, where
that is not exercised. "Mr. Lock mentions a lady whose daughter was nursed in
the country. She found the child so stubborn, as to be forced to whip it eight
times, before it was subdued. This was the first and last time of laying a hand
upon it. Ever after, it was all compliance and obedience. This ought to be a
lesson to parents never to relax the reins of government. Doubtless the mother
here suffered more pain than the child."

LETTER XL.
YOURS and mine, is a language we very early hear from children. They feel
their right to what they possess, long before they can be made to understand
the origin and foundation of property, by reasoning about it, a^ Rousseau
teaches Emilius, by their dialogue with Robert the gardener. The sense of right
and wrong, of yours and mine, arises from the nature and relation of man. But
the desire of possessing is much more powerful in childhood than this sense.
Happy for the world, had it been confined to that period! But for want of
proper culture in childhood and youth, this sense becomes dormant with many.
Hence those invasions of one another's property; and interferences of interest,
which cause so much disturbance in the world.

"AS society depends, in a great measure, on the sense of property, neglect no
opportunity to fortify that sense in your children. Make them sensible, that it
is a great wrong to take what belongs to another." It should be considered that
their possessions are as dear and valuable to them, as those of grown people.
If they are suffered to invade the property of others, however trifling, there
is danger that it will grow into a habit of injustice. They should be made to
restore the property, with such reproof, or punishment, as the nature and
aggravation of the case may require. No transgression of this nature is ever
suffered to pass unnoticed by the parents of Osander and Rozella. They
remonstrate against such actions, and endeavor to convey to the feelings of the
child, a sense of the wrong done, by reasoning with it in this way -- What
right have you to what you have taken? Does it not belong to your sister? How
would you like it, if she was to get away your things? Can you not be contented
with what is your own? Tho the child cannot comprehend the idea of injustice,
yet it can feel the force of this application. And, indeed, very little
understanding in children, except that which is derived from sensibility and
impressions, is necessary in the branches of education already mentioned. The
understanding of parents must supply the want of it in the child, while they
are rearing it up to that degree of maturity in which the understanding, as
well as the heart, may be cultivated. To that period, which may be considered
as a third stage in education, I shall proceed in my next.

LETTER XLI.
THE evening was serene, and invited to walk. The sweet fragrance of the
blooming flowers embalm the air, inspiring health. Pleasures breathe through the
bending wood; exhale from the fair bosom of the floods, and swell with the
nightingale's melodious note, while Mr. and Mrs. Bloomsgrove, accompanied by
their children and Fanny, walk in the gravel way. The pale glimmering
moon-beams, stealing through the opening foliage, softened all their feelings. The
serenity of the sky, the softness of the air, and the many glittering objects
around, inspired a placid cheerfulness, which opened the heart to the most
sensible delight. A circumstance which added much to the pleasure of the
evening was, they had all dined at Mr. Bloomsgrove's father's that day, being
the birth day of Rozella, who now commenced her thirteenth year.

HER grand papa and grand mamma were no less delighted with her sprightliness,
her respectful and pleasing manners, and the manly conduct of Osander, than
their parents. The union of three generations in convivial entertainment,
lightened the heart of the aged, and taught them to bend to the manners of the
young; while these, in turn, endeavored to repay such goodness by reverence and
attention, united to sportive pleasures. A day which renewed the age of sixty
in that of thirteen, could not be passed without the utmost enjoyment. I do not
relate the circumstance of their dining together as an uncommon thing; but this
being the birth day of Rozella, which raised her to A MISS IN HER TEENS,
afforded peculiar pleasure; and it drew forth from her grand mamma some
sparkling touches of humor, for which she had formerly been celebrated, and by
which she pleasantly conveyed instruction to her grand child. The dinner was
composed of every thing good which the season afforded; was served up in an
elegant simplicity of style; and the day passed in great conviviality, and good
humor. After returning home, they passed the evening in the gravel walk. Fanny
makes her observations on the pleasures of society, and especially on the
enjoyment of family circles, where all is harmony and friendship. Rozella
prattles about grand mamma's good puddings and pies, wonders if she shall ever
look as old as grand mamma, and repeats many of her pleasant and sensible
speeches. Osander wonders if grand papa ever read all the books in his library,
and thinks that if he has, his head is like a full moon, which reflects its
light every where. Fanny enters spiritedly into their chat, and gambols with
them on the green. Pleasure sparkles in the parents' eyes as they walk, and see
the sportive mirth of their youthful family.

THE evening being closed, they return to offer praises, on the domestic altar,
to that Almighty Being who guards the dwellings of the just, and is the friend
of the faithful. Having committed themselves to the care of his providence,
they retire to rest with full confidence in his paternal protection. All is
hush -- a profound silence reigns through the mansion. Sweet, balmy sleep had
chased away the events of the past, rendered them unconscious of the present,
and unapprehensive of the future. But, hark! A commissioned messenger arrives
-- a sudden and loud rap awakes the whole house -- Mr. Bloomsgrove hastily
arises; and, throwing up the window, inquires who is there. He is informed that
a violent illness has seized his mother; that the physician thinks her symptoms
threatening, and that she desires to see him and Mrs. Bloomsgrove as soon as
may be. They hasten to the house, where festivity had prevailed the day before,
to discharge the duties of filial piety.

IT will not be necessary to relate the minute circumstances that took place on
this occasion, and the general alarm it spread through the family. Suffice it to
say, that they lost no time to see so worthy a parent. The violence of the
disorder abated in the morning; when she desired to see the children, and
Fanny, whom she numbered among them. They were immediately sent for, and a
deluge of tears succeeded their entrance into the room. The old lady recovered
from the first shock, which the sight of those dear objects gave, and was able
to administer the most salutary advice. She appeared perfectly resigned to the
will of the supreme disposer of events. She spoke of death with an unaffected
firmness, as cast in the milder light of friend by the Christian revelation,
which softens that grim visage to the fair form of an angel, the messenger of
peace.

HOW interesting the scene! the parent of a numerous progeny, with a
countenance rendered serene and venerable by piety and age, giving them her
last advice, her parting blessing; the children and descendants administering
the proper cordial to old age, by the tender hand of filial affection. Neither
the native firmness of mind, nor the high rank in life which Mr. Bloomsgrove
held, lessened his affection for a mother whom he had every reason to venerate;
nor did he omit any attention in his power, to render the closing scene
comfortable. In this he imitated the conduct of Solomon, who, tho a KING, did
not lose the respect of a child; but rose from his throne, and bowed himself,
when his mother came to him with a request. This sickness gave them an
opportunity to exhibit an example of filial piety, affection, and reverence,
which made a lasting impression on the minds of their children.

THE disorder continued, with various symptoms, several days, until feeble
nature became exhausted, and she gently sunk down into soft slumbers; leaving
to the young a striking instance of the serene evening, which succeeds the
virtuous morning of life. Here was one of the most beautiful and interesting
scenes you can conceive of! dutiful and affectionate children, surrounding the
dying bed of a parent with unfeigned grief; and with respectful mourning,
following her remains to the grave; and recording in their faithful memories
the debt of gratitude they owed to parental care and love: "Me let the tender
office long engage
To rock the cradle of reposing age;
With lenient arts extend a mother's breath,
Make languor smile and smooth the bed of death;
Explore the thought, explain the asking eye,
And keep awhile one parent ^^om the sky."
POPE.

LETTER XLII.
A PLEASING melancholy for a while pervaded the house, and cast in softening
shades the illustrious qualities of its possessors. They failed not to improve
the sorrowful incident to moral and religious purposes. The sudden transition
from joy to sorrow; from health and festivity, to sickness and death, afforded
scope for many an useful lesson of instruction. And as they had trained their
children to submit to the ills of life, so they exhibited an example of it on
this occasion.

HITHERTO education has been carried on more by physical influence, than by the
light of understanding in the pupil. The period is now arrived, in which reason
begins to unfold more lively colors, and will bear a more active part in the
future management of the children. Placing ourselves on this boundary line
between childhood and youth, we can look back and survey, at a single glance,
the progress of education in infancy and childhood; but looking forward through
the devious paths of youth, an infinite variety and boundless prospects open
before us. To analyze this period of education, so that each part may be
distinctly viewed, and no one pass unnoticed, is not an easy task. The daughter
is to be trained in the line of her sex, and prepared to appear, to the best
advantage, in the world, which will employ all the prudence and good sense of
the mother. And the son, to be brought forward in the higher branches of
learning, and to be educated in such a manner, as will best prepare him for
usefulness and happiness in life.

BUT you will recollect that domestic memoirs, and not a treatise on school
learning, is our object. However the latter may be neglected, that which
belongs to parents, and is properly of the domestic kind, is, perhaps, much
more so. In schools we look for little else than the culture of the
understanding; at home we are to look for the culture of the heart. If parents
were as solicitous to do their duty in this respect, as they are to have
teachers of schools do theirs, it would redound much to the honor of human
nature, and the happiness of their children. But where the understanding has
been improved to the greatest degree of perfection, the cultivation of the
heart has been surprisingly neglected. Now is the season for the cultivation of
both head and heart in our young pupils.

OSANDER was to have been sent abroad to school about this time, in order to
prepare him for a public education; but the event of his grand mamma's death
detained him beyond the intended period. In order to supply the place of his
son, in some measure, Mr. Bloomsgrove invited a nephew, who had just finished
his academic studies, to reside at his house. This nephew was a worthy youth,
but had suffered much by being sent abroad too young. Science he had acquired;
but very little attention had been paid to the regulation of the heart. Mr.
Bloomsgrove soon discovered the disease and the cause of it. He saw that his
nephew had been under preceptors, who considered not the culture of the heart
as any part of their business; and, tho furnished with grammar rules, yet moral
principles, which are useful in every part and station of life, had not been
instilled into his mind. This turned Mr. Bloomsgrove's thoughts into a new
channel with respect to his son.

HE perceived that his nephew, whose passions were warm, but had a heart
susceptible of any impressions, had been governed by the exercise of power, not
by persuasion; that he had been taught by dry rules, but not according to
nature. Authority, indeed, is indispensable; and general rules, where there is
a number of youth, cannot be avoided. But the seat of empire should be the
heart; and general rules should be made to bend to particular circumstances, as
far as may be, without endangering government, and making youth unsteady.

THE noble writer of "Hints on Education" has proposed several weighty
objections against sending a son abroad to a public school, until sufficiently
prepared at home to resist temptation. He disapproves of the government and
method of instruction, used in the public schools in England. I believe,
however, that the modern practice of many preceptors, in America, is less
exceptionable. The current of his observations leads him to recommend a private
tutor in preference to a public school. This plan may do in England, where many
an opulent family may employ as many needy scholars in the capacity of private
tutors; but agrees not so well with the abilities of Americans. "Regular hours,
at school, of reading and diversion, have a woeful effect. Children, after a
painful lesson, are let out to play. Their time being circumscribed, appears
always too short. From the height of amusement, they are forced back to a dry
lesson. Can it be expected, that in such a state of mind, they will listen to
serious instruction? Let them play, let them fatigue themselves: guard only
against sauntering. When sufficiently tired, lead them back, with a cheerful
countenance, to a lesson, as a change of amusement. This is agreeable to human
nature." This, the writer observes, can be put in practice only by a private
tutor. I think that something similar might be practiced in our public schools;
that is, the exercises may be so varied, as to have the air of novelty. In a
public school, it is impossible that the youth should be so constantly under
the preceptor's eye, as is requisite at that age. "Hence, says he, it is in a
measure essential, that a young man be well tutored, in morals at least, before
he is left to himself, among a number of young men of different dispositions."

MR. Bloomsgrove, observing that his nephew, who was naturally of a mild,
gentle disposition, had acquired a forwardness improper for his age, and an
impatience of restraint, to which he had not been accustomed; that he assumed
an high tone; and, in short, that he had imbibed several of the ill qualities
of the different boys with whom he had associated, was convinced of the
necessity of keeping his son much longer under his own eye. Although his nephew
had not so deviated from the paths of innocence and virtue, but that his
prudent management cured him, in a little time, of all the ill habits he had
acquired; yet he chose not to venture his son from his own hands, until his
morals were formed and well established.

TO this end, several families, agreeing in their common views, associated to
facilitate the instruction of their children; and placed a tutor in a situation
to receive the pupils, and to accompany them in literary pursuits and playful
excursions. THE necessity and utility of general knowledge to the public, and
especially to the United States of America, are expressed in terms, just and
strong, by that renowned patriot and truly learned politician, The Vice
President of these states.

"THE instruction of the people, in every kind of knowledge that can be of use
to them in the practice of their moral duties, as men, citizens, and
Christians, and of their political and civil duties, as members of society and
freemen, ought to be the care of the public, and of all who have any share in
the conduct of its affairs, in a manner that never yet has been practiced in
any age or nation. The education here intended, is not merely that of the
children of the rich, but of every rank and class of people, down to the
poorest.

"IT is not so much to say, that schools for the education of all should be
placed at convenient distances, and maintained at public expense. The revenues
of the state would be applied infinitely better, more charitably, wisely,
usefully, and therefore politically, in this way, than even in maintaining the
poor. This would be the best way of preventing the existence of the poor.

"IF nations should ever be wise, instead of erecting thousands of useless
offices, or engaging in unmeaning wars, they will make a fundamental maxim of
this, that no human being shall grow up in ignorance. In proportion as this is
done, tyranny will disappear, kings and nobles will be made to feel their
equitable equality with commoners, and commoners will see their interest and
duty to respect the guardians of their laws; for guardians they must have as
long as human nature endures.

"THERE is no room to doubt that the schools, academies, and universities --
the stage, the press, the bar, the pulpit, and the parliament, might all be
improved to better purpose, than they have been in any country for this great
purpose. The emanations of error, folly, and vice, which proceed from all these
sources, might be lessened, and those of wisdom, virtue, and truth, might be
increased; more of decency and dignity might be added to the human character in
high and low life; manners would assist the laws, and laws reform manners; and
imposture, superstition, knavery, and tyranny, be made ashamed to show their
heads before the wisdom and integrity, decency and delicacy of a venerable
public opinion."

Defense Constable. Unit. States.
A house was erected for this purpose, in the center of a beautiful green,
where all concerned might have an equal advantage; and, while the tutor
conducted them in the paths of literature, he was able to second their parent's
exertions, to cultivate the moral qualities of the heart. By this kind of
school they were not only able to attend to their children, but to preserve
their affections. Another advantage arose from the expedient. The same person
who attended the boys, taught the young misses writing, arithmetic, geography,
grammar, and the belles lettres.

IT was not till the institution of this school, that Mr. Bloomsgrove
discovered that his son had rather an aversion to classical studies. For although
he had attended a grammar school before, and, in compliance with the wishes of
his papa, had made considerable progress in the languages, yet he had no love
for these studies. He loved books; but the dry study of Latin and Greek hung as
a dead weight upon his active genius, and gave disgust rather than pleasure.
This aversion had been increased by the dull round, in which he had been
plodding at the grammar school; committing to memory long lessons in a language
he did not understand, and dry rules of which he knew no use.

MISANDER, the son of a respectable farmer, who attended the same school, had
neither genius nor taste; and yet parental pride or partiality induced his
father to think of an university education. What solecisms are not parents
guilty of in the education of their children? How few consult their natural
abili^ies, or particular inclinations, as much as they ought? The child of
small abilities, and slow of apprehension, is often condemned, contrary to
reason and nature, through a long course of severe discipline, to some
professional pursuit in life, in which he can never excel, because he has
neither taste nor abilities for it. Another with shining talents, and an
unconquerable thirst for literature, will be cramped in his education; the
plants of nature will be stinted, and the youth destined to some occupation for
which he has no taste, and in which native genius can make no exertions.

THE watchful parent, who carefully attends to the gradual unfoldings of
nature, will be able pretty accurately to discover the mould in which the mind
is cast, and what mode of education will be most suitable for it. Those powers
he will endeavor to draw forth and cherish, in that way which nature seems to
point out: this will render them most useful, when brought to maturity. The
modes of instruction and education should be accommodated to the cast of the
mind, without reference to any preconcerted plan. Misander was destined from
the cradle to the college, without any regard to his abilities or inclination;
the consequences of which we shall see presently.

THE education of Osander is to be conducted in the path of nature. Therefore
his preceptor was desired to let him pursue those studies, to which he seemed
most inclined; making use of the classics only as an interlude, to diversify
the scene. Mr. Bloomsgrove hoped, by these means, his son would acquire a
relish for them. This hope was excited by the love which he himself had for the
literature of the ancients. As he advanced in life, he experienced more and
more of the pleasures of knowledge; and nothing could be more natural than to
wish his son to taste the same pleasures. To a man who delights in books and
contemplation, solitude cannot be irksome; nor will this source of
entertainment, like most others, be exhausted by age.

LETTER XLIII.
TO cherish in the heart moral sentiments, and engage youth to the practice of
prudential virtues, you allow to be a matter of the highest importance. "But
how, you ask, is this to be effected?" I conceive it, my dear sir, to be a
thing practicable, however difficult it may appear. The success of this attempt
depends more on observing the operations of human nature in various
individuals, and the particular temper of the children to be taught, than on
any dry rules. Mankind are formed with a diversity of passions and
inclinations. But it usually happens that some one of these predominates over
all the others, or, as was the case in some periods of the Roman empire, there
are two which bare sway alternately. This appears in childhood. Some children
you early perceive to be proud and haughty; others, modest and diffident: some,
warm and passionate; others, cool and gentle: some, obstinate and tenacious;
others, soft and flexible: some, covetous and selfish; others, liberal and
benevolent. When I speak of these natural passions, and the difference in the
strength of them, I only mean that there is an aptness in the objects about us
to touch some of those springs of action more forcibly than others; and that
different persons will be variously affected by the same objects.

THESE propensities exist, in a degree, in all men; but that which
predominates, or has the greatest facility in being affected, by surrounding
objects, marks the character of the man. As the seeds of those passions which
distinguish men in the public walks of life, are sown in childhood, the prudent
parent will keep a strict watch over that which appears to predominate. Against
this will he will direct the full force of reproof, counsel, and restraint. He
will, by prudent and steady management, check and control this master passion;
and will find that all the others will yield of course. This will enable him to
instill those virtuous principles into his children, which form their principal
glory and happiness in life.

MR. Bloomsgrove was careful to impress on the minds of his children, maxims of
prudence, resolution, and industry. In order to draw their attention, and
excite the love of these qualities, he gave them an example from the economy of
Augustus Caesar, Emperor of Rome; and of the industry of his wife Livia, and his
sister Octavia, who spun all the clothes the Emperor wore: of "Scipio, the
glory of Rome, and terror of Carthage, who dressed his garden with his own
hands: and of the venerable old senator, Fabricius, illustrious by many
triumphs, who supped only on the herbs he himself had raised." These were
examples of social and domestic virtues, very useful to the children, and they
derived great force from the illustrious characters who exhibited them.

SENSIBLE that happiness does not depend so much on the quantity of possession,
as on the manner of acquiring it, and the use to which it is applied; he was
especially careful to inspire his son with magnanimity; with sentiments of
truth, justice, temperance, moderation, contentment, and all those substantial
virtues, which add dignity to human nature, elevate the soul to its proper
rank, and form the welfare of society. Success in establishing these essential
virtues in the mind, depends much on preserving it from meanness and duplicity:
these are not native qualities, but the effect of mismanagement, and the
occasion of many vices.

LETTER XLIV.
AS children are naturally candid, Mr. Bloomsgrove found it not only
practicable, but a pleasant task to keep them so. He showed them the beauty of
this temper, by relating examples of it in many celebrated characters.
Especially an instance of it in the Marischal de Turenne, who, when he
commanded in Germany, was offered a considerable sum by a neutral city, to
march another way. "I cannot accept of it, said the Marischal, because I do not
intend to take the road to your city."

CHILDREN who are taught to be frank and candid, if they find they can always
be so without danger, will never think of dissembling, but when they are
conscious of having done wrong; and then, if they find as much security, and
more comfort, in confessing, than in dissembling, they will be candid and
honest. Candor is the basis of friendship and mutual confidence. It secures the
good will of others; is the sweetener of society, and endears men even to their
enemies; and a high degree of it is inconsistent with the practice of any vice.

THERE is a meanness which sometimes appears in children, that does not belong
to nature; it is either caught from example, or inspired by injudicious
management. This is sometimes the effect of too great severity; their spirits
are broken by too great restraint, and they become sheepish. In others, it may
arise from having the views crossed, and the pursuits checked, where there has
been an unconquerable thirst for some particular object. From whatever cause it
may arise, the effect is most unhappy. It damps that noble ardor of mind which
is a spring to worthy actions, and should be cherished with great care.

"EMULATION, inh^rent in the nature of man, appears ever in children: they
strive for victory, without knowing what makes them strive. Emulation, kept
within proper bounds, is an useful principle, and far from being unsociable; it
becomes only so, when it degenerates into envy. Approbation is bestowed on
those who behave well; but in struggling for victory, the prospect of being
approved is a very faint motive compared with emulation. Through the force of that
incitement, a young man will persevere in acquiring knowledge, who, without it,
would have made no progress."

THE same is true of making advances in virtuous qualities. The desire of
excelling others must be kept awake, and fanned by education, or the progress
will be slow. Osander strives to acquire as much knowledge, and as good a
character, as his cousin. Rozella endeavors to equal Fanny in the gentleness of
her manners; aad wishes to be as old as her mamma, that she may do as much
good, and make as many poor folks happy as she does. Can any thing be more
pleasing to a parent than to see their children emulating their own virtues?
Then let parents exhibi^ assemblage of the most excellent virtues to excite the
emulation of their children!

LETTER XLV.
MR. Bloomsgrove omitted no favorable opportunity of instilling into the minds
of his children, that a man should be regarded in proportion to the good he
does. There cannot be a more useful lesson of instruction to the young mind
than this. Dazzled with the glitter and pageantry of the gay world, young
people are too apt to respect a man according to the wealth he possesses, and
the external show he makes; and to emulate those qualities, while real virtues,
which make no splendid figure, are overlooked or neglected. Deluded by these
appearances, they form their judgment of men according to the splendour, and not
the merit of actions.

"ALEXANDER demanded of a pirate, whom he had taken, by what right he infested
the seas? 'By the same right,' replied he, boldly, 'that you enslave the world.
But I am called a robber, because I have only one small vessel; and you are
styled a conqueror, because you command great sleets and armies." Against the
false maxims and sentiments which too commonly prevail, Mr. Bloomsgrove guarded
his children; teaching them that the distinction between high and low, rich and
poor, is nothing in comparison with that which arises from the different
degrees of usefulness in the world; that the honest, industrious farmer who
trains his children to be useful members of society, is more worthy of respect,
than the most wealthy who regards not the poverty or distresses of his
neighbor, while he gratifies all his own expensive fancies. He accustomed them
to bridle their love of pleasure; and endeavored to initiate them into the true
secret of worldly felicity; showing them that it consisted in the suitableness
of a person's situation to his natural taste; in the temperate use of the
enjoyments of life; in doing good to others, and in making every condition and
circumstance in life subservient to the interests of virtue.

CERTAIN it is, that happiness consists in being of a quiet, peaceful mind, and
not in sonorous titles, nor extensive possessions. To exalt and elevate the
mind, therefore, was his object, without overheating the imagination; to
inspire courage and firmness, without kindling the fire of ambition into an
unhallowed flame. He was more solicitous to make his son a good, than a great
man. It is vanity that makes most people prefer shining and dangerous
qualifications to the more retired and milder virtues: the latter are the only
qualities which can ensure the repose and happiness of life.

ALTHOUGH he had every thing to build upon which ancestry in America could give,
yet he carefully instilled into his children this idea, that personal merit was
what they should attend to, without reference to ancestors. Often would he
repeat to them, in a winter evening, or in a leisure hour after dinner, the
speech of Gaius Marius to the Romans, in which he showed the absurdity of their
conduct in hesitating to confer on him the rank of general, on account of his
descent. "I HAVE, continues he, from my youth, been familiar with toils and
dangers. I was faithful to your interest, my countrymen, when I served you for
no reward but that of honor. It is not my design to betray you now, that you
have conferred upon me a place of profit. You have committed to my conduct the
war in Jugurtha. The Patricians are offended at this. But, where would be the
wisdom of giving such a command to one of their honorable body? a person of
illustrious birth, of ancient family, of innumerable statues, but -- of no
experience? What service could his long line of dead ancestors, or his
multitude of motionless statues, do his country in the day of battle? What
could such a general do, but, in his trepidation, have recourse to some
inferior commander for direction in difficulties to which he was not himself
equal? Thus your Patrician general would in fact have a general over him; so
that the commander would still be a Plebeian. So true is this, my countrymen,
that I have, myself, known those, who have been chosen consuls, begin then to
read the history of their own country, of which, till that time, they were
totally ignorant; that is, they first obtained the employment, and then
bethought themselves of the qualifications necessary for the proper discharge
of it.

"I SUBMIT to your judgment, Romans, on which side the advantage lies, when a
comparison is made between Patrician haughtiness and Plebeian experience. The
very actions, which they have only read, I have partly seen, and partly myself
achieved. What they know by reading, I know by action. They are pleased to
slight my mean birth: I despise their mean characters. Want of birth and
fortune is the objection against me; want of personal worth against them. But
are not all men of the same species! What can make a difference between one man
and another, but the endowments of the mind? For my part, I shall always look
upon the bravest man as the noblest man. Suppose it were inquired of the
fathers of such Patricians as Albinus and Bastia, whether, if they had their
choice, they would desire sons of their character or mine? What would they
answer, but that they should wish the worthiest to be their sons? If the
Patricians have reason to despise me, let them likewise despise their
ancestors, whose nobility was the fruit of their virtue. Do they envy the
honors bestowed upon me? let them envy likewise, my labors, my abstinence, and
the dangers I have undergone for my country, by which I have acquired them. But
those worthless men lead such a life of inactivity, as if they despised any
honors you can bestow; while they aspire to honors, as if they had deserved
them by the most industrious virtue. They lay claim to the rewards of activity,
for their having enjoyed the pleasures of luxury. Yet none can be more lavish
than they are in praise of their ancestors: and they imagine they honor
themselves by celebrating their forefathers; whereas they do the very contrary:
for as much as their ancestors were distinguished for their virtues, so much
are they disgraced by their vices. The glory of ancestors casts a light,
indeed, upon their posterity; but it only serves to show what the descendants
are. It alike exhibits to public view their degeneracy and their worth. I own I
cannot boast of the deeds of my forefathers; but I hope I may answer the cavils
of the Patricians, by standing up in defense of what I have done myself.

"OBSERVE now, my countrymen, the injustice of the Patricians. They arrogate to
themselves honors on account of the exploits done by their forefathers, while
they will not allow me the due praise for performing the same sort of actions
in my own person. He has no statues, they cry, of his family. He can trace no
venerable line of ancestors. What then? Is it matter of more praise to disgrace
one's illustrious ancestors, than to become illustrious by one's own good
behavior? What if I can show no statues of my family? I can show the standards,
the armor, and the trappings, which I have myself taken from the vanquished. I
can show the scars of those wounds, which I have received by facing the enemies
of my country. These are my statues. These are the honors I boast of* not left
me by inheritance, as theirs; but earned by toil, by abstinence, by valor;
amidst clouds of dust, and seas of blood; scenes of action, where the
effeminate Patricians, who endeavor by indirect means to depreciate me in your
esteem, have never dared to show their faces."




LETTER XLVI.
OSANDER and Rozella, have already obtained from nature and fortune every
advantage which can be derived from them. Every thing which education can add
to these may be expected from the care of their parents. Unconscious of any
merit from their own rank and fortune, they treat every one with affability and
respect. Their parents never flattered them with any ideas of superiority of
rank; but taught them that all just claims to superiority were founded in real
excellence and personal merit.

MRS. Bloomsgrove spoke slightly of dress before her daughter. -- "Gay dress,
she observed, is seldom necessary, and should never come into competition with
the improvements of the mind; that dress may serve to recommend a female among
strangers, but that a plain dress is more becoming a young lady of known
excellence, and that a flaunting dress only derogates from her character. She
did not mean, by these lessons, to depress the sprightly mind of Rozella, nor
to hurt her taste in dress, but to prevent any thing finical, and to elevate
her mind to more suitable objects.

IN order to guard Osander from being led astray by his strong and lively
passions, Mr. Bloomsgrove takes every opportunity to teach him how to gain an
empire over himself; and to inspire him with a desire to distinguish himself,
not by borrowed or superficial qualities, but by the gentleness of his temper,
and the nobleness of his soul. Ideas like these, grafted into the young mind,
will lay a sure foundation for future good conduct. The ardor of his spirits,
under such culture, will exalt his sentiments, and add delicacy to his manners.
His ambition will never suffer him to be guilty of base actions, because it is
directed to noble objects. Eager to be at the head of the list among his mates,
and desirous of the approbation of his father, he will be ready to sacrifice
every other pleasure to that of deserving and obtaining a good name.

THIS mode of education, you will say, may be proper for a youth of such lively
spirits as Osander; you may warm his imagination and elevate his mind. But what
is to be done with such an one as Misander? He is a youth of confined ideas; is
capricious in his temper, and has no aspirings of mind toward great objects.
To excite a degree of emulation will be necessary, but the particular mode of
treatment must be adapted to the natural character and disposition of the youth.

MISANDER might have been, in a great measure, cured of these ill qualities by
a seasonable attention to them; or they might never have appeared, had they not
been fanned into a flame by injudicious management. If opposite dispositions
had been cherished with due care, they would have prevailed and borne these
down. But, unfortunately for him, he was left, like too many other children, to
grow up without cultivation; and, as "ill weeds grow apace," he was soon
overrun by evil passions. These became too deeply rooted ever to be eradicated;
and tho conducted into the field of science, it was only to make his follies
the more conspicuous. A public education is generally lost upon such
characters. Their minds, not properly disciplined to virtue by domestic
education, have no secure basis; and having acquired science without virtue,
they are in the situation of an edifice without a foundation, and, like that,
overset before the first blast, and fall among the splendid ruins of society.

PHILO has merit, but not great talents. He has moderate abilities, with a good
disposition, and a noble soul. He has fortitude, and, for his age, a sound
judgment. With these qualities, directed in a proper manner, Philo promises
fair to make a greater, and, certainly, a more useful man, than many who are
endued with superior genius. The difference of character between these two
youth must be principally ascribed to the difference in their domestic
education. The one had been indulged in every thing; and never had his mind
directed to higher objects, than those which are suited to excite childish
desires. This had a most unhappy effect on his temper, by debasing his mind and
corrupting his heart. The other had been disciplined to virtuous habits under a
steady government; and although his genius was not brilliant, his heart was good;
his soul was averse to every thing mean and sordid; and his understanding was
adequate to all the purposes of useful life.

THE education of the last Czar of Russia, was suited to make him appear
foolish and ridiculous. "Born without genius or courage, his education
principally consisted in inspiring him with military ideas. Had he possessed
ambition to be an hero as well as a sovereign, he might have made a conqueror."

"CHARLES the twelfth, king of Sweden, whose valor rendered even his follies
glorious, should have possessed less valor or more genius. If he had had less
enthusiasm, his name might not have been so celebrated, but would have been
more truly great." It was the imprudent zeal of Charles that gave PETER THE
GREAT an opportunity of acquiring that illustrious title, by conquering him.
This Peter acknowledged, by drinking his Swedish master's health in presence of
a number of his captive officers after a celebrated victory.

LETTER XLVII.
LONG lessons on morality become tedious to children, and lose their designed
effect. In the management of their passions, therefore, Mr. Bloomsgrove used
great moderation with his children, and, by coolly exhibiting to them examples
of great self command, would sooth them, when irritated; and make them ashamed
of themselves, if at any time they gave way to a fit of anger.

"TWO gentlemen, said he to his young son, were riding together, one of whom,
who was very choleric, happened to be mounted on an high spirited horse. The
horse grew a little troublesome, at which the rider became very angry, and
whipped and spurred him with great fury. The horse, almost as headstrong as his
master, returned his treatment by kicking and plunging. The companion,
concerned for the danger, and ashamed of the folly of his friend, said to him
coolly -- Be quiet, be quiet, and show yourself the wiser of the two."

THE child who has been taught from his infancy to restrain angry passions,
may, when further advanced in age, be convinced of the impropriety of suffering
them to carry him away. They make a man appear ridiculous in the eyes of the
world, and render him unhappy in himself; and are attended with the most
mischievous consequences. Against the ill effects of these, the affectionate
parent will carefully guard, by the interposition of advice, remonstrance, and
authority when necessary.

OSANDER was thrown into a violent passion with one of his schoolmates, as they
were diverting themselves; and, in the heat of his passion, expressed himself
in a manner highly displeasing to his father, who, when it came to his ears,
called him to account for his conduct, and soon made him ashamed of his folly.
After showing him the folly and danger of giving way to anger, and
remonstrating against the like again, he related several instances of greatness
of soul in repressing anger, with the good effects of it. He recommended to him
to observe the maxim of a Roman emperor, never to speak, when he was in a
passion, till he had leisurely repeated all the letters in the alphabet. He
instanced also Socrates saying to a servant, who had offended him -- "I would
treat you as you deserve, were I not in a passion." But his generous soul
melted at the relation of the dispassionate conduct of Themistocles, who was
the means of saving Greece from ruin by his calmness, in answering the
passionate threatenings of Euribiades, admiral of the Grecian fleet which was
collected against the Persians.

"ANGRY at being opposed in a council of war by Themistocles, a young officer,
he brandished his staff in a threatening manner -- 'Strike, said Themistocles,
but hear me first.' Subdued by this instance of self command, Euribiades
listened, followed the advice of the young officer, and obtained a complete
victory. The cool behavior of Themistocles saved Greece, which would probably
have been ruined by the old general." Not more complete was the victory over
the Persians than that which the recital gained over the spirits of Osander. He
confessed his error, and declared that he wished for nothing so much as to be a
second Themistocles. By embracing those opportunities which particular
incidents afforded, Mr. Bloomsgrove's lectures were agreeable and doubly
useful. This method proved effectual with his children; not to prevent an
emotion of anger sometimes; but to accustom them to restrain their passions,
and to reduce them speedily to order, when they were put into motion; to remain
silent, while they were under the influence of irritated passions; and to be
doubly on their guard, when injured or affronted.

THOSE persons are very ill qualified for society, who take fire at every
insult, and give vent to their passions without restraint. They live in a state
of hostilities with the world, and more so with themselves. Their impatience
involves them in perpetual difficulties, and often into great distresses. All
these evils are avoided by a due restraint on the passions; and the peace and
order of society is preserved, while individuals enjoy the pleasures of calm,
serene spirits. A gentleman was one day attacked in public by a brutish fellow,
with opprobrious language, but took no notice of him: as he returned home at
night, he was followed by the same person venting himself in a similar manner
against him. It being dark, when he reached home, he ordered a servant to light
the man back, for fear he should lose the way. To overlook or dissemble small
injuries, is the surest way to avoid great ones.

LETTER XLVIII.
XENOPHON, in his Cyropoedia, tells us that "The Persian children went to
school, and spent their time in learning the principles of justice, as children
do in other countries to learn the knowledge of letters. Their governors
devoted the greatest part of the day to deciding causes among them, respecting
theft, violence, and deceit; punishing those whom they found guilty in any of
these matters, or who were convicted of unjust accusation. Ingratitude too,
they punished; a crime, which, tho the principal occasion of animosity, is
little taken notice of among men."

HAPPY would it be for this rising empire, if a similar practice was adopted by
our schools, academies, and universities, and by all heads of families.
Children are soon to be initiated into society; and society cannot exist,
unless the principles of justice are understood, and its sacred bonds preserved
inviolate. It requires no abstract reasonings to become acquainted with those
principles. They lie near the surface, and are within the reach of the most
moderate capacities. The principles of commutative justice, which are expressed
in that short sentence -- "All things whatsoever ye would that others should do
unto you, do ye even so unto them," are applied to the natural sense of right
and wrong. They are addressed to the feelings of every man, and appeal to their
own sense of wrong, when unjustly treated, to assign to themselves the same
penalty in doing injustice to others, which they do to those who injure and
offend them.

THAT a sense of right and wrong is natural to man, and ought to be cherished
by education, and explained to children as soon as they are capable of
understanding the relation of things, was an opinion in which Mr. Bloomsgrove
was fully confirmed. He therefore took care to explain and impress on the minds
of his children the obligations of justice and equity in all their actions, as
soon as they could comprehend any thing of these obligations; and he enjoined
their preceptor to let no favorable opportunity pass, without doing the same.

IN order to try their invention, and to assist them in understanding the
principles of justice, he would propose questions to them on the case of
certain transactions, and request their determination. These judiciary
proceedings were as amusing as they were instructive to the children; and while
they led them to an acquaintance with the principles of common justice, they
gave him an opportunity to correct their judgment when wrong.

WHAT do you think, my son, said Mr. Bloomsgrove to Osander, one evening after
he came home from school, when Misander had been punished for doing wrong to
his mates -- of the conduct of Cyrus? -- Pray, papa, repeat the story. That I
will do with pleasure, my son, if you will profit by it.

"CYRUS was a little boy of a good disposition, and a very humane temper, and
had been well educated from childhood. One evening his father asked him what he
had done or learned that day. -- Sir, said Cyrus, I was punished to day for
deciding unjustly. How so? said his father. There were two boys, replied Cyrus,
one of them was a great, and the other a little boy. It happened that the
little boy had a coat that was much too big for him; but the great boy had one
that scarcely reached below his middle, and was too tight for him in every
part; upon which the great boy proposed to the little one to exchange coats
with him, because then, said he, we shall both be exactly fitted, for your coat
is as much too big for you, as mine is too little for me. The little boy would
not consent to the proposal; upon which the great boy took his coat away by
force, and gave his own to the little boy in exchange. While they were
disputing upon this subject, I chanced to pass by, and they agreed to make me
judge of the affair. But I decided that the little boy should keep the little
coat, and the great boy the great one; for which judgment my master punished
me. Why so? said Cyrus's father; was not the little coat most proper for the
little boy, and the large coat for the great boy? Yes, sir, answered Cyrus; but
my master told me, I was not made judge to examine which coat best fitted the
boys, but to decide, whether it was just that the great boy should take away
the coat of the little one against his consent; and therefore I decided
unjustly, and deserved to be punished." I think so too, replied Osander; for no
body has any right to take another's coat without his consent.

MR. Bloomsgrove was going to relate some other instances of erroneous judgment
about right and wrong actions; but just as he finished this, the bell rang for
supper, and the young master and miss retired to bed, much edified and pleased.

LETT^R XLIX.
NOTHING can be more destructive to society than falsehood; nor can any thing
deserve the attention of parents and teachers of children so much, as to
cherish in them a love of truth. This, like good coin; will pass every where;
but falsehood, like counterfeit money, is liable to suspicion; and persons
addicted to this vice are despised and rejected. There is a dignity peculiar to
that character which preserves a sacred regard to truth, while those of an
opposite character fall into the lowest contempt.

ROUSSEAU has objected, with considerable force of reason, against the use of
fables for the instruction of children, as having a tendency to teach them
falsehood. A fable is in fact a false story contrived to teach some moral
truth. "How is it possible, said he, men can be so blind as to call fables the
moral lectures for children, without reflecting that the apologue, in amusing,
only deceives them; and that, seduced by the charms of falsehood, the truth
couched underneath it escapes their notice? Yet, so it is; and the means which
are thus taken to render instruction agreeable prevent their profiting by it.
Fables may instruct grown persons, but the naked truth should be presented to
children: for if we once spread over it a veil, they will not take the trouble
to lay it aside, in order to look at it."

WHATEVER force you may allow to these observations, you may be assured that
Mr. Bloomsgrove was cautious of using them. Very few ever came to his
children's knowledge, until they were grown to years of discretion; and of
those few, he or his good lady had the choosing, that they might have only such
as were plain and well suited to convey instruction without any ill effect.
They paid an early attention to every circumstance which had any tendency to
inspire their children with a regard to truth, and an abhorrence of falsehood.
In order to this, they were careful to encourage their speaking truth, by
making it most convenient for them. Cautious not to drive them into subterfuges
and dissimulation, they were seldom found guilty of fraud or falsehood; and as
they advanced to years of understanding, they were taught the nature and
obligations of truth: its beautiful image was presented to their mind in a
pleasing and engaging manner; and the deformity of falsehood and deceit,
painted in all its odious colors. They represented to their children and
family, the mean and contemptible light in which those are held, who practice
so base a vice. They would adduce instances of each, some of which fell within
their own observation; and others selected for that purpose.

ONE evening as Mr. and Mrs. Bloomsgrove were walking on the verdant margin of
the river, with their nephew, Fanny, and their children, the moon shone
beautifully upon the smooth surface of the water. Osander, observing that every
object appeared crooked in the water, asked his papa the reason of it. Instead
of replying that it was occasioned by the refraction of the rays of light, as
they passed a denser medium, he said that it was a deception, and that the
water in that case was not the proper representative of the truth. Just so it
is with those who pervert the truth, by representing things in a false light in
many instances; they cannot be credited in other cases.

MRS. Bloomsgrove turning to Fanny, asked her what she had read that day, that
made the deepest impression on her mind. She replied, with a modest delicacy
peculiar to her, that the story of the frankness of a galley slave in owning
the truth, though he knew not but it might be the means of his ruin, had struck
her more than any thing she had read. Repeat it, my dear, said her excellent
patroness. That I will do with pleasure, madam, as soon as I can recollect it,
and shall feel myself extremely happy, if I can gratify you in any thing; and
proceeded as follows.

IN the memoirs of the Duke d'Ossuna, I found the following anecdote -- "The
Duke having leave from his Catholic Majesty to relieve some galley slaves, such
as he should think best deserving of pardon, went on board the Admiral galley
at Barcelona, and asked several of the slaves what were the crimes that had
sent them to the galleys. Every one endeavored to excuse himself, that it was
out of malice, that the judges were corrupted, and the like. The same question
being put to a little sturdy fellow, he acknowledged that he was justly
condemned; for that, being in want of money, he had robbed a man on the high
way. On which, the Duke gave him a blow over the shoulders with a cane, saying,
you rogue, why should you be with so many honest innocent men? get you out of
their company, for shame."

THEY were all much pleased with the story, and agreed that if any thing could
entitle him to his freedom, it was his frankness in telling the truth, Now,
says Mr. Bloomsgrove to Osander, your cousin Fanny has related so pretty a
piece, and done it very well, (at this unexpected compliment Fanny's cheeks
were crimsoned) let us hear what you can give on the same subject. Osander,
with his usual frankness, immediately proceeds -- "Eugenio had contracted such
a habit of lying, by the bad company he kept, that he could scarce ever be
believed by his friends; and was often suspected of faults, because he denied
the commission of them; and could not get reparation for injuries of which he
complained, bebecause he could never be credited. A lusty boy, of whom Eugenio
had told some falsehoods, often way laid him as he went to school, and beat him
very much. Conscious of his ill desert, Eugenio bore for some time, in silence,
the chastisement; but the frequent repetition of it, at last overpowered his
resolution, and he complained to his father of the usage he met with. His
father, tho doubtful of the truth of his account, applied to the parents of the
boy who he said abused him. But he could obtain no redress from them, and only
received for answer, "Your son is a notorious liar, and we pay no regard to his
assertions. Eugenio was therefore obliged to submit to the wonted correction,
till full satisfaction had been taken by his antagonist for the injury which he
had sustained." The evening advanced, and they all returned home much pleased
with the excursion.

THE first formation of children's minds being impressions; and their first
actions the notices of impressions, it will follow that children are capable of
considerable progress in falsehood, before they can learn the use of words. An
ignorant or careless nurse, not distinguishing the different tones of pain and
hunger, will soon teach a child to deceive in those sensations. Hence it is
that parents, who do not attend carefully to their offspring, are astonished
that the first use of speech is to deceive. This they ascribe to an unhappy
perversion in the nature of their children; or to any but the true reason --
their own criminal negligence. Under an apprehension that their children were
born with a lie in their mouth, or with lying constitutions, they attempt
beating it out by stripes. The disorder will only be increased by these means.
Proper management would have prevented it. A very cautious and tender usage is
necessary to remedy the evil.

CHILDREN can have no desire to deceive, till it is made their interest. They
feel their dependence, and naturally wish to be on good terms with those on
whom they depend; but if they are directly charged with any crime, and are
sensible that if they plead guilty, it will endanger that harmony, they will
deny it. If they have not been trained to make voluntary confessions, at least
to great candor and frankness, they will dissemble, when questioned; and deny,
when charged with a fault.

IF Osander, at any time, seems disposed to equivocate, his papa draws him off
from such ungenerous attempts. He queries whether the frankness of the galley
slave did not make him appear better, than the wealthiest man who has no regard
to the truth. As to Rozella, her mamma's prudent management inspired her with
so delicate a regard to truth, that she would shudder at the thought, even of
the least equivocation. An excellent example for those of her age!

LETTER L.
THE virtue, fidelity, seems to be but little understood by children. They are
made, like a parrot, to promise any thing that is put into their mouth, without
knowing any thing of the nature of the obligation. If the fear of punishment or
the hopes of reward lead them to make engagements, which they will violate as
soon as the force of the motive abates, the violation is not to be considered
as want of the principle in the child. It must be charged to imprudence in the
parent or preceptor. A child cannot be said to be unfaithful in not fulfilling
engagements which he makes, before he is capable of understanding the nature of
such obligations. No such promises, therefore, should ever be extorted from
them. The obligation does not exist in nature, but in contract or agreement. If
the nature of the obligation is not so far understood, as that the moral sense
of right and wrong will exert itself in producing a fulfillment, from what cause
do we look for it?

MRS. Bloomsgrove was ever attentive to this matter, when the children were
young and under her more immediate care; nor did their papa ever exact any
promises of them, until they were able to comprehend the reason, and see the
consequences of promising. The principal sense which children have of
engagements, is their utility. But when the innate sense of right and wrong
begins to exert itself, and conscience imposes that as a duty which convenience
only had dictated before, then the force of engagement is felt from an
understanding of its principles. These are unfolded to Osander as he can bear
them, and enforced by considerations suited to touch his feelings. He is taught
never to promise any thing slightly; but to consider what he is about to
engage, and whether he shall be able to perform; and having made an engagement,
however trifling, he is closely watched as to the fulfillment of it. This
strengthens his resolution and accustoms him to punctuality. But if he at any
time violates his word, his papa expresses as much surprise as indignation; and
tells him, "If you were not quite young, such an action would be very
disgraceful; and if you should do the like again, you would render yourself
contemptible in the eyes of every one."

HIS instructions were always accompanied with example. He considered promises
made to children as of sacred obligation; and was careful to fulfill them,
however trifling in themselves. Many parents fail much in this point. They
promise children, perhaps to get rid of a present importunity, that they shall
have such a thing, or go to such a place, without any thought or intention of
fulfilling their promise. The child remembers the promise, and, at the time,
claims a performance; but the parent has forgotten it, or declines a
fulfillment. What is this but teaching them to deceive and be unfaithful?

IN some animals there appears an instinctive principle, which bears a strong
analogy to this virtue. It begets the strongest attachment to certain objects;
and leads to do every thing in a certain line, which the most sacred
engagements could effect. But this moves in a confined circle, and never
enlarges as it goes round. The strength of it, in some instances, puts to the
blush men who claim the rank of intelligence, and who profess to act on
principles superior to instinct.

THE following instance of fidelity in a dog, is worthy of notice; and it must
be the more agreeable, as it happened not many years ago -- An officer in the
late American army, on his station at the westward, went out in the morning
with his dog and gun, in quest of game. Venturing too far from the garrison, he
was fired upon by an Indian, who was lurking in the bushes, and instantly fell
to the ground. The Indian running to him, struck him on the head with his
tommahawk in order to dispatch him; but the button of his hat fortunately
warding off the edge, he was only stunned by the blow. With savage brutality he
applied the scalping knife, and hastened away with this trophy of his horrid
cruelty, leaving the officer for dead, and none to relieve or console him, but
his faithful dog.

THE afflicted creature gave every expression of attachment, fidelity, and
affection. He licked the wounds with inexpressible tenderness, and mourned the
fate of his beloved master. Having performed every office which sympathy
dictated, and sagacity could invent, without being able to remove his master
from the fatal spot, or procure from him any signs of life, or his wonted
expressions of affection to him, he ran off in quest of help. Bending his
course toward the river, where two men were fishing, he urged them by all the
powers of native rhetoric to accompany him to the woods.

THE men were suspicious of a decoy to an ambuscade, and dared not venture to
follow the dog, which finding all his caresses fail, returned to the care o^
his master; and, licking his wounds a second time, renewed all his
tendernesses, but with no better success than before. Again he returned to the
men; once more to try his skill in alluring them to his assistance. In this
attempt he was more successful than in the other. The men seeing his
solicitude, began to think the dog might have discovered some valuable game,
and determined to hazard the consequences of following him. Transported with
his success, the affectionate creature hurried them along by every expression
of ardor. Presently they arrive at the spot where -- behold an officer wounded,
scalped, weltering in his own gore, and faint with the loss of blood -- Suffice
it to say, he was yet alive. They carried him to the fort, where the first
dressings were performed. A suppuration immediately took place, and he was soon
conveyed to the hospital at Albany, where, in a few weeks, he entirely
recovered, and was able to return to his duty.

THIS worthy officer owed his life, probably, to the fidelity of this sagacious
dog. His tongue, which the gentleman afterward declared, gave him the most
exquisite pleasure, clarified the wound in the most effectual manner, and his
perseverance brought that assistance without which he must soon have perished.

My dog, the trustiest of his kind,
With gratitude inflames my mind;
I mark his true, his faithful way,
And in my service copy Tray. --
GAY's FABLES. END of VOL. I.
MEMOIRS OF THE BLOOMSGROVE FAMILY. In a Series of LETTERS to a respectable
CITIZEN of PHILADELPHIA. Containing SENTIMENTS on a MODE of DOMESTIC EDUCATION,
Suited to the present State of SOCIETY, GOVERNMENT, and MANNERS, in the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA: AND ON The DIGNITY and IMPORTANCE of the FEMALE CHARACTER.
INTERSPERSED With a Variety of interesting ANECDOTES.

BY ENOS HITCHCOCK, D. D.

VOL. II.

Printed at Boston, BY THOMAS AND ANDREWS, At FAUST's STATUE, No. 45, NEWBURY
STREET MDCCXC.

TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR THE SECOND VOLUME.
LETTER LI. A DIGRESSION. Page 9 LETTER LII. To Mrs. --, on the subject of
female education. Page 13 LETTER LIII. Mrs. --, to the author. Page 18 LETTER
LIVE. The subject assumed. Page 21 LETTER LV. Of female dignity -- importance of
female education. Rozella trained to industry. Page 23 LETTER LVI. On the
importance of accommodating female education to the state of society in this
country. Page 28 LETTER LVII. Rozella trained to domestic knowledge --
consequence^ of educating females too effeminately. Eloisa, a letter. Page 32
LETTER LVIII. On the reciprocity of influence, or the balance of power between
the sexes. Page 4^ LETTER LIX. Some observations on female pedantry, by Mrs.
Bloomsgrove and the young ladies. Page 49 LETTER LX. An evening's conversation,
on the folly of being vain of beauty and adventitious ornaments. Anecdote. Page
53 LETTER LXI. Second evening's conversation. Character of Catharina, Empress
of Russia. Page 59 LETTER LXII. Third evening's conversation -- on affectation
-- an instance of it. Of Ad^lina and Aspasia. Page 69 LETTER LXIII. Fourth
evening's conversation. Mrs. Bloomsgrove describes the writings proper for
young females to read. Page 80 LETTER LXIV. Of cultivating personal qualities
-- anecdote of Cornelia. Rozella called from the boarding school by an incident
at home. Page 95 LETTER LXV. Containing an account of Fanny's sickness. Page
101 LETTER LXVI. From a clergyman to Miss Fanny. Page 103 LETTER LXVII. Miss
Fanny's answer. Page 108 LETTER LXVIII. Of contentment -- its importance in
education -- how cherished. Anecdotes. Page 115 LETTER LXIX. Of cultivating the
memory -- humorous instance of extraordinary memory. Page 122 LETTER LXX.
Parental partiality -- unnatural and dangerous -- an instance of its ill
effects. Page 127 LETTER LXXI. Dignified familiarity procures respect and
affection. Page 134 LETTER LXXII. On filial piety -- a complaint of undutiful
children -- generally the effect of parental indulgence -- Misander an
instance. Page 140 LETTER LXXIII. Fraternal affection -- how preserved --
anecdote -- an affecting instance. Page 149 LETTER LXXIV. Of their treatment of
servants. Page 166 LETTER LXXV. The fatal effects of bad company. Page 176
LETTER LXXVI. The dangerous tendency of bad books. Page 185 LETTER LXXVII.
Religious instruction -- how made agreeable -- different modes of religion no
just ground of disaffection -- christian religion suited to inspire noble
sentiments. Page 193 LETTER LXXVIII. Of prayer -- early piety recommended by
p^^asing allusions. Page 207 LETTER LXXIX. The true art of pleasing. Page 217
LETTER LXXX. Their method of observing the sabbath -- attendance on public
worship -- its beauty and usefulness. Page 223 LETTER LXXXI. On the pernicious
effects of slavery on domestic education. Page 232 LETTER LXXXII. Osander sent
to the university. Page 243 LETTER LXXXIII. From Mr. Bloomsgrove to his son at
the university. Page 248 LETTER LXXXIV. Of Mr. Bloomsgrove's method with regard
to his son's expenses. Anecdote of a noble Venetian. Page 253 LETTER LXXXV. On
the importance of method and system in all affairs. Anecdote of a reformed
profligate. Page 257 LETTER LXXXVI. The subject c^^^inued. Page 261 LETTER
LXXXVII. An affectionate parting. The nephew settled. Page 268 LETTER LXXXVIII.
Young Mr. Bloomsgrove's character. Page 270 LETTER LXXXIX. Mr. Bloomsgrove's
advice to his son. Page 274 LETTER XC. Of young Mr. Bloomsgrove's settlement --
character of Augusta. Page 278 LETTER XCI. On friendship. Achmet and Fatima, a
modern story. Page 281 LETTER XCII. Mrs. Bloomsgrove's advice to her daughter
-- influence of female education on society. Page 289 LETTER XCIII. Portait of
Rozella. Character of Augustus. Conclusion of the memoirs. Page 294
DOMESTIC MEMOIRS.
LETTER LI.
MY DEAR SIR,
THIS day is announced to us, the agreeable intelligence of the arrival of our
late BELOVED General, now the illustrious President of the United States, at
the present seat of federal government.

I SUSPEND all other concerns for a moment, to felicitate you on the auspicious
event which commences a new era in the history of human affairs. Other nations,
after many years of effort and misery in the cause of freedom, have been
obliged, either to yield to their haughty conquerors, or to accept conditions
of a partial deliverance from their oppressors, unworthy of their attempts. But
America presents to the world* the sublime and affecting spectacle of a brave
people, after a few years struggle against a proud and rapacious nation,
becoming free and independent; founding a mighty empire, which, tho agitated
awhile, like the swelling bosom of the ocean, is now settling down into
calmness and tranquillity. She presents to the world a constitution of civil
government, which, founded in equality and justice, unites energy in the
executive with the liberty of the subject; in such a manner as most effectually
to secure the responsibility of the one, and the common good of the other.

THE present may with propriety be styled the age of philosophy; and America,
the empire of reason. The agitations which usually follow such convulsions, and
the dismemberment of kingdoms, are rapidly subsiding, and she is fast rising
into superior consequence. America now promises fair to be the asylum of genius
and liberty, the seat of arts and learning, and the universal emporium of
wealth and commerce.

ALL this is acknowleged by a transatlantic panegyrist, who says -- "Amidst the
number of intrepid soldiers, of experienced generals, and wise legislators, who
distinguished themselves on this occasion, an illustrious name appears, which
is not only eminently conspicuous in the annals of the present age, but shines
unrivalled by the most celebrated characters of antiquity. The irresolute only,
who fail in resisting oppression, are branded with the name of rebels. The
brave, who succeed in the arduous strife, reap, with the glorious fruit of
their toils, the laurel of renown: convinced of this, the great WASHINGTON drew
his sword; at the eventful, perilous moment, when the world, with eager
concern, attended to the fate of America, in the infancy of her strength,
unjustly invaded by the overwhelming power of a monarchy, grown wanton, and
deemed irresistible: through an almost uninterrupted series of victory and
conquest, this great man rushed forward; and, to save his country, risked his
fame, his property, and his life! Animated with a generous, a disinterested
ardor, he stood forth a volunteer in the sacred cause of justice! Freedom, and
not power, was his aim: independence, happiness, and the prayers of virtuous
millions, were his reward."

I AM highly gratified by your account of the emulation which appeared in every
class of citizens to be foremost in their expressions of joy on the occasion.
It must be flattering to a mind, superior to vanity, to stand unrivalled in the
hearts of a grateful country, who unanimously hail him WELCOME to the seat of
federal empire.

I am, etc.

LETTER LII. To Mrs. --.
MADAM,
I AM about to arraign myself at the tribunal of your sex. To stand approved at
so equitable a bar, I shall rank in the first class of my felicitie^* Besides
your acquaintance in the republic of letters, you have a more there knowledge
of the female character than I can be supposed to possess; and can better judge
of proper expedients to raise and dignify that character.

I HAVE, therefore, sent to your perusal those sheets on the subject of female
education, which I mentioned in my last. If, in casting an eye over them, any
thing should appear unfriendly to your sex, your goodness will place it to an
error in judgment, not to a want of esteem and respect for so amiable a part of
our species. If your long acquaintance with domestic life, and the necessary
qualifications for discharging its duties, suggests any expedients for
cultivating those qualities which have escaped my notice, you will be so
obliging, Madam, as to mention them with freedom.

I HAVE assigned to the female an important rank in domestic society; and, with
that rank, a laborious task -- a task imposed by nature; not by me. In the
former part of these memoirs, I have shown the obligations our sex are under to
participate the cares, and lighten the burden of yours, by every possible
expression of tenderness and affection. The thoughtful, anxious, and
affectionate mother interests my esteem, and commands my sincerest respect. She
renders the most essential service to the world; and doubly blesses her husband
by the happiness she entails upon the objects of their mutual affection.

ON the most critical, and perhaps, least pleasing part of the subject, I have
only to say, that I have endeavored to follow nature, and to vindicate the just
claims of the sex. The idea of inferiority on the part of your sex, I renounce
with indignation. While the names of Mrs. Row, Chapone, Macauley, Barbauld,
Miss Burns, Moore, and many others are remembered, the sprightliness, strength,
and elegance of female genius must be acknowledged. -- Seized in thought,
On fancy's wild and roving wing I sail,
From the green borders of the peopled earth,
And the pale moon, her fair attendant;
From solitary Mars; from the vast orb
Of Jupiter, whose huge gigantic bulk
Dances in either like the highest leaf;
To the dim verge, the suburbs of the system,
Where cheerless Saturn 'midst his watery moons*
Girt with a lucid zone, majestic sits
In gloomy grandeur; like an exiled queen
Amongst her weeping handmaids: fearless thence
I launch into the trackless deeps of space,
Where, burning round, ten thousand suns appear*
Of elder beam; which ask no leave to shine
Of our terrestrial star, nor borrow light
From the proud regent of our scanty day;
Sons of the morning, first born of creation,
And only less than HIM who marks their track,
And guides their fiery wheels. Here must I stop*
Or is there aught beyond? what hand unseen
Impels me onward through the glowing orbs
Of habitable nature; far remote,
To the dread confines of eternal night,
To solitudes of vast unpeopled space,
The deserts of creation, wide and wild;
Where embryo systems and unkindled suns
Sleep in the womb of chaos? Fancy drops,
And thought astonished stops her bold career.
MRS. BARBAULD.
I often blush at the inferiority of husbands to their wives in mental
improvements, as well as in polite and graceful accomplishments.

ANY thing that implies servility, or a yielding of any right or prerogative of
nature, I consider as dishonorable in our sex to exact; and, if possible, more
so in yours to grant. Nor do I admit of an idea of the kind, in any thing I
have said on the subject of the PRIORITY of men. In all societies, there must
be one who stands at the head of the list, whose responsibility is necessary
for transacting the common concerns. Whether nature has assigned this task to
our sex or yours, I refer to the decision of your own judgment.

WHEN I use the term submission, I mean submission to nature, not to human
caprice. I should have consigned the opprobrious word to the shades, had I not
found it necessary to use it, in order to show the importance of that restraint
to which the honor of your sex, their security from numberless and nameless
dangers, and, I will venture to add, the safety of the world, require they
should be early habituated.

WHEN, therefore, I am pleading for the submission of females, I mean to
recommend to mothers to cherish, by education, those habits of restraint, and
that native modesty by which only they can preserve propriety of character.
Whatever inconvenience they may suffer from this species of restraint, is amply
compensated by their power of command over the will and affections of men;
which reciprocates the influence, and the submission; and, like the laws of
attraction and repulsion, preserves the equilibrium of the world.

YOUR consequence in the creation I fear not to acknowledge. I assert it with
pleasure; and will ever assert it, by pleading the cause of your sex against
the ignorance, pride, and prejudice of the world.

I am, With sentiments Of esteem and affection, Madam, Your obedient Servant,
E. HITCHCOCK.
Providence, Sept. 4, 1789.
LETTER LIII. From Mrs. --.
THE unmerited honor you have conferred on me, respected sir, calls for my
warmest gratitude. With pleasure I have perused the sheets you so kindly sent
me. You have condescended to request my candid opinion; which must apologize
for my giving it without reserve. Sure I am, they are (...) ^lated to answer
the important end they have in view; and I will not injure my own sex so much,
as once to doubt their favorable reception with the females of this country in
general. Every work, which has in view the improvement of their children, and
especially their daughters, whose education has been, hitherto, too much
neglected, must be received with avidity by them; and I am confident that the
mode of education, exhibited in your portrait of the Bloomsgrove family, will
be joyfully adopted by every prudent, anxious, and affectionate mother.

I THANK you, my dear sir, for the condescension you have shown in explaining
away the humbling necessity of tame submission, which some writers on the
subject have inculcated. I cannot suppose happiness to exist but in equality,
tho the powers of each sex may be, and certainly appear so widely different, as
to (...) a perpetual disti^^^^^^, which gives the (...) ^o you in some
respects, to us in others; for where can a mind repose itself with such certain
confidence and cordial unreserve as in a congenial mind? I pity the proud being
who, looking abroad through the widely differing characters of the female mind,
cannot find one soft, but elevated heart to own as his equal.

I FEEL myself perfectly satisfied with the rank I hold in the scale of
creation; nor does all that the wit or folly of proud and sa^irical men can say
in contempt of us, lessen my ideas of our native importance. That we too often
forfeit this claim to native importance, is, indeed, a melancholy and
humiliating truth. But are not your sex, in a great measure, the cause of our
frailty; by first denying us the advantages of education, which you take care
to appropriate to yourselves; and then flatter and admire us for adventitious
powers, and shadowy accomplishments; nay, even for vanities and follies that,
as our protectors, you ought to blush at discovering in a human mind?

I HOPE, sir, your efforts will procure us a more respectable place in the
opinion of the world. I trust, too, that we shall be the more worthy of filling
that place by the pains you have taken to establish our rights, and turn our
minds to objects worthy of ourselves.

I FEEL the full force of all you say on the important subject of female
education, and am deeply interested in its success.

I am, Reverend sir, Your grateful and obliged friend, --.
Philadelphia, Oct. 1, 1789.
LETTER LIVE.
HITHERTO, my dear sir, have I spoken in general terms of Osander and Rozella;
and, indeed, every thing which has been said on the subject of sensibility and
impressions, on the culture of the head or heart, applies, with little
variation, to both sexes. Whatever difference is requisite in the management of
them will readily occur to the vigilant mother; for their different
propensities soon appear.

THE difference, necessary to be observed in the mode of treatment, increases
with their years; and must now make female education a distinct part of these
memoirs. Leaving Osander, for awhile, in pursuit of his studies at school, and
employing some part of his leisure hours in the mechanic arts, and in
agriculture, under his father's direction; we shall accompany Rozella through her
teens, under the peculiar guidance and instruction of her mother.

ATTEND me, my dear sir, through this enchanting walk, variegated with beautiful
flowers, to yonder summit; where we see reclined on a green sofa, in a
jessamine bower, the amiable, the sensible, the accomplished Rozella.

"Fain would I strew life's thorny way with flowers,
And open to your view elysian bowers;
Catch the warm passions of the tender ^outh,
And win the mind to sentiment and truth."
LETTER LV.
THE dignity of females consists in their acting always agreeably to their own
character; and in preserving their influence in that way which nature points
out; by a mixture of reserve and benevolence, in young women; of affection and
condescension, in the married state; by a diligent attention to the formation
of the character and manners of children of both sexes, in their earliest
years, and the entire education of daughters.

THE importance of the female character consists in the extensive influence
which the sex has on the face of human affairs. This influence is much greater
than is commonly imagined; greater than women themselves have any idea of; for,
besides their extensive sway over gallants and husbands, the minds of our whole
species receive their first formation under the fostering care of female
tenderness. How, then, does female education rise into consequence? How much
praise is due to those mothers, who, filling with dignity their own rank in
society, and discharging the duties of domestic life with fidelity, bless the
world with virtuous sons and amiable daughters?

GREAT as the consequences of female education are to the world, it must be
acknowledged that it has been much neglected, and the objects of it greatly
mistaken. Boarding schools have been considered as the seminaries of female
education. Here they have been taught a graceful deportment, some of the fine
arts, and the less useful parts of needle work. They have learned to dissemble
gracefully, rather than to think or act virtuously. To what purpose is all
this, if they are not taught the science of economy, and the necessary branches
of domestic business? Let their young hearts be inspired with virtuous
principles, and with benevolence which is the basis of true politeness, and
they will soon acquire all the forms which are necessary to good breeding. Let
them be made acquainted with the most useful kind of literature, and they will
not only be better qualified to be mistresses of families, but more suitable
for companions and friends in the connubial state. Females should be directed
to such studies, as have a tendency to enlarge the understanding, without the
labor of close investigation; to entertain the mind, while they direct the
affections of the heart. Economy and domestic employments are necessary
branches of female education; and works of ingenuity and fancy may innocently
and agreeably fill up many of their leisure hours.

IT is not the business of education to alter the course of nature, but to
follow her dictates, and bring to perfection the plants of her own production.
The prudent parent will arrest every native passion, and direct its influence
to the noble objects of education. The passion which females early discover for
ornamental and showy dress may be made an useful engine for teaching industry,
economy, taste, and cleanliness. A little girl will spare no pains, nor think
the time long, which is employed in dressing and undressing her doll; in making
and adorning this idol of her fancy. But, in order to have it properly formed
and attired, she is obliged to have frequent recourse to others for assistance:
this affords the mother, or the elder sisters, where there are several
daughters, an opportunity to communicate useful instruction in a most pleasing
manner. The little artist will listen to every proposal for altering, amending,
and beautifying it: she receives any instruction she can obtain as a favor: she
will work with indefatigable industry to complete the object of her wishes, and
use great economy in saving all the shreds which fall from the scissors. But
she would be more happy, if less dependent: she endeavors, therefore, to become
mistress of the business, that she may enjoy the undivided satisfaction of
making and dressing her image.

WHILE her mamma and Fanny were teaching Rozella the art of making the
requisite articles of dress for her doll, they were communicating knowledge to
her, not as a task but as a favor, which was useful through life. The dress must
be clean, or it will look ugly: this begets a habit of cleanliness, which is of
great consequence in females, both as a pleasing and a healthful quality. The
assemblage of colors and materials in the dress must be proper, or it will not
be ornamental: this excites taste and attention to propriety. Making it with
her own hand gives scope to invention, and renders industry necessary: this
draws forth into exercise, the latent powers of nature, and keeps them
employed. The effects of her own industry are enjoyed with a double relish; and
invention is a source of new pleasures every moment, and keeps alive the
disposition to industry.

LETTER LVI.
THOSE who are not engaged in domestic education, or have no concern in the
instruction and government of families, may think a minute detail of childish
matters frivolous and unnecessary; but the thoughtful, anxious, and
affectionate mother, who is immediately occupied in domestic education, has
very different ideas. She is perpetually surrounded with difficulties; is
anxious for a minute detail of particulars in the process of education. She
wishes not only to know wherein she is wrong, but to have every particular
track pointed out which will lead to the great object in view, the good of her
children. In this, the mother shows less judgment than solicitude. To give
instances and explanations which will apply to every case, would exceed the
bounds of any compositions on the subject of education. As education must be
conducted by improving incidents and occasions, so the considerate mother will
seize general principles, and improve instances and examples, by similitude or
analogy.

THE object Mrs. Bloomsgrove had principally in view, in the education of her
daughter, was to make it proper for her sex; to inspire her with the love of
those occupations which are their peculiar province; to instruct her in that
modest unassuming air, which best becomes her sex; and to make her acquainted
with those things, which will make her the most useful and happy in life. To
these ends she avails herself of opportunities and incidents as they occur.

IT should be considered that in this country, marriages generally take place
earlier than in older countries; and, from the circumstances of the people, the
mistress of the family must be at the head of her domestic affairs. The term
allotted, by this usage, for the education of females, being short, it should
be improved with the more diligence. Not attending sufficiently to the
difference of circumstances between our own country, and that, from which we
have been too long accustomed implicitly to borrow our maxims and manners, many
parents have laid the foundation of great domestic difficulty and wretchedness
by mismanagement in the education of their daughters. Deluded by romantic ideas
of elegance and splendour, borrowed from European writers, customs, and manners,
many have copied them in the education of their children, without making proper
allowances for the difference which subsists in the state of society and
government of the two countries.

DAUGHTERS born to expectations, as it is phrased, have had their minds swelled
with vanity, from an idea of their own consequence on that account; and felt
themselves above the drudgery of learning the necessary parts of domestic
duties. Their education, proceeding on the supposition of a certain
inheritance, has consisted mostly in the arts of dress, music, dancing, paying
and receiving visits, and the graces of an assembly room; while very little
attention has been paid either to the head or heart -- still less to the useful
branches of domestic economy. Others of less estates, but not less vanity, have
followed on in full career. What kind of wives these have made, you may read in
the shattered fortunes of many industrious husbands, who have been caught by
the waving plumage.

WHETHER this would be a proper mode of education, if estates were as sure and
durable as the everlasting mountains, I am not about to inquire -- I think it
will not bear a question. But when we consider that in a free country, under a
republican form of government, industry is the only sure road to wealth; and
economy the only sure means of preserving it, we see the necessity of educating
females in a manner suited to the genius of the government. It is an old adage,
"A man must ask his wife, whether he may be rich." He gets the estate by his
industry: she preserves it by her economy. If she has no economy, he labors in
vain. The want of attention to this branch of female education, has poisoned
the happiness and ruined the circumstances of many families. I know several
females, whose only boast has been that they were never taught to do any labor,
and that they never did any work in their lives. They are now old; and have
nothing to boast of, but extreme poverty, without the power of remedying their
circumstances.

LETTER LVII.
I DO not mean to speak slightly of the polite and graceful accomplishments;
but to show the necessity of uniting to them, the knowledge and habits of
domestic duties. Her own house is the place for a lady to shine in. The showy
accomplishments will appear advantageously abroad; but domestic qualities, like
the robe de chamber are of constant use: without these a lady must make an
awkward figure at home, however graceful she may appear abroad. She may grace
an assembly room, but do no honor to herself at the head of a table. Her
parlour may appear neat and in order, but her kitchen like that of a slattern.
Her own dress may be a proper assemblage of materials to adorn her person; but
the education of her children, a reproach to her domestic character.

AS the portrait painter should never suffer an unfinished piece to go out of
his hands, so a mother should never give her daughter in marriage, till she is
qualified to fulfill the vow, of being "a true and faithful wife." After such an
engagement, in the presence of her mother, who has had the care of her
education, and is supposed to have qualified her for the station to which she
presents her; what must be the mortification of her husband, when he finds her
wanting in almost every part of domestic knowledge? This disappointment is a
fruitful source of domestic animosities, when family cares increase and
multiply. This want of knowledge in the duties of her station becomes the
occasion of many difficulties with servants. The mistress of the house being
unacquainted with their duties, cannot judge of the merits of their service;
expects too much from them, and makes too little allowance for the feelings
attendant on human nature.

IF prospects of interest could have excused any one from attending to these
concerns, Rozella might have pleaded an exemption. But her mamma, who knew the
importance of this kind of knowledge, determined to depart from the too common
custom of educating daughters. "I consider," she said to a friend, who had
observed to her that he could not conceive the necessity there was for her
daughter to labor -- "I consider that among the events which may attend her
future days, poverty is a possible event. Should any unforeseen occurrence
render it inevitable, she will now be prepared for the worst, and provided with
a remedy. If the sun of prosperity should shine upon her, still, at its
meridian splendour, this will be useful to her; she will be a better wife, a
better mistress, and a better woman, in every view, and in every relation."

I HAVE already observed that she accustomed her daughter to be always engaged
in some employment; and as far as possible, made her amusements subservient to
the great objects of education. At the age of twelve, she had become acquainted
with several branches of cookery, understood the composition and proportions of
pastry, and even before that period, she could assist her mamma in doing the
honors of the table. This made her ambitious to rise above childish toys. At
that age, she was entrusted with the inspection of some parts of the house;
with the adjustment of the parlour for the reception of company; of the lodging
rooms, with the assistance of Fanny, who was better able to judge whether every
thing was in proper order to receive their guests. In this respect Fanny was of
no small advantage to her; for to her was committed the care of things which
were of too great magnitude for Rozella, who was to assist Fanny, and to have
the whole charge of them, as soon as she should be able to receive it. This
confidential commitment of affairs, according to the several stages of ability
and merit, gave a constant spring to improvement and fidelity.

TOO much pains cannot be taken on this head, since the most of our time, and
especially that of a female, is to be passed at home; and since the prosperity
and happiness of the whole depend on the ability and disposition of each member
to discharge the duties of her particular station. If the mistress of the
house, who holds the first place in all the economical concerns within it, is
unacquainted with the duties of so important a place, the order of things must
be broken in upon, and peace, in the same proportion, destroyed; and she must
be the greate^t sufferer, because most confined to the scene of confusion.

YOU will not conclude, my dear sir, from any thing which has been said, that
Rozella's time was wholly occupied in domestic concerns, or that these were
imposed as a daily task. Her attention to these was granted as a favor; and it
was made to yield to other improvements. "You can be useful to me, said Mrs.
Bloomsgrove, by attending to these things, and by alleviating the burden of the
servants, who, you should recollect, are of the same species with yourself:
they will love you and think labor more honorable for your taking a part in it,
and will do it with more cheerfulness."

THE time which was spent in domestic occupations, was far from being lost in
the view of a polished education. It rather facilitates than impedes progress
in knowledge and polite literature. It furnishes many opportunities for putting
into practice the useful parts of knowledge, and of practicing many civilities,
which become e^sy and graceful by use only. Another advantage flowing from
those domestic exercises is, it prevents too great a degree of effeminacy, and
inures to a little hardiness, which is requisite for other reasons than the
preservation of the health. The delicate and effeminate manner, in which many
females are fostered when young, destroys their health, deprives them of the
power of enjoying life, and entails on posterity enervated constitutions.

HENCE most writers on education bring up to view, the Spartan and Roman young
ladies mixing with the young men in military games, wrestling, and other
violent exercises. This practice was said to have been introduced with a view
of rendering the female constitution healthy and robust, that their states
might never be wanting in well nerved sons for defense at home, or for carrying
on their military operations abroad. But these exercises seem to me too
athletic, to have the force of example upon our ladies, who do not wish their
sons to be soldiers, nor their daughters wrestlers. All that is necessary for
health, is plain food, with frequent exercise. English females far exceed those
in this country in the exercise of walking. I am told that it is no uncommon
thing for them to walk several miles, of choice, when they might have passed it
in a coach.

ELOISA has the following observations, charmingly made, in a letter to her
friend.

"PERSUADED as I am of the influence which our sex might have over yours, and
which, in many cases, they actually possess, I have always been astonished at
the impolicy of keeping them in so much ignorance, as they generally are. Did
your sex but once recollect that the statesman, the warrior, and the
philosopher, who swell the boasted appellation of man, into importance, unfold
the first traces of genius, as well as of virtue, under the fostering
tenderness of maternal care, they would certainly be solicitous to have them
intelligent and wise, as well as tender.

"THO I feel not the advantage of a well formed understanding, yet my heart
ought to be good, for it was formed beneath the cherishing hand of the best of
mothers. I was not trained and disciplined to virtue by cold and lifeless
precepts. I was soothed, I was persuaded by the most amiable of examples. I was
never taught ^ virtue, which I did not see eminently practiced. My faults never
escaped the scrutiny of maternal solicitude; but I was only pained at being
reprehended by the bitter consciousness of meriting correction.

"IF I did a good action, I was not flattered and made vain by applause, but
rewarded with the smiles of assurance, that I had done my duty, and was
approved. Her sweet and gentle affability of manners, as far removed from the
levity of childhood as the frowns of austerity, engaged my entire confidence.
Some of the happiest, the most silvered moments of my life, I have passed with
this ^eloved mother. Had she kept me at an awful distance, and never
condescended to appear interested in my childish pursuits, I had never dared to
confide those pursuits to her; and that fear would have taught me to dissemble,
before I knew the meaning of the word.

"IT is very natural for children, and I believe the propensity grows up with
us, to love those best who appear most interested in our happiness. As I never
found any person at once so tender and so watchful of me, who guarded me from
danger, and met my infantile advances with such cordial delight, it was
impossible but I should love, respect, and confide in her more than in any
other created being. My duty, my reason, my self love, all combine with my
inclination in forming the gordian knot that binds her closely to my heart. But
for the most unceasing care of her ever wakeful tenderness, I had now been
mouldering in the grave. What obligations has her goodness laid me under! and
what inducements could be laid before a child to pursue a line of conduct
agreeable to a parent, so strong and effectual as these?

"N. B. I COULD only give you my sentiments on female education, which you
request, by repeating to you the ideas which you have already seen better
expressed by Madame de Genlis, Mrs. Ch^pone, and other writers on the subject,
or by giving you a sketch from my own experience. I have ventured on the
latter, and hope it will not be unacceptable from

Your grateful and obliged, etc."

LETTER LVIII.
MUCH has been said by Rousseau and others on the subject of the submission of
women. If by the term, they mean to express any inferiority of species, or a
surrender of any natural rights, there cannot be any ground in nature, or any
reason in society, for the odious idea. If they mean that women should submit
to the caprice of man's will, because of his superior strength, then they are
prisoners at discretion; which is an idea equally detestable. But if nothing
more is intended by it, than that delicate modesty which is a dictate of female
nature, and the effect of conscious weakness, which leads them to look to men
as their protectors; it will be the delight of every sensible woman to exercise
her daughter in the habits of it. No woman of understanding, or of goodness,
would attempt to subvert the order of nature, and train her daughter to
masculine sentiments and manners. There is no decent woman but would be
mortified at having it said she ruled her husband, especially if it was true.
To have it said, that she has a complaisant husband, is the pride of every
woman; as it is of every husband to have it said of his wife, that she has all
that sensibility of heart, that delicacy of sentiment, and pliability of
manners which belong to her sex.

IN order that the voice of nature may be obeyed; that the modesty and delicacy
which is the glory of the sex, and the palladium of virtue, may be preserved,
it is necessary that females be habituated to restraint. This will be an
unavoidable attendant of female life; and without it they cannot preserve
consistency of character.

I FIND it difficult to express myself with clearness and precision on this
part of the subject. I beg leave to advance under the standard of Lord Kaimes
and Rousseau. "Women, says the first, destined by nature to be obedient," (to
be under restraint, I think, would have expressed the idea better) "ought to be
disciplined early to bear wrongs without murmuring. This is a hard lesson; and
yet it is necessary even for their own sakes." "The perverseness and ill nature
of the women only serve to aggravate their own misfortunes, and the misconduct
of their husbands; they might plainly perceive that such are not the arms by
which they gain the superiority."

"SULLENNESS or peevishness, say both, may alienate the husband, but tend not
to sooth his roughness, nor to moderate his impetuosity. Heaven did not bestow
on them the powers of insinuation, to make them perverse and morose; it did not
constitute them feeble, to make them imperious; it did not give them so soft
and agreeable a voice, to vent abuse; nor features so delicate and lovely, to
be disfigured with anger."

BUT after all, says the NOBLE writer, "has nature dealt so partially with her
children, as to bestow on one sex absolute authority, leaving nothing to the
other absolute submission? This indeed has the appearance of great partiality.
But has a woman no influence over her husband? I answer, providence has
provided her with means to rule over his will. He governs by law, she by
persuasion; nor can her influence ever fail, if supported by sweetness of
temper and zeal to make him happy."

ROUSSEAU charmingly says -- "Hers is a sovereignty founded on complacence and
address: caresses are her orders; tears, her menaces. She governs in a family
as a minister does in the state, procuring commands to be laid upon her, for
doing what she inclines to do." And adds -- "When they give way to rage,
therefore, they forget themselves, for tho they may often have reason to
complain, they are always in the wrong to SCOLD. "RENDS with tremendous sounds
your ears asunder,
Like gun, drum, trumpet, blunderbuss, and thunder."

Each sex should preserve its peculiar tone and manner; a meek husband may make
a wife impertinent; but mildness of disposition on the woman's side will always
bring a man back to reason, if he be not absolutely a brute, and will sooner or
later triumph over him."

THE influence of females over the manners of the world is sufficiently great
and extensive. It is only to be wished that their education might be such, as
to direct that power to the best purposes. "That little boy you see there, said
Themistocles, is the arbiter of all Greece: for he governs his mother; his
mother rules me; I, the Athenians; and the Athenians, all the other Greeks."

SUBMISSION in females does not therefore imply the least servility of
obedience to capricious men, but only an acquiescence in the constitution of
nature, which, having formed them of finer materials, renders them more feeble
in habit, more susceptible in heart, and more complacent in manners. With these
arms nature has furnished them for defense at every point. When they employ
these, they follow nature, and success attends them. But when they commence
hostilities, and commit the decision to the event of the field, they must
surrender prisoners at discretion.

TO cherish this softness, pliability, and power of self restraint, is one
great object of female education. It is under her mother's tuition, and from
her example, that a young lady acquires the knowledge of what properly
constitutes the female character, and the habits of restraint. Rozella is all
submission to her mamma, without the use of any severity. She is modest but not
bashful; is sprightly and tractable, but not unhappy under restraint. In her
mamma she sees a constant example of those domestic qualities, which are
requisite to conjugal and domestic enjoyment; that her inferiority in point of
strength is amply compensated in the commanding gentleness of her manners; that
her empire is attendant on her virtues. She reigns triumphant in the mildness
of her disposition, and her modesty renders her sway absolute. It is in this
way that nature has provided a balance of power between the sexes.

LETTER LIX.
THE evening was overcast; and the soft murmur of expiring day had induced
Fanny to the window, that she might enjoy the cheerful note of a musical trush,
sweetly warbling in a neighboring grove. A pleasing melancholy soothed and
harmonized all her feelings, and raised her grateful heart to him whose praise
it sung. While meek eyed contemplation soft effused its balmy influence over
her gentle spirit, a stranger called with a large packet, which he said he was
to deliver there, and went directly away. Fanny, who supposed it to contain
some papers from Mr. Bloomsgrove, who was then at the general assembly, sat
down to enjoy the reverie which had been interrupted by the incident. Mrs.
Bloomsgrove, who had been occupied in some domestic concerns, hearing somebody
at the door, ordered a candle into the room where Fanny was sitting -- Judge,
my dear sir, what must have been her surprise, when she saw the budget was
directed to her! She read the letter with avidity. It was from her twin sister
Constantia; of whom, as I have had no occasion to speak till this time, I shall
only say: She is sensible without ostentation; tall without elegance; agreeable
without beauty; amiable without a display of virtues, and admired without a
fortune.

HAVING read the letter, which contained many family matters with which we have
no concern at this time; she perceived that the books, contained in the budget,
were a present from her brother Edward, who was then in England. The books she
unfolded, and opening one of them, she saw at the head of a section, the
complaint of a female concerning the insensibility of men to the charms of a
female mind cultivated with polite and solid learning. The piece drew her
attention; and she sat down and read it. Just as she had done it, Mrs.
Bloomsgrove and Rozella came into the room. Fanny read to them the letter,
which was very affectionate, and closed with many respectful compliments for
the family. After some conversation suggested by the letter, Fanny related what
she had been reading, which was in substance as follows.

A YOUNG lady, who was the daughter of a gentleman of literature, having lost,
her mother when she was very young, was educated by her father. As he lived in
a solitary village and had leisure, he devoted much of his time to her; and,
being fond of classical learning himself, he introduced her into an
acquaintance with several languages. The attention she had paid to these (I
suppose) made her neglect some more agreeable and useful improvements; for she
complained that she did not meet a very favorable reception in company. As she
was very learned and wrote poetry well, she thought it beneath her to attend to
dress and the etiquette of the polite world. Tho she was versed in the
sciences, and had been taught music and even dancing, yet she was unversed in
domestic science. "She can make verses, said the gentlemen wittily; but give me
the woman who can make a pudding." She complained that after all her
improvements, and her endeavors to prevent them from becoming invidious, she
was avoided by her own sex, and treated with the cold formality of constrained
civilities by the gentlemen.

WHEN Fanny had finished, the conversation turned upon the pedantry of some of
the female literati, in which many smart things were said by the young ladies,
as well as by Mrs. Bloomsgrove, who gracefully descended to their pleasantries
on this occasion. After a little diversion at the expense of a certain
description of LEARNED ladies, she resumed her usual serenity and dignity in
conversing with her family; and availed herself of the occasion to make many
judicious remarks on female propriety, and on the true excellence of the female
character. To her own observations she added many anecdotes useful and
entertaining, some of which I will offer for your perusal in my next.

LETTER LX.
YOU will not expect that I shall give a particular detail of the evening's
conversation; nor that I relate exactly and in order, all the particulars of
Mrs. Bloomsgrove's judicious and instructive observations. I shall relate them
as they occur.

THE path of life, on which you, my dear girls, are entering, is narrow,
winding, and intricate: you can see but little way in the devious course, and
therefore must be watchful at every step you take. Life, in its best condition,
is a mixed state: thorns growing with flowers attend our whole progress. But
life is very much that to us which we make it to be. The condition of young
females is peculiarly critical, and requires to be guarded by c^nstant
circumspection; but there are pleasures peculiar to the female life, which, by
maintaining their proper character, will afford a full balance against all its
difficulties.

THE dignity of that character consists in an equal mixture of reserve with
benevolence; of modesty with civility; of a sense of the refinement of female
virtue, with a degree of prudence void of affectation. Consider how tender a
thing a woman's reputation is; how hard to preserve; and, when lost, how much
harder to recover; how frail many of the gifts you have received, and how
dangerous most of them; what miseries have been occasioned by an abuse of them,
and how great the accessions of enjoyment in life by a proper use of them.

VANITY, a foible too incident to our sex, is, if possible, more absurd than in
the other sex. Men have bodily strength, learning, power, and the like, to
pride themselves upon. Beauty is the only peculiar boast of a female; for
virtue and good sense are never the subjects of vanity. Against this folly it
will be necessary to guard, or it will grow with years, and become as obvious
as it is disgusting. Wha^ever misfortune the want of beauty may be to a young
lady, it is a greater misfortune to be vain of it.

I WILL give you an instance, my dear children, which will illustrate my idea.
"A youth from the country went to a neighboring fair, where were to be
exhibited a number of foreign animals, as well tame and useful, as beasts of
prey. An animal of uncommon size, but great ugliness, first presented itself to
his astonished view. After surveying the monster, with great surprise and some
degree of fear, his attention was called to an animal of a beautiful and
elegant form. When he had, for some time, contemplated the smoothness of its
hair, the symmetry of its limbs, and especially the apparent sweetness of its
countenance, he inquired of the keeper, the name of that beautiful animal; and
whether he did no^ place it hy the side of that ugly creature, in order that it
might shine the more by the contrast. The intelligent keeper admonished the
young man to be cautious not to be too easily captivated with external
appearance. The animal which you so much admire is called a tiger, and
notwithstanding his placid appearance, he is fierce and savage beyond
description, and is an untameable beast of prey. But the one you despise, which
is a camel, is a docile, affectionate animal, and highly useful to man."

YOU cannot but perceive, continued Mrs. Bloomsgrove, that mere external beauty
is of little worth, and that deformity, when associated with amiable
dispositions and useful qualities, does not preclude our respect and
approbation. I would not be understood to despise, or even undervalue beauty.
Where it is the gift of nature, we ought to value and cherish it, as we should
all her other gifts. But if the possessor spends her mornings at the toilet,
and under the hands of the friseur; and her evenings in company, to display the
additional beauty she derives from adventitious ornaments, her mind must be
neglected, while her heart is corrupted by flattery and poisoned by vanity.
They who live only to display a pretty face and a fine dress, can scarcely be
ranked above an insensible statue, or a painted image. A head without
understanding will always appear contemptible, whether it be covered with a cap
or a wig.

A FEMALE, who plumes herself on her beauty, is in great danger of having her
temper soured by the apprehension of flights and neglects with which she meets.
One instance of this will cancel a thousand flatteries of professed admirers.
The repetition of them irritates the spirits; and the mind, being awake to the
least appearance of inattention, is so often in a ferment, that sourness of
temper is the consequence. Sickliness, fears, false delicacies, pride,
affectation, and weakness of nerves, are incidents not uncommon to females of
this stamp. Finding themselves admired without saying or doing any thing worthy
of notice, they save themselves the trouble of acquiring any valuable
accomplishments. A taste for reading and a habit of thinking would be too much
trouble for them. But beauty is a rose that soon withers. With the loss of
that, they lose the power of pleasing others; and, what is still worse, possess
not the power of pleasing themselves.

I HAVE, indeed, known very beautiful women, who have been educated with
uncommon care, both sensible and amiable. Their beauty was doubly valuable,
when combined with a cultivated understanding, and the moral qualities of the
heart. There are now to be found many instances, which show to the world, that
females may possess beauty without vanity, and learning without pedantry.

LETTER LXI.
THE next evening being very pleasant, they were induced by the serenity of the
sky and the mildness of the season to walk in the shrubbery. As they were
repeating some things which had passed the evening before, Mrs. Bloomsgrove
observed, that all she had then said was verified in the character of
Catharina, Empress of Russia. In her were united virtue, with beauty; piety,
with poverty; humility and great benevolence, with great prosperity. Fanny
joined with Rozella in earnestly requesting her to repeat her story; to which
she readily consented. They repaired to the bowery; and being seated where the
moon shone pleasantly upon them, she related the following part of her history.

"CATHARINA was born in a small city in Livonia, and heir to no other
inheritance than the virtues and frugality of her parents. Her father being
dead, she lived with her aged mother, in their cottage covered with straw; and
both tho very poor, were very contented. Here, retired from the gaze of the
world, by the labor of her hands she supported her parent, who was now
incapable of supporting herself. While Catharina spun, the mother would sit by,
and read some book of devotion: thus, when the fatigues of the day were over,
both would sit down by their fire side, and enjoy the frugal meal with vacant
festivity.

"THO her face and person were models of perfection, yet her whole attention
seemed bestowed on her mind: her mother taught her to read, and an old Lutheran
clergyman instructed her in the maxims and duties of religion. Nature had
furnished her not only with a ready, but a solid turn of thought; not only with
a strong, but a right understanding. Such truly female accomplishments procured
her several solicitations of marriage from the peasants of the country; but
their offers were refused, for she loved her mother too tenderly to think of a
separation.

"CATHARINA was fifteen, when her mother died: she now, therefore, left her
cottage, and went to live with the Lutheran minister, by whom she had been
instructed from her childhood. In his house she resided in quality of governess
to his children, at once reconciling in her character, unerring prudence with
surprising vivacity.

"THE old man, who regarded her as one of his own children, had her instructed
in dancing and music, by the master who attended the rest of the family. Thus
she continued to improve until he died, by which accident she was once more
reduced to pristine poverty. The country of Livonia was at this time wasted by
war, and lay in a state of desolation. Those calamities are ever most heavy
upon the poor; whereof Catharina, tho possessed of so many accomplishments,
experienced all the miseries of hopeless indigence. Provisions becoming every
day more scarce, and her private stock being entirely exhausted, she resolved
at last to travel to Marienburgh, a city of great plenty.

"WITH her scanty wardrobe, packed up in a wallet, she set out on her journey
on foot. She was to walk through a region miserable by nature, but rendered still
more hideous by the Swedes and Russians, who alternately plundered it at
discretion: but h^nger had taught her to despise the dangers of the way.

"ONE evening, upon her journey, as she had entered a cottage by the way side,
to take up her lodging for the night, she was insulted by two Swedish soldiers.
They might, probably, have carried their insults into violence, had not a
subaltern officer accidentally passing, come to her assistance. Upon his
approach the soldiers immediately desisted; but her thankfulness was not
greater than her surprise, when she instantly recollected in her deliverer, the
son of the Lutheran minister, her former instructor, benefactor, and friend.

"THIS was an happy interview for Catharina: the little stock of money she had
brought from home, was by this time quite exhausted; her clothes were gone
piece by piece, in order to satisfy those who entertained her in their houses.
Her generous countryman parted with what he could spare, to buy her clothes;
furnished her with an horse, and gave her letters of recommendation to a
faithful friend of his father, who was then superintendant of Ma^^^^burgh.

"OUR beautiful stranger had only to appear, to b^ well received: she was
immediately admitted into the superintendant's family, as governess to his two
daughters; and tho yet but seventeen, showed herself capable of instructing her
sex, not only in virtue, but politeness. Such was her good sense and beauty,
that her master himself, in a short time, offered her his hand, which, to his
great surprise, she thought proper to refuse. Actuated by a principle of
gratitude, she was resolved to marry her deliverer only, even tho he had lost
an arm, and was otherwise disfigured in the service.

"IN order, therefore, to prevent further solicitations from others, as soon as
the officer came to town upon duty, she offered him her person, which he
accepted with transport, and their nuptials were solemnized according to
custom. But all the lines of her fortune were to be striking. The very day on
which they were married, the Russians laid siege to Marienburgh: the unhappy
soldier had no time to enjoy the well earned pleasures of the connubial state:
he was immediately called off to an attack, from which he was never after seen
to return.

"IN the mean time the siege went on with fury, aggravated on one side by
obstinacy, on the other by revenge. This war between the two northern powers at
that time was truly barbarous. The innocent peasant, and the harmless virgin
often shared the fate of the soldier in arms. Marienburgh was taken by assault;
and such was the fury of the assailants, that not only the garrison, but almost
all the inhabitants, men, women, and children, were put to the sword. At
length, when the carnage was pretty well over, Catharina was found hid in an
oven.

"SHE had hitherto been poor, but free; she was now to conform to her hard
fate, and learn what it was to be a slave: in this situation, however, she
behaved with piety and humility; and tho misfortunes had abated her vivacity,
yet she was cheerful. The fame of her merit and resignation reached even the
Prince Menzikoff, the Russian general: he desired to see her -- was struck with
her beauty -- bought her of the soldier, her master, and placed her under the
direction of his own sister. Here she was treated with the respect which her
merit deserved, while her beauty every day improved with her good fortune.

"SHE had not been long in this situation, when Peter the Great paying the
Prince a visit, Catharina happened to come in with some dry fruits, which she
served round with peculiar modesty. The mighty monarch saw, and was struck with
her beauty. He returned the next day -- called for the beautiful slave -- asked
her several questions, and found her understanding even more perfect than her
person.

"HE had been forced, when young, to marry from motives of interest; he was now
resolved to marry pursuant to his own inclinations. He immediately inquired the
history of this fair Livonian, who was not yet eighteen. He traced her through the
vale of obscurity, through all the vicissitudes of fortune, and found her truly
great in them all. The meanness of her birth was no obstruction to his design.
Their nuptials were solemnized; the prince assuring his courtiers, that virtue
alone was the surest path to greatness.

"WE now see Catharina, from the low mud walled cottage, Empress of the
greatest kingdom upon earth. The poor solitary wanderer is now surrounded by
thousands, who find happiness in her smiles. She, who formerly wanted a meal,
is now capable of diffusing plenty upon the whole nation. To her fortune she
owed a part of this preeminence, but to her virtue more.

"SHE ever retained those great qualities which first placed her on a throne;
and while the extraordinary prince, her husband, labored for the reformation of
his male subjects, she studied in her turn the improvement of her own sex. She
altered their dresses -- introduced mixed assemblies -- instituted an order of
female knighthood -- and, at length, when she had greatly filled all the
stations of empress, friend, wife, and mother, bravely died without regret,
regretted by all."

SHE ceased -- the young ladies sat in silent astonishment at the variety and
greatness of incidents which attended this lovely woman. The full tide of
nature had prevented their utterance, and they waited for Mrs. Bloomsgrove to
break the silence, which she did after a little pause. She observed to them
that new beauties arose in every circumstance which attended the various
fortunes of this extraordinary person. Her dutifulness to an aged mother; her
attachment to the clergyman who patronized her; gratitude to her deliverer;
fidelity to her master; her resignation and cheerfulness in the depth of
adversity; her modesty, humility, and charity in the height of prosperity, all
derived luster from the peculiarity of circumstances which brought them into
view, and formed the materials of an excellent character.

IMITATE, my dear children, her piety in every part of life; her cheerful
acquiescence in the disposals of providence; the humility, modesty, and
beneficence, which were assembled in her character; and although I cannot promise
you the title of Empresses, yet I can ensure you happiness in this life, and in
the other, a CROWN that shall never fade, whose princely wreaths shall flourish
in immortal green. -- She was interrupted by an incident; with which, as it was
of no other consequence than to prevent further conversation for the evening, I
shall not trouble you.

LETTER LXII.
THE drawing room was hung around with evergreen, interspersed with globe
amaranthus and a variety of other flowers, which, tho a little faded at this
season, afforded a contrast to every thing gloomy and cheerless. In this
spacious and delightsome room they assembled the evening following, for the
purpose of reading and conversation. As industry marked the character of the
family, so they were all employed in some productive labor, except the one who
was reading. This was certainly a rational, as well as an economical way of
spending their evenings; as it gave Mrs. Bloomsgrove an opportunity to advance
many useful and instructive observations, which generally slowed from what they
read. This evening she enriched her conversation with a variety of sprightly
observations and agreeable anecdotes. The conversation happening to turn upon a
certain class of females, whose conduct lessens the dignity and degrades the
character of the sex; it reminds me, said Mrs. Bloomsgrove, of an humorous
transaction of Dr. Swift, when on a visit to Dr. Sheridan at his country seat.
"He went one Sunday to church, at the distance of more than two hours ride. The
clergyman of the parish invited him to dinner, but Swift excused himself by
saying it was too far to ride home afterward; no, I shall dine with my
neighbor Reilly, at Virginy, which is half way home. Reilly, who was there
called a gentleman farmer, was proud of the honor, and immediately sent a
messenger to his wife to prepare for the reception of so extraordinary a guest.
She dressed herself in her best apparel; the son put on his new suit, and his
silver laced hat adorned his head. When the lady was introduced to the Dean, he
saluted her with the same air, as if she had been a duchess, making several
congees down to the ground, and then handed her with great formality to her
seat.

"AFTER some polite compliments, he addressed his host -- 'Mr. Reilly, I
suppose you have a considerable estate here; let us go and look over your
demesne.' Estate, says Reilly, not a foot of land is there belonging to me, or
any of my generation. I have a pretty good lease here, indeed, from Lord
Fingal, but he threatens me that he will not renew it, and I have but a few
years of it to come.

"WELL -- but when am I to see Mrs. Reilly? 'Why, don't you see her now before
you?' That Mrs. Reilly! impossible! I have heard she was a prudent woman, and
as such would never dress herself in silks, and other ornaments, fit only for
ladies of fashion. No -- Mrs. Reilly, the farmer's wife, would never wear any
thing better than plain stuff, with other things suitable to it. Mrs. Reilly
happened to be a woman of good sense, and taking the hint, immediately
withdrew, changed her dress as speedily as possible, and in a short time
returned to the parlour in her common apparel. Swift saluted her in the most
friendly manner, taking her by the hand, and saying, 'I am heartily glad to see
you, Mrs. Reilly. This husband of yours would fain have palmed a fine lady upon
me, all dressed in her silks, and in the pink of the mode, for his wife, but I
was not to be taken in so.'

"HE then laid hold of the young master's fine hat, with his penknife ripped
off the lace, and folding it up in several papers, thrust it into the fire.
When it was sufficiently burnt, he wrapped it up in fresh paper, and put it in
his pocket. It may be supposed that the family was put into no small confusion
at this strange proceeding; but they did not dare show that they took any
umbrage at it, as the presence of Dr. Swift struck every one with uncommon awe,
who was not well acquainted with him.

"HOWEVER, as he soon resumed his good humor, entertaining them with many
pleasantries to their taste (for no man knew better how to adapt his
conversation to all classes of people) they soon recovered their spirits, and
the day was passed very cheerfully. When he was taking his leave, he said, I do
not intend to rob you, Mr. Reilly; I shall take nothing away with me belonging
to you; there is your son's hat lace. I have only changed the form of it to a
much better one. So God bless you, and thanks for your good entertainment.

"WHEN he was gone, Mrs. Reilly opening the paper, found there were four
guineas enclosed in it, together with the burnt lace. While he stayed in the
country, he kept an eye upon them, and found his lessons had not been thrown
away, as they were cured of their vanities and affectation of grandeur, and
lived in a manner more consonant to their situation in life. In consequence of
which, one of the first things he did on his return to Dublin, was to pay a
visit to Lord Fingal, and engage him to renew Reilly's lease; without which the
poor man would, in a few years, have had nothing for his own or his family's
support."

YOU see, my dear children, the sentiments which gentlemen of abilities and
distinction entertain of affectation. All attempts to please by an appearance,
or by manners which do not properly belong to us, are not only lost, but become
the occasion of raillery and contempt. Whoever seeks admiration and applause by
means of affectation, acts as wise a part as the female, who, seeking after
beauty, destroys her real complexion and her health by artificial paints. I
have seen ladies, in public places, of the most exquisite forms, render
themselves perfectly ridiculous by a conceited and affected air, a simpering
smile, or a general air of disdain. Those ladies, who might, by a modest and
truly female behavior, have commanded universal admiration, became the disgust
of the company, and the subject of ridicule in every circle afterward.

AFFECTATION in men is bad enough, but in women, whose conduct should always be
easy and proper, it is much worse. Indeed, added Mrs. Bloomsgrove, it is
generally owing to the other sex that affectation appears in ours; for no woman
can become completely foolish, or vicious, without their assistance; and then
they despise her for it.

AFFECTATION is that in manners which hypocrisy is in religion -- an attempt to
impose on others by an appearance of qualities which we do not possess. We
cannot pay ourselves a worse compliment than by affectation: it is a tacit
acknowledgement that we ought to be what we are not. Like a mask, it may
conceal our face; but is still known to be a false face. However common
affectation may be, there is no failing more generally detested, because it is
used to hide all the other failings, and to display perfections to which we
have no claim.

THIS is a folly incident to youth, but not confined to that age. It is
generally worn off by age, and by an acquaintance with the world. It is always
disgustful, not only because unnatural, but because it indicates a trifling
vanity of mind. It usually arises from a fondness to imitate some one who is
admired for superior accomplishments. But it is blind and undiscerning, and
adopts the infirmities and defects of the person admired, as readily as the
beauties and the graces.

ADELINA is a young lady who has declined several advantageous offers of
marriage, because she had too much virtue to give her hand where she could not
bestow her heart. She moves in the first circle of females, without the help of
a fortune; is handsome, without being beautiful; has an elegant form, and an
engaging aspect; her natural good sense and lively genius are much improved by
a polite education, with an extensive knowledge of books and of the world. She
is agreeable in all companies, without descending to the follies of any. In
conversation she is always entertaining. She is companionable, but never
loquacious, or assuming. She can be humorous, without departing from innocence,
or the delicacy of her sex; witty, without ridiculing religion, or aspersing
characters. She never mortifies any one in her company, by a seeming
indifference to what they say, nor offends any by direct contradiction; she
rather insinuates, than imposes her sentiments upon those with whom she
converses. Her language is pure and accurate, but not labored; her temper is
calm, with great sensibility; her deportment is respectful without courtliness,
and dignified without haughtiness.

ASPASIA is a young lady of more fortune, but less genius; of more vanity, with
less reason for it. She has had offers of marriage, but lost her lovers by
coquetish airs. She is but little acquainted with books, and less with the
world. She is thought, by some, to be a beauty, but few think her pleasing; she
is tall and straight, but not of a comely form; she is not without animation,
but is not engaging; and yet she affects to be all this and more. Without a
fund for conversation, she says much, but little to the purpose. She uses bad
grammar, and a worse style; engrosses the conversation in company, and will
venture upon any subject, because she thinks to imitate, and even excel,
Adelina. Aspasia affects wit -- politeness may induce some of the gentlemen to
force a smile, but no one laughs at it: this she ascribes to any other cause
rather than the want of smartness in her witticisms. Aspasia might pass for an
agreeable companion, if she would act herself, and not affect to be something
more than she really is. She would never appear to be destitute of wit or good
sense, if she had enough of either to prevent forced attempts to display them.

"MAMMA, said Rozella, why do not some of her friends tell her how such
affectation appears to others, and break her of it?" It is not easy, my dear,
replied Mrs. Bloomsgrove, to break off bad habits; and besides, she might only
attribute it to envy, if any one was to mention it to her; for nothing is more
difficult than to make people see their own errors, especially if they have
much vanity. Do you, my dear, avoid affectation as you would a siren. Nothing
conduces more to render a person agreeable, than easy and graceful manners.
That our manners, may be graceful, they must be natural; for actions which are
forced, are stiff and awkward, and therefore disgustful. Shun affectation
therefore in all its odious forms; assume no borrowed airs; and be content to
please, to shine, or to be useful, in the way which nature points out, and
which reason approves. -- Just as Mrs. Bloomsgrove had finished these
observations on affectation, which I think you will allow were judicious, the
nephew returned from a neighboring county, whither he had been to transact some
business of his own. As the most perfect harmony subsisted between all the
members of this family, they suspended all further conversation on the subject
of female conduct, to welcome him home after a few weeks absence. But the young
ladies wished for the next evening to arrive, that they might have the pleasure
of hearing more on that subject.

LETTER LXIII.
THE next day, being on a visit at Mr. -- 's where a large number of ladies
were collected, they were entertained by the conversation of Miss --, a lady
who had been some years out of her teens, but had not lost the power of speech.
This lady had been a great reader; but her reading had not furnished her with
the most useful knowledge, nor the soundest judgment. Her conversation
consisted of such materials, as are to be found in books written merely to
amuse the mind, without instructing it; to vacate the passing hour, without
leaving one useful impression. Shady groves and purling streams, fashions,
etiquette, and romantic scenes of love and high life, filled up the mighty
void, and wasted the afternoon.

AS this lady was a stranger, lately arrived from the capital on a visit, the
inconvenience of her perpetual motion was endured with that fortitude and
calmness which true politeness inspired. But the close of the day was far from
being; the least agreeable part of it. To a woman of Mrs. Bloomsgrove's clear
understanding and solid judgment, nothing could have appeared more insipid: she
was glad, therefore, to retire at as early an hour, as she could with
propriety. The young ladies, who had been mute most of the time during the
visit, recovered the power of speech, as soon as they returned. Tho Mrs.
Bloomsgrove never allowed them in the use of any scandal; nor did she commonly
permit them to make any remarks to the disadvantage of any one of the company
they had left, yet on this occasion she indulged them in a few liberties of
speech on "the elegance of the conversation" with which they had been
entertained.

FINDING themselves once more assembled in their own circle, Mrs. Bloomsgrove
renewed the conversation which had been interrupted the evening before, in the
following manner -- I was going on to observe, when your cousin arrived last
evening, and agreeably prevented my proceeding, that another thing which has a
tendency to lessen the excellence of the female character, and render the minds
of young ladies empty and vain, is the books they read, and the manner in which
they spend their time. Nothing can have a worse effect on the mind of our sex,
than the free use of those writings which are the offspring of modern
novelists. Their only tendency is to excite romantic notions, while they keep
the mind void of ideas, and the heart destitute of sentiment. They create a
false taste, without balancing the account by the weight of information and
judgment.

I DO not mean, my dear girls, to intimate that all books bearing the
denomination of novels or plays, are of the above description: there are many
works of imagination, and of entertainment, which are the most agreeable
vehicles of pure and excellent instruction. But the common herd of both those
kinds of writing serve to corrupt the heart, while they prevent improvements in
useful knowledge; and yet what a proportion of that agreeable part of life,
from twelve to twenty years old, do many girls devote to this kind of
amusement! It is amusement, only as it serves to waste the time insensibly.

THE female mind being left thus vacant, or filled with trifling and romantic
ideas, it is not at all strange that the conversation partakes of the same. The
other sex laugh at the weakness of ours on this account. "In order to please
the ladies, they say, they are obliged to trifle:" and this reflection appears
but too well founded, when we observe how much better reception the empty
skull, cringing fop, who can talk an hour without saying any thing to purpose,
meets among females of this stamp, than the gentleman whose head is enriched
with useful knowledge, and whose heart is formed by virtuous principles. This
is as great a reflection as can be cast upon our sex, and degrades the female
character in the mind of all persons whose esteem is worth enjoying.

IT is not my wish that you, my dear children, should ever acquire the epithet
Of LEARNED LADIES; but that you should enrich and adorn your minds with such
knowledge, as will both raise you above the danger of being corrupted by the
false taste, or the artful insinuation of any books you may read; and render
you less dependent on external amusements and empty gratifications. If young
girls indulge freely in reading books of mere amusement, these will unavoidably
give their minds a cast, which can never be suitable to the useful part of a
female character, which is wholly domestic. Let your understandings be enriched
with seize, which will enable you to shine in conversation, without
affecting or even appearing to know it; to unite decorum and good sense with
mirth and joy, and to inspire complacence, while you command attention and
respect. How would it raise the female character in the view of the world, if
young ladies would generally spend their leisure hours in reading books of this
tendency?

BOOKS written with a view to convey instruction through the channel of the
imagination, are not only harmless and agreeable, but useful and improving to
the young mind. To these I would turn your attention, as being proper to
accompany the more solid parts of learning. The world abounds with works of
this kind, where the enlightened authors display genius, and a thoro knowledge
of the world. With fine sensibilities, and an extensive view of men and
manners, they address the heart with simplicity and chasteness, in a variety of
images, where the likeness is caught warm from the life, sentiment is united
with character, and the beautiful portrait presented to their mind. "WORKS of
this kind are peculiarly calculated to allure the lively and the gay, who are
not yet delivered over to licentiousness. Hardly indeed will girls, who mean no
ill, but whose fancies are alive and restless, submit to have their
understandings attired at wisdom's glass; if lovely forms and smiling images be
not often reflected thence, to detain the eye and captivate the heart."

IT has often been urged that a catalogue of books, suitable for females,
should be published; but it would be impossible to give a list of books which
would reach the object, on account of the great diversity in the degrees of
intellectual accomplishment, at which they aim; (there being no professional
standard) in the capacities, opportunities, and encouragements they severally
enjoy. A description of the writings may be much more useful than an
enumeration of authors.




AMONG all the writings, which unite sentiment with character, and present
images of life, Richardson's, perhaps, may be placed at the head of the list;
of whom it has been justly said -- "He taught the passions to move at the
command of reason." His Clarissa has been considered, by good judges, as the
most finished model of female excellence which has ever been offered for their
imitation; and yet even this great master in the science of human nature, has
laid open scenes, which it would have been safer to have kept concealed; and
has excited sentiments, which it would have been more advantageous to early
virtue not to have admitted. He has pointed out dangers and temptations which
seldom occur; and although I doubt not that his novels were written with the
purest intentions of promoting virtue, yet it is much to be feared whether the
moral view is not lost by the youthful reader in those love scenes, which
interest the passions more than the understanding. The beautiful productions of
his incomparable pen, are, therefore, to be read with caution, and under the
direction of a guide.

THE same danger attends the works of Fielding. They will always be read with
pleasure, because they exhibit a series of pictures drawn in a masterly manner;
but they may corrupt a mind not well established in the principles of virtue.
Smollet has merit; but, on account of his unpolished humor, is not read with
the same pleasure as the others.

ALL books which lead to a false taste of life and happiness, in which vicious
characters are painted in captivating colors, their vices represented as manly
graces, and their intrigues as genteel gallantries, are dangerous to the
morals, and incompatible with the chaste mind of young females. It is a great
unhappiness to a young woman to be destitute of wise parents, or faithful
friends, to direct her to the choice of proper books of amusement and
entertainment. The little time which females can devote to reading, should be
employed in the most economical manner in perusing those books from which they
may draw the most, and the purest sentiments.

THE extreme insipidity of many of our modern novels, one would suppose a
sufficient preventive against their being read; and yet, with what avidity are
they devoured by many young girls? The futility of many of them is an effectual
security against their doing any other injury, than consuming that time which
should be better employed. How much more profitably might young females spend
their time in reading history, biography, travels, voyages, memoirs, and those
periodical pieces where the powers of wit, fancy, and judgment, have united in
exposing vice and folly, such as the Spectator, and many other ingenious
writers who have pursued the same track? To these I would add geography, both
as an agreeable study, and requisite to the reading of the others to advantage;
and some acquaintance with astronomy, as a pleasing science and useful in
expanding the mind to comprehend more of the Creator's works, and to dilate the
heart to universal being. To what cause shall we ascribe the general neglect of
these studies by our sex? Is it because they have not solidity of judgment
enough to relish them? or is it because they are not calculated to touch the
fancy and flatter the passions? To acknowledge either of these, as the cause of
such neglect, would be humiliating to me as a woman; and yet what can remove
just ground of susspicion that it is the case, unless our sex can be prevailed
upon to pay greater attention to these more useful and solid parts of learning?
Females should think, as well as read: by inuring themselves to this exercise,
they will qualify themselves for the stations they are to fill in life. If they
read without reflection, they may store their memories with facts, but never
will know how to apply them: less reading and more study and reflection,
therefore, would be of inconceivable advantage to them.

NO longer can our sex complain that they are depressed and kept in ignorance
by man, who, jealous of dominion, is unwilling to furnish them with the means
or opportunities of attaining knowledge. I am fully sensible that the female
mind has been too much neglected in the domestic state, and more so at boarding
schools. IT is ardently to be wished that academies for the education of
females, in the sciences necessary for their accomplishment, may be the future
boarding schools of America. Here, while the higher sciences should be taught
by gentlemen of refined taste and elegant manners, improvements in every thing
graceful and pleasing would be equally great, and less exceptionable, because
conducted more by reason and sentiment.
But you may be assured that when mothers shall discover as much zeal to
accomplish the mind, as the person of their daughters, there will be little
room left for complaint of the meanness and cruelty of men in keeping the sex
in ignorance. Or when females shall discover as great a thirst for knowledge as
for dress; and when they shall be able to forego a party of pleasure which
comes in competition with the duties of life, or the pursuits in useful science
-- what will hinder their improvements? Yea, what will prevent their gaining
eminence in literature? Books are to be had in plenty, which convey the most
useful instruction, and that in a pleasing manner; but in order to profit by
them, they must be read with attention and reflection. Females have more time
for reading than the other sex, and actually read more books. Why then are they
not as well versed in solid and useful literature? evidently, because they
neglect those studies which have a tendency to enlarge the mind, enrich the
understanding, and expand the heart.

IT is a suggestion unsupported by fact, that women are either feared or
despised by the other sex on account of their being learned: both those
passions may be excited for the want of it, and by the pedantry of some
females. A woman who affects to dispute, to decide, to dictate on every
subject; who watches or makes opportunities of throwing out scraps of
literature, or smatterings of science in every company; who engrosses the
conversation, as if she alone was qualified to entertain, and discovers more
inclination, to shine than capacity to effect it, such an one will justly
become the object of ridicule and contempt. In this case she is despised, not
for having too much knowledge, but too little; for an attempt to display more
learning than she has. It is shallow water that makes the most sound: deep
rivers flow silently along, and bear down all before them. Wherever real
learning appears, matured by reflection, accompanied with judgment and
unassuming manners, it will never disgust, but always give pleasure to every
man or woman of discernment and worth; and will inspire even the envious with
awe and respect.

I HAVE hitherto said nothing of the importance and advantages of reading the
scriptures and books of devotion. I am happy, my dear Fanny and Rozella, that
your attachment to those writings precludes the necessity of my saying much on
that head. There is a majesty in the scriptures peculiar to themselves; a
plainness and simplicity of style, to which the meanest capacities are
competent, and yet an elegance which renders them pleasing to the greatest. The
historic part is filled up with such a variety of incidents and interesting
events, as to combine in one view, all the advantages of character and
sentiment, description and precept; to paint the different shades of virtue and
vice in real life and genuine character. All the human passions, with their
various operations, are unfolded in the numerous scenes exhibited, and the
picture presented to the heart through the medium of the imagination. Besides the
agreeableness of the narrative and its instructive tendency, there is a
refinement of benevolence, a sublimity of morals, an extent and perfection of
precept and example, which cannot fail to entertain, please, and ennoble the
mind of the attentive reader. -- Mrs. Bloomsgrove was going on in this sublime
strain of panegyric on the scriptures, when Mr. Bloomsgrove's unexpected
arrival, at so late an hour, put an end to her proceeding further on the
subject.

LETTER LXIV.
PERSONAL qualities are of infinitely more consequence, than those which are
merely adventitious, and transient in their nature; such as beauty, dress, or
any external embellishments. Fond mothers too often prefer beauty before every
other qualification; and if their daughters are possessed of that, dress is
studied with great assiduity -- vanity is inspired by flattery -- but the more
useful and durable qualities are neglected. Cornelia, daughter of Scipio the
Great, and mother of the Roman Gracchi, who makes a distinguished figure in the
history of Rome, was visited by a lady of rank, who valued dress, and was
remarkable for an elegant toilet. Observing every thing plain in Cornelia's
apartment -- "Madam, says she, I wish to see your toilet, for it must be
superb." Cornelia waved the subject until her children came from school. --
"These, my good friend, are my ornaments, and all I have for a toilet."

IN Mrs. Bloomsgrove, America can boast a Roman matron, as in her husband, more
than Roman greatness of soul. Sensible that dress may make a FINE woman, and
beauty command a transient admiration, but that good sense and virtue alone can
preserve what beauty gains, she attended to these as the richest and most
durable ornaments of her sex. In dress and ornaments, for Rozella, her mamma
does not disregard the fashion, but instructs her always to yield to propriety;
assuring her, at the same time, that simplicity in dress, as well as manners,
is most becoming.

SHE takes her daughter into polite circles; but enjoins upon her affability
toward all classes of people. When on a visit to her at the boarding school,
she accompanies Rozella to the ball; but, to check that avidity for pleasure
which too often precipitates young girls into a round of dissipation, takes an
opportunity to show her that such pleasures are to be considered as mere
amusement -- unfit to employ much of the time of a young woman, who is destined
by nature to more important concerns -- the care and government of a family.

IT was under the care of Mrs. --, that she made great improvements in a
graceful deportment and in the etiquette of the fashionable world. This lady
was celebrated for her piety and good sense; and for her attention to the minds
and morals of those misses who were committed to her care. Rozella's parents
were not willing to place her at any boarding school till they could find such
an one; nor was she placed under the care of Mrs. --, till she had passed that
giddy age at which misses are too commonly sent to such schools, and before
they have judgment to make the best use of the opportunity for improvement. On
this account her preceptress was able to enlarge her mind, and regulate her
heart, as well as embellish her manners; for reading the scriptures and books
of useful knowledge, as well as works of taste and imagination, made a part of
the daily exercise of this school.

HAVING an exquisitely fine ear for music, a master was provided to instruct
her in that pleasing art. In a few months she acquired a considerable know^edge
of the theory, and, by practice, became a complete mistress of the business.
Those who have a great taste for music, I think, ought to be encouraged; but it
is ridiculous for one who has neither voice nor ear to throw away that time in
forcing nature, which might be spent to more useful purposes. I am acquainted
with a lady, who has long been attended by a music master, at the enormous
price usually set on that service, and has learned to touch every note by rule.
I know another, who, never having received any instruction, but being possessed
of a fine ear for music, will play any tune after a few times hearing it. The
artificial performance of the one will always give pain to the company, while
the natural air of the other will never fail to communicate the most sensible
delight.

VOCAL music may be more easily acquired than instrumental. This falls within
the reach of most people, and should be a part of the education of every
female, as well to enable them "to sooth the cares of domestic life," as "to
join in that pleasing part of public worship which consists in psalmody."
This was also a branch of instruction at the boarding school, where Rozella
acquired a thoro acquaintance with that celestial science.

DRAWING is also a pleasing art, where there is a natural taste for it; and it
is an accomplishment not altogether useless; but without that taste, it ought
never to be attempted. Neither the usefulness of the art, nor the time or
abilities of people in this country, will justify its being a necessary part of
a polite education. Rozella having early discovered a natural genius for
drawing, was indulged with an opportunity of gratifying her inclination.

I NEED not mention that dancing made a part of the instruction of this school,
nor that a young lady of Rozella's activity, distinguished herself at so
graceful an exercise. To be a good player is no index of mental faculties; it
requires only a fine ear, with perseverance. But to dance with grace and
expression, is an index of the mind; a certain dignity of mind is requisite,
supported by good sense: and besides, the general deportment and gesture will
partake of the easy elegance which is thereby acquired. "Much time, however, in
teaching a girl to dance, is thrown away, if she has not a pregnant genius: it
is sufficient that her motions be made easy to prevent her being awkward."

ROZELLA was to have spent a few months longer at the school, but a
circumstance of an interesting nature suddenly called her home, and she did not
return to it any more. Fanny was seized with a violent fever which threatened
her life; and indeed it was wholly despaired of by her physician. Rozella was
sent for -- she flies with all speed to her dear Fanny -- was deluged in tears
at seeing her, and never left her bed side, until her symptoms became more
favorable, which took place in about twenty four hours after her arrival. After
a long confinement, she was restored to health; but never lost the favorable
impressions which this near approach to death made upon her mind.

THE sickness which had left such good impressions on Fanny's mind, gave them
both a greater relish than ever for the serene pleasures of mental and moral
improvement. Their time passed on balmy wings, because undisturbed by the
vanity of dissipation, and distributed in just proportions between business,
amusement, and rational improvement. Their pleasures were sweet and uncloying,
because they flowed from a pure source.

LETTER LXV.
DURING her sickness, in which she had the perfect exercise of her reason,
Fanny was visited, at her own request, by the clergyman, whose ministry she
had, for a few years, attended with pleasure. It may naturally be supposed that
in this situation, when the awful period of dissolution appeared to her to be
at hand, a young lady in the bloom of life would wish for the counsel and
support of some friend, on whose judgment she could rely. Such was her
confidence in his abilities to administer the most salutary advice at this
period, that she listened with avidity to the sentiments which dropped from his
lips, and from the sequel appears to have found that satisfaction of mind which
she most ardently wished. In the course of these conversations some sentiments
of importance were dropped, which occasioned a correspondence between them
after her recovery. Among the many interesting letters, which passed between
them, I shall give the two following a place in these memoirs, both on account
of the sentiments expressed in them, and of the advantage of female education
discoverable in the easy style of Fanny's letter. There is evidently a greater
facility in females for letter writing than in our sex.

LETTER LXVI. From a CLERGYMAN to Miss FANNY.
THE calmness of the evening, the solemn silence which at this late hour reigns
through the house, a prevailing inclination to gratify and oblige you, all
contribute to the design! While the heart of the midnight reveller, the sordid
debauchee, beats high with impure passion or guilty fears, mine is filled with
ardent desire: the flame is pure; the passion is hallowed by the excellence of
its object!

MY inclination conspires with my professional duty in exertions for the good
of human kind; nor is it possible for me to express how much your happiness is
the object of my wishes. I should therefore feel myself culpable, were I to
omit any favorable opportunity of contributing to its advancement. Such an one
seems now to offer, and I embrace it with pleasure, while the heart is softened
by recent affliction, and all the avenues to it are laid open by its own
solici^ude for happiness.

NOT many weeks have passed, since my amiable friend, whom I now address, was,
to all appearance, launching into the vast, the unexplored world of spirits. On
my last visit, before the disorder formed a crisis, I had little doubt but that
a few hours would have closed your eyes forever upon all mortal things. -- The
scene was tender -- it was truly affecting! The grief of your friends was of
that luxurious nature, which is crowned with hope, and can be understood by
perception only.

I WISH not to give pain by recalling to your view, an event from which, through
the goodness of your heavenly Father, you have so happily escaped. Fain would I
make a recollection of the whole scene you so lately passed through both agreeable
and beneficial, by exciting the pleasing emotions of gratitude to heaven for
the satisfaction of mind you experienced in the most threatening moment, and
for the health you now enjoy; and by offering a friendly hand to guide you through
the devious paths of youth in virtue's peaceful course.

YOUR late experience evinces more than words can do, what is necessary to
render us happy in the most trying condition to which our feeble nature is
liable to be reduced. The books I this day put into your hand, will convince
you of the importance of a public avowal of that religion which your own
experience has taught you is essential to happiness. Your conspicuous situation
in life makes the example of it more to be desired, as its influence would be
more extensively felt.

AS I did not take the advantage of your weakness, and the alarming prospects
of approaching dissolution, to precipitate an entrance into the pale of the
visible church, when just going to the church triumphant, I shall be justified
in earnestly enjoining upon the living, that incorporation with the church,
which I could not think necessary for the dying. By a public profession of
religion we show to the world our readiness to comply externally with the
commands of God; and by a living example of that religion, which is our only
consolation when dying, we show our inward sense of its truth and excellence,
and add our testimony to its reality and importance.

TO make an open profession of our belief of the Christian religion, of our
regard to Christ and his institutions, and our determination to obey his
precepts, amidst the unreasonable prejudices of many against the gospel,
requires a spirit of fortitude and perseverance: it may draw upon us the
obloquy of such persons. But can we call ourselves the disciples of Christ, or
expect the reward of such, if we regard their unkind speeches more than his
positive command, of whom it is our greatest reproach to be ashamed?

HOW much does it become us to obey the commands of Christ, by observing those
institutions by which we publicly declare our faith in his death and
resurrection; and by which a lively remembrance of his love, and of our
obligations, are perpetuated, and their happy influence felt in the world. If
we were only to repair to our devotions, as the disciple of quality did to his
Lord and Master, secretly and by night, for fear of the Jews, would not
religion, thus lonely and unfriended, soon decay for want of public countenance
and encouragement?

BUT it is not necessary for me at this time to adduce many arguments upon the
subject, as you will see them fully stated in those books, to which I doubt not
you will pay due attention. May you, my dear Fanny, be directed by a spirit of
wisdom and prudence, and be guided in the sure path of virtue and piety; the
great end of all external forms of religion! The path is strewed with flowers;
thorns and briers, indeed, spring up among them, but even these yield delicious
fruit in the end. It leads to the still waters, in whose ceaseless streams flow
pleasures ever new and never failing.

THE only apology which this urges for a candid reception, is, that it is
dictated by a real desire to promote your happiness; is therefore the best
testimony of esteem and affection from

Your assured friend, etc.
Hamlet, May 22.
LETTER LXVII. Miss FANNY's Answer.
THE gentle spirit of benevolence, which has inspired your breast, respected
and dear sir, in favor of a girl who had no right to expect your solicitude,
has awakened all her gratitude: but with gratitude awakes a chaos of ideas, a
train of perplexing thoughts.

PERHAPS I ought not to have answered your letter, sir, till I had read the
books, you put into my hands yesterday. But I could not, I wished not to resist
the impulse which prompted me to give you some idea of my sentiments on the
solemn, and, I believe, important subject of your letter; and yet they are too
deeply involved in a veil of ignorance and error, for me to arrange them
clearly* -- I have been reading your letter again, and again: it swelled a
sweetly painful tear into my eye. Is, then, a public avowal of religion
necessary? Mistake me not, my dear sir -- I would not, I never would indulge a
sentiment less pure than that which I should blush to avow. Your arguments are
weighty; they are convincing. But a step of this kind is of too high a nature,
to be slightly adopted. To your kind injunctions I shall endeavor to pay
merited attention. I am, per^^ps, too fondly attached to the society, the
pleasures, the follies of the world. I have never thought a moderate indulgence
of this fondness incompatible with my other duties; yet perhaps it has
prevented my reflecting so frequently as I ought on this subject.

THE truth is, tho I respect, tho I sincerely venerate the holy institution,
yet I never, till now, thought it my indispensable duty to be initiated into
its mysteries. I hope, sir, you will not impute my neglect wholly to
inattention, much less to a disinclination to my duty, when convinced of it. I
knew my own weakness: I felt my heart, tho not vicious, too often cold and
culpable. I had not the temerity to make a public offering of a lukewarm
virtue. I knew myself too well, not to be afraid of professional devotion. I
still tremble at the idea of assuming a character, lest I should not have
virtue enough to support it.

PERHAPS it has been a mistake in me to consider an attendance on the holy rite
as the reward only, and not the assistant of virtue. An admission into the
church, I have viewed as more properly the privilege and reward of those firm
spirits, whose solid and persevering virtue entitles them to a nearer approach,
a more filial intercourse with heaven, than the enjoyment of unconfirmed and
unhallowed virtue. A short lived enthusiasm has, I believe, led many a youth to
the sacred altar, and to a sonorous profession, whose succeeding conduct, tho
it could never pollute the spotless image of religion in the eyes of the good
and the discerning, has given the infidel, and the thoughtless, a pretext to
contemn her precepts. How melancholy, a fall like this! and how disgraceful to
the rash youth, who dared venture into a recess too dazzling for his powers!
May I never be suffered to offer such unhallowed service at the foot of the
altar! and whenever I shall make an offering of myself at the holy shrine, may
a corresponding example justify the deed; and my daily prayers and praises,
sweetly arising before the Almighty, prove the sincerity of my own heart!

FULL well do I remember the awful period to which you allude; and your image,
my good sir, forever accompanies the remembrance. To you I owe the mildness of
resignation which at length pervad^d my anxious bosom. I was alarmed; I was
fearful; I trembled at the dark abyss before me. I did not despair; not for one
moment did the horrid phantom haunt me; but I could not dispel the doubts which
the humbling consciousness of my own insignificance and my multiplied errors
awakened. It was one other than the soothing voice of heaven descended piety
which breathed through your lips, and bade me trust with implicit confidence the
goodness of that being, before whose awful tribunal, I thought a few hours
would present me. You then, my dear sir, added another to the many inducements
I before had, to respect your counsels, to approve and obey your precepts, to
be virtuous myself, that I might merit the friendship you have deigned to favor
me with. I have availed myself of this friendship, to pour out before you the
undisguised effusions of my heart.

I HAVE already said much, but I have still much to say. You must be sensible,
that the first walks of my life were in a different track from yours, tho the
object was the same. I have no faith in particular forms of worship. I think
them no further essential, than as they tend to awaken and animate devotion.
Yet some modes appear more solemn than others; and that to which we are
accustomed in the first part of life, commonly appears to us in that light. I
doubtless feel some influence of the first impression^ of habit; and had
circumstances conti^ued me in the same way till this time, I might have felt a
decided preference. But circumstanced as I am, I prefer the path I am in at
present.

WITH regard to the difference of sects, I have little choice. I believe they
are all good; and cannot help thinking that the various b^eathing incense which
arises from innumerable altars, unites in one pure flame, as it ascends the
heights of heaven, and glows forever beneath the approving smiles of the
Almighty. That only appears the best for me, which inspires the most solemn and
devout sentiments. But I mean not, by uniting to one, to reject any other.

YOUR friendly interest has superseded the necessity of an apology for this
long letter. I have written without reserve. With full confidence have I
unfolded to you the recesses of a heart, as yet, too much unformed. May I hope
you will deign to correct its errors, to model it by the purity and benevolence
of your own! I am just going to the springs at --, for the confirmation of my
health. On my return I shall be able to submit my sentiments on Dr. Haller, and
the other books, to your inspection.

I CANNOT quit my pen, without again expressing my gratitude for the undeserved
attention you pay to my happiness. Make me but worthy of your solicitude; I
must then be good and happy. What a blessed task is yours! To recall the
wanderer, to warm with the glow of piety the wretch who freezes with despair;
to dispel the clouds of ignorance; to remove the veil of error; to disclose to
the eye of faith the shining lands of bliss; to raise the earth attracted
spirit to sublimer objects and an higher sphere: these are some of the
enjoyments which your virtue secures to you.

MAY these pleasures be yours, my dear sir; and when painful disease shall be
extinguishing your vital flame, may you find some faithful being to illumine
the shades of death, to be an angel of consolation to you, as you have been to
me, till you go to realize the blessedness you have so well described! May I
not venture to hope you will there meet your grateful and obliged

FANNY.
Tusculum, May 27.
LETTER LXVIII.
LEAVING boarding schools to the management of those who have the care of them,
with this remark -- The time devoted to the acquisition of the graces, should
bear due proportion to the time usually allotted females to qualify themselves
to move with propriety and dignity in the important sphere, to which the custom
of this country generally calls them early in life -- I shall now return from
female education to the consideration of several instances of domestic
management with regard to both sexes, of great importance to the peace of
families, the happiness of individuals, and the welfare of society.

AS tranquillity and contentment are requisite to the enjoyment of life, so
also to improvements in knowledge and virtue; for when the mind is restless and
uneasy, it cannot pay that attention which is necessary for the acquisition of
knowledge; and, by indulging a discontented humor, is disqualified for virtuous
exercises. The mind will be more or less at ease, according to the impulses of
those different passions or principles which agitate it. In order to make the
progress of learning easy and certain, it is necessary to bring the mind to a
balance, and to fix its situation. This disposition, like the order of the
heavenly bodies, is generated by the harmonious effect of several powers,
acting in different directions. It may be difficult to adjust the exact
proportion of these different impulses, where the sensibilities are strong,
lively, and various; but in general it may be effected, by exciting one passion
to counteract another, and throwing in one circumstance in such time and order,
as to balance another. By the constant vigilance of parents, which the domestic
state gives them opportunity to exercise, they may almost invariably preserve
harmony in the minds of children, by this opposite influence. Children who are
dull or stupid, may be easily rendered contented: but those who are formed for
enjoyment as well as to charm others, are easily deranged; and, if a
coincidence and harmony of the several principles and causes of action be not
secured by proper management, will generally be unhappy.

DESIRES, accustomed to restraint, may be satisfied with little, when success
does not attend proper exertions to acquire more; but intemperate desires will
not be satisfied with the utmost success of attention, industry, or ambition.
Youth, who are accustomed to have every passion gratified, will soon learn to
fancy every splendid object they see; and, desirous of possessing whatever they
fancy, can never rest contented with any thing. Children and youth become
restless and discontented, by having their vanity excited, either by hearing
themselves praised, or by the finery with which they are loaded. By these means
parents often blow up a flame in the minds of their children, which cannot
easily be extinguished, but will consume all their peace in life.

MISANDER was self conceited, because he had been flattered by his parents from
a child. This was a perpetual source of mortification to him; for he was often
stung by APPREHENDED slights or neglects, and suffered a thousand IMAGINARY
affronts. He was therefore perpetually discontented and unhappy. Florinda, his
only sister, was made vain by the same causes. After loading her with finery,
her mother would call her A LITTLE ANGEL, and flatter her with the idea of
being admired by every body, because she was gaily dressed. At the age of
fourteen, she had acquired an immoderate passion for dress. Being used from a
child to be loaded with ornaments, she grew up with this impression, that dress
constituted the principal qualification of a female; and despised all who
dressed more plain, or less fashionable than herself.

ROZELLA was more simple in her taste, and appeared best in her own eyes, and
in the eyes of every one else, when dressed with a becoming plainness. She
thought not the worse of any body on account of their dress, however plain it
was; and treated every one with civility, whatever their condition in life
might be. Rozella was contented and happy with what she had, because she had
learned to check and moderate her desires: she attracted the notice of every
one who saw her, because she was modest and unassuming. Florinda, on the other
hand, was neither contented nor happy, because her desires were extravagant and
ever roving. She disgusted every one who saw her, because she was haughty and
trifling; and was always unhappy, because she never thought she had sufficient
attention paid her.

MR. Bloomsgrove, observing the beautiful landscape in the river, occasioned by
the perfect tranquillity of its surface, which, like a mirror, reflected every
object before it, took the opportunity to recommend moderation to his children,
as the only means of enjoying the pleasures of a serene mind. From the pleasing
images then before them, he borrowed many instructive and entertaining
observations, which he farther illustrated by several agreeable anecdotes.

"A BOY, fond of a butterfly, pursued it from flower to flower. He thought to
surprise it among the leaves of a rose; then to cover it with his hat, as it
was feeding on a daisy. He followed it from blossom to blossom, but the nimble
creature still eluded his grasp. Observing it now half buried in the cup of a
tulip, he rushed forward, and happened to crush it. The poor boy, chagrined at
his rashness, seemed to be addressed by the expiring insect in the following
words. -- "Behold the fruit of thy impetuosity! Know that pleasure is but a
painted butterfly, which may be indulged for amusement; but if embraced with
too much ardor, will perish in thy grasp."

THE other which I shall mention was the different appearance of Parnabasus,
lord lieutenant to the king of Persia, and Agesilaus, king of Lacedemon* whom
the other had invited to a treaty of peace with him. "The interview was in the
open field. The first appeared in all the pomp and luxury of the Persian court.
He was dressed in a purple robe embroidered with gold and silver: the ground
was spread with rich carpets, and cushions were laid down for him to sit upon.
Agesilaus, in a plain dress, sat down on the green grass without any ceremony.
The pride of the Persian was confounded; and he appeared little in the eyes of
the beholders compared with the Lacedemon."

THE frequent repetition of such examples had a good effect on Osander,
inspiring him with a noble independence of spirit; and his sister, who listened
to them with pleasure, saw that no part of true excellence consisted in parade
and finery, and that, to moderate her desires was the only sure road to
contentment.

LETTER LXIX.
MEMORY is one of those useful faculties which deserved notice before, because
it may be improved by early culture. But it will not be misplaced here, if we
consider that it may be cultivated to much greater advantage in a miss in her
teens, or a youth in the higher forms of school learning, than in infancy, when
it is difficult to fix the attention. The first act of a child's memory is
nothing more than a retention of simple images, which are painted on the mind
by sensible objects, without any idea of the relation of those objects, by
which the impression was made, to each other. That is, the child forms no
judgment about the things so impressed; for it is merely passive in receiving
them. But the ideas formed in consequence of such sensations, arise from a
capacity of judging of them. The only effectual way, therefore, to increase the
retentive faculty, is to enlarge the understanding. Whatever is committed to
the infant memory should be adapted to the child's capacity, and be of useful
tendency; for the treasures stored up in the memory, will have their influence
in forming the character.

MR. Lock supposed that this faculty cannot be strengthened by exercise. I
believe that a contrary opinion, has been generally received. I shall only
remark, that there were no children in the school or vicinity, whose memories
were equal to the memories of Mr. Bloomsgrove's children. Whether this was
owing more to a native strength of this faculty, or to a habit of recollecting
and frequently repeating things committed to memory, I pretend not to say. They
were accustomed from childhood to commit to memory little pieces, suited to
their age and understanding. That these pieces might never tire, but be a
constant amusement, Mrs. Bloomsgrove, who was a favorite of the muses, used to
compose short pieces, in prose and poetry, calculated to make virtuous
impressions. In these she would give a lively description of the transient
beauties of the flowers, which bloom with great splendour for a little while,
and then fade away; and would take occasion to celebrate the beauty of virtue,
which, instead of fading like a flower, grows brighter by time. Sometimes she
would give a little history of the humbird, which annually came and drew
nourishment from the richest flowers, suspending its nest on the slender branch
of a weeping willow. As they grew, these pieces were enlarged, and others, of
the most chaste and pure sentiment, collected from history, or poetry, short
sketches of the character of great and good men, dialogues, and select pieces.
If the memory was not improved by these means, the heart was. And the world now
abounds with such judicious collections, that parents have no other trouble
than to purchase them.

THE following remarkable instance of strength of memory affords a pleasant
story. The fact is related in the life of Frederic the second, king of Prussia.

"WHILE the celebrated Voltaire resided at Potsdam, as the literary friend and
companion of the late king of Prussia, an Englishman was introduced to his
majesty, as one who possessed such an extraordinary memory, that he could
repeat word by word, a very long discourse, after having heard it once.
Frederic put him to an immediate proof of this wonderful retention, and the
Englishman justified the character that had been given of him. At this instant
Voltaire was to wait upon his majesty, to read him some verses he had just
finished. The king, who was desirous of enjoying some amusement from this
singular circumstance, caused the Englishman to be concealed in a closet
adjoining, and desired him to get by heart all that the poet might read.
Voltaire entered, and read the verses with great animation. The king heard them
with an air of coldness and indifference, to which the poet had not been
accustomed. "Indeed, my dear Voltaire," exclaimed his majesty, "you have taken
it into your head, for some time past, to steal verses from others, and to
repeat them to me as your own." Voltaire affirmed with great earnestness, that
they were his, and that he had finished them but that very morning. The king
then sent for the Englishman, and desired him to repeat the verses he had shown
him that morning. The Englishman, without hesitation, and without the omission
of a single syllable, repeated the whole of what Voltaire had read. The poor
poet was astonished and enraged, and declared he must be the Devil himself. The
king did not fail to enjoy his anger and agitation for some time; but at last
he confessed the whole trick, and the scene was concluded by his making a
handsome present to the Englishman for the pleasure he had afforded them."

LETTER LXX.
AMONG all the monstrous productions of nature, there can scarcely be found a
greater, than the heart of a parent, which makes an idol of one child, while it
neglects another. There may be a great difference in the qualities of children,
which is apt to induce a degree of partiality. But this is as imprudent, as it
is wrong and unnatural; for where the others discover a decided partiality,
they cannot feel either filial piety or fraternal affection.

A MORE affecting instance of the fatal effects of it cannot be found, than in
the history of Joseph. The whole story is interesting, and contains a variety
of incidents, which furnish many important lessons of instruction. Besides the
mischiefs of parental partiality, it displays the fatal effects of envy,
jealousy, and discord among brethren; the blessings and honors with which
virtue is rewarded; the beauties of a forgiving spirit; the joys which flow
from fraternal love, and filial piety. But I shall only relate that part of it
which has reference to the present subject.

WE are told that "Jacob loved Joseph more than all his children;" and whence
this extraordinary partiality? The only reason assigned for it, is, that "he
was the son of his old age." As good a reason as can generally be assigned for
the partiality of parents! It is a blind guide, and seldom chooses its objects
from the discernment of peculiar merit. The favorite son is distinguished by
some peculiar marks of affection, which render him the object of jea^ousy,
envy, and hatred to the rest. "His father made him a coat of many colors." Long
had a spark of envy lurked in their breasts, and this decided preference
kindled it into a flame. "And when his brethren saw that their father loved him
more than the rest, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him." Of
all the feuds and animosities which disturb the peace of the world, those of a
domestic kind are the bitterest and most to be dreaded. They should therefore
be studiously avoided. The circumstance which fixed this hatred, and determined
them to strike the deadly blow, which they had so much reason to regret
afterward, was his relating to them a dream; which was, that "they were
binding sheaves in the field, and that his sheaf stood upright, while theirs
made obeisance to his." He probably related it in the simplicity of his heart.
But their minds, awake to jealousy, construed it into an insult. "And his
brethren said unto him, shall thou indeed reign over us?" Another dream of a
like tenor, in which "he saw the sun, moon, and eleven stars make obeisance to
him," gave umbrage even to the fond mother; and wrought up fraternal hatred to
a perfect rage.

THE latent purpose only waits a favorable opportunity to break forth into a
dreadful storm. When domestic jars have divided the affections of the family,
and they lie in wait to injure each other, an opportunity is seldom long
wanting to the vigilant eye of malice and ill will. This was truly the case
with the sons of Jacob. The unsuspecting father sends the favorite son, but
envied brother, to inquire after the welfare of his brethren, who were feeding
the flocks in a distant field. As they were ripe for vengeance, little else was
necessary, than to form a plan for the execution of it. "Behold, say they, the
dreamer comes," and they conspired against him to slay him. When the end is
determined upon, malice and envy are ingenious at inventing means for
perpetrating the vilest actions, and throwing a veil over them. So dangerous is
the indulgence of these passions!

"COME now, and let us slay him, say they, and cast him into a pit; and we will
say some evil beast has devoured him; and we shall see what will become of his
dreams." One of his brethren, a little more humane than the rest, proposed to
commute the revenge from death, to slavery in Egypt. They accordingly sold him
to a company of traders who were going thither, where he was sold as a slave.
Horrid as the alternative was, it seemed to be some alleviation of the crime.

THUS ended their malice and envy against a brother, hated and despised, not
for any fault of his own, but for the ill judged partiality of a doting
parent. But the heart of the aged parent is soon to bleed through the effects of
its own imprudence. The party colored coat is to be brought before him, all
drenched in blood. By this stratagem, they attempt to cover the base, the cruel
deed. It succeeds. The father recognizes the coat, all stained as it was. Yes;
"it is my son's coat: an evil beast has devoured him: Joseph is without doubt
rent in pieces." The full tide of parental affection rises on the occasion. He
refused to be comforted, and said -- "I will go down to the grave, unto my son,
mourning."

IT would be entertaining and delightful to follow the young captive down into
Egypt, to note the various fortune of the exiled youth, and mark the several
steps by which he rose from his depressed condition to the chief seat of
government there; his great wisdom in becoming the savior of his country; and
to review all the tender scenes of meeting his brethren, and of rejoicing the
heart of his aged parent, who had long mourned for him as dead. But these
belong not to our present design.

THE story of Joseph was so familiar to Mr. and Mrs. Bloomsgrove, that they
considered it as a serious warning to themselves and all parents to guard
against the like conduct. They observed that those parents who had a stronger
affection to one child than another, were blind to the faults of the favorite,
which often proved its ruin. They also observed that such partiality was often
followed with ingratitude from the favorite child. Solicitous to raise him
above the rest, said Mr. Bloomsgrove to the father of Misander, they think no
labor or expense too much: they deny themselves every pleasure, except what
they enjoy in anticipating the figure which their darling child will make in
the world. They are commonly much too sanguine in their expectations. But
suppose them quite answered, and that they see him rise superior to their
hopes, yet how often does it happen that the consequence of such partial
regard, instead of exciting sentiments of gratitude and respect, is, that he
feels himself superior to his original, and blushes to acknowledge his parents
and benefactors, who receive no other return for all their exertions than being
shunned in public and despised in private! This may be a just punishment upon
the parent for an unjust partiality, but does not extenuate the base
ingratitude of the child.

LETTER LXXI.
IN a family like Mr. Bloomsgrove's, where no enviable preeminence of one
raises the hatred of the rest, filial reverence may always be expected. The
dignified familiarity which these parents observed toward the children and
family, preserved the most perfect bond of union; and while it prevented a
servile fear, it created veneration and respect.

THO the authority of parents is, in its nature, absolute, yet it is by no
means inconsistent with familiarity, as their children advance in age. This
indeed is the most effectual way to secure their reverence and obedience,
because it engages their esteem and confidence. If family discipline is
preserved by coertion only, there can be no harmony between the heads and the
members, and consequently very little domestic enjoyment. Children may by this
means be rendered abject and servile, but they will feel no respect or
veneration.

MANY parents seem to have no other ideas of family government, than that which
consists in keeping their children at an awful distance, being silent and
reserved before them, never suffering any pleasantry to pass between them, and
seldom speaking to them but in a commanding tone of voice. In this case they
lose the best part of authority, that over the heart. The parent cannot
discover the genius of the child, for it dares not exert itself. Nor can he
ever know the true character of the child, for he is driven to assume a mask in
the presence of the parent. There can be no pleasure in each others company.
The house is a prison to the child, and the parent is the keeper. They must
either sit silent at home, or steal away to seek enjoyment abroad; and they
never feel so happy, as when out of the parent's sight. This must be a most
unhappy condition for persons connected by the closest ties of nature and
society.

ON the other hand, what can be a more pleasing sight than that of a parent,
with condescending greatness, mixing in the social pleasures, and innocent
mirth of his little flock? The young mind feels the obligation; and children
will be cautious of doing any thing to displease a parent who will step out of
himself, without losing sight of his character, so far as to become their
intimate friend, and contribute to their pleasures, at least appear interested
in their childish pursuits. As they advance toward maturity, more sentimental
conversation, and more elevated pleasures, may occupy the place of the puerile.
The heart is open to receive any thing from so good a parent. Counsel and
admonition have the full force of authority; instruction is easily conveyed to
the heart warmed with filial affection and respect. They need not rove abroad
for agreeable and rational society: of this they experience the sweetest
enjoyjoyment within their own domestic circle.

OSANDER, during his tutelage, was under entire government, but felt no
awkwardness in his father's presence. He could address him without any reserve,
but never without respect; and as he advanced toward manhood, he seemed to be
on terms of familiarity with his father, and felt all the pleasures of
friendship, but never lost the reverence of a son. As the parent stooped to
meet the child, the child naturally rose to meet the parent. By conversing
freely with him, he raised the youthful mind to a manly habit of thinking and
acting. Often would he advise with his son about his affairs; and, whenever he
could consistently, he followed the plan he struck out. By this mode of
treatment, his son acquired some knowledge of his father's circumstances, and
of a proper method of doing business. He secured the friendship and confidence
of his son, and erected the most effectual barrier against fraud,
dissimulation, and the vices to which young people are liable. Feeling the
reverence of a son united to the ties of familiar friend and companion, he was
holden by a three fold cord, from those dangerous combinations in vice, which
are sometimes sanctioned by the sacred name of friendship; and besides this
security, he was constantly improving from his father's experience and
observations.

I CANNOT conclude these observations, without noticing the advantage which
might be derived from a similar practice in those to whom the care and
instruction of children are committed. You never can forget the ridiculous
figure which young Mr. --, one of the officers of instruction at --, made even
in the eyes of all the pupils, by assuming an air of wisdom and authority which
did not become his age. See the vain youth, how he swells! and stoutly exerts
his borrowed power! His instruction and government are carried on, not by
lenient arts, but by magisterial dictation. To be polite, or even civil, to
those young gentlemen who fell within the reach of his official power, he
thought would be to let down his tutorical dignity.

MR. --, the preceptor at Tusculum, treated his pupils in a very different
manner. He conversed freely with them, but with a dignity of manner that
inspired awe, while it seemed to admit them to the greatest familiarity. His
government was steady and firm, but not severe. There were few transgressions,
because there were few rules, and no unnecessary restraints. He instructed more
by communicating to them than by dry lessons. He encouraged their asking him
questions, by the kind and communicative manner in which he answered them. This
mode of treatment greatly facilitated their improvement, and gave him an
opportunity of discovering how far they understood the subject they were upon.
A dry lesson, placed before a boy, may be acquired, without his understanding
any thing of the subject. But knowledge acquired in the other way, will be
clear and durable, and what is so acquired will be his own.

HE was not only a man of science and literature, but of polite
accomplishments. He treated his pupils as rational creatures, and as young
gentlemen, who were to borrow their manners, in some degree, from himself. This
endeared him to his pupils, and gave him an entire sway in their affections;
and it recommended him to the notice and attention of all his employers. How
far preferable such a teacher to one of unformed manners, who has read books,
but knows not how to read men!

LETTER LXXII.
INGRATITUDE and disrespect to parents is unnatural, said Mr. Bloomsgrove to a
neighbor who was complaining of the disobedience of his son, as they were one
morning walking through a grove; it must therefore be owing generally to the
mismanagement of parents. Herodotus, continued he, in his account of the
customs and manners of the Persians, tells us that "They looked upon parricide
as a thing impossible; and that, when any thing happened that looked like it,
the reputed son was considered as supposititious, and probably owing his birth
to adultery." This sentiment showed in what light they viewed undutifulness in
general: and it is said, that, among the Chinese, disodedience to parents is
looked upon in such a light, even at this day, that, "If a son should so far
forget himself, as to lift up an hostile hand against his father, not only
himself, but his wife and children, would be put to death; his servants and
dependents would share the same fate, the house where he lived would be razed,
and the ground sowed with salt, as supposing there must be the most hopeless
depravity of manners in a community to which such a monster belonged." The
gentleman acknowledged the justness of the sentiment, and left him with a sigh.

IN the evening, happening to meet in the same shady grove, the gentleman
resumed the subject, and said -- Ingratitude and disobedience to parents is a
conduct to be ranked among the basest crimes. It is increased and aggravated by
the countless obligations conferred on children by parental care and
tenderness. What anxious solicitude and daily fatigue attend the nurture of
helpless infancy! What unwearied application is requisite in forming the minds
and guarding the morals of youth! What anxieties often rend the parents' breast
for the future welfare of their offspring! How often do they deny themselves
the conveniences of life, that their children may have the superfluities?
"These are obligations, replied Mr. Bloomsgrove, which never can be cancelled."

AND yet, continues the other, after all this, how often are they treated with
disrespect and ingratitude, and perhaps despised for those very infirmities
which parental assiduity has brought upon them! "This surely, rejoined Mr.
Bloomsgrove, is a height of impiety, that admits of neither addition nor
palliation: and 'he who fills his father's soul with bitterness, and drowns his
mother's eyes in tears, may justly fear a son that will revenge their wrongs.'
Such baseness may expect to experience, in turn, those sharp pangs which itself
has occasioned."

NOTWITHSTANDING the long tried friendship of parents, the continual reception
of benefits, which ought to engage every expression of duty and affection, it
is an observation of undoubted truth, the gentleman replied, that there are
many more undutiful children than there are unkind parents. "Our all wise
Creator, says Mr. Bloomsgrove, has so ordered it, for the security and
preservation of the human kind, that there should be very few of the latter;
for if parental care and tenderness were generally rewarded with ingratitude,
there would not be that attention paid to children which is necessary to rear
them up. The whole body of the Athenian laws, in the early state of that
people, was comprised in this short sentence -- "Honor your parents; worship
the Gods; hurt not animals." And by one of the laws of Solon, that person was
accounted infamous, who treated his parent with disrespect, or neglected that
care of him which his circumstances required. That great legislator never would
establish any law against parricides, saying -- "The Gods forbid that such a
monster should ever come into our commonwealth." And it is certain that upwards
of two centuries elapsed, from the first founding of Rome, before the name of
parricide was known among them.

IN this respect the sentiments of Pagans, Jews, and Christians, harmonize; and
the laws of revelation perfectly concur with the language of nature. "Honor thy
father and thy mother, was the first command, with a promise" of temporal good.
And the Mosaic law bears the most solemn testimony against disrespect to
parents -- "Cursed be he who sets light by his father or his mother, and all
the people shall say Amen." The crime is so unnatural, that all men will
approve the sentence.

HE then adduced several instances of filial piety worthy the imitation of all
of every age, sex, and condition -- That of Eneas, who is so justly celebrated
in ancient history for saving his aged father from the flames of Troy, whom he
rescued on his back through raging flames, armed enemies, and innumerable dangers:
that of Joseph, who, when advanced to the chief seat of government in Egypt,
respectfully bowed himself to his father, and made his aged heart leap for joy,
by his expression of filial respect and duty. Solomon did not lose the respect
of a child in the authority of a king. He arose from the throne and bowed
himself in a respectful manner to his mother. Excellent examples indeed, said
the gentleman! It was our early care, continued Mr. Bloomsgrove, to habituate
our children to treat us with respect and dutifulness; and that which they did
in childhood from habit, they now do from principle. They are constantly
endeavoring to repay, by acts of filial piety, the debt of gratitude due to
parental care and labor. The gentleman dropped a tear and bid him a good night.

CONTRASTED to the character of Mr. Bloomsgrove's children, and the effect it
had on their friends, was that of the unhappy Misander. He was the son of
decent, worthy people, in good circumstances, but too easy and indulgent
toward him. Misander did not want abilities, but they had been much neglected.
While young, and under the management of his mother, he was gratified in every
thing he asked for, and never crossed in any respect; and as he increased in
years, his passions grew without check or control. So blind was the eye of the
indulgent parents, that his very faults were converted into perfections: His
pertness, they construed into wit; his pride, into nobleness of spirit; and his
artfulness, into good sense. It was thought time enough to improve his mind and
correct his manners, when riper years had established his constitution. The
teachers to whom he had been committed for instruction, were desired not to
correct him, nor to be strict in requiring of him the exercises that were
exacted of other children; and he must often be excused from school on one
pretense and another. This farce was carried on, till his passions had gathered
too much strength to be resisted. He had associated himself with companions
suitable to his taste, and such as prevented him from being reclaimed. He had
long since usurped that authority over his parents, which they should have
exercised over him: His will was law; and as he advanced toward manhood, his
desires gradually became demands: His passions led him blindfold to every
gratification. At an early period of life, he was lost in a hopeless depravity
of manners. The counsel and authority of his parents, he treated with contempt.
From an unnatural indifference to them, he proceeded to despise them.

OVERWHELMED with grief and anxiety, they follow him with tears and entreaties:
But in vain do they now attempt his reformation: he laughs at their impotent
efforts; and plunges himself tho deeper into expensive vices, and dissoluteness
of manners. He never stopped in his fatal career, till he had reduced himself
to beggary, and broken the hearts of his parents. His vices at length
undermined his constitution -- a threatening disorder seized him -- Emaciated
by sickness and worn out with pain, he gave up the ghost, amidst the horrors of
an awakened conscience, and the tremendous apprehensions of his future
condition; and, what rendered the scene most distressful, was, that reflecting
upon the neglect and indulgence of his parents, as the cause of all his
miseries, he cursed them with his dying breath.

SO fatal to virtue and the filial piety of children, are an indiscriminate
gratification of every childish wish, and a blind partiality to all their
foibles. May you, my dear sir, never taste the bitterness of disobedient
children, but be the happy occasion of adding to society the inestimable
blessing of virtuous sons and amiable daughters; who, enjoying the fruits of
parental care and attention, will rise up and call you blessed. This will be
the most valuable legacy you can bequeath the world, and will reflect the
highest honor upon yourself, while it will lay the surest foundation for their
happiness.

LETTER LXXIII.
THE transition from filial to fraternal affection, is natural and easy. That
parent who teaches his children to look up with affection and respect to
himself, will not fail to cherish in them a reciprocal affection toward each
other: and, indeed, in a family consisting of several children, there is a
degree of fraternal respect due from the youngest to the eldest; of protection
from the eldest to the youngest; of delicacy, even in childhood, between the
different sexes, and of affection between them all, which require cultivation,
and afford the attentive parent an opportunity to inculcate many useful lessons.

THE following extract of a letter which I have just received from a judicious
correspondent, I think deserving of particular notice. "The rights of
promogeniture, so much esteemed among the Jews, I believe, are founded in
nature, and have their uses in every family. Where the eldest son or daughter
is honored and preferred by parents, a family is never without government in
the absence of parents from home; and when these parents are removed by death,
there is a foundation laid in the habits of the younger children for a
continuance of subordination in a family -- a circumstance always essential to
harmony and happiness!"

ON reading this, an instance immediately occurred to me, of the usefulness of
subordination among children. There was a family, consisting of several sons
and daughters, who were made orphans, while they were young. The oldest, a
daughter of an amiable disposition, undertook to preserve the family together
by her own management, which she effected greatly to her own credit, and to the
advantage of the rest. The sons were trained to business, and the daughters
were well educated in the habits of industry and the embellishments of taste.
They lived together in great harmony and affection, until she had an
advantageous offer in marriage, when they were all nearly grown to mature age,
which she accepted, and was happily settled with a worthy companion, who is now
in flourishing circumstances. She engaged the esteem of all her acquaintance,
and is now justly numbered among the most amiable of her sex in domestic life.

BY the eldest child being honored and preferred, my friend could mean no more
than that respect which is due to a priority in age; and this is just and
reasonable, for it is founded in nature, and is necessary for society. Let a
person be recommended to you as excelling in affection to his brothers and
sisters, as remarkable for his attention to his mother, and for tenderness and
attachment to his family, your heart will instantly bear testimony in his
favor; you will esteem and honor him.

THE wise author of nature has implanted in our breasts those tender
sympathies, which, while they are useful to society, are very pleasing to
ourselves: and this affection strengthens in proportion to the nearness of the
relation, or the habits of living together. Therefore it may naturally be
expected, from the general idea of man as a social creature, and from that of a
family, as the first social connection, that affection and friendship should
prevail here in perfection. Here we are to look for the most perfect amity, a
harmony that stands opposed not only to prejudice and ill will, but to
indifference and reserve.

CONTEMPLATE a whole family, eminent for their union and affection to each
other: See the brothers not only dutiful to their parents, but kind and
attentive to their sisters; affectionate and obliging in their conduct toward
each other -- You cannot help admiring them; you are sure there is virtue and
goodness among them; you think, you speak of them with pleasure; and certainly
you would prefer a connection in business with such, to those of an opposite
cast.

DOCTOR Percival, in one of his entertertaining pieces, gives us the following
agreeable mirror. "I will amuse you with a little experiment, said Sophron, one
evening, to Lucia, Emelia, Alexis, and Jacobus; and rising from the table, he
took the candles, and held them about half an inch asunder, opposite to a
medallion of Dr. Franklin, and about two yards distant from it. The motto round
the figure, UNHURT AMIDST THE WAR OF ELEMENTS, was just distinctly visible.
When the degree of light had been sufficiently observed, he united the flames
of the candles together; and the whole figure, with the inscription, became
instantly illuminated in a much stronger manner than before.

"THEY were all pleased and struck with the effect; and they desired
Euphronius, who now entered the parlour, to explain the cause of it. He
commended their entertainment, and informed them that a greater degree of heat
is produced by the junction of the two flames, and consequently a further
attenuation and more copious emission of the particles, of which light
consists: But, my dear children, continued he, attend to the lesson of virtue
as well as of science. Nature has implanted in your hearts, benevolence,
friendship, gratitude, humanity, and generosity; and these social affections
are separate shining lights in the world. But they burn with peculiar warmth
and luster, when more concentrated in the kindred charities of brother, sister,
child, and parent; and harmony, peace, sympathy in joy and grief, mutual good
offices, forgiveness, and forbearance, are the bright emanations of domestic
love. Oh! may the radiance of such virtues long illuminate this happy
household!"

FOR the exercise of these virtues, there will be room in the best regulated
families. Many little transactions will be daily taking place, which, if viewed
with a jealous eye, will breed disgust and malevolence: But fraternal love and
tenderness will, if not wholly annihilate those evils, in a great measure,
correct them. It will dispose each to condescend to the other, and to make the
most candid allowances for each others foibles. It will show itself in attempts
to reclaim a dissolute and vicious brother, and the tear of sympathy will wash
away the stain of guilt.

UNITED in nature, or associated by compact, and allied by interest, every
member of a family should cordia^^ endeavor to promote the common good.
Children should be taught from their infancy, not only to banish all enmity
from among themselves, but to avoid that neutrality and indifference which
destroys cordiality, and introduces a distance and reserve fatal to domestic
felicity.

THE cultivation of domestic affection and friendship, depends much on the
female head of the house. Not only is she more with the family, and
consequently has more opportunities to reconcile the little jarring interests
which arise, but her native tenderness qualifies her better for it. We have
already seen Mrs. Bloomsgrove interposing, with judgment and success, in
settling the differences which sometimes arise among children of the best
dispositions; and she cherished the most endearing cordiality between her
children, and the whole family. They partook in each others griefs, and shared
each others joys. A sigh does not pass unnoticed, nor does a tear fall
unpitied. In Osander you behold a son respectful to his mother, kind and
attentive to his sister, ever mindful of her wishes, her protector, companion,
and friend.

THIS is one of the most pleasing traits in a young gentleman's character, and
will never fail to recommend him to the female sex, and secure him the esteem
of his own. They will naturally conclude, that he, who, from motives of
brotherly affection, devotes his attention to a sister, on account of the
delicacy of her situation, is possessed of a good disposition. They will have
little doubt that a dutiful son, and a complaisant brother, will make an
attentive husband. A complaisant brother never need tear neglects on a sister's
part. I will pledge myself for the female world, that they will never be
insensible to such attentions, nor ever cease to return them with tenderness
and every office of sisterly affection. Should such a brother, in any instance,
experience the neglect of a sister, he would be much less affected by it, than
she would be by his: he is more independent, and has less need of attentions.
He may act as he pleases; she must always do what is proper. He can defend
himself; she must be kindly protected. He may say what he knows; she must say
what is agreeable. A young gentleman may be uncouth in his manners; if he has
understanding, it in a great measure compensates the want of the graces: but a
young lady without taste cannot by any means balance the deficiency. A
brother's politeness to a sister consists in offering her every service in his
power; a sister's, in receiving his attentions gracefully, and returning them
by gentle and obliging manners.

ROZELLA is all goodness to her brother. The sweet sympathy which heaves her
gentle breast, when he is ill; the lenient hand and assiduous care with which
she renders a thousand kind offices, show the ardor of a sisterly affection,
and how much she prizes a brother's civilities. I know a young gentleman who is
remarkable for his attention to the ladies. They are not displeased at his
gallantry; but his want of politeness to an amiable sister often draws upon him
their severe remarks. His civilities would be much more pleasing to the ladies
in general, if his sister shared in them. Such neglects are the more
inexcusable, because they wound a sister very sensibly, and because his
attentions might be rendered to her without pain or expense on his part. It is
in the power of brothers to alleviate their condition, and to contribute much
to their convenience, with very little trouble; and where there is any
sincerity of affection, those acts of friendship will not be neglected.

ACCUSTOMED from their childhood to be together, on the most friendly terms, to
go hand in hand to amusements, to visits, and to public worship, and always to
speak kindly to each other, Osander and Rozella lived together in youth on the
happiest terms. A const^^^ intercourse of kind offices and friendly society,
prove to their parents, how much the harmony of domestic society may be
promoted by an early cultivation of the ties of nature, and how much they may
be strengthened by habit. Growing together like a cluster of cherries from the
same bough, and in continual contact, it will not be difficult to confirm the
union nature has created. I have named only the brother and sister in the
light of domestic harmony; but to a stranger, the nephew and Fanny appear to
hold the same relation to the family as they do. As each had acquired a spirit
of benevolence by always breathing in its atmosphere, so they all participated
in the common stock of domestic affection and tranquillity.

I WILL give an instance of the strength of fraternal affection in the
following affecting story.

"IN the year 1585, the Portuguese Caracks sailed from Lisbon to Goa, a very
rich and flourishing colony of that nation in the East Indies. On board of one
of those vessels, there were no less than twelve hundred souls. The beginning
of their voyage was prosperous, but not many days after, through the perverseness
of the pilot, the ship struck on a rock, and instant death began to stare them
in the face. In this distress, the captain ordered the pinnace to be launched,
into which having tossed a small quantity of biscuit, and some boxes of
marmalade, he jumped in himself with nineteen others, who, with their swords,
prevented the coming of any more, lest the boat should sink. Thus scantily
equipped, they put off into the great Indian ocean, without compass to steer
by, or any fresh water, but what might happen to fall from the heavens, whose
mercy alone could deliver them. At the end of five days, the captain died with
sickness, and they were obliged, to prevent confusion, to elect one of their
company to command them. This person proposed to them to draw lots, and cast
every fourth man overboard, their small stock of provision being now so far
spent, as not to be able, at very short allowance, to sustain life above three
days longer. To this they agreed; so that there were four to die out of their
unhappy number, the captain, a friar, and a carpenter being exempted by general
consent.

"THE lots being cast, three of the first submitted to their fate, after they
had confessed and received absolution. The fourth victim was a Portuguese
gentleman, who had a younger brother in the boat; who, seeing him about to be
thrown overboard, most tende^^^ embraced him, and with tears besought him to
let him die in his room; enforcing his arguments by telling him, "that he was a
married man, and had a wife and children at Goa, besides the care of three
sisters, who absolutely depended upon him for support; whereas himself was
single, and his life of no great importance." He conjured him therefore to
suffer him to supply his place; assuring him that he had rather die for him,
than live without him. The elder brother, astonished, and melting with his
generosity, replied, "that since the divine providence had appointed him to
suffer, it would be wicked and unjust to permit any other to die for him, but
especially a brother to whom he was so infinitely obliged." The younger,
however, persisting in his refusal, would take no denial; but throwing himself
on his knees, held his brother so fast, that the company could not disengage
him.

"THUS they disputed awhile, the elder bidding him be a father to his children,
and recommending his wife and sisters to his protection; but all he could say
could not make the younger desist* This was a scene of tenderness that must
fill every human breast with pity. At last the constancy of the elder brother
yielded to the piety of the other, and suffered the gallant youth to supply his
stead; who being cast into the sea, and a good swimmer, soon got to the stern
of the pinnace, and laid hold of the rudder with his right hand. This being
perceived by one of the sailors, he cut off the hand with his sword; then
dropping into the sea, he presently regained his hold with his left hand, which
received the same fate by a second blow. Thus dismembered of both hands, he
made a shift, notwithstanding, to keep himself above water with his feet and
two stumps, which he held bleeding upwards. This moving spectacle so stung the
pity of the whole company, that they cried out, "he is but one man; let us
endeavor to save him!" Accordingly, he was taken into the boat, where he had
his hands bound up as well as the place and circumstances would admit. They
then continued rowing all night; and the next morning, when the sun arose (as
if heaven would reward the gallantry and piety of this young man) they descried
land; which proved to be the mountains of Mozambique, in Africa, not far from a
Portuguese colony. Thither they all safe arrived, where they remained till the
next ship from Lisbon passed by, and carried them to Goa. At that city, a
writer of credit assures us he himself saw them land, supped with the two
brothers that very night, and had the story from their own mouths."

CONTRAST the characters of a Cain and a Joseph, and you find fraternal
affection recommended at every point. The former, for his fraternal hatred,
driven from society, stigmatized by the hand of God, made an outcast and a
vagabond, hated and despised by all his fellow creatures. The latter you behold
melting with fraternal love, forgiving every injury, providing for his father's
house, weeping over the necks of his brethren who once sought his destruction,
bowing with reverence to an ancient and venerable parent. While we feel emulous
of the character of Joseph, how do we shrink with horror from the fratricide of
Cain!

SO many and great are the advantages of union and affection among brothers and
sisters, that it would not be an easy task to specify them. "The sweet peace
and satisfaction, diffused through families; the ease and alacrity with which all
offices are discharged, when every member is desirous to be first in his
services; the surprising velocity with which the minds of youth develop, and
spring into utility and beauty, by reciprocal information and assistance; and
the delightful multiplication of joy, by being reflected from every countenance
and every heart!" These are affecting objects of contemplation, and yet they
express but a part of the advantages of brotherly and sisterly affection, and
domestic union.

LETTER LXXIV.
I SHALL not, perhaps, find a more convenient place to notice the manner in
which Mr. Bloomsgrove's servants were treated, than the present. On the right
management of this class of the family, and on the conduct of children toward
them, depend a large share of domestic tranquillity and enjoyment. Of all the
troubles and difficulties which infest domestic life, there is scarce one which
is so fruitful a source of complaint, as the badness of servants; and it must
be granted that there is much room for it. I will hazard a conjecture, that, if
the truth was known, there is nothing of which servants so much complain, as
the want of kindness and gentle usage in masters and mistresses. "IT is the
government that corrupts the people; not the people, the government. Reform the
masters; and you will have no great reason to complain of servants."


THAT servants should be subject to government, is readily granted; but this
ought to be exercised agreeable to the rights of human nature, and with a kind
allowance for its imperfections; and it should be so exercised, as to secure
their esteem and affection as well as submission. How can it be expected that a
servant will be faithful to his master, while he is constantly suffering injury
from the abuse of his authority? Or how can good natured and cheerful services
be looked for from a servant, who is always harrassed and irritated by the
peevishness of his mistress?

IN a country, where the division of property approaches so near an equality as
in the United States, particularly in New England, and where the government is
founded in equality, servitude will be lighter than in those countries, where
custom has established a greater and more decided distinction. It must
therefore be conducted on different principles. Those who attempt to influence
their servants, of whatever description, by the exercise of benevolence and
mildness, will find it much more effectual, than the exertion of mere
authority. They will be more faithful, because obedience will be a pleasure;
and more useful, because the service will be more cheerful. Ideas of
superiority, and of the power we possess of commanding, may prevent our
condescending to court the esteem and affection of a servant; but a contrary
conduct renders them hostile to us. "ALL tyrannical governments have perfidious
subjects; and the perfidy is nearly in proportion to the degree of illicit, or
capricious power. It is impracticable to have good servants, as it is to have
good subjects, without rendering the terms of connection equitable."
They may obey for awhile from fear or necessity, but will take the earliest
opportunity to retaliate, and will never do any thing more than the force of
authority compels them to do.

MRS. --, a lady of respectable character, who now lives in --, has many
excellent qualities, is famed for piety, and it is confidently said she has but
one fault, and that is, her conduct toward her servants. This indeed is of
such magnitude, as to absorb many good qualities, and to cast a shade over the
most brilliant character. It is said, she often entertains her friends with
tedious tales of the vileness and ill behavior of her servants. She has charity
for almost every one else, but none for them. She often laments, as a good
woman, the weakness and infirmity of human nature; but appears to expect from
her servants a conduct, which we are to look for only from beings who have none
of those imperfections. It is reported that some of her servants have ventured
to say, that, although she is called a good woman, yet she is severe and unkind
toward them; that she is never satisfied with what they do, even when they do
their utmost to please her; and I am inclined to believe that the report is not
without foundation, for she often changes them. Her husband makes no
pretensions to religion. He is a man of quick and violent passions, and is
governed in all his conduct by present feelings. But although he is passionate,
capricious, and sometimes very severe, yet he does at times treat them with
kindness, and is willing to allow that they have some merit.

IN order to make servants faithful, and render them submissive to order and
government, we must secure their esteem and affection; then every thing will go
on easy and agreeable. But, if we undertake to procure submission by the force
of authority only, the task will be arduous, and our eye must be perpetually
over them; we must issue our orders in a peremptory tone, and, after all, must
frequently endure the painful jealousy of undutifulness, and want of fidelity.
On the contrary, if, by our equity and gentleness toward servants, we secure
their affection, we have the best possible influence over them. They will not
only be subservient to our pleasure, but be so with cheerfulness. Feeling
interested in our persons, they will extend the same affection to all our
affairs, and every thing that concerns us; and seeing us have some regard to
their ease and convenience, they will aim as much as possible to please us.
While this attachment secures their fidelity, it relieves us of many anxieties
and exertions, which would otherwise be unavoidable.

MR. Bloomsgrove had the most entire government over his household. But his
servants were more afraid of displeasing him, than of being punished. They
obey, because they love him. They feel interested in all his interests, and
troubled in all his troubles. They feel themselves rich, because they think he
is so; and they consider all his misfortunes as befalling themselves. He
reigned securely in their affection, and possessed an authority over them, on
all occasions cordially acknowledged, without seeming to be asserted.

MRS. Bloomsgrove was the idol of her servants, and every thing depends on the
mistress of a family with respect to them. They were loud in her praises; for
she always treated them with great humanity and tenderness. She considered them
as fellow creatures, placed indeed in a lower station, but not the less
entitled to kind and gentle usage. She ever considered it a dictate of
humanity, to render a state of servitude and dependence as light and easy as
possible. She viewed them as friends of humbler rank. She never descended to a
familiarity which lessened her in their esteem; and if, at any time, they
presumed too far upon her goodness, she knew how to preserve her dignity. She
was careful to see them well instructed in their duty to God, and to one
another, as well as to do the office of menial domestics. In order to this,
proper books were provided and kept for them; for they were all taught to read
who fell within the reach of her care. Nothing could be a finer stroke of
domestic policy, separate from religious considerations. By thus appearing to
have an interest in their happiness, it rendered her very dear to them, and
made them hold her in high veneration.

THE character and condition of servants requires some degree of distance and
reserve on our part, of humility and reverence on theirs: but all this may
consist with a degree of familiarity, especially of equity and kindness, to
which they have the fairest claim, as well from the service rendered, as from
the equality of nature; and if we consider that we have all one master, to whom
we are amenable for all our conduct toward each other, in our various
relations, we shall find sufficient reason to induce us to a just and equitable
conduct toward that part of our own species, whose misfortune it is to be
subject to the will of others.

THE lowest domestic is entitled not only to civility, but to benevolent and
kind usage from every member of the family. In some families you see them
treated in a taunting, overbearing manner, by children, and the younger parts
of the family, who are supported in such ungenerous conduct by their parents;
but nothing can be more cruel and impolitic. It is cruel, because it is a
violation of the laws of nature and humanity. It is impolitic, because it sours
their mind against those whom they serve, and renders them less desirous to
please, and more averse to the service.

MRS. Bloomsgrove taught her children from infancy, to speak kindly to the
servants, and to ask, not command, them to do any service they wish from them.
"They are not your servants, my dear," said she to Osander, who was refused by
a servant to whom he had spoken in a domineering tone. Caspina, a maid servant,
never refuses any service to Rozella; for she asks in so kind and gentle a
manner, that she who does the service seems to be the most obliged. Rozella
never forgets her, when she has any cake or fruit, but always imparts a share
to Caspina. The present is of little worth, but the notice and attention are of
inestimable value. Her mamma affords her a constant example of tenderness and
attention to servants. She lends them every seasonable aid, and never trusts
one servant wholly to the care of another in case of sickness; but visits their
apartments herself, and sees that every thing comfortable is provided for them;
and the whole of the family express a most friendly sympathy on those
occasions. "If one member suffers, all the members suffer with it."

TO the kind and affectionate manner in which they treated their servants, is
to be ascribed the diligence and fidelity for which they were remarkable.
Contented and happy in their station, they were ever disposed to do their duty
from motives of affection as well as of interest. It was their aim, not only to
escape the reproaches of their own conscience, but to enjoy the good will and
applause of those whom they served. How amiable must that master and mistress
have been, who could thus "enchant beings, the very best of whom can scarce
pardon us for their servitude, or for our superiority!"

LETTER LXXV.
IN forming and preserving the morals of youth, two things are especially
necessary to be regarded. They are, the pernicious effects of bad company and
bad books. As these are different sources of the same kind of corruption, I
shall mention them separately, and begin with vitiated associates as the origin
of the greatest evil, because it commences at a much earlier period than the
other.

MAN is formed for society; and, in a state of absolute solitude, there can be
no enjoyment. Our joys are insipid, when alone; and our sorrows insupportable,
without a friend. "From society proceed all the refined comforts and superior
enjoyments of life; and from society, (so very much mixed are all human
blessings) proceed the greatest advantages and evils of life. Good society is
no less difficult to attain, than it is advantageous when attained. Evil
society, as common as the air, is as blasting to the manners, as that air, when
it bears on its noxious wings pestilence and disease." So true is this, that it
became a sacred maxim, that "Evil communications corrupt good manners." And it
is an adage of long standing, "Tell me with whom you go, and I will tell you
what you are."

MRS Bloomsgrove, who appears to have studied human nature with great
attention, was extremely cautious on this head. Lest the minds of her children
should be tainted with the bad qualities of others, she endeavored to find
amusements for them at home; and when they went abroad, she commonly
accompanied them, or rather carried them with her on visits when young; and
afterward she and her husband were very watchful over the characters of the
youth with whom they associated. Boys are in much more danger from this quarter
than girls: they have more opportunities, and less caution: they have need
therefore of more constant watchfulness. If they are suffered to mix intimately
with rude, disorderly children, they will insensibly contract similar habits,
which will baffle all dry lessons to the contrary.

AN intimacy therefore was encouraged between Osander, Philo, and two or three
others of good disposition and decent manners. With these he was permitted to
make a little party at home, and sometimes at their houses. On these occasions
they were indulged full latitude in innocent mirth; to walk in the garden, and
to gather fruit for themselves. It was by means of an early acquaintance with
boys of this cast, that Osander had a taste for good company only; and it made
it no difficult thing, to preserve him free from the danger of vicious
companions. His ear became too delicate for the vile language of the profane,
and the vociferous mirth of the rude. His taste was too refined and elevated,
to receive any pleasure from companions whose enjoyments consisted in a
gambling table, a tavern, or the gratification of some vitiated appetite. No
one sees his companions with more pleasure, or has a higher relish for social
enjoyments; but associates in vice have no charms for him.

LOOSE and dissolute companions proved the bane of Misander; and these are the
most formidable enemies a young man is in danger of. From the very nature of
social union, he will study to be assimilated to his companions, and they will
strive to make him so, for without likeness there can be no complacency. Under
the ruins of such connexions lie buried many a promising youth, the hope of his
parents; many a splendid genius, the pride of human nature, and which promised
great public usefulness. Instances innumerable might be summoned to the present
purpose, but I shall satisfy myself with the following.

A WRITER of reputation, speaking of prince Eugene of Soissons, says -- "All
those qualifications and endowments that can procure love and esteem, shone
conspicuous in this young prince. A graceful person, the most engaging
affability and sweetness of temper, a quick understanding, an heroic ardor, a
skill in the sciences, and other parts of polite literature (which was the more
extraordinary in a prince then but fifteen years of age) united to justify the
exalted hopes conceived of him. He showed a strong inclination to a military
life, and at that early period was inuring himself to it; so that commonly a
bare board served him for a pillow. The king had taken the greatest care of his
education, and suffered him to be ignorant of no branch of knowledge, which
might contribute to his future advancement.

"TO keep him out of the way of public diversions and other dissipations, he
resided at a distance from court, having apartments at the riding academy:
there he gave himself up to the study of the sciences, with such intenseness
and application, that he scarce came to court once in a week, nor appeared at
any public diversions. The apartments of the prince and his excellent tutor
were full of a philosophical apparatus, and mathematical instruments; of the
construction and use of which the prince had gained a perfect knowledge, as it
were by way of diversion. He allowed himself no other amusements, but such as
improve, as well as divert the mind; and was as fond of these as too many young
gentlemen are of diversions which tend to alienate their minds from any intense
application, and render them unable to bear the least hardship.

"HOW great things were to be expected from a prince of such endowments, so
disposed to the worthiest pursuits, so closely applying himself to them, making
so happy a progress in them! Alas! every pleasing expectation formed of him
proved, in the event, vain! Bad companions insinuated themselves into his
esteem; bad examples found him unable to withstand them: when the vicious were
his companions, their manners were no longer his abhorrence. By associating
himself with them, he soon became as abandoned as the worst of them; and in a
few years, having lost his virtue, he unhappily lost his life.

"THERE cannot be a stronger or more melancholy proof of the fatal influence,
which bad company and bad examples have over the best cultivated and best
disposed minds. How then can others expect to avoid the contagion, tho ever so
carefully informed and well inclined, if they are hardy enough to venture into
the midst of it; even when they see before their eyes a youth, thus well
trained, blasted at once, and all his fair blossoms withering, ere they were
ripened into promised fruit?"

BISHOP Burnett gives us the following account of the learned and pious Sir
Matthew Hale -- That when a youth he was too much addicted to the society of
some vicious people, which he did not break off, till an alarming accident
drove him from it. Being invited with some other young students to a carouse
out of town, one of the company drank to such excess, that he fell down as dead
before them. All present were terrified, and used every means in their power to
recover him again to himself. The circumstance so affected Mr. Hale, who had
remonstrated against the excess, that he went into another room, and shutting
the door, fell on his knees, and prayed earnestly to God, both for his friend,
that he might be restored to life again, and that himself might be forgiven for
having countenanced such excesses. He also vowed to God, that he never would
again keep company in that manner, nor drink another health while he lived. His
friend recovered, and Mr. Hale most religiously observed his vow, till his
dying day. It was this great man's resolution, drawn up by him in writing for
his own private use, with regard to company (among other articles of conduct)
to "do good to them; to use God's name reverently, while with them; and to
receive good from them, if they were more knowing than himself."

AN English poet has beautifully expressed the advantage of associating with
the wise and virtuous, in the following couplet.

"Who can travel through the Arabian grove^,
And not bear thence some fragrance?"
LETTER LXXVI.
THE oldest library of which we have any account, was that established among
the Egyptians, by their king Osymandias; and upon the front of it was the
following inscription, "MEDECIN FOR THE MIND." This was expressive of the true
design of books. But it is with books, as it is with society; they are the
occasion of much good to the world, and vehicles of great mischief. Bad company
and bad books have a similar effect on the mind; they corrupt and debauch the
heart, while they please the fancy. It is a melancholy reflection, that such
books should be extant. But so it is. The world abounds with them; and they are
generally written in order to catch the imagination of the reader, and beguile
into vice and error unawares. I do not confine the idea to books of infidelity,
professedly written to undermine the beautiful fabric of christianity, but
extend it to all books which have a tendency to serve the cause of immorality,
and to be the foul vehicles of indecency, obscenity, and profanity.

IT is therefore a great happiness for children to have parents, who are able
to judge of the merit of books, and to direct them to the choice of the best
authors; and those parents who are not conversant with books, should consult
those who are esteemed judges of them. Much time is wasted, even by those who
wish to read useful books, for want of a proper selection of the best authors,
and a judicious arrangement of them. Mrs. Bloomsgrove, whose mind was
enlightened by extensive reading, as well as ennobled by virtue and
benevolence, had the principal direction of her daughter's reading, as we have
already seen. Her husband, of blessed memory, provided books suitable for both
his children, and all his family. He took care to keep from their sight, when
quite young, the wretched trash with which the world abounds. The free access
which many young people have to romances, novels, and plays, has poisoned the
mind and corrupted the morals of many a promising youth; and prevented others
from improving their minds in ^seful knowledge.

I MEAN not to pass an indiscriminate censure on all writings of this stamp;
but on a promiscuous and an indiscriminate use of them. Parents take care to
feed their children with wholesome diet; and yet how unconcerned about the
provision for the mind, whether they are furnished with salutary food, or with
trash, chaff, or poison? How many thousands have, by a free use of such books,
corrupted their principles, inflamed their imagination, and vitiated their
taste, without balancing the account by any solid advantage?

IT was never the wish of Mr. Bloomsgrove to deprive his children of the
innocent pleasures of imagination. But he collected for them the writings of
the best poets, historians, travels, characters, geography, elements of natural
philosophy, and books of taste and elegance, miscellaneous, moral, and
entertaining. He used them to give him some account of the books they read.
This method made them read with attention and recollection. In the evening, he
would often inquire how they had passed their time; what they had read, and
what improvement they had made; and when they had read a book through, he would
request them to favor him with a particular account, in their own language, of
the subject, the author's design, and their opinion of the execution of the
work. In the course of this conversation, he would make his own remarks and
observations, which made it a scene of entertainment and instruction.

BESIDES, that they were prevented by these means from reading books
prejudicial to them, many advantages arose from rendering an account of what
they read. They found it was necessary to read with attention, and to make the
subject their own, by digesting it in their own minds; and were sure to be set
right, if they had mistaken the writer's design. Many take upon trust whatever
they read, especially upon a favorite topic, and never consider the objections
which lie against it. Others run over books in so cursory a manner, that they
scarcely collect a sentiment from what they read. They exert no powers of the
mind, in order to pluck the flowers which are scattered up and down the
unfolding pages, as they go on. If books of ill fame and bad tendency should be
read even in this manner, they may be sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the
end, for the lurking poison will be imperceptibly conveyed through the system,
and, if repeated, will corrupt the whole mass.

ANOTHER thing which contributed much to their improvement, was their being
directed to keep a common place book, to note the material occurrences, the
books they read, the subjects on which they treated, with their own comments
upon them, and to transcribe some of the most remarkable passages they
contained. This proved a very great advantage to them, both on account of
preserving the knowledge they acquired, and also of maturing their judgment.
While many other young people, who had read no less than they, could recollect
little more of a book than the author's name, they could give a good account of
their contents.

APROPOS -- I consider it a circumstance most auspicious to the rising
generation, that our country now abounds with books suitable to every age, and
both sexes. From the lisping infant to the full grown youth, there are books
suited to please and instruct; which beguile to virtue, ^hile they invite the
reader to gratify his imagination. How much is it to be lamented that books of
an opposite cast, with which the country also abounds, should be read with so
much avidity by young people! and how unhappy it is "that any of our species
should be so lost to all sense of shame, and all feelings of conscience, as to
sit down deliberately, and compile a work, entirely in the cause of vice and
immorality; a work, which, for aught they know, may serve to pollute the minds
of millions, and propagate contagion and iniquity through generations yet unborn;
living and spreading its baneful effects long after the unhappy hand, which
wrote, is mouldered into dust!"

"WORDS, says Mr. Addison, are the transcript of those ideas, which are in the
mind of man. Writing and printing are the transcript of words. As the Supreme
Being has expressed, and, as it were, printed his ideas in the creation, men
express their ideas in books; which, by this great invention of latter ages,
may last as long as the sun and moon, and perish only in the general wreck of
nature. Books are the legacies which a great genius leaves to mankind, and
which are delivered down from generation to generation, as presents to the
posterity of those who are yet unborn. Now, if writings are thus durable,
(continues he) and may pass from age to age, throughout the whole course of
time, how careful should an author be of committing any thing to print, that
may corrupt posterity, and poison the minds of men with vice and error? Writers
of great talents, who employ them in propagating immorality, and seasoning
vicious sentiments with wit and humor, are to be looked upon as pests to
society, and the enemies of mankind. They leave books behind them to scatter
infection, and destroy their posterity. They act the counterparts of a
Confucius, or a Socrates; and seem, as it were, sent into the world to deprave
human nature, and sink it into the condition of brutality."

DR. Young expresses his indignation at such prostitution of genius, in the
following animated strain.

"THE flowers of eloquence, profusely poured
Over vice, fill half the lettered world;
As if to magic numbers' powerful charm
'Twas given to make a civet of their song
Obscene, and sweeten ordure to perfume.
Wit, a true pagan, deifies the brute,
And lifts his swine enjoyments from the mire:
Can powers of genius exercise their page,
And consecrate enormities with song?"
"ART, cursed art! wipes off the indebted blush
From nature's cheek, and bronzes every shame.
Man smiles in ruin, glories in his guilt,
And infamy stands candidate for praise."
NIGHT THOUGHTS, 5. THE complaint here made, applies principally to foreign
writings and foreign manners. May this rising empire cease to import both the
one and the other!

LETTER LXXVII.
ON the subject of religion, mankind are crumbled into an almost infinite
variety of schemes; and, not satisfied with enjoying that which their
education, or their own choice, led them to embrace, have poured out torrents
of abuse upon others.

MR. Bloomsgrove, being a person of an independent spirit, and disregarding the
terms of reproach with which ignorance or intolerance would guard its
usurpations, pursued his own judgment in the religious instruction of his
family. His first object was, to stamp on their docile minds, an impression of
a benevolent Deity; not doubting but such an impression, early made, would
become a ruling principle of action.

IT was placing morals on a sure footing, to assist their young minds in
forming some idea of a Supreme Being, and to cherish suitable affections
toward him, as a continual spring of good actions. A regard to personal
interest or reputation, may induce a man of business to punctuality and honesty
in his dealings. A love of praise may excite to many actions of useful
tendency; and a variety of motives may operate in disposing men to preserve a
fair character; but no respect may be had in all this to any fixed principles
of action. As God is the supreme object of all religious exercises, so a
conduct flowing from respect to him will be steady and uniform, like the motive
itself. This depends not on any present apparent good, nor on the opinion of
the world; but on the sense of moral obligation; and as the authority of God is
invariable, and extends to the intention as well as the action, so to have this
moral sense cherished in the mind, will afford the most effectual security
against vice, however secretly it may be practiced, and will be a constant
stimulus to virtue, tho it be not seen of men.

THERE can be very little doubt, that where the morals of youth are preserved
pure, religion will have its proper influence in the heart. Religion is natural
to man; and so long as the human heart can be guarded against acquired
corruption, it will feel a tendency to the indulgence of devotion. Sensibility,
refined and elevated affections, will mark its character in this state of
purity. But in proportion as vice is suffered to make its inroads, that
delicacy and susceptibility, with which nature usually furnishes the heart,
will be destroyed; "and in the general extinction of our better qualities, it
is no wonder that a sentiment so pure as that of piety, should be one of the
first to expire. It is certain that the understanding may be improved in a
knowledge of the world, and in the arts of succeeding in it, while the heart,
or whatever constitutes the moral and sentimental feelings, is gradually
receding from its original perfection. Indeed, experience seems to evince, that
it is hardly possible to arrive at the character of a complete man of the
world, without losing many of the most valuable sentiments of uncorrupted
nature. A complete man of the world is an artificial being. He has discarded
many of the native and laudable tendencies of his mind, and adopted a new
system of obj^cts and propensities of his own creation. These are commonly such
as tend directly to blunt the sense of every thing liberal, enlarged, and
disinterested; of every thing, which participates more of an intellectual than
of a sensual nature."

MR. Bloomsgrove took great care to preserve this moral sensibility; and always
directed the minds of his children to God, as the first object of all religious
regard. This he considered as the great principle which binds together
universal intelligence, and leads all rational beings up to the common source.
Without this nothing can be secure; no actions or promises, relied upon; all
appearances must be delusive; morality, but a name, a sign without the thing
signified; society must crumble to pieces, and all things fall into confusion!

SINCE, then, religion is the great combining power which unites the moral
world, and secures the order and course of things among men, without some
degree of which they could not subsist, and with the highest degree of it would
be entirely happy, how wise a part did Mr. Bloomsgrove act, in cherishing it in
his children! As this could not be effected but by communicating just ideas of
the Deity, he conceived it a duty of indispensable obligation to second the
voice of nature (which has engraven on the mind the being of a God and the
worship due to him) by more explicit instruction.

BEFORE Osander and Rozella were able to comprehend any consistent idea of a
Supreme Being, their mamma always represented him in the most pleasing and
amiable light; in such a light, as was calculated to dispel gloominess, inspire
love, and contribute to serenity and cheerfulness of mind. This had a most
happy effect on their dispositions; and led th^^ to form the most pleasing idea
of the divine character, when they were capable of receiving more rational
instruction concerning it. At this period, they were taught to look up to God
as their heavenly father and friend; that they ought to perform his will, which
is to do all the good in their power; that God is always present, and that not
a thought can be concealed from him. These instructions were accompanied with
descriptions of the Deity, as kind and benevolent; conducting all things for
the good of his creatures; always countenancing the virtuous, and rewarding
them, if not in this life, yet most certainly in a life to come. They described
him as the friend of the good, and the enemy of none but the wicked, whom he
readily forgives and receives to favor, when they repent. "As your papa and I,
said Mrs. Bloomsgrove, when instructing them one day on this subject, are never
displeased with you, my dear children, except when you behave amiss, so our
heavenly father is "angry with the wicked only*" Good children, continued she,
are not afraid of their parents; and they have no reason to be afraid of their
heavenly parent."

"AS it is a capital branch of education, I think the most capital, says Lord
Kaimes, it merits great attention. It is easy to fortify in children the belief
of a Deity, because his existence is engraved on the human heart; but it is far
from being easy to fortify belief, so as to become a ruling principle of
action: and yet this is indispensable; for belief, without producing that
effect, is of little significancy in any case; and least of all with respect to
the duties of religion, which are the great and ultimate end of instruction. In
order that a firm belief of the Deity may warm the mind to persevere in what is
right, the following hints may be of use to parents and tutors.

"TAKE early and proper opportunities of talking pleasantly to your children of
their heavenly father, who loves them, and who, tho unseen, is always doing
them good; that he created the sun to warm them, and made the earth to produce
every thing necessary for their nourishment, and for their clothing. In fine
weather, lead them to the fields, and point out to them the various beauties of
nature. 'How beautiful that smooth plain, intersected with a stream perpetually
flowing! how comfortable to the eye its verdure, and how beneficial, by giving
food to many innocent and useful animals! Behold that gay parterre, variegated
with a thousand sweet colors. See that noble oak spreading its branches all
around, affording a shade in summer, and shelter in winter. Listen to the birds
which cheer us with their music, and are busily employed in bringing forth
their young.' Impress it upon the minds of your children, that all these things
are contrived by our heavenly father to make us happy; and that it ought to be
our chief delight to testify upon all occasions our gratitude to him."

THE parents of Osander and Rozella, who conducted their religious education in
this manner, were happy in finding that it prevented them from entertaining any
of those frightful notions of the Deity, which were formerly thought to
constitute the essence of ^eligion. In those ages, when superstition reared its
sable standard, and taught men that, to serve God with fear and dread was the
only acceptable manner of worshipping him, the Deity was represented as severe
and unforgiving. Nothing could be more pernicious to the cause of religion,
than such ideas of its author. Weak minds, it rendered abject and servile; but
the bold and the inconsiderate became totally negligent of religion. But as men
acquired more rational notions of the Deity, the gloom of superstition
dissipated, as vapor before the rising sun.

MR. Bloomsgrove took an early and unceasing care to cherish the devout
affections in his children, while his eye watched over the other passions of
nature, which were springing up. "The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom;"
of religious knowledge and practice. But the love of God is the parent of
devotion in the heart. Whenever they admired the sun's refulgent beams, the
full orbed moon, or any of the striking beauties of nature, he endeavored to
raise their thoughts to the Creator; to set before them his greatness and
majesty, without those terrors that might drive them from the contemplation,
but inspire them with a glow of piety and gratitude. In their seasons of
recreation and innocent delights, he would represent him as the indulgent
parent, from whose bounty they enjoyed such blessings, and who, at all times,
can bestow every good, and guard from every pain and evil. In sickness he
recommended to them to bear it patiently, because they were in the hands of
God, who will do what is best for them; and because he will reward their
patience in a proper time. It was by means of this cheerful doctrine, early
instilled into their minds, that they acquired a habit of looking up to the
Deity in the amiable light of friend and benefactor, while awe and veneration,
free from servile dread, composed their minds.

AT the age of twenty, Rozella affords to her sex a most pleasing example of
piety; and whatever advantage religion can receive from the luster of female
accomplishments, it derives from her. In the midst of youthful life, and polite
circles, she never forgets who, and what she is. She never does any thing of
consequence, without first considering whether it will be agreeable to her
maker, and satisfactory to her own mind, upon reflection. Her life is cheerful,
because it is innocent: She is universally beloved, because unexceptionably
good, and uniformly pious.

OSANDER having been trained in the belief of an om^^present being, whose
providence super^ntends all his works, felt the sentiment to be an effectual
security against vice and dissimulation. Accustomed to consider himself always
in the actual presence of an all seeing Deity, he would as soon think of
attempting to hide his intentions from himself as from his maker. The
intercourse with heaven which they had maintained by habit from childhood,
became their delightful employment, when they arrived at mature age. They fly
to God as their best friend, and only sure protector in every difficulty; and
pour out their hearts in grateful praises for his favors. With pleasure they
retire to pray unto him, who sees in secret and will reward openly; and they
find more exalted and permanent enjoyment in such devout exercises, than in
seasons devoted to mirth and gaiety.

DEEPLY impressed with a conviction of the truth and importance of revealed
religion; it was an object of peculiar attention with these worthy parents, to
make their children acquainted with its principles and doctrines, as their
minds opened to receive them. Although they led them on in their own mode of
worship, which they considered the indispensable duty of all parents, yet they
were assiduously taught that these differences of sentiment, and modes of
worship, which they observed among Christians, afforded no just ground of
discord; that all persecution on account of religion, or strife and contention
about modes and forms of it, must be repugnant to that system, the design of
which was to establish peace on earth, and to promote good will among men; that
religion was given for our good, and therefore that any scheme of it, which has
a tendency to disturb the peace, or endanger the safety of society, comes not
from God. They were taught that the Christian religion consists, not in
external forms and appearances, but in truth and sincerity, and in the practice
of every substantial virtue; that modes of faith or worship are nothing more
than signs, and that love and charity, truth and righteousness, are the things
signified; and therefore that different sentiments or modes, which have a
tendency to promote these, do not hinder Christians of all denominations from
living together amicably. The state of human nature was represented to them as
degraded by sin, and exposed by transgression to the heaviest penalties; but
that a remedy is provided in Jesus Christ; that the Gospel contains the most
astonishing display of God's mercy to a revolting world; that it is a scheme of
benevolence, suited to engage the warmest gratitude to its great author; and
that it is divinely accommodated to the nature and condition of man, and suited
to inspire mutual forbearance, kindness, and condescension; that it opens the
door of hope, which human apostasy had closed; that it teaches us wherein our
true interest consists in this world, and holds up to view a state of
transcendent glory and felicity in that which is to come.

THESE sentiments, I doubt not, will meet your approbation, notwithstanding all
that is said against p^dicing children in favor of this or the other scheme of
religion. The object is not to make them sectaries, but good hearted
Christians. How can this be done but by the use of some means? and what means
shall parents employ, but those which they have sound salutary to themselves?
You and I, my dear sir, have assumed different modes in the external profession
of religion. In the spirit of it I trust we perfectly agree. In the religious
education of our families, it is equally fit and proper that we lead them in
the way in which we respectively walk.

LETTER LXXVIII.
SURE I am that you will not admit Rousseau's plan of religious instruction. He
says it should be deferred till fifteen, or even eighteen years of age, because
"the idea which a young mind forms of God is low and unworthy of him;" and
because "it is better to have no ideas of God than such as are injurious." The
same objection will hold against cultivating a sense of Deity upon the mind at
all, for at best our notions of him must be gross and imperfect: and, as to
having ideas injurious, because childish, I conceive there can be no danger
from this quarter, if he is represented in the amiable light above described.
"Will not the idea of divine benevolence be relished, while pleasure and hope
combine to make the morning of life serene? Is there a likelier means of
averting injurious thoughts of God, than presenting such as are just?" A mind,
early enlightened with views of the divine goodness, and touched with the
participation of it, is prepared to meet with temporary evils, and to discern
goodness through the veil. But if religious instruction is deferred till the late
period mentioned by Rousseau, there is very little reason to expect that it
will ever be attended to. Such persons must pass through life, destitute of the
surest guide; and through death, without the light of religion to illumine, or a
ray of hope to cheer their passage through the gloomy vale.

"THE propriety of prayer, says the noble writer before mentioned, is seldom
questioned, except by philosophers."

ROUSSEAU says, "I thank God for his favors, but I do not pray to him. What
should I ask?" He professes "not to philosophize with his pupil, but to assist
him in consulting his own heart." And is there not in the heart a tendency to
prayer strongly felt, at times; as in dangers that human power cannot avert; in
perplexity, from which human prudence cannot extricate; under sorrow, for which
this world yields no consolation, and under the pangs of an awakened
conscience? Was it not a dictate of the heart, which made the mothers in Israel
bring their little children to Jesus, that he might lay his hands on them and
pray?

"SHORT forms of prayer are of use at first. As children advance, let the form
be varied. Let it express a sense of dependence, gratitude, and a desire to
grow in favor with God and men. Let prayer to God be made with reverence.
Reverence may be felt, even before the object of it is distinctly apprehended.
From that sympathetic reverence which the solemnities of worship excite, the
mind gradually rises to an invisible object.

"THE preparation of the heart is necessary. It may be prepared by elevating
views of nature: -- 'The heavens declare the glory of God:' they declare it to
the inhabitants of the earth. 'There is no speech nor language, where their
voice is not heard.' 'Their awful and majestic silence speaks the language of
every people. It speaks to the heart of every man.' Before that powerful and
benign Majesty, let us bow and worship. Views of providence may in like manner
prepare the heart. 'I wound and I heal. I kill and I make alive.' To that
being, in whose hand our life is, and who alone can make us happy, let us
devote ourselves. Select passages of scripture may be used to predispose the
heart. Prayer degenerates into rote, if the heart is not prepared. While you
pray with and for your children, the principles of devotion in their minds
unfold. In that sacred hour, they feel themselves the objects of tender
affection: they perceive that you are as dependent as they; that blessings must
be derived from a higher hand on yourselves and on them. The stated and avowed
exercise of devotion, is the only remedy against false shame; the strongest
arguments cannot overcome it. Let parents who believe in the efficacy of
prayer, and who are yet ashamed to pray, deliver their children from the same
temptation. When the habit of praying daily is acquired, devout thoughts
associate with the hour of prayer. The impression of God's presence, often
renewed, checks temptation, and strengthens virtue, and establishes
tranquillity of mind on a good foundation."

IF love to men is promoted by exciting and regulating sentiments of humanity
at an early period, may not love to God be promoted by raising devout
sentiments, before the heart is occupied by the cares and pleasures of this
life?

TO you, my dear children, said Mr. Bloomsgrove, as he (...) walking with them,
his nephew, and Fanny, on the margin of the river, one evening when the setting
sun had cast in soft shades all the beauties of nature, I recommend piety to
the great author of all the wonders we here survey. Piety is the surest
foundation of morals, the best guard against the evils to which you are exposed
in life, and the only unfailing source of comfort under them. It is a
disposition most graceful and becoming in youth, and it argues great
sensibility of heart. The want of it implies a coldness of heart, and an
insensibility which does not belong to your period of life.

YOUTH, continued Mr. Bloomsgrove, is the season of warm and generous emotions.
Then should the heart spontaneously rise into the admiration of what is great;
glow with the love of what is fair and excellent; and melt at the discovery of
tenderness and goodness: and where, my dear children, can any object be found,
so proper to kindle these affections, as the great Father of the universe, and
the Author of all these beauties, which afford so much pleasure to the eye? If
the grandeur and majesty, which his works every where display have so agreeable
an effect on the mind, what reverence and pleasing awe must the contemplation
of his moral character inspire? -- He was here interrupted a few minutes, by
the arrival of Philo and his sister Aurelia, who had called on the young
gentlemen and ladies. After the introductory salutations were over, they made
some observation on the beautiful scenery which lay before them. Yes, said Mr.
Bloomsgrove, I was just conducting the minds of your young friends through these
effects, up to their original cause; and then repeated to Philo and his sister,
who were amiable youths, the substance of what he had been saying; and added;
you cannot, surely, my dear friends, view that profusion of good, which, in
this pleasing season of life, the beneficent hand of heaven pours around you,
without emotions of gratitude. God is seen in his works and felt in his favors.

YOU are now capable of tasting the pleasures of admiration and praise, of
trust and confidence, of society and friendship. Happy in the love and esteem
of your connexions and friends, you are to look up to the author of nature as
the inspirer of all the friendship which has been shown you by others; himself
your best friend, the supporter of your infancy, the guide of your childhood,
now, the guardian of your youth, and the hope of your coming years. You should
consider religious homage as a natural expression of gratitude to him, for all
his goodness; and let not your devotion be the cold and barren offspring of
speculation, but the warm and vigorous dictate of the heart, guided by the
light of the understanding.

MR. Bloomsgrove was prevented following the delightful subject any further at
that time, by the approach of night. Fearing that the heavy dew, which began to
fall, might injure their health, he proposed returning to the house. As they
were passing through the spiral walk, which ascended from the river to the summit
of the hill, inhaling the ambrosial sweets which perfumed the air, he took
occasion to display the beauties of virtue, and the sweet fragrance of
innocence, by analogy. His conversation* enlivened by those natural and
striking figures, appeared to his youthful friends, like "apples of gold in
pictures of silver."

THIS conversation, united to the pleasantness of the scene, had so engaged
their attention, that they were surprised to find themselves so soon arrived at
the house. Here Rozella entertained the company with a few sprightly airs on
the harpsichord, interluded by many pleasantries between the young people.
Having regaled themselves with fruit, and enjoyed a social hour in youthful
amusement, Aurelia reminded Mr. Bloomsgrove that he had promised to entertain
them with some account of the true art of pleasing, and very modestly said she
hoped he would now gratify them. Mr. Bloomsgrove, pleased at the delicate
manner in which Aurelia expressed her wish, replied, with a smile, "I find
promises made to young ladies are of indispensable obligation. But previous to
that, I will entertain you with a number or two of Mr. Addison's Spectator,
(which he then had in his hand) on a similar subject, if it is agreeable." They
all joined in requesting him to proceed; and, having read the numbers he
proposed, HOW much more rationally might many of the social hours of young
people be employed in reading some book of entertainment and improvement, than
in the too common custom of wasting them at cards, or in vain and unmeaning
conversation.
he complied with Aurelia's request, which was, indeed, the wish of all the
company. The substance of what he said on that subject, I shall endeavor to
collect and transmit you by the next post.

LETTER LXXIX.
TO render ourselves agreeable to each other by soft and graceful manners, is a
dictate of humanity. To do this from principles of benevolence, and without
dissimulation, is among the leading precepts of Christianity. I am sorry to
find that polite writers have recommended the art of pleasing upon different
grounds. Some learned writers, of austere virtue, have condemned the art of
pleasing, not only as having no connection with religion, but as inconsistent
with the purity and simplicity of its doctrines. While others, inattentive to
true excellence, have considered religion either as incompatible with, or no
ways related to the art of pleasing. The former we shall dismiss, with their
brother Diogenes, to his solitary tub, and endeavor to rectify the mistaken
notion of the other.

IF the true art of pleasing consists in an appearance of good dispositions and
amiable qualities, exhibited in an agreeable light, then the perfection of this
art must consist in possessing the qualities which we would display. For the
reality must certainly be more agreeable than an appearance only. Can any one
be more pleased with flattery and deceit than with truth and sincerity? Can
softness and plausibility of manners atone for the want of benevolence and
generosity? Or can attention, assiduity, and gracefulness, compensate for
meanness of spirit, hardness of heart, selfishness, and a total want of those
virtues which can flow only from opposite passions?

I WOULD recommend to you, my young friends, to exalt the talent of pleasing
above the fraudful arts of flattery and deceit: place it in the rank of virtues
sounded upon principle, and on the best dispositions of human nature. Indeed,
the virtues and the graces are much more nearly allied, than those who are the
advocates of the latter, without possessing the former, are sensible of. The
moral virtues, when clearly understood and reduced to practice, afford an
assemblage of every thing beautiful and excellent; and what can be more
agreeable than that placid serenity, by which image the true character of
religion is described? You will readily allow that good coin is, in all cases,
preferable to counterfeit; and it will never fail of having a currency from its
own intrinsic value. As much more valuable, and sure of success, are attempts
to please, when excited by morality and religion (to which all the
embellishments of external gracefulness may be added) than the tinsel outside
of false pretenders, with all their duplicity.

WHAT can be more conducive to the true art of pleasing, than that gentleness
of disposition and manners* that pliability of temper and conduct, which the
sublime morality of the gospel recommends? Whatever is malignant in its nature,
or hurtful in its tendency, religion roots out or corrects; and inculcates
whatever is just, mild, and candid. By curing the heart of its moral disorders,
eradicating pride, envy, malice, and all the malevolent passions, it destroys
the source of every thing disagreeable in manners; and, by inculcating the
opposite dispositions, promotes a system of conduct, which, without any guile
or deceit, cannot fail of being agreeable.

TO form an opinion of the different effects of that pleasing art which flows
from principle, and that which is void of sincerity, contrast the character of
Mr. M -- with that of Mr. N --. The former is distinguished by the softness and
gentleness of his address: assiduous to please, he assumes every appearance of
benevolence, generosity, and friendship, especially toward people of fashion
and fortune; and his attentions, assiduities, and gracefulness, procure him a
favorable reception among those who are pleased with varnished qualities, which
are not supported by any thing within corresponding to them. Under this
disguise, lurk meanness, selfishness, and avarice. In his private character, he
is as remarkable for cruelty to his servants, uncharitableness to the poor, and
the want even of an appearance of friendship or benevolence to those, whose
riches or rank do not lead him to cultivate their favor, as he is for the
elegance of his manners in polite circles.

ON the other hand, Mr. N --, whose actions are the true index of his heart,
possesses qualities equally capable of pleasing all, without the danger of
offending any by the want of virtue and benevolence. To the polite address of
an accomplished gentleman, he unites all the virtues of the Christian. He
evidently derives his talent at pleasing, not from the study of the world, not
from an appearance of qualities which disguise real deformities; but from the
amiable dispositions of the heart, expressed in his graceful and obliging
manners. As he possesses the substantial powers of pleasing, polished by a
taste for society, he is under no necessity of injuring his conscious feelings,
by assuming deceitful appearances without any reality: and, what is of more
consequence to his happiness, than pleasing others, he will be satisfied with
himself; and, on a review of life, will enjoy tranquillity of mind, unalloyed
by the recollection of treachery and deceit. -- The conversation was here
interrupted by the arrival of Angelina, Fanny's sister, who, combining in one
fair form all the virtues and the graces, was justly entitled to the elegant
person and ample fortune of young Mr. --, to whom she had been united in
marriage a few months since: and Philo and his sister returned home much
pleased with THE ART OF PLEASING. "IT is certain that the art of pleasing which
is founded on sincere principles, and derived from religion and morality, is as
far superior to that base art, which consists in simulation and dissimulation,
as the roseate hue on the cheek of Hebe, to the painted visage of an haggard
courtezan." --

KNOX.


P. S. WHERE can be found a better man, or a more polite gentleman, than the
late Dr. C --, of Boston, whose death you so much regretted when I saw you
last? In him united the gentleman, the scholar, and the Christian. The happy
assemblage of these qualities in his character, endeared him to his numerous
acquaintance, and rendered him more extensively useful: and while religion
received luster from his literary and polite accomplishments, these, in turn,
derived their greatest power of pleasing from religion.

LETTER LXXX.
IT is a circumstance very desirable, that parents should be agreed in
sentiment upon the importance of observing the sabbath, and of attending upon
public worship with their families. An attendance on public worship has ever
been considered, by all wise and good men, a decent avowal of piety. It was the
observation of one of this character, that -- "In the solemn assembly, the
distinction of ranks is suspended, mutual benevolence kindles, and the fire of
devotion burns: the laws of God are heard with reverence. Tho the effects of
social worship are not always felt, through the distraction of the worshipper, or
the incapacity of those who minister; still one of just and liberal sentiments,
will add the weight of his example to an institution, which, with all its
imperfections, promotes a sense of God and of moral obligation among men."

SATISFIED that all religion stands or falls with this, Mr. and Mrs.
Bloomsgrove accustomed their children and family to a decent observance of that
day, sacred to instruction and piety. That they might derive every possible
advantage from an institution so admirably fitted to our condition in the
present life, they rose at an early hour to hail the welcome day; and, having
offered the morning incense on the domestic altar, they repaired constantly to
the place of public worship; alluring their family to a cheerful attendance by
motives suited to their age and disposition, by the beauty and order of
worship, and by their own example, and that of others.

HAVING established the practice of a steady attendance, they found no
difficulty in continuing it; and nothing could exceed the beauty of this little
flock, moving together in solemn pace, to pay their devout attendance on the
ordinances of religion. Every member of the family, who could possibly be
spared from the necessary offices of a domestic state, always appeared at both
public services of the sabbath. They never suffered them to wander from one
place of worship to another; not from want of charity to all denominations, but
to avoid an appearance of levity, and of disrespect to their own minister, and
the church to which they belonged. Great regard was had to those whose servile
state made their absence sometimes unavoidable: their service was alleviated as
much as possible on that day; and whenever circumstances would admit, their
attendance was regarded as an indispensable duty.

THOSE parents and householders, who think it their indispensable duty to pay
their devotions at the house of worship themselves, must be sensible that duty
binds with equal force to see that their children and domestics regularly
attend upon it also. Their attendance was not only constant but punctual, and
accompanied with an exemplary decency in their external deportment. I the
rather mention these circumstances, because there are many who wish to educate
their children well, and yet pay very little attention to these means of
improvement. They appear never to have considered, of how great importance they
are to domestic education. A well regulated house of public worship is a school
of refinement and good manners, as well as of instruction and devotion. What
plan could be conceived of, as having a stronger tendency to correct the
follies, and form the morals of youth, than a steady attendance on social
worship with those, whose decent and reverent behavior inspires them with the
love of order and propriety, and gives them exalted ideas of their Maker?

THAT no kind of influence might be wanting to render the public services
useful to the family, the worthy clergyman, whose ministry they attended, was
treated with every mark of respect by them; and was often made a guest at their
hospitable table and in their friendly circles. The learning, politeness, and
piety of this amiable minister of religion, rendered his company always
agreeable and profitable. Easy and affable in his manners, the children listen
with pleasure to his observations on various subjects. Charmed with his
delicate manner of expressing himself, and delighted with the beautiful images
by which he would represent the excellence of virtue and religion, they wished
to be possessed of that, to which he gave so pleasing a form. Often would he
amuse them with entertaining stories and anecdotes, suited to catch the ear and
reach the heart; and in turn would hear their stories, and pleasantly show them
how to draw a moral from them.

MRS. Bloomsgrove usually spent some time, after the services of the Lord's day
were over, with her children and domestics, instructing them in the principles
of religion and virtue, following her instructions with advice and counsel.
Most affectionately would she press it upon them to regard their Maker as their
best friend, and the practice of virtue and piety as their highest wisdom; and
she was able to say in language of maternal affection -- "My dear children, be
ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ."

I HAVE mentioned Mrs. Bloomsgrove, because these exercises commonly fall to
the mother's lot; and, to the early care of pious mothers, are we generally to
ascribe the first dawnings of true wisdom: But Mr. Bloomsgrove was not wanting
in due attention to whatever practice would encourage a spirit of piety and
virtue among his household. Attendance on the public worship was not the only
exemplary exercise of the sabbath with him. In addition to domestic worship,
reading the scriptures and books of rational devotion, he assisted them in
refreshing their memories, and impressing their minds with what they had heard.
These exercises, conducted in an easy familiar manner, and so varied as to have
the air of novelty, never appeared long and tedious; but secured the attention,
and informed the understanding, while they warmed the heart. Other advantages
besides instruction arose from this practice. It preserved the family together
on the sabbath, a thing of great consequence to domestic order. It prevented
the reprehensible practice of visits, parties, and of vain and useless
conversation, by which all good influence from public instruction is often lost.

MARK well the happy effects of all this care and pains! With what pleasure do
they assemble together for the most important purposes! What serene
cheerfulness mingles with the seriousness of the parents! With what attention
do the children and servants listen to the instructions which, like the gentle
dew of Hermon, distill from their lips! Sweet was the harmony which prevailed;
and happy the effects which this practice produced in their temper and manners!
This house was a lively emblem of the fair mansions above. Their days flowed
sweetly on, unembittered by contention, undisturbed by reflections on the past,
or anticipations of the future. They accounted the sabbath a delight, the holy
of the Lord, honorable; and the church of Christ the gate of heaven: and tho
rich in the goods of fortune, and high on the list of fame, yet they esteemed
religion to be their chief riches; and that it was their highest honor to be
numbered among the disciples of the humble Jesus.

LET the vain and the giddy, if they will, condemn all this as superstition and
bigotry; it adds dignity and amiableness to the eminent character of Mr.
Bloomsgrove, while it spreads the genial influence of religion through his house.
Let them who will, conceive of religion as inimical to cheerfulness and
pleasure; the reverse is the case: Fear and gloominess are neither the
offspring, nor the companions of religion: Pleasantness and peace are her
inmates. Who has so much reason for enlivening joy, as he who lives under the
smiles of approving heaven? and what domestic joys are so highly flavored, as
those which are tinctured, and kept alive by a genuine sense of religion? Where
shall happiness be found, if not in those dwellings, where good nature, good
sense, and piety reign? A thousand acts of the most endearing love and
friendship confirm their mutual attachment, and constantly add new pleasures to
the domestic state.

ADIEU, my dear sir; I rejoice with you in the recovery of your son from the
dangerous sickness with which he has been visited. May your gratitude bear some
proportion to the favor you have received; and may your domestic happiness ever
proceed on the sure basis of religion. My best respects attend your good lady.
In my next I will comply with your request.

LETTER LXXXI.
ON reading the pamphlets which you were so obliging as to send me, I cannot
forbear to express my astonishment at the inconsistency, between the love of
liberty which prevails in our country, and the practices of many individuals in
inthralling their fellow creatures. Americans can write with precision upon the
principles of liberty. With valor they can defend their own liberties, when
attacked by foreign power or domestic insurrection! and yet many, who can
defend their own rights with one hand, are extending the other for the purpose
of enslaving a part of their own species. This surely is departing from the
golden rule of doing as we would be done unto.

I AM very sorry to find that my worthy friend Mr. M -- has changed sides; and
from being an able, and warm advocate for the rights of human nature, and the
liberties of mankind, has become an advocate for the practice of enslaving the
Africans, by excluding them from a community of nature with our own species. Is
it then a sufficient argument with him to cut them off from sharing in that
nature, to which, it must be confessed, he adds honor and dignity, because of
their woolly hair, their flat nose, and black face, and their supposed want of
natural genius and abilities? May not physical causes be assigned for these
phenomena in the personal appearance? and may not the totally uncultivated
state in which they live, in their own country, and their depressed condition
in a state of servitude, "Jove fixed it certain that whatever day
Makes man a slave, takes half his worth away."
HOMER.
account for the apparent want of intellectual faculties? What strength of
native genius would not be requisite, in order to break through this thick cloud,
and sparkle, while thus wrapped up in its own cell? Shall we pronounce the
diamond void of luster, and incapable of any polish, because it does not
glitter while it lies in its native crust? As well may we do this, as suppose
the Africans incapable of improvements, and, therefore, an inferior order of
beings, because they, as a people, have not exhibited marks of genius equal to
more civilized and enlightened nations. Instances of genius, however, have not
been wanting among them, tho they are not numerous. If there is any weight in
this argument, does it not prove too much? Is there a greater difference
between the average abilities of Americans and that of the Africans, than
between the acquirements of Sir Isaac Newton and a common porter in
Philadelphia? If there is not, and yet their inferiority is to prove that they
are not of the same species with us, will it not follow that the above
mentioned porter belongs to a species of beings inferior to that of Sir Isaac
Newton? Nay, will it not follow also, that every different grade, in natural or
acquired abilities, between these two extremes, draws a line between different
species of beings, and so destroys all those obligations of love and charity,
justice and beneficence, which arise from a community of nature? for on this
ground only can we place the common law of commutative justice.

AMONG the many excellent remarks which Governor Jefferson, now Ambassador at
the court of Versailles, makes on this subject, I think the following worthy
the serious consideration of Mr. M --, which may have escaped his notice.

SPEAKING of Virginia, he says, "There must doubtless be an unhappy influence
on the manners of our people produced by the existence of slavery among us. The
whole commerce between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most
boisterous passions, the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and
degrading submissions on the other. Our children see this, and learn to imitate
it; for man is an imitative animal. This quality is the germ of all education
in him. From his cradle to his grave, he is learning to do what he sees others
do. If a parent could find no motive either in his philanthropy or his self
love, for restraining the intemperance of his passion toward his slave, it
should always be a sufficient one that his child is present. But generally it
is not sufficient. The parent storms, the child looks on, catches the
lineaments of wrath, puts on the same airs in the circle of smaller slaves,
gives a loose to his worst of passions, and thus nursed, educated, and daily
exercised in tyranny, cannot but be stamped by it with odious peculiarities.
The man must be a prodigy, who can retain his manners and morals undepraved by
such circumstances. And with what execration should the statesman be loaded,
who, permitting one half the citizens thus to trample on the rights of the
other, transforms those into despots, and these into enemies, destroys the
morals of the one part, and the amor patriae of the other. For if a slave can
love a country in this world, it must be any other in preference to that in
which he is born to live and labor for another; in which he must lock up the
faculties of his nature, contribute as far as depends on his individual
endeavors to the evanishment of the human race, or entail his own miserable
condition on the endless generations proceeding from him.

"WITH the morals of the people, their industry is destroyed. For, in a warm
climate, no man will labor for himself who can make another labor for him. This
is so true, that of the proprietors of slaves a very small proportion indeed
are ever seen to labor. And can the liberties of a nation be thought secure,
when we have removed their only firm basis, a conviction that these liberties
are the gift of God? That they are not to be violated but with his wrath?
Indeed I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is ju^^: that his
justice cannot sleep forever: that considering numbers, nature, and natural
means only, a revolution of the wheel of fortune, an exchange of situation, is
among possible events: that it may become probable by supernatural
interference! The Almighty has no attribute that can take sides with us in such
a contest."

IT hence appears that true policy and domestic education, as well as religion
and morals, loudly plead against a practice, which has no other than interested
and avaricious motives to plead in its favor. As the public mind is now
prepared to bear testimony against this practice, which centres in the hands of
a few individuals only, and is rapidly growing into disrepute in Europe, query
whether the evil might not be radically cured, by making it a part of domestic
education? And it were to be wished that short dialogues, and other pieces,
suitable for schools and academies, were offered to the public by some able
hand, in which the injustice and inhumanity of the practice may be properly
exhibited. This would have a tendency to beget, in the minds of youth, an early
detestation of it. It is undoubtedly our duty to arrest the attention of young
minds to the cause of virtue and humanity, peace and charity, by every means
which has any prospect of success.

HOW incompatible this commerce is with the character of a Christian people,
you may clearly learn from Isaiah's prophetic description of the peaceable
kingdom of the Messiah, and the happy effects it would produce on the temper
and conduct of mankind toward each other? Beautiful is the figure, and
peaceful the motto of this prophetic portrait. The scene is laid as on the
summit of a gilded mountain, which reflects its divinely enlightening rays on
every side, until "the whole earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord." On
the top of this mountain springs up a branch, from an ancient stock, green,
vigorous, and spreading. Under its shadow, the wolf and the lamb, the leopard
and the kid, the lion and the satling, the young child and the serpent, all
rest together in harmonious sort. And this is their perpetual motto, "THEY
SHALL NOT HURT NOR DESTROY IN ALL THIS HOLY MOUNTAIN." ISAIAH, xi. 9.


P. S. IF we should, for a moment, allow Mr. M -- to be right in his theory, it
does not follow that we have a right to the involuntary and unrewarded service
of the Africans; much less that we have any right to make property of them; for
God never gave man this right. The original grant of dominion to man over the
inferior ranks of creatures extended only to "the fish of the sea, the beasts
of the earth, the fowl of the air, and every thing that CREEPS upon the
earth." Any order of creatures, however inferior to us, not answering either of
these descriptions, cannot fall under the dominion of man in the sense in which
they do.

AND in what respect do Africans answer this description? If in none, it will
follow that there is no sense in which we can claim them as property.

BUT if we should grant that the claims of property, founded on supposed
inferiority in the scale of being, is just; yet nothing can justify the cruel
usage they often experience. The ground on which dominion over the animal world
was given to man, was, the likeness he bore to the Deity. It was merely on
account of his being endued with reason and moral rectitude, and inspired with
kind and benevolent affections, by which he was assimulated to the divine
character, that he was constituted lord of this lower creation, and made the
representative of its great author and governor, and the dispenser of his
authority. And as we are created after the image of God, so we should imitate
his example, in the government of the universe, in exercising that dominion
over the animal world which he has given us. Cruelty or severity to them shows
that we have lost those sentiments of goodness and pity, which are our most
glorious resemblance of the Creator. How much more does cruelty to our own
species show the depravity of the best affections of the human heart.

"CONCEIVE then a human being, with a number of his fellow creatures in his
power; their sustenance at his discretion, administered only to enable them to
labor; their enjoyments enumerated or dealt out with a strict regard to the
profits of the master: and when parts, even of their bodies, are thought to
divert attention from a wretched task, they are mutilated in methods atrocious
to humanity. Will it be said, any law or usage can reconcile, or afford
satisfaction to man, while he subjects a being of the same form and sensibility
to such misery?

"EVERY ingenious evasion, on the subject of slavery, has been used, to excuse
civilized nations, in having recourse to it. The sciences have been called to
the assistance of this vile cause; and have been prostituted to defend it.
Differences in the formation have been discovered; the superiority of white to
black persons has been inferred, and consequently the right of slavery. The
argument, if good, would prove too much. Anatomy exhibiting only a difference,
a negro may pronounce it in his favor, and infer the right of enslaving his
present oppressor. But superiority does not imply this kind of power; and
custom cannot accommodate or reconcile it to the reason and goodness of the
human mind."

LETTER LXXXII.
WILL you now, my dear sir, take a turn with me back to the school at Tusculum,
where we find Osander making improvements under his judicious preceptor, which
answered the expectations and gratified the wishes of his father. He pursued
his studies with such industry, as soon gained him the first rank of
scholarship among the youth. He did not, however, acquire a relish for the dead
languages. The native energy of his genius made him pant for more improving and
agreeable studies.

I THINK it is a matter worthy of consideration, whether the Latin and Greek
languages have not been made, too much, the tests of genius in our schools; and
whether public advantage might not arise from abolishing the custom of making a
knowledge of them an indispensable condition of a public education. Many
persons of genius, perhaps, have been prevented gaining their proper rank in
society, because they could not plod the dull round of tasteless languages. The
time, which is consumed in the study of these languages, by those who will have
no use for the knowledge of them in the business or occupations of life, might,
surely, be better employed in the pursuit of such branches of learning, as
would apply more directly to their future employments.

OF this Mr. Bloomsgrove became more convinced, as he perceived that his son
made great proficiency in other parts of literature. As he designed his son for
a civilian, he determined to waste no more time in the study of languages, for
which he had no taste. In order that his mind might be formed to a right
temper, and the habits of virtue might be well fixed, he continued him longer
at the school than usual, for the sake of having him under his own eye. He
considered, on the other hand, the danger which might follow from retaining him
too long within the narrow sphere of the domestic state.

A YOUTH of genius, at the age of sixteen or seventeen, who has been
industrious at school, begins to require new objects to excite emulation, and a
new field for exertion. Although his passions begin to gather strength, at this
period, and new appetites begin to spring up, yet, if domestic education has
been well conducted, the mind will be provided with a balance against them; and
he may be safely trusted abroad in the higher walks of science.

INDUCED by sentiments like these, Mr. Bloomsgrove placed his son at the
university at --, whither his vigilant eye followed him; and every prudent
method was taken to guard him against the seductions of vice, and to allure him
to virtue. It is too commonly the case, that when parents have committed their
children to the care of others, they relax in their own attention to them.
Confiding entirely in the integrity and abilities of those, to whose care they
are committed, they no longer watch over them. But those, to whom the care of
youth is committed, seldom consider themselves under any other obligations than
to teach the art or the science for which they apply, and to restrain them from
vicious habits, no further than is necessary to the purpose of doing this.
Between these two errors, the culture of the heart is neglected.

MR. Bloomsgrove determined that no effort should be wanting on his part, to
complete the culture of his son's heart, and preserve his morals. He,
therefore, assured his son that he should follow him to the university with a
watchful eye, with a parent's heart; expressing great confidence in his
prudence and attention to the objects before him. He enjoined it upon his son
to write him frequently; and, at the end of every month, to render him an
account of his studies. This method enabled Mr. Bloomsgrove to judge of his
proficiency, while it gave him an opportunity of administering salutary advice.

THE proficiency, which Osander made at the university, was flattering to his
parents, as well as honorable to himself. But this pleasure was a little
interrupted, some time after his entrance there, by an information that he was
in danger of being ensnared, and led astray by some dissolute youth, as it
appears from the following letter. As the moderation, firmness, and confidence
expressed in it, had the desired effect, I will send it you by the next post.

LETTER LXXXIII. From Mr. BLOOMSGROVE to his SON at the university.
THUS far, my dear son, have your parents watched over you from helpless
infancy. They have conducted you, with all parental care and solicitude, to an
age in which your mind is capable of manly improvements. To withdraw that
solicitude and attention at the present, which is the most critical and
important period of your life, would be no less cruel to you than unnatural in
them. In your prudence, integrity, and virtue, we have all that confidence, to
which your years can lay claim.

IN order that our confidence in you may not be shaken, it is necessary that we
call your attention to the situation you are in, and to the circumstances which
surround you. Consider, my son, that you now stand on the vibrating line
between childhood and majority. The passions acquire new strength; objects,
suited to excite them, are addressed to every sense; open to your view, appear
a variety of fascinating prospects. Even that frankness and generosity of
temper, which is usually attendant on youth, and is amiable in itself, may
become a snare.

THE vigilance and artfulness of designing profligates may improve that
facility of mind as a means of seduction; but a prudent youth will ever be upon
his guard against the dangers to which he is exposed, and never suffer the
generosity of his temper to be the dupe of their crafty designs. The most fatal
consequences would, probably, attend a false step at this period. Every thing
in the future part of your life is depending on the present moment. Puerility
should now yield to more solid judgment. Fancy should give place to
consideration; and understanding should supply the place of sensibility and
impressions. But time alone can give experience: and during that progress, the
want of experience can only be supplied by substituting that of a father.

YOUR parents have no other demand upon you, for their unremitting attention to
your interest and happiness, than that you continue to make those improvements
which will result in your own advantage, and to pursue a line of conduct which
will lead to your reputation and happiness. On your own exertions you must rely
for rendering the means of literary acquisitions effectual; and on your
diligence, for proficiency in knowledge. Let the business of the university be
your pleasure; and let amusements be pleasures, only as a necessary relaxation
from study. Regard not the misapplied ridicule of those, whose want of learning
and virtue excites envy at those who are possessed of both; and whose love of
pleasure leads them to prevent the mortifying improvements of others, and, if
possible, to seduce them to their own guilty practices. Under the mask of their
gaiety and good humor lurks the malignant spirit of detraction, which endeavors
to render the industrious and the virtuous ridiculous.

RIDICULE is the weapon with which the fortress of virtue is usually assaulted;
and if you yield to the assailants without a manly resistance, they will add
insolence to triumph. You ought to display, at least, as much fortitude in your
pursuits, as they do obstinacy in theirs. Your fortitude will soon overcome
theirs; and you will effectually repel every attack by a dauntless spirit, and
an unyielding perseverance.

ADORN your mind with useful and elegant literature: Establish yourself in the
habits of virtue; and you will baffle all the devices of the crafty. You will
then be able to pay an undisturbed attention to your studies; you will enjoy
peace and tranquillity of mind; and you will lay the foundation for
respectability of character, while those, who would gladly seduce you to
sacrifice at the shrine of pleasure, will suffer merited reproach for their
idleness, extravagance, and folly.

BE assured, my son, that we hear of your proficiency in learning with great
pleasure; and, that nothing could so much wound our feelings, as to have your
reputation marred by any conduct inconsistent with the character of a young
gentleman, walking in the noble paths of science. Aim not merely to avoid
faults, but to cultivate the most amiable virtues. Do not content yourself with
the acquisition of knowledge only, but aim at the elegance of literature, and
the refinements of taste: this has a connection with many virtues. Elegance of
taste, and an acquaintance with the fine arts, tend to render the possessor
both good and agreeable.

PLEASANT, indeed, are all the paths of science. Great is your opportunity for
improvement; and I doubt not of your resolutions to make the best use of them,
and to add the unspeakable blessing of a virtuous son to

Your most affectionate parents. BLOOMSGROVE.
Tusculum, October 27.
LETTER LXXXIV.
OSANDER had too much discernment, not to see the object at which his father
aimed; and too much sensibility, not to feel the force of the confidence which
his father placed in him. It had the desired effect; and his father never had
occasion afterward to address him on the same subject, tho the correspondence
continued till he completed his university education, which he did with great
reputation, and much to the satisfaction of his friends.

AFTER receiving the honor of a degree, he continued to reside at the
university, for the benefit of the library, and of the public lectures. He
continued his studies, particularly in history, chronology, ethics, rhetoric,
the law of nature and nations, and politics, under the direction of Mr.
Professor --, till an affair at home made his return necessary. What that was
shall be related in another place.

ALTHOUGH I have not taken a view of Osander's progress through the several stages of
his education, yet I cannot omit to mention one or two things in his father's
manage^ent, with respect to him, which I think worthy of imitation. He
furnished Osander with a memorandum book, in which he was directed to give
credit for all the moneys he received, and charge all his bills, which he was
to preserve as vouchers; and make minutes of his loose expenses, noting the
places, and for what they were incurred.

THO Osander's expenses could not be great, from his studious turn, yet keeping
an exact account of the moneys received, and how expended, had a good effect in
accustoming him to method in his affairs, and to accuracy in accounts. It would
not have been easy, if he had been disposed, to have eluded his father's
vigilant eye, or to have passed many impositions upon him. It could not be very
difficult to judge of the probability of the account from the general
character, and from the company he kept.

VOLATILE youth often become profligate for want of this check; and if such an
one has a plentiful supply of money at college, without rendering to his father
any account of his expenses, it is much but his expenses prove his ruin. His
ambition to distinguish himself as a person of spirit and figure, will soon
lead him to look upon the drudgery of college exercises as beneath him. His
books and his instructors will be inimical to his enjoyments; and he will find
more pleasure in his vices than in literary pursuits.

"A NOBLE Venetian, whose son wallowed in the plenty of his father's riches,
finding his son's expenses grew very high and extravagant, ordered his cashier
to let him have, for the future, no more money than what he would count when he
received it. This, one would think no great restraint to a young gentleman's
expenses, who could freely have as much money as he could tell. But yet this,
to one who was used to nothing but the pursuit of his pleasures, proved a great
trouble, which at last ended in this sober and advantageous reflection: 'If it
is so much pains to me, barely to count the money I spend, what labor and pains
did it cost my ancestors, not only to count, but to get it?' This rational
thought, suggested by the little pains imposed upon him, wrought so effectually
upon his mind, that it made him, from that time forward, prove a good husband."

BESIDES the advantage which it would have on a young gentleman's economy, to
have the state of his expenses always before him, this plan of keeping his
accounts, and being brought to frequent settlements with his father, lays a
foundation for system and method in his affairs; the habits of which are of the
utmost consequence, both to interest and morals, through the whole course of life.

LETTER LXXXV.
THE progress of learning might be greatly accelerated by a regular system in
the pursuit of it. Instructors of youth might afford great assistance to their
pupils, by directing them to a proper arrangement of studies, to books proper
to be read on each subject or science to be pursued, to a suitable proportion
of time to be allotted to each branch. Much time is lost by a confusion of
studies, and by a promiscuous manner of reading books.

BUT my object is to consider the advantages of system on a larger scale, which
befits the age and employments of young Mr. Bloomsgrove, who is soon to appear
on the great theater of the world. From the systematic manner in which he has
been trained, we may naturally suppose that system and order will attend all
his affairs. He who does not meet every duty in its own place, and assign it
its proper rank, cannot expect to preserve the natural order and connection of
things, or form any consistency of character.

A RIGHT division of time is as necessary as order in the arrangement and
discharge of the duties of our respective departments. Nothing is performed
right, where nothing is performed in its proper time and place. Confusion must
attend the life of such a man. But, by a prudent management of his affairs, and
an orderly arrangement of time, a man may live more in a few years than others
do in many. He arrests every flying hour: He loses no time by confusion in his
affairs; but, using it with economy, he accumulates a stock, to which the
indolent waster of time must be forever a stranger.

METHOD in every part of conduct is a matter which deserves the particular
attention of young people; and the following maxims should be deeply fixed in
their minds.

"PROVIDE what is necessary, before you indulge in what is superfluous."

"STUDY to do justice to all, with whom you deal, before you affect the praise
of liberality."

THE want of economy has been a fruitful source of distress and misery:
Families, once flourishing, have been reduced to ruin: the melancholy widow,
the helpless orphan, have been thrown out friendless upon the world. To ease
and affluence have succeeded the pinching hand of poverty, occasioned by an ill
timed piece of expense, which brought confusion on their affairs.

WHEN young men live beyond their means, they tread on enchanted ground; their
path is strowed with poisonous flowers; perplexity and danger must attend their
progress. It is as incompatible with industry as it is with prudence. Their
passions gather strength with the prodigal waste of substance. The enchantments
of habit become invincible; and, with their eyes open, they plunge themselves
into the gulf before them, tho often admonished by the fa^^ of others.

AN old military gentleman, who was as much distinguished for his morals as for
his courage, told a friend, "that his father, who was a sensible man, but
extremely devout, seeing that he was much inclined to a certain vice, spared no
pains to curb this propensity; but finding, notwithstanding all his care, that
his son still persisted in his vices, he carried him to an hospital established
for the cure of a certain vile disease; and without any previous intimation of
his design, led him into a gallery full of those unhappy wretches, who were
severely expiating the folly which had brought them thither. At this hideous
spectacle, so offensive to all the senses, the young man grew sick. 'Go thou
wretched debauchee, said the father, with a significant look and emphasis,
follow thy loose inclinations; it will not be long before thou will think
thyself happy in being admitted into this place. Or, perhaps, a victim to the
most infamous sufferings, thou will compel thy father to thank God for thy
death.' These few words, joined to the affecting scene before him, made an
impression upon the young man, which time could never efface. Condemned, by his
profession, to spend his youth in garrisons, he chose rather to bear the
raillery of his companions than imitate their vices."

LET parents and tutors place less confidence in words than in a proper choice
of time, place, and circumstances; let examples be their lectures, and they
need not doubt of a good effect.

LETTER LXXXVI.
FATAL, indeed, are the effects of prodigality, or the neglect of method in
living! But he who forms his conduct upon his circumstances, and discharges the
obligations* he owes to society, will neither waste his substance by
prodigality, nor destroy his virtue by extravagant pleasures. But, preserving
the liberty and independence of his own mind, he will be able always to act his
part with fortitude as a man, and with fidelity as a Christian.

"THE youth, who has acquired a relish for the pleasures of devotion, yields
his heart to those pleasures. He views, at a distance, the active life upon
which he has entered, and makes a true estimate of wealth, fame, and
preeminence. He attends to his character as an accountable being, and thi^^s of
the time when success or disappointment will figure less, than the steps by
which they arrived; when the pleasure of success will be increased by the
honorable means of obtaining it, and the pain of disappointment lessened,
because nothing dishonorable was done to avert it."

THE regulation of amusements is a matter of great consequence for young people
to attend to, both as to time and place. Parents and others of rigid virtue,
having passed the season of youthful pleasures, are too apt to look with
indignant eye upon all those recreations by which human cares are relieved, and
the union of society cemented. By thus passing an indiscriminate censure on all
amusements, they lose all that influence over youth, which age, rendered
respectable by virtue, always possesses.

MR. Bloomsgrove, therefore, did not aim at restraining his children from all
amusements, but at assisting them in the regulation of amusements, so as not to
interfere with the higher duties of life. In countries full of inhabitants and
of wealth, pleasure becomes the business of many. But in a country just rising
into national existence, industry must constitute ^ts wealth, and business must
form its pleasures. When Virgil sung, in captivating strains, the peaceful
occupations and affecting pleasures of rural life, the Romans had lost all
taste of them, and sought the means of luxury and dissipation, by oppressing or
plundering provinces. Neglecting the exercise of their talents in useful
duties, and seeking splendid pleasures, by successful depredations on their
more wealthy neighbors, they ruined the commonwealth. It would not require a
spirit of prophecy to predict the fate of these states, if a love of pleasure
should so far prevail, as to root out industry, or to render it disreputable.
Money constitutes the sinews of war; numbers, the strength of a country; and
industry, its wealth. But a spirit of dissipation destroys the latter, relaxes
the other, and cuts off the sinews of the former.

HOW necessary to regard time, season; and measure in pleasures and amusements!
Strong and eager is the propensity to these; and great vigilance is requisite
to guard against their delusive influence. He, whose passions are in a
continual ferment, cannot look through the sober eye of reason, nor hear its
milder voice through the buzz of tumultuary pleasures. Whereas he, who mingles
pleasures in a temperate succession with the higher business of life, preserves
the mastery of himself, and is able to make a just distribution of his time
between the employments and the amusements of life; between the concerns of the
present, and a proper regard to the interests of the future world. Accustomed
to contemplate nobler objects, and to taste more rational enjoyments, young Mr.
Bloomsgrove meets amusements with a manly indifference; and, by the habits of
self command, is guarded against excess, and prepared for every occurrence.

A YOUNG gentleman, who has no system of conduct, with reference to associating
with others, is in danger of being ensnared by the time, place or manner of
social enjoyments. If he suffers himself to be led into places consecrated to
the infernal demon of debauchery, he soon finds himself on enchanted ground.
The example of others, the ardor of his own passions, excited by the
fascinating influence of vicious indulgencies, give him a license he never
before felt. All moral restraints, being bantered and ridiculed, soon appear to
him as the idle dreams of superstition. This barrier broken down, he loses his
innocence, and with that his peace of mind.

BESIDES the character of associates, regard should be had to time and season
for social pleasures. Confusion and ruin must attend the affairs of that man,
who devotes those hours to company, in which his business calls his attention.
Company, business, and reading or study, should succeed each other at proper
intervals. These should be so conducted, as not to interfere with the duties of
life. He, who can find no enjoyment in discharging the duties of life, will not
long be happy. To a vacant mind, company may afford a temporary relief; but he
will be so much the more oppressed and languid, when forced to return to
himself. By a due mixture of public and private life, or of society and
business, young Mr. Bloomsgrove kept free from the snares of both, and enjoyed
each to much greater perfection.

THE system by which he directed all his actions, extended to the most minute
part of his transactions in life: even the little punctilios of civility were
invariably observed by him. He, who is negligent and careless in the smaller
parts of his conduct, will be in the utmost danger of a growing remissness in
higher duties of life. Disorder will imperceptibly grow upon his affairs.
Inattention toward others, will generate indifference to their happiness; and
from actions, in themselves of little worth, will proceed habits of criminal
remissness. As a little spark kindles a great fire, so the inconsiderable
beginnings of inattention to the rules of civility, which are generally agreed
upon as proper marks of respect to human nature, affection to individuals, or
of esteem and respect for particular characters, have been the occasion of
destroying friendships and converting them into enmity.

LETTER LXXXVII.
THE affairs of Mr. Bloomsgrove's nephew made it necessary for him to go, and
take possession of his patrimonial estate in a neighboring county, where he was
to settle. This circumstance induced Mr. Bloomsgrove to call his son home,
sooner than he had intended; that he might apply some of the knowledge which he
had acquired, in the oversight of his business, in which his nephew had
hitherto been his assistant.

NOR was the nephew the only member of which this happy family was soon to be
deprived. This young gentleman had resided too long in a family, where domestic
order and harmony prevailed, to be unacquainted with the advantages of habits
acquired there; nor was he less discerning as to the merit and amiableness of
Fanny This attachment was long known to he^, and was answered by a
corresponding sympathy. As soon, therefore, as he found himself in a situation
to enter upon the domestic state, he returned, and was united in marriage to
this object of his sincere affections.

THE consent of her patrons evinced their affection to him; while the
reluctance, with which they parted with Fanny, showed the strength of their
regard for her. After passing two weeks in receiving the attentions of her
numerous friends and acquaintance, the day of their departure arrived. You can
better conceive, than I describe, the affecting scene between Fanny and
Rozella. They hung on each others' necks; wept; and, with inarticulate voice,
said -- adieu -- adieu!

FANNY received the parting blessing of her patrons with feelings of gratitude
too big for utterance, and which she could only testify by expressive silence.
Even the servants followed her to the gate, bathed in tears; and, while Mr. and
Mrs. Bloomsgrove bestowed on them their last benediction (for Rozella had
retired to her room) and sent forward their best benedictions to the place of
their future residence, the servants thanked her a thousand a thousand times
for all her goodness to them.

YOUNG Mr. Bloomsgrove accompanied them to their new home, where they were
received with many expressions of joy by their friends and neighbors. After
passing a few days with them, he embraced his cousins in a most affectionate
manner, and returned home, with accounts of their situation and prospects, much
to the satisfaction of the family.

LETTER LXXXVIII.
TO furnish you with a complete portrait of young Mr. Bloomsgrove, I must call
in the aid of your own imagination. He is tall, straight, and well
proportioned; has a piercing black eye, a florid complexion, with an open,
placid, and manly countenance, indicating good sense, magnanimity, and
benevolence: Every thing within corresponds to personal appearance. To an
enlightened understanding, he unites a liberal mind. To good sense, he unites
good nature; to magnanimity, a compassionate heart; to sobriety, cheerfulness;
and to strict virtue, elegant accomplishments, and the most graceful manners.
Affable and courteous toward all, he was held in high estimation by all who
knew him.

FOR his intimates, he chose the wise and virtuous; having no relish for
company of an opposite character. Encouraged by his father's attention to his
young friends, (for they were always received by him with an open hearted
cheerfulness) he enjoyed their company, without seeking it at places of public
resort. He was not destitute of all relish for amusements; but he enjoyed much
greater pleasure in the society of a circle of sentimental ladies, and with
some literary friends, than in the usual amusements of young people.

HAVING been trained to diligence and application, the habits of industry were
so fixed that he became a great economist of his time. His taste for
agriculture and the mechanic arts, was a source of pleasure and amusement, as
well as of exercise, to him. He found an agreeable exercise in the use of the
mechanical tools which he procured for that purpose. He not only gained a
theoretical acquaintance with the arts, but became a proficient in the practice
of some of the most useful arts. "Czar Peter worked as a common ship carpenter
in the yard, and served as a drummer in his own troops." Mr. Bloomsgrove did
not think it beneath his son to be acquainted with the use of tools, or to
spend some time with the workmen, as well for improvement as for exercise.

IT is impossible to say what revolutions of fortune may take place; and what
advantage this acquaintance with secular affairs may be to him in future.
Besides the contingencies of life, which may make such knowledge necessary, it
will render him less dependent on others, and more able to help himself; and it
gave him an opportunity of contracting an acquaintance with a class of people,
by far the most numerous in all communities: and by these means he gained a
more perfect knowledge of human nature, than is possible for those who keep
themselves aloof from them.

WHAT can be more ridiculous than the airs which some young gentlemen put on
toward those who have been trained up in a different -- a supposed humbler --
walk in life from themselves? A youth educated behind a counter, plumes himself
on his own importance, and often looks down, with disdain, upon the more
ingenious and promising youth who has been trained at the work bench. Vain
youth! know thou not that the king is supported by the labor of the
husbandman; and that thou art indebted to the mechanic's art and industry for
every thing that is convenient, ornamental, or splendid in life?

WHILE young Mr. Bloomsgrove rendered himself more extensively useful, by
attending to the theory of agriculture and mechanic arts, and by gaining some
practical knowledge of those occupations, he endeared himself to the people who
followed them, and daily grew in the esteem of all about him. It was
particularly happy that his love for literary pursuits had not deprived him of
a taste for secular employments; the period being now arrived, in which he is
to be placed in a situation, to exercise his talents both in his secular
occupations and learned profession.

LETTER LXXXIX.
IN carrying on an occupation or exercising a profession, much is depending on
the place chosen for the purpose, and on the manner of entering upon the
business of life. A father's aid and counsel can never be better applied than
in this critical and important transaction. Young Mr. Bloomsgrove, having
established himself under the patronage of the best of fathers, began to think
of assuming the domestic state. But in a transaction, on which the happiness of
life so much depended, he determined to profit by the wisdom and experience of
his father.

TAUGHT, from childhood, to revere his father's judgment, he listened
attentively to all he said on the subject of choosing a companion for life. Mr.
Bloomsgrove does not object to early marriages; but advises that, when a young
man is settled in business, and has the means of supporting a family, with the
exertions of industry, he should look out for a suitable companion. Many and
great are the advantages of early marriages in young countries.

I CAN promise you, my son, said Mr. Bloomsgrove, upon the general experience
of all wise and prudent men, that, if you make a judicious choice, you will not
have reason to repent the step you take; but every thing is depending on that
choice. In placing your affections upon a lady, to be the partner of your days,
employ your reason and judgment, as well as your fancy. Suffer not yourself to
be taken by surprise, but preserve the mastery of your affections.

IF you are not well upon your guard, you will fall a prey to beauty, or some
other external qualification, which will be of little consequence in the
matrimonial state. Beauty is a dangerous property, as it tends to corrupt the
mind; and it soon loses its influence. But good sense and sweetness of temper,
united to an agreeable figure and engaging manners, are durable qualities; and
never lose their influence, like beauty. Consider that the happiness of the
married state does not depend on fortune, birth, or beauty; nor on any external
qualification, separate from the properties of the mind. The management of
domestic affairs and the education of a family, are duties of an indispensable
nature in a married woman. But as the cheerful discharge of these duties, and
the happiness thence resulting, depend upon a certain degree of correspondence
of character and circumstances in the parties, so, in forming this connection,
regard should be had to them.

IN order to ensure permanent affection and harmony, there should be such a
general similarity of age, natural temper, education, external accomplishments,
and religious sentiments, as that the difference in them, may leave no
impediments in the way of the tenderest affection and most perfect harmony.

A YOUNG man, who has profited by instructions like these, will not be
captivated by a pretty face, a sprightly air, or any external accomplishment.
"The picture of a good wife is fixed in his mind; and he compares with it every
young woman he sees: -- 'She is pretty, but has she good sense? She has sense,
but is she well tempered? She dances elegantly, or sings with expression; but
is she not vain of such trifles?"

MR. Bloomsgrove did not wish to control his son with respect to the particular
object; but to point out the character suitable for him. He described the
family, without pointing to any particular one, in which he would most probably
find such an one. "A family where ^he parents and children live in perfect
harmony, and are fond of one another." A female taken from such a family,
seldom fails to make the married state happy.

LETTER XC.
YOU must have anticipated already, my dear sir, every thing that I can say of
the young lady to whom young Mr. Bloomsgrove paid his addresses. I need only to
observe, therefore, that Augusta, to whom he was united in marriage in the
twenty fifth year of his age, was the daughter of respectable parents, who had
paid great attention to her education. She was more distinguished by her good
sense than by her beauty, tho equalled by few in personal figure. Mild and
gentle in her temper, with a heart sensible to the miseries of others, and
always ready to relieve them, she was engaging in her manners. The pleasing, as
well as more elevated qualities, were so happily blended in her composition as
to make her, at once, tender, sprightly, and agreeable, and to render her
worthy of so amiable and excellent an husband. "Here Is the mild luster of the
rising morn,
And his, the radiance of the risen day."



IN a relation, of all others the most tender and endearing, they observed a
line of conduct which prevented all the ill effects of discordant passions. If,
at any time, an untoward accident occasioned a sally of his passions, he
quickly repressed them; and, by renewed expressions of tenderness, added new
strength to a friendship which time itself could never dissolve. On the other
hand, the native delicacy of her sex led her to treat her husband with that
kind respect which was due to his character: a tribute prompted by nature, not
exacted on his part!

VIEWING him through the flattering, but laudable medium of conjugal partiality,
his virtues always magnified in her affectionate eye, and his imperfections
receded from her view. By yielding to his will, she gained an ascendency over
him, which she securely enjoyed, without seeming to possess it. In her gentle
breast, esteem and affection were so blended, and in her deportment toward
him, mildness and condescension were so combined with dignity, as to strike
every observer as the soft impulse of nature, rather than the result of studied
prudence. This never failed to procure, in return, the tribute of admiration
and esteem, as well as of affection and delight.

ENDUED by nature with an excellent disposition, cherished by habitual
gentleness of manners, with great natural talents, improved by education and
experience, with a laudable and well directed ambition, seconded by respectable
connexions, he soon rose to distinguished places in the state. Qualified for
the stations he filled, he drew the attention and confidence of all about him.
He was respected by the world, beloved by his friends, and revered by the
church of God.

LETTER XCI.
FRIENDSHIP is a principal source of the pleasures of life. It is founded in
the sociability of our nature, and consists in a reciprocity of affections,
which have been accustomed to sacrifice immediate gratification to the hope or
enjoyment of high participated pleasures. These pleasures are the most highly
flavored of any enjoyments in life; and without them all others are tasteless.
If we pursue pleasure, we cannot enjoy it alone. Without a friend, to whom we
may communicate with freedom, our knowledge would afford no pleasure; wealth
would bestow no happiness, and every situation would be joyless. In prosperity,
a friend multiplies our joys; in adversity, he divides, and, by dividing,
lessens our sorrows. Friendship, by administering the best* and the purest
satisfaction, alleviates our condition under disappointment, and renders all
our miseries supportable.

WHEN this attachment is founded on truth, honor, and goodness, it contributes
not only to present satisfaction, but to real and permanent happiness. It is
beyond the reach of accidents. In the operation of such affections, a
competition of interest will not interrupt the general happiness. Neither age,
nor absence, "IT was the second morn since thou had left me,
When, through the wood, I took my usual way,
To seek the coolness of the well spread shade
That overlooks the flood. On a ^ear branch
Low bending to the bank, I sat me down,
Musing and still; my hand sustained my head;
My eyes were fixed upon the passing stream;
And all my thoughts were bent on heaven and thee."
ETHELINDA.
nor death, "I lost my Scipio -- I lost him suddenly: but he yet lives; he will
forever live, in my affection. It was the virtue of my friend I loved; and
virtue cannot die. Nor is he present to me only, who was familiar with him; his
fame and glory shall endure through all generations. For no man shall form the
idea or hope of noble achievements, without looking up to the glory of Scipio;
and proposing his example as a model."

CICERO.
can destroy it; but so long as we retain any consciousness or remembrance of
its object, its pleasures will be enjoyed.

THOSE, who ridicule the idea of sacrificing first sensations to reflected
pleasures, and all attempts to render the force of friendship superior to the
direct operations of interest, can have no idea, either of the reality, or of
the pleasures of friendship. "History affords attested instances of persons,
who have sacrificed property, views of interest, prospects of honor, and even
their lives, to the affections of this union. In early youth, while the heart
is uninjured by the vicious customs of societies, examples of the kind, have
made us glow with the desire of imitation."

IN the direction of youth, therefore, the benevolent affections should be
cherished, in order to give a proper expansion to self love. Selfishness is
inconsistent with the noble and generous affections of friendship. Truth,
honor, integrity, and sincerity, are essential ingredients in friendship; and
to be deficient in these, is to want capacity for this connection. Friendships,
formed at random, and regulated by interest or convenience, seldom afford a
permanent connection. Hence complaints of ingratitude and inconstancy frequently
arise. Of what importance, then, is a proper and judicious choice of friends?
What an acquisition, a real friend! This exhibits the art of distinguishing the
characters, by which that choice may be happily made, as an important object in
the education of youth. Especially, is it a lesson of great importance in a
state of preparation for the duties of conjugal affection. When the conjugal
relation is formed, upon the principles of true friendship and real love, no
adverse circumstances can ever destroy the attachment; nor any temptations lead
to a violation of the sacred bonds. The female will cheerfully follow the
fortun^ and submit to the conditions of her husband, while his affection will
remain the fame in every change of condition.

THE following story, related in a Vienna paper of July, 1788, which is said to
have taken place in the camp before Belgrade, affords a striking specimen of
the strength of such friendships.

"ACHMET Marowa was the son of an eminent magistrate of that city, with great
merit and fine accomplishments. He had long addressed Fatima, the only daughter
of Hassan Buglo, a Bashaw in the armies of the Port, and on the morning of the
day on which the siege of Belgrade commenced, led, exulting to the altar of
Alla, one of the loveliest women of the empire. Most of the distinguished
families of the place, on the approach of the imperial troops, retired to
Barrowza, and other places further down the Danube; but the nuptials of Achmet
and Fatima, and the rapid movement of our forces, prevented that, otherwise
fortunate pair, from taking shelter in the interior country till the investment
of the city was complete.

"ON the night of the fourth of June, however, Achmet determined at all hazards
to convey his bride from the imminent perils to which she would be exposed
during a siege that threatened scenes of carnage. He had her dressed as a young
man of fashion; and putting himself in the habit of a slave, left the city at
twelve o'clock at night, hoping to avoid our guards, and to reach a place of
safety before the return of day. Unhappily for the wanderers, they had scarce
begun their midnight meander, when loud peals of thunder appalled the heart of
the distressed Fatima; torrents of rain succeeded, the darkness increased, the
fugitives wandered about bewildered and forlorn, till, upon the gleam of day,
they found themselves surrounded by a patrolling party of Hungarian Hussars,
and were hurried to the main guard.

"THE Prince of Cobourg having notice given him immediately, that a youth of
apparent distinction, attended by a slave, was taken in his camp, ordered them
to be kept apart; and if, on examination, any circumstance occurred that should
mark them as spies, that their execution should take place instantly. To the
interrogations that were put to Fatima, she replied that she was the son of a
merchant of Belgrade, and attended by a poor domestic of her father, and only
wished to join her family at a village at about ten leagues distant. She,
however, was soon given to understand, that the manner of their being taken
precluded all apologies from having the effect she wished; and that the rigid
usages of war allowed her but half an hour to live. She received this dreadful
information without manifesting any perturbation, and only begged that her
slave might be permitted to carry her friends a few remembrances that she
particularized.

"WHILE she was closing this request, she beheld the beloved Achmet, surrounded
by armed men, passing the door of the tent she was in. As she had not doubted
of his safety, from the servility of his appearance, she inquired in an agony
of agitation what was to be his fate? and was answered -- 'immediate death.' At
the word DEATH she shrieked out, and fell from her seat in convulsions. The
officers around her flew to her assistance; and, to give her free respiration,
unbuttoned her waistcoat; when, to their amazement, they found their unhappy
prisoner a lady.

"THE execution of Achmet was suspended, until the Prince of Cobourg could be
informed of these particulars. The generous chieftain examined each of them
apart, and received such information, as convinced him that they were not the
insidious agents he had suspected. The heroic Fatima and her husband were
furnished with habits befitting their real situations, and before the close of
the day, safely escorted to the village whither their despairing friends had
retired."

LETTER XCII.
THE education of a daughter cannot be considered as at an end, so long as she
continues in a single state. Instructions preparatory to marriage have been
considered, by writers on education, as of the greatest consequence in bringing
children forward into life.

THE fondness, which mothers have sometimes discovered, for precipitating their
daughters' appearance on the public theater, has been the source of many
mortifications. Unacquainted with the world, young and volatile, they sometimes
fall a prey to dishonorable pretensions; and such is the delicacy of the female
character, that the foul breath of suspicion may stain it, but all the streams
that flow can never restore its former luster: or, incapable of making a
prudent choice, they bestow themselves on an unworthy object, and owe a whole
life of inquietude and sorrow to a single rash and indiscreet action. Here a
prudent mother will keep a vigilant eye, and, by her maternal advice,
cautiously administered, will supply the want of a daughter's experience by her
own.

"MOTHERS and nurses, says Lord Kaimes, are continually talking of marriage to
their female pupils, long before it is suggested to them by nature; and it is
always a great estate, a fine coat, or a gay equipage that is promised. Such
objects impressed on the mind of a child, naturally biass her to a wrong
choice, when she grows up." But Mrs. Bloomsgrove has never spoken to her
daughter upon that subject, till since she has arrived at mature age; and,
indeed, the habits of discretion have become so fixed, by her management with
her from childhood, as to supersede the necessity of much instruction on the
subject at this period. The whole of her education has been preparatory to the
duties, connexions, and changes of life.

BUT as her age, and the attentions which she now receives from many young
gentlemen, indicate the propriety of some preparatory instruction, Mrs.
Bloomsgrove lets no favorable opportunity slip, of dropping such hints, as she
thinks may be useful. Her main object is, without giving any direct
instructions, to prepossess the mind of Rozella in favor of the character,
rather than the appearance of a man. She represents the happiness of the
married state, as depending more on the good temper, sobriety, and industry of
an husband, than on any particular circumstances of interest, or outward
appearance; that men of good morals are the only true admirers of females;
that, tho they may not have all the fulsome jargon of gallantry, yet that their
assiduities are more sincere and more tender.

THAT permanent affection, which lays the only sure foundation of connubial
bliss, is so far from being bought or sold, that money frequently destroys it.
Never consider, my dear, said Mrs. Bloomsgrove to her daughter, what the estate
is valued at, but attend to the character of the person; and the only sure way
of judging of a man's character, is from the figure he makes among his own sex.
The presumption is, that men are best able to judge of one another merits.
Accustomed to less delicacy and reserve than the female sex, a man's character
may be very precisely ascertained from his male associates; especially his
temper and disposition, upon which the happiness of the married state depends
much more than on any outward circumstance.

MUTUAL affection is essential to reciprocal enjoyment; but where the moral
pleasures of love do not exist, what security can either have, that a virtuous
attachment, which will warrant an entire confidence, exists between them? The
person may remain the fame, but if the passion decays, it is no longer viewed
in the same light. The veil of delusion falls off, and love takes its flight.
In order to guard her daughter against the danger of making a rash choice, she
converses on marriage as an hazardous step to a female, because an error in
choosing an husband admits of no remedy. Every step toward that should be
taken with caution.

THE great object of female education, through the whole course of it, should be
to qualify females for the important station they are to hold in domestic
society, and to make them useful and agreeable companions in the matrimonial
state. Domestic concerns are the province of the wife; and nature prompts young
women to qualify themselves for behaving well in that station: and the
influence of the female character over the manners of men, both before and
after marriage, exhibits female education in a point of light extremely
interesting. "LET the ladies of a country be properly educated, and they will
not only make and administer its laws, but form its manners and character.

"IT would require a lively imagination to describe, or even to comprehend, the
happiness of a country, where knowledge and virtue were generally diffused
among the female sex. Our young men would then be restrained from vice, by the
terror of being banished from their company. The loud laugh, and the malignant
smile, at the expense of innocence, or of personal infirmities; the seats of
successful mimickry, and the low prized wit, which is borrowed from a
misapplication of scripture phrases, would no more be considered as a
recommendation to the society of the ladies. A double entendre, in their
presence, would then exclude a gentleman forever from the company of both sexes.

"THE influence of female education, would be still more extensive and useful
in domestic life. The obligations of gentlemen to qualify themselves, by
knowledge and industry, to discharge the duties of benevolence, would be
increased by marriage; and the patriot, the hero, and the legislator, would
find the sweetest reward of their toil in the approbation and applause of their
wives. Children would discover the marks of maternal prudence and wisdom in
every station in life; for it has been well remarked that there have been few
great, or good men, who have not been blessed with wise and prudent mothers.
Cyrus was taught by his mother Mandane, to revere the Gods. Samuel was devoted
to his prophetic office, before he was born, by his mother Hannah. Constantine
was rescued from paganism by his mother Constantia: and Edward the sixth
inherited those great and excellent qualities, which made him the delight of
the age in which he lived, from his mother Lady Jane Seymour."

Dr. RUSH.


LETTER XCIII.
IT is now time, my dear sir, to collect the detached traits of female
excellence, which, like the scattered rays of the fair morning that tinge the
mountain tops with their golden hue, when drawn to a point, will afford a
beautiful assemblage of colors. I shall only aim at collecting the principal
features of Rozella's character, and will present you with her portrait, as
drawn by the hand of nature and of education.

IN the first rank of her virtues, I shall place that respectful attention with
which she treats her parents. Often does the tear of maternal affection start
from Mrs. Bloomsgrove's eye, at beholding the assiduity and respect with which
her daughter endeavors to reward a mother's care. The love of virtue is
Rozella's ruling passion. She loves it, not only on account of its native
excellence, and of its being the only sure road to happiness; but on account of
its being dear to her respectable father and tender mother. Her sensibility is
too great for an undisturbed enjoyment; but is such as to afford the most
exquisite pleasure in relieving the distressed. "We sometimes see instances of
young ladies, who weep away a whole forenoon, over the criminal sorrows of a
fictitious Charlotte or Werter, turning, with disdain, at two o'clock, from the
fight of a beggar, who solicits in humble accents or signs, a small portion
only of the crumbs which fall from their father's tables." But Rozella never
suffered any one to go unrelieved, to whom she could afford relief.

ROZELLA is possessed of superior understanding; but she endeavors to conceal
that superiority with as much care, as many take to display the superiority
they have not. She conforms to the company she is in; and never offends any by
a display of talents greatly above theirs. She is cheerful with the merry,
serious with the grave, and silent with the absurd. To good nature she unites
good breeding: is therefore, polite without ceremony, and obliging without
ostentation. Rozella never talks of her own sex but to express the good she
knows of them; and never suffers slander or detraction to escape from her lips.
She experiences less pain, from the wrong she receives, than from that which
she does.

ROZELLA prepares for managing a family of her own, by assisting her mother in
the care of hers. She is well acquainted with cookery, and with the price and
quality of provisions; and she can do the honors of the table with dignity and
propriety. While she continued the delightful companion of her mother, she
reigned in the hearts of all the servants, to whom she always spoke in the
kindest manner; received the benedictions of the poor, and the merited applause
of all who knew her.

THE personal charms of Rozella allure many young gentlemen to seek her
company. She has that sweetness of countenance, which interests without
dazzling beholders. Her sprightly and sentimental conversation (for she never,
of choice, consumed her time over an unmeaning card table) renders her a most
agreeable and entertaining companion, especially to her intimate acquaintance;
for, in presence of strangers, a modest reserve, blended with that native
frankness which ^^nders her easy and graceful, casts a transparent veil over
her mental accomplishments, which, while it seems to conceal, displays them to
the best advantage.

AND while Rozella's personal qualities, graceful manners, and sentimental
conversation, attract and please the gentlemen, her virtues teach them to
respect her character. The vicious and profane are awed by her white robed
innocence, and never profane its purity in her presence. Great is her influence
over the mora's of those who have the honor of associating with her. Her empire
is attendant on her virtues; her gentleness and modesty confirm the sway. In
her company, the rudest and most insensible of men will abate their ferocity,
and will affect more engaging manners. Her beauty seems but a proper and decent
lodging for her mind; it never makes her unmindful of her sex nor of her age.
Her modest diffidence interests every one in her favor, and she draws that
respect and attention to herself which she pays to the company.

YOU will naturally conclude, my dear sir, that a young lady, possessed of so
many accomplishments, did not remain long upon the stage without offers of
marriage. The deep rooted habits of education had taught her to move with
caution, and never to decide on an important matter, till her judgment had
gained an ascendency over her fancy. She was not to be deluded by the
assiduities of fulsome gallantry, by the pageantry of wealth, nor by the false
luster of beauty, elegance, or any external accomplishments. Nor could any of
her admirers gain a favorable reception, till the young Augustus, son of an
eminent planter, made an offer of himself in marriage.

THE offer of so elegant a person, with a mind uncorrupted by vice, enlightened
by extensive science, dignified by the most amiable virtues, and embellished by
graceful manners, was not to be declined. To him she listened with a pleasure
before unexperienced: and, with the perfect approbation of her parents, her
friends, and her own heart, the happy Augustus called the lovely, the
excellent, the accomplished Rozella HIS, in the twenty second year of her age.

FINIS.

