Rev. Mr. HALL's SERMON, DELIVERED OCTOBER 17, 1790.

A SERMON, AGAINST PROFANE SWEARING; DELIVERED at KEEN, On LORD's DAY, OCTOBER
17, 1790, And published at the request of a number of the hearers.

BY AARON HALL. A. M. Pastor of the Church in KEEN.

But I say to you, swear not at all.

Jesus Christ. But above all things, my brethren, swear not; neither by heaven,
neither by the earth, neither by any other oath; but let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.

Apostle James. KEEN, (State of New Hampshire) Printed and Sold by JAMES D.
GRIFFITH.

A SERMON.
PROVERBS, 18th Chap. 21st Ver. Death and Life are in the power of the Tongue.


BEHOLD how great a matter a little fire kindles! The tongue is a fire, a
world of iniquity; a world indeed, such is its power. How dangerous a weapon
then is this little member! and how nice and critical, as well as important an
affair, must be the conduct and regulation of it! If the issues of life and
death are from thence, we ought to look well to it, to see that the current be
restrained to its proper channel; that nothing flow from thence, but what may
tend to the fairest issue, and end in life, immortality and happiness. But is
it possible that so much can depend upon the tongue? are words so pregnant with
happiness or misery? words which are but a breath of transient air! Yet by thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. But
let us come to a closer examination of the matter. Let us inquire how this
great power came to be lodged in this little instrument, the tongue; and in
what sense, and how far it is evidently resident in it. Let us see what are the
usual offices and employments of the tongue. The avowed office of this little
useful and significant member of the human frame is, to express the conceptions
of the brain; and its employment takes in the whole extent of language;
comprehending at once, praise and obloquy; worship and execration; mirth and
sorrow; harmony and discord. Therewith bless we God, even the Father of all
things; and therewith curse we men, who are made after the similitude of God.
Therewith may we on the one hand make confession to salvation; and on the other
defile our whole body, and inflame or set on fire the whole course of nature.
And in all this, it is supposed to act under the influence of the heart; and in
the worst cases, I believe it generally does. External expressions of virtuous
and pious sentiments, cannot always be depended on for their truth and
sincerity. Men may think it necessary to make an appearance of good qualities,
of which they are not in reality possessed; but the case must be widely
different on the opposite side of the question. There is no end to be served in
a man's appearing worse than he is; and the rancor of the heart will ever be
considered as the probable source and fountain of the malediction of the
tongue. Thus are death and life in the power of the tongue. For on the very
same principle that men shall give account of, and consequently receive the
equitable punishment for every idle word they shall speak, they shall also
receive the applause and reward that is due to a just and proper regulation of
speech; and by their words be justified, as well as condemned. With what
apparent view; for what evident purpose, was this instrument of speech made a
part of the human fabric? Physically speaking, to enable man to express his
wants; to acquaint his fellow-animals with the otherwise illegible characters
of his heart; in a word, to render him a conversable sociable creature. But
with respect to moral and religious ends, there were much higher and more noble
views.

THE Lord has given man a tongue, that he might praise him therewith. The
first principle view of the creation of man, of his being endowed with such
high and noble faculties; such peculiar excellencies; was doubtless the glory
of the Supreme Being. Man is the offspring of ineffable goodness. Every faculty
he enjoys, is the donation of unbounded benevolence. Will not this suggest to
him, that the proper and natural employment of those faculties, is to give
glory, honor and thanksgiving to that Being from whom they are derived? What
then are we to say to such persons who pervert those very powers which were
given them for the best and noblest, to the worst and vilest of all purposes;
who employ that tongue to blaspheme and dishonor that Being whom it was given
them to praise; to confuse and destroy that society which they were formed to
support and adorn? Is not this putting the most glaring affront on the author
of our being? Is not this perverting the course and order of nature in the most
gross and palpable manner? Is not this in short, opposing the express views of
providence, and destroying the apparent end and design of our creation? What
shall be done to thee, O thou false tongue? False in the truest and most
extensive latitude, false to all views; social, moral, or religious; and false
to thy father, friend and benefactor. What shall be done to thee? Even mighty
and sharp arrows, and hot burning coals, shall be the fatal but just reward of
thy perjury. But who are they that have done this great wickedness? Is this
however to be asked, when our streets are filled with cursing and blasphemy;
when execrations and oaths intrude themselves into every article of discourse;
when they become the most considerable part of every general conversation; when
even our women and infants become remarkable; remarkable by the worst brand of
infamy, for a shocking proficiency in the language of hell? I know not whether
those who are addicted to this pernicious vice in any degree, are at all to be
argued with, upon the principles of reason and religion; surely not the latter.
The rule by which any practice stands so solemnly condemned, must certainly be
disallowed before the practice can become so general; and if this is the case,
then farewell reason too. The connection is so close between those inseparable
friends, reason and religion, that human power is too weak to disingage them;
and divine approves of the union. But as it is to be hoped there are but few
such, and that the practice of that destructive vice of common cursing and
swearing, is more generally owing to the want of duly considering, or perhaps
of rightly understanding the heinous nature and future consequences of it; I
shall therefore proceed to lay before you, a few of the most obvious and most
conclusive arguments which may be urged against it; from the respective
considerations both of reason and religion. With respect to the latter, it is
certain that nothing can be more forcibly prohibited; more formally condemned;
or more solemnly denounced against, through the whole system at least of the
christian law. The author of this law has strictly forbid us to swear at all,
by any kind of object, either in heaven or on earth; not even by our own heads,
how much less then by the great and venerable name of that tremendous Being,
who first formed and who upholds all things. If the inanimate heavens are not
to be called upon thus vainly, because they are his throne; if to the very
senseless earth, we owe this solemn reverence, because it is his footstool; how
dreadful a profanation must it be to invoke the sacred name of the great King
himself, from whom alone both throne and footstool receive their sanctity.

So great a stress is laid upon it by the Apostle, that he commands it to be
avoided, even above all things. Above all things, my brethren swear not. And of
so much importance is the government of the tongue considered by him in another
place, that he scruples not to pronounce it entirely destructive of all
religion, and absolutely incompatible with the essential qualifications of a
true and sincere christian. If any man among you seems to be religious, i. e.
professes a belief of the doctrines and a regard to the rules of the gospel;
yet if that man bridle not his tongue, but is licentious and extravagant in his
speech, launching out into oaths, execrations and blasphemies, depend upon it
those professions are insincere. What little appearance he makes of religion,
is vain; and what hopes and expectations he may form from it, vain and absurd;
groundless and delusive. As for curses, how ill do they become the mouth of him
who professes himself a disciple of the meek and benevolent Jesus whose
doctrine and whose life breathe nothing but love and blessing. Whose example
forbids us being reviled to revile again; and whose repeated precepts,
positively enjoin blessings, even in return for curses received; and prayers
for spiteful and injurious treatment. Even under the law it had been long since
expressly forbidden to take the name of the Lord in vain; and a severe
vengeance was denounced against such as should be hardy enough to violate the
precept. The prophet Hosea ranks the swearer with the atheist, the thief, the
murderer and adulterer. But it is needless to multiply prooffs that the
practice of common profane cursing and swearing is wholly indefensible on the
side of religion. If there is any force in words, nothing is more expressly or
solemnly prohibited. And what can be expected from the open violation of those
repeated prohibitions, but the punishment annexed to such offenses; the
vengeance particularly denounced against such glaring and absolute affronts
upon the supreme governor and legislator? The Lord will not hold him guiltless
who takes his name in vain. And in what degree of guilt he shall be held, let
the holy Psalmist in some measure instruct us. -- As he loved cursing, so shall
it come to him. As he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him. As
he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so let it come into
his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones; let it be to him as the
garment which covers him, and for a girdle wherewith he is girded
continually. Thus we see the imprecations of the curser, whether they be
levelled at himself or not, will still retort upon himself in their fullest
influence.

HIS mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate, says the Psalmist. Hear how aptly this is
confirmed by the son of Syrack -- A man who uses much swearing, says he, shall
be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his house. If
he shall offend, his sin shall be upon him, and if he acknowledge not his sin,
he makes a double offense, and if he swear in vain, he shall not be innocent;
but his house shall be full of calamities. This is the word that is clothed
about with death. Were we even destitute of these frequent, express and solemn
cautions against profaning the name of God, certainly reason must inform us
that we cannot be guilty of a more bold affront to the Supreme Being, than to
invoke him on every the most trivial and impertinent occasion, or to sport with
the great and awful character of him who gave beings to all worlds; and how
immensely does it exaggerate this guilt, if that sacred authority be appealed
to* that inviolable name be prostituted in attestation of the most impudent and
daring falsehoods. But that this is too generally the case with common swearers,
need not be observed to you; nor will they themselves, if they have the least
sense of shame or modesty, dare to deny it. The vice of common swearing is
then, in the first place, by an apparent violation of his express commands,
most provoking to the Supreme Being. But do we provoke God? What motive have we
for it? Has he ever injured us? On the contrary, are we not the creatures of
his bounty? Do we not depend upon him for life and all things which pertain to
it? Does he not dispense to us the various blessings of nature and providence
with a most bountiful hand? What encouragement have we to it? Are we stronger
than he? Can we overruled his just resentments? Can we ward off the stroke of
vengeance? The swearer then in this respect, stands doubly convicted of folly
in regard to himself, by exposing himself to ills which he knows not how to
avoid or endure.

BUT secondly, it is injurious to men; not only to those individuals who are
the particular objects of curses and execrations, but even to society in
general; because by swearing the land mourns, says the prophet. The sin is of
so deep a dye, as to occasion national visitations, by sword -- famine -- or
pestilence. He therefore whose crimes are so flagrant as to bring on public
vengeance, is (...) bane and pest to society; a public enemy; a traitor to his
country; and ought to be treated as such. After this consideration, it is
needless to mention the comparatively trivial guilt of indecency. When a man
has done his endeavor to destroy the peace of his country, it is littte to
say, that he wounds the ear of every rational and religious man; that he
destroys the peace of every good man; and puts the grossest affront upon his
understanding, by entertaining him with the language of hell.

SUPPOSE we should ask the swearer, what possible plea can you urge in support
of this shocking and abominable practice? We are not to expect from him any
rational or satisfactory answer. For will he pretend views of profit or worldly
advantage? Who ever heard of wealth, honor, or reputation, acquired in this
way? It is true, in cases of direct perjury, something of this kind may often
be the consequence; but the common swearer has nothing to do with this: And few
I believe will pretend to say, that they have ever made a friend; procured a
legacy, inheritance, place, pension, or donation, because they were remarkable
proficients in blasphemy. On the contrary, this argument lies against him
strongly, in more respects than one; for it is not only repugnant to the laws
of God, but is provided by our laws, that all offenses of this nature shall be
punished: So that a man gets nothing by this practice, but poverty as well as
infamy. As to his gaining honor, the portion that comes to his share, is to be
ranked in the most abject and lowest class; among the very dregs and outcasts
of the people. Is fame and reputation his view? Here perhaps he may succeed
better; but yet he must wait a little for his harvest, 'till he is received
into that society, where alone he can find fit companions for him, and where it
may be considered as some kind of excellency perhaps (such as it is) to be most
a devil, and to come nearest the grand pattern of blasphemy and impiety.
Perhaps the swearer may imagine that oaths give grace and spirit to his
discourse, and to himself the character of courage and vivacity. But who are to
be his judges? The sensible part of mankind, who have the best right to that
office. He must not appeal to, and the abandoned themselves dare not publicly
side with him, were they ever so much inclined by opinion, which I am persuaded
they are not. The only creatures who are likely to favor him on this occasion,
seem to be the inhabitants of a certain region, where probably blasphemy is the
reigning wit. But let him enjoy the applause of devils unenvied; few will
grudge him his admirers, who consider that every peal of laughter thus raised,
will cost him a groan in the internal prison; and the mirth which is to succeed
it, shall consist in weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. I will not
suppose that there can be a wretch so abandoned as to assert that there is a
pleasure, a self-satisfaction in common swearing; in blaspheming the sacred
name of the great God; in violating positive ordinances, as well human as
divine. Sure devils themselves cannot derive agreeable sensations from so
shocking a practice. In short, in every light it can be viewed; in all possible
considerations; common swearing is the most irrational, the least defensible,
of any in the whole catalogue of human vices: For it exposes a man to the
hearty contempt and abhorrence of every good man; to the loss of his property
by the penal laws, if the magistrates and the sober part of the people would
have spirit enough to put them in force; and to the certain loss of all that is
truly valuable, even eternal happiness hereafter, from the just resentments of
an injured God; without the least triffle in the world in exchange for them;
without the possibility of attaining either pleasure, profit, honor, or any
other useful acquisition by the bargain. It has not even the common pleas of
other vices to be urged in its behalf. There are several crimes which a man
may, with some little appearance of advantage, charge upon nature; but here
every thing of that kind is out of the question; and neither constitution nor
appetite will stand him in any stead. For certainly a man will not think of
saying that he has a constitutional propensity to blaspheme; as the prodigal,
the miser, the wanton, etc. may urge for their respective vices; or an appetite
to swear, as the glutton avows to the delights of his palate. Perhaps every
syllable he can possibly urge in his excuse, may be reduced to these three
pleas; -- passion -- habit -- and inadvertency. But I would not have him build
much upon either of them; for in the first place, whatever is in itself
absolutely evil and unwarrantable, can never satisfy or excuse what results
from it. A man swears because he is in a passion: But why is he in a passion?
Does he not know that intemperate anger is itself almost one of the greatest
faults a man can be guilty of? Does not he know that it stands expressly
forbidden by the letter of scripture, which tells him he must be slow to wrath?
That furious anger was not made for him that is born of a woman; that he should
be angry and sin not. Does he not know that the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God? Will a man then swear because he is in a passion? And one
great prohibition is on this very account; lest he should be tempted to
blaspheme, and to take the name of his God in vain. If a man says he swears by
dint of habit, this is making the case ten times worse; for an habitual custom
of sinning, is certainly a greater degree of guilt than an occasional lapse.
But how did he acquire that habit? Was it not by an apparent failure in his
duty, both to God and man? But be this habit ever so strong, he must shake it
off, reason as well as religion requires it; nay, his own safety demands it of
him, unless he has a mind to experience the truth of another necessary
deduction, and run without further thought into eternal ruin, because he has a
habit of deserving it. Even inadvertency will not serve his turn; when a man
thinks it a sufficient excuse for a servant who has neglected his business, for
that servant to reply, it was owing to his not troubling his head about his
directions; then may he himself be allowed to urge the plea of inadvertency for
swearing and taking God's name in vain, in open contempt of the most solemn,
most express and frequent commands to the contrary. You see then how the affair
stands, without the least counter-balance of profit or pleasure, either present
or future; the certain gain may be resolved into contempt, ignominy, and
perhaps poverty here -- chains and darkness, vengeance and eternal misery
hereafter. It is not too late for the most desperate to retrieve himself; but
for him who is a blasphemer of yesterday, to persist in it but one moment
longer, may be attended with the most fatal and deplorable consequences. Let me
adjure therefore all such as are conscious of any guilt in this respect, by all
that they themselves hold dear, to give the observations that I have made their
due force. Not to look upon any affectionate remonstrances on this head as a
matter of course, or mere words only; but the effect of a real and sincere
concern for their present and future well being. And though I would if possible
hope, that we shall meet with but few occasions to employ it; yet I must not
omit to desire the hearty concurrence of the magistrates and all sober minded
persons, in endeavoring to suppress this horrid and pernicious vice, by
applying another kind of argument to such perverse, obstinate and wicked
wretches, as shall be deaf to these. You know what power the legislator has
put into our hands; let every one resolve to use it to the utmost, on every
occasion which may offer for the glory of God, and the good of our
fellow creatures; that the character pointed at by the wise man, may not be
applied to us: He hears cursing and bewrays it not. O that there was indeed
such a spirit in us, though we were to slay every one his man, who joins to
Baalpeor; that the iniquity may be done away from the congregation! for on
those terms only will the Lord return to his wonted displays of mercy and
indulgence, and the plague be stayed from Israel.

CONSIDER what you have heard, and may the Lord give us understanding in all
things.

AMEN.

