

APHORISMS ON MAN. TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT OF THE REV. JOHN
CASPAR LAVATER, CITIZEN OF ZURIC.

-- e coelo descendit (...).

JUV. Sat. IX. THIRD EDITION.

T and J S

LONDON: PRINTED. NEW YORK: REPRINTED BY T. AND J. SWORDS, FOR BERRY AND
ROGERS, HANOVER-SQUARE. M,DCC,XC.

TO HENRY FUSELI, A. M.
TAKE, dear observer of men, from the hand of your unbiassed friend, this
testimony of esteem for your genius.

All the world know that this is no flattery; for, in an hundred things, I am
not of your opinion; but, in what concerns the knowledge of mankind, we are
nearer to one another than any two in ten thousand.

What I give here is the result of long experience, matured and confirmed by
various and daily application. It will be found, I hope, an useful book for
every class of men, from the throne to the cottage. All is not, cannot be, new;
but all ought to be true, useful, important; and much, I trust, is new and
individual.

I give you liberty not only to make improvements, but to omit what you think
false or unimportant.

The number of rules may appear large, yet it is small compared to what might
have been written; in the mean time you and I, as well as our readers, may find
ample employment in studying these.

J. C. LAVATER.
Zuric, October 13, 1787.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the following collection of Aphorisms the reader is not to expect a set of
maxims compiled from the author's own, or by him selected from the works of
others; but an original, meditated and composed in the series here offered
during the autumn of 1787, and trarsmitted in the author's own manuscript to
the publisher.

Notwithstanding the rapidity that attended this work, (and the world know that
all this author's works are affusions,) it will be found to contain what gives
their value to maxims -- verdicts of wisdom on the reports of experience. If
some are truisms, let it be considered that Sclomon and Hippocrates wrote
truisms: if some are not new, they are recommended by an air of novelty: if
whim should appear to have dictated others, it was the whim of humanity; and
what may be deamed rash will be found to flow from the fervor of indignant
honesly, or the exultations of benevolence. Acute and perspicuous, they are not
infected by the cant of sects, or circumscribed by local notions, but general
as the passions and feelings of the race.

It is the intention of the editor to add another volume of AMPHORISMS ON ART,
WITH CHARACTERS AND EXAMPLES, not indeed by the same author, which the reader
may expect in the course of the year.

APHORISMS.
1.
KNOW, in the first place, that mankind agree in essence, as they do in their
limbs and senses.

2.
Mankind differ as much in essence as they do in form, limbs, and senses -- and
only so, and not more.

3.
As in looking upward each beholder thinks himself the center of the sky; so
Nature formed her individuals, that each must see himself the center of being.

4.
Existence is self-enjoyment, by means of some object distinct from ourselves.

5.
As the medium of self-enjoyment, as the objects of love -- so the value, the
character, and manner of existence in man; -- as his thou, so his I. --
Penetrate the one, and you know the other.

6.
The more complex yet unisorm, the more varied yet harmonious, the medium of
self-enjoyment; -- the more existent and real, the more vigorous and dignisied,
the more blessed and blessing is man.

7.
He, whom common, gross, or stale objects allure, and, when obtained, content,
is a vulgar being, incapable of greatness in thought or action.

8.
Who pursues means of enjoyment contradictory, irreconcilable, and
self-destructive, is a fool, or what is called a sinner -- Sin and destruction
of order are the same.

9.
The more unharmonious and inconsistent your objects of desire, the more
inconsequent, inconsistent, unquiet, the more ignoble, idiotical, and criminal
yourself.

10.
Copiousness and simplicity, variety and unity, constitute real greatness of
character.

11.
The less you can enjoy, the poorer, the scantier yourself -- the more you can
enjoy, the richer, the more vigorous.

You enjoy with wisdom or with folly, as the gratification of your appetites
capacitates or unnerves your powers.

12.
He scatters enjoyment who can enjoy much.

13.
Joy and grief decide character. What exalts prosperity? what imbitters grief?
what leaves us indifferent? what interests us? As the interest of man, so his
God -- as his God, so he.

14.
What is a man's interest? what constitutes his God, the ultimate of his
wishes, his end of existence? Either that which on every occasion he
communicates with the most unrestrained cordiality, or hides from every profane
eye and ear with mysterious awe; to which he makes every other thing a mere
appendix; -- the vortex, the center, the comparative point from which he sets
out, on which he fixes, to which he irresistibly returns; -- that, at the last
of which you may safely think him inconsolable; -- that which he rescues from
the gripe of danger with equal anxiety and boldness.

The story of the painter and the prince is well known: to get at the best
piece in the artist's collection, the prince ordered fire to be cried in the
neighborhood -- at the first noise the artist abruptly left the prince, and
seized his darling -- his Titian. The alarm proved a false one, but the object
of purchase was fixed. The application is easy: of thousands it may be decided
what loss, what gain, would affect them most. This the sage of Nazareth meant
when he said, Where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also. -- The
object of your love is your God.

15.
The more independent of accidents, the more self-subsistent, the more fraught
with internal resources -- the greater the character.

16.
The greatest of characters, no doubt, would be he, who, free of all trifling
accidental helps, could see objects through one grand immutable medium, always
at hand, and proof against illusion and time, reflecting every object in its
true shape and color through all the fluctuation of things.

17.
Where you find true internal life, consistence of character, principles of
real independence, sympathy for universal harmony -- where inexorable
resolution against all that threatens the real unity of existence and bands of
order -- where you find these, there offer the homage due humanity.

18.
The study of man is the doctrine of unisons and discords between ourselves and
others.

19.
As man's love or hatred, so he. Love and hatred exist only personified. As his
hatred and love, so his will and its energy. As the energy of will, so the
value, the character of man. Investigate then what and how he loves or hates --
as these are in perpetual unison, you discover his energy of will, and by that
himself.

20.
Distinguish with exactness, in thyself and others, between wishes and will, in
the strictest sense.

Who has many wishes has generally but little will. Who has energy of will has
few diverging wishes. Whose will is bent with energy on one, must renounce the
wishes for many things. Who cannot do this is not stamped with the majesty of
human nature. The energy of choice, the unison of various powers for one, is
alone will, born under the agonies of self-denial and renounced desires.

21.
Calmness of will is a sign of grandeut. The vulgar, far from hiding their
will, blab their wishes. -- A single spark of occasion discharges the child of
passions into a thousand crackers of desire.

22.
He knows not how to speak who cannot be silent; still less how to act with
vigor and decision. -- Who hastens to the end is silent: loudness is impotence.

23.
Who in the same given time can produce more than many others, has vigor; who
can produce more and better, has talents; who can produce what none else can,
has gemus.

24.
The acquisition of will, for one thing exclusively, presupposes entire
acquaintance with many others. Search into the progress of exclusive will, and
you may learn whether it was formed by accident, or judgment, or both.

25.
Wishes run over in loquacious impotence, will presses on with laconic energy.

26.
The more uniform a man's voice, step, manner of conversation, handwriting --
the more quiet, uniform, settled, his actions, his character.

27.
Who is open without levity; generous without waste; secret without craft;
humble without meanness; bold without insolence; cautious without anxiety;
regular, yet not formal; mild, yet not timid; firm, yet not tyrannical -- is
made to pass the ordeal of honor, friendship, virtue.

28.
The glad gladdens -- who gladdens not is not glad. Who is fatal to others is
so to himself -- to him, heaven, earth, wisdom, (...), virtue, vice, are equal
-- to such an one tell neither good nor bad of yourself.

29.
Who forces himself on others, is to himself a load. Impetuous curiosity is
empty and inconstant. Prying intrusion may be suspected of whatever is little.

30.
The shameless flatterer is a shameless knave.

31.
As the impudence of flattery, so the impudence of egotism.

32.
Let the degree of egotism be the measure of confidence.

33.
Indiscretion, rashness, falsehood, levity, and malice, produce each other.

34.
Who (the exhilarating mirth of humor excepted) gives uneasiness in order to
enjoy it, is malicious; but there is both dignity and delicacy in giving
uneasiness to confer greater delight than could have been obtained without it.

35.
Who pries is indiscreet -- the side glance, dismayed when observed, seeks to
ensnare.

36.
Who begins with severity, in judging of another, ends commonly with falsehood.

37.
The smiles that encourage severity of judgment hide malice and insincerity.

38.
He, who boldly interposes between a merciless censor and his prey, is a man of
vigor: and he who, mildly wise, without wounding, convinces him of his error,
commands our veneration.

39.
Who, without pressing temptation, tells a lie, will, without pressing
temptation, act ignobly and meanly.

40.
Who, under pressing temptations to lie, adheres to truth, nor to the profane
betrays aught of a sacred trust, is near the summit of wisdom and virtue.

41.
Three things characterise man: person, fate, merit -- the harmony of these
constitutes real grandeur.

42.
Search carefully into the unison and discords of a man's person, fate, and
merit; and you may analyze his character so clearly, that you may almost with
certainty foretell what he will be.

43.
As the present character of a man, so his past, so his future. Who recollects
distinctly his past adventures, knows his destiny to come.

44.
You can depend on no man, on no friend, but him who can depend on himself. He
only who acts consequentially toward himself will act so toward others, and
vice versa.

Man is for ever the same; the same under every form, in all situations and
relations that admit of free and unrestrained exertion. The same regard which
you have for yourself, you have for others, for nature, for the invisible
Numen, which you call God. -- Who has witnessed one free and unconstrained act
of yours, has witnessed all.

45.
What is truth, wisdom -- virtue -- magnanimity? -- consequence. And what is
consequence? -- harmony between yourself and your situation, your point of
sight, and every relation of being.

46.
Where consequence ceases, there folly, restlessness and misery begin.
Consequence determines your degree of respectability, in every diverging point,
from your enemy to your God.

47.
Man has an inward sense of consequence -- of all that is pertinent. This sense
is the essence of humanity: this, developed and determined, characterises him
-- this, displayed, in his education. The more strict you are in observing what
is pertinent or heterogeneous in character, actions, works of art and
literature -- the wiser, nobler, greater, the more humane yourself.

48.
He who acts most consequentially is the most friendly, and the most worthy of
friendship -- the more inconsequential, the less fit for any of its duties. In
this I know I have said something common; but it will be very uncommon if I
have made you attentive to it.

49.
Trust him with none of thy individualities who is, or pretends to be, two
things at once.

50.
The most exuberant encomiast turns easily into the most inveterate censor.

51.
The loss of taste for what is right is loss of all right taste.

52.
Who affects useless singularities has surely a little mind.

53.
All affectation is the vain and ridiculous attempt of poverty to appear rich.

54.
Frequent laughing has been long called a sign of a little mind -- whilst the
scarcer smile of harmless quiet has been complimented as the mark of a noble
heart. -- But to abstain from laughing, and exciting laughter, merely not to
offend, or to risk giving offense, or not to debase the inward dignity of
character -- is a power unknown to many a vigorous mind.

55.
Who cannot make one in the circle of harmless merriment, without a secret
cause of grief or seriousness, may be suspected of pride, hypocrisy, or
formality.

56.
Softness of smile indicates softness of character.

57.
The immoderate cannot laugh moderately.

58.
The horse-laugh indicates brutality of character.

59.
A sneer is often the sign of heartless malignity.

60.
Who courts the intimacy of a professed sneerer, is a professed knave.

61.
I know not which of these two I should wish to avoid most; the scoffer at
virtue and religion, who, with heartless villainy, butchers innocence and truth;
or the pietest, who crawls, groans, blubbers, and secretly says to gold, thou
art my hope! and to his belly, thou art my god!

62.
All moral dependence on him, who has been guilty of one act of positive cool
villainy, against an acknowledged, virtuous and noble character, is credulity,
imbecility, or insanity.

63.
The most stormy ebullitions of passion, from blasphemy to murder, are less
terrific than one single act of cool villainy: a still rabies is more dangerous
than the paroxisms of a fever. -- Fear the boisterous savage of passion less
than the sedately grinning villain.

64.
Who defends a thing demonstrated bad, and, with a contemptuous shrug, rejects
another demonstrated good, is, by the decision of the most unequivocal charity,
a decided knave.

65.
Take this as another mark of a decided knave -- that, after each knavish
expression, he labors to suppress a grin of malice, and meditates new mischief.

66.
Can he love truth who can take a knave to his bosom?

67.
There are offenses against individuals, to all appearance trifling, which are
capital offenses against the human race: -- fly him who can commit them.

68.
There ought to be a perpetual whisper in the ear of plain honesty -- take heed
not even to pronounce the name of a knave -- he will make the very sound of his
name a handle of mischief. And do you think a knave begins mischief to leave
off? Know this -- whether he overcome or be foiled, he will wrangle on.

69.
Humility and love, whatever obscurities may involve religious tenets,
constitute the essence of true religion. The humble is formed to adore; the
loving to associate with eternal love.

70.
Have you ever seen a vulgar mind warm or humble; or a proud one that could
love? where pride begins love ceases -- as love, so humility -- as both, so the
still real power of man.

71.
Every thing may be mimicked by hypocrisy, but humility and love united. The
humblest star twinkles most in the darkest night. -- The more rare humility and
love united, the more radiant when they meet.

72.
From him, who premeditatedly injures humility and love, expect nothing --
nothing generous, nothing just.

73.
Modesty is silent when it would not be improper to speak: the humble, without
being called upon, never recollects to say any thing of himself.

74.
The oppressive is hard. If ten, chosen from the crowd by yourself, call you
oppressive, it is more than probable that you have a raw, hard, indelicate side.

75.
Humility with energy is often mistaken for pride, though pride with energy is
never called humble. Mankind expect much oftener pride than humility. Humility
must be amazingly certain indeed before it shall be acknowledged by the humble
and the proud, as readily as pride by both.

76.
All have moments of energy; but, those moments excepted, the
humbly-affectionate, as such, is never oppressive; whilst the least motion of
the proud oppresses. Hardness and pride show themselves in a thousand forms,
speak a thousand languages, which every eye and every ear can interpret.

77.
He who has the power to pass suddenly from rage to calmness, or, what is the
same, to hide a gust of passion, may not be a hypocrite, but must be
intolerable in his fits.

78.
The wrath that on conviction subsides into mildness, is the wrath of a
generous mind.

79.
Who will sacrifice nothing, and enjoy all, is a fool.

80.
Thousands are hated, whilst none are ever loved, without a real cause. The
amiable alone can be loved.

81.
He who is loved and commands love, when he corrects or is the cause of
uneasiness, must be loveliness itself; and

82.
He who can love him in the moment of correction, is the most amiable of
mortals.

83.
He, to whom you may tell any thing, may see every thing, and will betray
nothing.

84.
You often feel yourself invigorated to tell, without fear, some bold truth to
certain great characters who would never forgive being corrected in trifles.
Pushed once for my opinion by one who pretended a serious design of
self-amendment, and prefaced his request by protesting -- that nothing could
offend him -- that he would even submit to be called a fiend -- I replied, you
may tell a man thou art a fiend, but not your nose wants blowing -- to him
alone who can bear a thing of that kind, you may tell all.

85.
He can feel no little wants who is in pursuit of grandeur.

86.
The freer you feel yourself in the presence of another, the more free is he:
who is free makes free.

87.
Call him wise whose actions, words, and steps, are all a clear because to a
clear why.

88.
Who knows whence he comes, where he is, and whither he tends, he, and he
alone, is wise.

89.
Decided ends are sure signs of a decided character; and

90.
Vague ends of a vague character.

91.
Who makes quick use of the moment is a genius of prudence.

92.
Who instantly does the best that can be done, what no other could have done,
and what all must acknowledge to be the best, is a genius and a hero at once.

93.
The discovery of truth, by slow progressive meditation, is wisdom. --
Intuition of truth, not preceded by perceptible meditation, is genius.

94.
Intuition is the clear conception of the whole at once. It seldom belongs to
man to say without presumption, I came, saw, vanquished.

95.
Avoid the eye that discovers with rapidity the bad, and is slow to see the
good.

96.
Dread more the blunderer's friendship than the calumniator's enmity.

97.
He only, who can give durability to his exertions, has genuine power and
energy of mind.

98.
Before thou call a man hero or genius, investigate whether his exertion has
features of indelibility; for all that is celestial, all genius, is the
offspring of immortality.

99.
Who despises all that is despicable is made to be impressed with all that is
grand.

100.
Who can pay homage to the truly despicable is truly contemptible.

101.
The most contemptible of those that ever were or ever can be despised by the
wise, is he who, with opportunities of being acquainted with what is noble,
pure, grand, gives himself airs of despising it.

102.
He who can despise nothing can value nothing with propriety; and who can value
nothing has no right to despise any thing.

103.
Sagacity in selecting the good, and courage to honor it, according to its
degree, determines your own degree of goodness.

104.
Some characters are positive, and some negative.

105.
Who gives is positive; who receives is negative; still there remains an
immense class of mere passives.

106.
There is a negative class whose constant aim is destruction, who perpetually
labor to demolish, to imbitter, to detract from something within us; these
avoid if you can, but examine what they say; their far-fetched criticisms will
often make you attend to what else might have escaped observation.

107.
Who takes from you ought to give in his turn, or he is a thief; I distinguish
taking and accepting, robbing and receiving: many give already by the mere wish
to give; their still unequivocal wish of improvement and gratitude, whilst it
draws from us, opens treasures within us that might have remained locked up,
even to ourselves.

108.
Seeking, accepting, giving, make nearly the sum of all necessary knowledge.

Who seeks, investigates, entreats, and asks; who accepts, hears, fixes, and
applies; who gives, communicates, gladdens, and enriches.

109.
Who can hear with composure, attend in silence, and listen to the end -- may
already be considered as wise, just, noble: his judgment, of whatever comes
within his sphere, where he can hear, and hear out with composure, may, till
you meet with one better, serve for an oracle.

110.
Who can relate with composure, with precision, truth, clearness, and artless
sentiment, and relate the same twice equally well -- him seek for a friend, or
rather deserve to be his friend.

111.
Who can listen without constraint whilst an important thing is telling, can
keep a secret when told.

112.
As a person's yes and no, so all his character. A downright yes and no marks
the firm; a quick the rapid; and a slow one a cautious or timid character.

113.
Vociferation and calmness of character seldom meet in the same person.

114.
Who writes as he speaks, speaks as he writes, looks as he speaks and writes --
is honest.

115.
A habit of sneering marks the egotist, or the fool, or the knave -- or all
three.

116.
Who cuts is easily wounded. The readier you are to offend the sooner you are
offended.

117.
Who, inattentive to answers, accumulates questions will not be informed, and
who means not to be informed asks like a fool.

118.
Who writes an illegible hand is commonly rapid, often impetuous, in his
judgments.

119.
As you treat your body, so your house, your domestics, your enemies, your
friends -- Dress is a table of your contents.

120.
Certain trifling flaws sit as disgracefully on a character of elegance as a
ragged button on a court dress.

121.
Who knows not how to wait with yes, will often be with shame reduced to say
no. Letting " I dare not wait upon I would." Shakespeare.


122.
As one flatters so he cuts, so he detracts.

123.
Who has done certain things once may be expected to repeat them a thousand
times.

124.
Who has a daring eye tells downright truths and downright lies.

125.
Who sedulously attends, pointedly asks, calmly speaks, coolly answers, and
ceases when he has no more to say, is in possession of some of the best
requisites of man.

126.
Who seldom speaks, and with one calm well-timed word can strike dumb the
loquacious -- is a genius or a hero.

127.
Who makes many decided questions, and gives evasive answers, will find it
difficult to escape the suspicion of craft and duplicity.

128.
Who interrupts often is inconstant and insincere.

129.
Who always willingly relates is not sagacious; and who relates always with
reluctance seems to want sentiment and politeness.

130.
The quicker, the louder, the applause with which another tries to gain you
over to his purpose -- the bitterer his censure if he miss his aim.

131.
The ambitious sacrifices all to what he terms honor, as the miser all to
money. Who values gold above all considers all else as trifling: who values
fame above all despises all but fame. The truly virtuous has an exclusive taste
for virtue. A great passion has no partner.

132.
The procrastinator is not only indolent and weak but commonly false too --
most of the weak are false.

133.
All cavillers are suspicious. The supercilious imbitters: he will neither love
nor be loved.

134.
Who trades in contradictions will not be contradicted.

135.
Who can look quietly at nothing will never do any thing worthy of imitation.

136.
Who is respectable when thinking himself alone and free from observation will
be so before the eye of all the world.

137.
Who not only renders spontaneous justice to his rival, but with cordial praise
enumerates his merits more clearly than his competitor could himself have done,
is not only one of the most perspicacious, but one of the grandest of mortals
-- and has, superlatively, pronounced his own panegyric.

138.
True genius repeats itself for ever, and never repeats itself -- one ever
varied sense beams novelty and unity on all.

139.
He who has genius and eloquence sufficient either to cover or to excuse his
errors, yet extenuates not, but rather accuses himself, and unequivocally
confesses guilt -- approaches the circle of immortals, whom human language has
dignified with the appellation of gods and saints.

140.
Small attentions to pressing disregarded wants, not easily discovered, and
less easily satisfied, are the privilege of a few great souls.

141.
Many trifling inattentions, neglects, indiscretions -- are so many unequivocal
proofs of dull frigidity, hardness, or extreme egotism.

142.
He, who confident of being right, can check his anger at the effrontery of
unjust claims, calmly produce his vouchers, and leave them to speak for
themselves, is more than a just man.

143.
Who, in the midst of just provocation to anger, instantly finds the fit word
which settles all around him in silence, is more than wise or just: he is, were
he a beggar, of more than royal blood -- he is of celestial descent.

144.
There are actions, sentiments, manners, speeches; there is a silence of such
magnitude, energy, decision -- as to be singly worth a whole life of some men.
He who has these features never can act meanly -- all his actions, words,
writings, however to appearance ambiguous, must be stamped by their superior
energy.

145.
There are many who are much acquainted with man, and little with the world;
others that know the world, and are not acquainted with man. These two kinds of
knowledge, mistaken for each other, occasion many unjust and precipitate
decisions: let every one, really intent on the study of mankind, avoid
confounding, and carefully search to unite them.

146.
Who always loses the more he is known must undoubtedly be very poor.

147.
Who, in a long course of familiarity, neither gains nor loses, has a very
mean, vulgar, character.

148.
Who always wins and never loses, the more he is known, enjoyed, used, is as
much above a vulgar character.

149.
Who has no friend and no enemy is one of the vulgar; and without talents,
powers, or energy.

150.
As your enemies and your friend so are you.

151.
You may depend upon it that he is a good man whose intimate friends are all
good, and whose enemies are characters decidedly bad.

152.
He must be a man of worth who is not forsaken by the good, when the mean and
malicious unite to oppress him.

153.
He must be very bad who cannot find a single friend, though he be praised,
noticed, puffed.

154.
Who is thoroughly bad? -- he that has no sense for what is thoroughly good.

155.
That most uncommon of all mortals, him who can, whilst advancing to fame,
enter into the detail of all the wants of an unknown good character, and who
would lose the whole enjoyment of it if he knew he had been observed -- him I
should wish to know, and to address him -- Saint of saints, pray for us!

156.
The strong or weak side of a man can never be know so soon as when you see him
engaged in dispute with a weak or malicious wrangler.

157.
Say not you know another entirely till you have divided an inheritance with
him.

158.
Who keeps his promise punctually, and promises nothing but what he had the
power and the will to keep, is as prudent as just.

159.
Who, at every promise, intends to perform more than his promise, and can
depend on the sincerity of his will, is more than prudent and just.

160.
There are rapid moments of joy and of grief; moments which every one has, at
least once in his life, that illuminate his character at once.

161.
The manner of giving shows the character of the giver more than the gift
itself -- there is a princely manner of giving, and a royal manner of accepting.

162.
Who forgets, and does not forget himself, in the joy of giving and of
accepting is sublime.

163.
Who, at the pressing solicitation of bold and noble confidence, hesitates one
moment before he consents, proves himself at once inexorable.

164.
Who, at the solicitations of cunning, self-interest, silliness, or impudence,
hesitates one moment before he refuses, proves himself at once a silly giver.

165.
Examine carefully whether a man is fonder of exceptions than of rules; as he
makes use of exceptions he is sagacious; as he applies them against the rule he
is wrongheaded. I heard in one day a man who thought himself wise produce
thrice, as rules, the strangest half-proved exceptions against millions of
demonstrated contrary examples, and thus obtained the most intuitive idea of
the sophist's character. Of all human forms and characters none is less
improveable, none more intolerable or oppressive, than the race of sophists.
They are intolerable against all nature, against all that is called general,
demonstrated truth: they attempt to demolish the most solid and magnificent
fabric with a grain of sand picked from off its stones. Such knaves, whom to
tolerate exceeds almost the bounds of human toleration, avoid like serpents! If
you once engage with them there is no end to wrangling. A sneer, and the
helpless misery of better hearts, are their only aim and their highest
enjoyment.

166.
Who speaks often hastily, sometimes slowly, now hesitates, then wanders from
the question, is either in a state of confusion or stupefaction, or may be
suspected of inconstancy and falsehood.

167.
Who, without call or office, industriously recalls the remembrance of past
errors to confound him who has repented of them, is a villain.

168.
Whenever a man undergoes a considerable change, in consequence of being
observed by others, whenever he assumes another gait, another language, than
what he had before he thought himself observed, be advised to guard yourself
against him.

169.
Who, present or absent, thinks and says the same of his friend and enemy -- is
more than honest -- more than man -- he is a hero.

170.
I am prejudiced in favor of him who can solicit boldly, without impudence --
he has faith in humanity -- he has faith in himself. No one who is not
accustomed to give grandly can ask nobly and with boldness.

171.
The worst of all knaves are those who can mimic their former honesty.

172.
He who goes round about in his requests wants commonly more than he chooses to
appear to want.

173.
Who crawlingly receives will give superciliously.

174.
Who rapidly decides without examining proofs will persist obstinately.

175.
Who praises what he thinks bad, and censures what he thinks good, is either
unimprovably weak, or intolerably deceitful.

176.
As a man's salutation so the total of his character: in nothing do we lay
ourselves so open as in our manner of meeting and salutation.

177.
Be afraid of him who meets you with friendly aspect, and, in the midst of a
flattering salutation, avoids your direct open look.

178.
The presence of him is oppressive whose going away makes those he leaves easy;
and he, whose presence was oppressive, was either good in bad or bad in good
company.

179.
Fly both the sneaking and the boisterous; for the one will wound, the other
will not defend you.

180.
Examine what, and how, and where, and when, a man praises or censures; he who
always, and every where, and, as to essentials, in an uniform manner, censures
and blames, is a man that may be depended upon.

181.
He, who has the air of being quite unconcerned at the praises bestowed upon
another, is either very prudent or very envious; and at the same time convinced
that those praises are deserved. Perhaps he acts nobly if, from motives of
humanity, he represses his own judgment, which possibly might crush the praise.

182.
Who censures with modesty will praise with sincerity.

183.
Too much gravity argues a shallow mind.

184.
Pedantry and taste are as inconsistent as gaiety and melancholy.

185.
All finery is a sign of littleness.

186.
Slovenliness and indelicacy of character commonly go hand in hand.

187.
The sloven has no respect either for himself or others.

188.
Who makes too much or too little of himself has a false measure for every
thing.

189.
He, who has no taste for order, will be often wrong in his judgments, and
seldom considerate or conscientious in his actions.

190.
The more honesty a man has the less he affects the air of a saint -- the
affectation of sanctity is a blotch on the face of piety.

191.
There are more heroes than saints; (heroes I call rulers over the minds and
destinies of men); more saints than humane characters. Him, who humanizes all
that is within and around himself, adore. I know but of one such by tradition.

192.
Who in certain moments can entirely lose himself in another, and, in the midst
of the greatest action, thinks of no observer, is a jewel in the crown of human
nature.

193.
Who seeks those that are greater than himself, their greatness enjoys, and
forgets his greatest qualities in their greater ones, is already truly great.

194.
And truly little is he who, absorbed in trifles, has no taste for the great,
goes in perpetual quest of the little, and labors to impress inferiors with
his own conceited greatness.

195.
The more one speaks of himself the less he likes to hear another talked of.

196.
The more you can forget others who suffer, and dwell upon yourself, who suffer
not, the more contemptible is your self-love.

197.
Who partakes in another's joys is a more humane character than he who partakes
in his griefs.

198.
Who can conceal his joys is greater than he who can hide his griefs.

199.
Who conceals joys is formed to invent great joys.

200.
The wrangler, the puzzler, the word hunter, are incapable of great thoughts or
actions.

201.
Who, crab-like, crawls backwards when he should meet you like a friend may be
suspected of plotting and falsehood.

202.
Neither the cold nor the fervid, but characters uniformly warm, are formed for
friendship.

203.
The ungrateful are not so certainly bad as the grateful are certainly good
characters.

204.
We see more when others converse among themselves than when they speak to us.

205.
Ask yourself of every one you are concerned with what can I give him? what is
he in want of? what is he capable of accepting? what would he accept of? and if
you can tell you know at least three fourths of his character.

206.
Who has no confidence in himself has no faith in others, and none in God.

207.
Who can subdue his own anger is more than strong; who can allay another's is
more than wise; hold fast on him who can do both.

208.
Who seems proud wants at least the look of humility. -- Light without
splendor, fire without heat, humility without meekness, what are they?

209.
None love without being loved; and none beloved is without loveliness.

210.
He, whose pride oppresses the humble, may perhaps be humbled, but will never
be humble.

211.
Who, at the relation of some unmerited misfortune, smiles, is either a fool, a
fiend, or a villain.

212.
Who pretends to little when he might assume much, feels his own importance and
oppresses not, is truly respectable.

213.
Kiss the hand of him who can renounce what he has publicly taught when
convicted of his error, and who, with heartfelt joy, embraces truth, though
with the sacrifice of favorite opinions.

214.
He who attaches himself to the immoral is weak and abject; or, if he have
parts, plots mischief.

215.
The friend of order has made half his way to virtue.

216.
There is no mortal truly wise and restless at once -- wisdom is the repose of
minds.

217.
His taste is totally corrupt who loves contradictory variety or empty
unconnected uniformity alone.

218.
Whom mediocrity attracts taste has abandoned.

219.
Who in giving receives, and in receiving shares the bliss of the generous
giver, is noble.

220.
Make friendship with none who upbraidingly scores up against thee the moments
of harmless indulgence.

221.
Who can wait the moment of maturity in speaking, writing, acting, giving, will
have nothing to retract, and little to repent of.

222.
He is a great and self-poised character whom praise unnerves not; he is a
greater one who supports unjust censure -- the greater is he who, with
acknowledged powers, represses his own, and even turns to use undeserved
censure.

223.
Who, in receiving a benefit, estimates its value more closely than in
conferring one, shall be a citizen of a better world.

224.
Avoid him as a fiend who makes a wry mouth at the praise bestowed on a great
or noble character.

225.
Suspicion bids futurity disavow the present.

226.
Forbear to enquire into the motive of plans decidedly useful to society; nor,
if they are of a nature to want general assistance, think you have done enough
in concurring to vote public honors or statues to their authors.

227.
Great affairs may be entrusted, and still greater actions expected, of him
who, by a single ready medium, knows how to unite and to attain many harmonious
ends.

228.
He plans like a pedant who is obliged to drag a number of means to the
attainment of some petty end.

229.
The more inconsiderable, common, and seemingly easy of discovery, the means to
the attainment of some great end -- the more genius is there is the plan.

230.
Imitate him whose observation passes not even the most minute, whilst it
follows only the highest, objects: the seeds of grandeur lie already in
himself; he gives his own turn to every thing, and borrows less than seizes
with one immediate glance: such an one never stops; his flight is that of the
eagle, who, like an arrow, wings the mid air, whilst his pinions appear
motionless.

231.
Who (to speak with Shakspeare) lets slip the dogs of war on modest defenseless
merit, and bursts out into a loud insolting laugh, when pale, timid innocence
trembles -- him avoid -- avoid his specious calmness, the harbinger of storms
-- avoid his flattery, it will soon turn to the lion's roar, and the howl of
wolves.

232.
The connoisseur in painting discovers an original by some great line, though
covered with dust, and disguised by daubing; so he who studies man discovers a
valuable character by some original trait, though unnoticed, disguised, or
debased -- ravished at the discovery, he feels it his duty to restore it to its
own genuine splendor. Him who, in spite of contemptuous pretenders, has the
boldness to do this, choose for your friend.

233.
He who writes with insolence, when anonymous and unknown, and speaks with
timidity in the presence of the good -- seems to be closely allied to baseness.

234.
Who writes what he should tell, and dares not tell what he writes, is either
like a wolf in sheep's clothing or like a sheep in a wolf's skin.

235.
Despond, despair for ever, of the character and manly honesty of him who, when
he has obtained forgiveness from a noble character ignobly offended, in base
reliance on his magnanimity continues publicly to calumniate him.

236.
Distinguish exactly what one is when he stands alone, and acts for himself,
and when he is led by others. I know many who act always honestly, often with
delicacy, when left to themselves; and like knaves when influenced by some
overbearing characters, whom they once slavi2hly submitted to follow.

237.
Be certain that he who has betrayed thee once will betray thee again.

238.
Know that the great art to love your enemy consists in never losing sight of
man in him: humanity has power over all that is human; the most inhuman man
still remains man, and never can throw off all taste for what becomes a man --
but you must learn to wait.

239.
If you never judge another till you have calmly observed him, till you have
heard him, heard him out, put him to the test, and compared him with yourself
and others, you will never judge unjustly, you will repair whatever
precipitately has escaped you.

240.
He, who is too proud to atone for wilful detraction, is a thief, who keeps
possession of what he stole, and laughs at the idea of restitution as
enthusiastic nonsense.

241.
The most abhorred thing in nature is the face that smiles abroad and flashes
fury when it returns to the lap of a tender helpless family.

242.
Let him look to his heart whose call it is to speak for friends and against
enemies: if calmly he speak pure truth for and against, he will stand the test
of moral inquiry on earth or in heaven.

243.
Who welcomes the look of the good is good himself.

244.
I know deists whose religiousness I venerate, and atheists whose honesty and
nobleness of mind I wish for; but I have not yet seen the man who could have
tempted me to think him honest who publicly acted the Christian whilst
privately he was a positive deist.

245.
The venal wanton, who robs her culley, is a saint to him who wheedles himself
into the confidence of an honest heart, to throw his secrets to the dogs.

246.
He who laughed at you till he got to your door; flattered you as you opened
it; felt the force of your argument whilst he was with you; applauded when he
rose, and after he went away blasts you -- has the most indisputable title to
an archdukedom in hell.

247.
Who sinds the clearest not clear thinks the darkest not obscure.

248.
The merely just can generally bear great virtues as little as great vices.

249.
The craftiest wiles are too short and ragged a cloak to cover a bad heart.

250.
Who asks, without insolence, what none else dare to ask, with noble freedom
answers as none else would answer; requests as none dare to request; and,
without humbling or offense, gives as none other can give -- is formed for
friendship, is the flower of his age, and must be a prince in the world to come.

251.
Ask not only, am I hated? but, by whom? -- am I loved? but, why? -- As the
good love thee, the bad will hate thee.

252.
Who assigns a bad motive to debase an act decidedly good, may depend on the
contempt of the bad and good.

253.
Who is feared by all the weak, despised by all the strong, and hated by all
the good, may securely say to himself -- No matter, if there be no other rascal
left on earth, I am still one.

254.
The bad man, who protects another bad man, has either committed some action
notoriously bad, or plots one.

255.
The disinterested defender of oppressed humanity against an usurping tyrant --
is a royal hero -- and this was the time to tell it.

256.
He who is always in want of something cannot be very rich. It Is a poor wight
who lives by borrowing the words, decisions, mien, inventions, and actions, of
others.

257.
He who has opportunities to inspect the sacred moments of elevated minds, and
seizes none, is a son of dullness; but he who turns those moments into ridicule
will betray with a kiss, and in embracing murder.

258.
Who prefers being seen to seeing is neither sincere nor humble.

259.
The breath of envy blasts friendship: he, whom the superiority of a friend
offends, will never impress an enemy with awe.

260.
Have you ever seen a pedant with a warm heart?

261.
The generous never recounts minutely the actions he has done; nor the prudent
those he will do.

262.
Who can act or perform as if each work or action were first, the last, and
only one in his life, is great in his sphere.

263.
Who seeks to sever friends is incapable of friendship -- shall lose all that
merits the name of friend, and meet a fiend in his own heart.

264.
Him, who sets out with the praise of a friend, stumbles as he proceeds on a
but, and ends in rigid censure, call what you choose -- but honest.

265.
Not every one who has eloquence of speech understands the eloquence of
silence. He, who can express a great meaning by silence when much might have
been said pointedly, and when a common man would have been prolix, will speak
in the moment of decision like an oracle.

266.
We can do all by speech and silence. He, who understands the double art of
speaking opportunely to the moment, and of saying not a syllable more or less
than it demanded -- and he who can wrap himself up in silence when every word
would be in vain -- will understand to connect energy with patience.

267.
Just as you are pleased at finding faults, you are displeased at finding
perfections.

He gives me the most perfect idea of a fiend who suffers at the perfections of
others, and enjoys their errors.

268.
Let the unhappiness you feel at another's errors, and the happiness you enjoy
in their perfections, be the measure of your progress in wisdom and virtue.

269.
Who becomes every day more sagacious, in observing his own faults, and the
perfections of another, without either envying him or despairing of himself, is
ready to mount the ladder on which angels ascend and descend.

270.
He, who seeks to imbitter innocent pleasure, has a cancer in his heart.

271.
He, who is good before invisible witnesses, is eminently so before the visible.

272.
The more there is of mind in your solitary employments, the more dignity there
is in your character.

273.
He, who attempts to make others believe in means which he himself despises, is
a puffer: he, who makes use of more means than he knows to be necessary, is
quack; and he, who ascribes to those means a greater efficacy than his own
experience warrants, is an impostor.

274.
He is not a step from real greatness who gives to his own singular experiments
neither more nor less importance than their own nature warrants.

275.
He, who can at all times sacrifice pleasure to duty, approaches sublimity.

276.
The calm presence of a sublime mind inspires veneration, excites great
thoughts and noble sentiments in the wise and good.

277.
The most eloquent speaker, the most ingenuous writer, and the most
accomplished statesman, cannot effect so much as the mere presence of the man
who tempers his wisdom and his vigor with humanity.

278.
He who maliciously takes advantage of the unguarded moments of friendship, is
no farther from knavery than the latest moment of evening from the first of
night.

279.
Between the best and the worst, there are, you say, innumerable degrees -- and
you are right; but admit that I am right too, in saying that the best and the
worst differ only in one thing -- in the object of their love.

280.
What is it you love in him you love? what is it you hate in him you hate?
Answer this closely to yourself, pronounce it loudly, and you will know
yourself and him.

281.
There is no object in nature and the world without its good, useful, or
amiable, side. -- Who discovers that side first in inanimate things, is
sagacious; and who discovers it in the animate, is liberal.

282.
If you see one cold and vehement at the same time, set him down for a fanatic.

283.
The calmly warm is wise and noble.

284.
It is a short step from modesty to humility; but a shorter one from vanity to
folly, and from weakness to falsehood.

285.
Who can hide magnanimity stands on the supreme degree of human nature.

286.
Who demands of you what he knows he never gave you, stands on the lowest
degree of human nature, and is despised by the best and worst.

287.
Who, from negligence, defers the restitution of things perpetually redemanded,
has lies on his right and theft on his left.

288.
He, who has the impudence either to exhibit as good, an action undeniably bad
-- or ascribes a bad motive to another, undeniably good -- is at once a false
coiner and a juggler.

289.
You need not hear seven words (said a peasant whom I passed this 28th of
September, 1787, whilst I was meditating these rules); you need not hear seven
words to know a man, five or six are sufficient.

290.
The proverbial wisdom of the populace in gates, on roads, and markets,
instructs the attentive ear of him who studies man more fully than a thousand
rules ostentatiously arranged.

291.
He has not a little of the devil in him who prays and bites.

292.
He who, when called upon to speak a disagreeable truth, tells it boldly and
has done, is both bolder and milder than he who nibbles in a low voice, and
never ceases nibbling.

293.
As the shadow follows the body, so restless sullenness the female knave.

294.
As the wily subtility of him who is intent on gain, so the abrupt brutality of
him who has gained enough.

295.
Be not the fourth friend of him who had three before and lost them.

296.
Who is never rash in letters, will seldom be so in speech or actions.

297.
He, whose letters are the real transcript of friendly conversation, without
affected effusions of sentiment or wit, seems to have a heart formed for
friendship.

298.
Want of friends argues either want of humility or courage, or both.

299.
He, who, at a table of forty covers, thirtynine of which are exquisite, and
one indifferent, lays hold of that, and with a "damn your dinner," dashes it in
the landlord's face, should be sent to Bethlem or to Bridewell -- and whither
he, who blasphemes a book, a work of art, or perhaps a man, of nine-and-thirty
good and but one bad quality, and calls those fools or flatterers who,
engrossed by the superior number of good qualities, would fain forget the bad
one.

300.
Pull off your hat before him whom fortune has exalted above ten thousand; but
put it on again with both your hands if he laugh at fortune.

301.
Who turns up his nose is unfit for friendship.

302.
The collector who trifles not, and heaps knowledge without pedantry, is a
favorite of Nature.

303.
Who parodies a good character without a desire of improving him, has a bad
heart.

304.
Let the four-and-twenty elders in heaven rise before him who, from motives of
humanity, can totally suppress an arch, full-pointed, but offensive bon mot.

305.
Him, who incessantly laughs in the street, you may commonly hear grumbling in
his closet.

306.
Who will not see where he should or could, shall not see when he would.

307.
Be sure that every knave is a sop or coward when a downright honest man plants
himself over against him.

308.
Insolence, where there is no danger, is despondence where there is.

309.
He, who is led by the passionate, has three enemies to cope with during life
-- the contempt of the good, the tyranny of his leaders, and rankling
discontent.

310.
The sooner you forget your moral intuition the weaker, the less to be depended
on, yourself.

311.
Trust him with little who, without proofs, trusts you with every thing; or,
when he has proved you, with nothing.

312.
Compare carefully and frequently the different ways in which the same person
speaks with you and with others; before you, and with you alone; or, in the
presence of others, on the same topic.

313.
Call him Saint who can forget his own sufferings in the minute griefs of
others.

314.
He, who loses the sun in his spots -- a beautiful face in a few freckles --
and a grand character in a few harmless singularities -- may choose, of two
appellations, one -- wronghead or knave.

315.
He alone, who makes use of his enemies to improve the knowledge of himself, is
seriously inclined to grow better.

316.
Who, purposely, cheats his friend, would cheat his God.

317.
She neglects her heart who studies her glass.

318.
Keep him at least three paces distant who hates bread, music, and the laugh of
a child.

319.
Could you but hear how one speaks to the poor and despised, when he thinks
himself unobserved, you might form a judgment of his character.

320.
It is a mighty mind that praises an enemy, and grasps at never-fading honors.

321.
He, who in questions of right, virtue, or duty, sets himself above all
possible ridicule, is truly great, and shall laugh in the end with truer mirth
than ever he was laughed at.

322.
A merchant who always tells truth, and a genius who never lies, are synonymous
to a saint.

323.
Between passion and lie there is not a finger's breadth.

324.
Avoid, like a serpent, him who writes impertinently, yet speaks politely.

325.
He is good enough for the present and future world who is content with a
fourth, is grateful for the half, and gives more than measure.

326.
He can bear his griefs in silence who can moderate his joys.

327.
He, who shuts out all evasion when he promises, loves truth.

328.
Search carefully if one patiently finishes what he boldly began.

329.
Who comes from the kitchen smells of its smoke; who adheres to a sect has
something of its cant: the college-air pursues the student, and dry inhumanity
him who herds with literary pedants.

330.
As you receive the stranger, so you receive your God.

331.
Call him truly religious who believes in something higher, more powerful, more
living, than visible nature; and who, clear as his own existence, feels his
conformity to that superior being.

332.
Superstition always inspires littleness, religion grandeur of mind: the
superstitious raises beings inferior to himself to deities.

333.
Who are the saints of humanity? Those whom perpetual habits of goodness and of
grandeur have made nearly unconscious that what they do is good or grand --
heroes with infantine simplicity.

334.
To know man, borrow the ear of the blind and the eye of the deaf.

335.
The jealous is possessed by a "fine mad devil Shakspeare.
" and a dull spirit at once.

336.
He has surely a good heart who abounds in contriving means to prevent
animosities.

337.
He has the stamp of a great soul who hides his deepest grief from the friend
whom he might trust even with the communication of vices.

338.
The words of love sleep in the ear that is too dull to comprehend her silence.

339.
The mind, whose trifling griefs or joys can absorb the general joys and griefs
of others, is lamentably little.

340.
He, whom no losses impoverish, is truly rich.

341.
That mind alone is great in which every point, and the tides and ebbs of power
that support or shrink from that point, can fluctuate with ease.

342.
He alone has energy that cannot be deprived of it.

343.
Sneers are the blasts that precede quarrels.

344.
Who loves will not be adored.

345.
He who renders full justice to his enemy, shall have friends to adore him.

346.
Number among thy worst of enemies -- the hawker of malicious rumors and
unexplored anecdote.

347.
Let me repeat it: if you cannot bear to be told by your bosom friend that you
have a strong breath, you deserve not to have a friend.

348.
No little man feels and forgives offenses.

349.
No great character cavils.

350.
The convivial joys of him whose solitude is joyless, are the forerunners of
misery.

351.
He alone is an acute observer, who can observe minutely without being observed.

352.
Good may be done by the bad -- but the good alone can be good.

353.
It is not the privilege of vulgar minds to mark the line between the friend
and lover, and never step beyond.

354.
He who is always the same, and never the same, resembles God.

355.
He can love who can forget all and nothing.

356.
The purest religion is the most refined Epicurism. He, who in the smallest
given time can enjoy most of what he never shall repent, and what furnishes
enjoyments, still more unexhausted, still less changeable -- is the most
religious and the most voluptuous of men.

357.
He knows little of the Epicurism of reason and religion, who examines the
dinner in the kitchen.

358.
I esteem the wisdom and calmness of mind that always can reserve the best for
the end.

359.
Who slowly notices requests and prayers, is either a tyrant or a god.

360.
The generous, who is always just -- and the just, who is always generous --
may, unannounced, approach the throne of God.

361.
There are but three classes of men -- the retrogade, the stationary, the
progressive.

362.
Who of man's race is immortal? He that fixes moments and gives perennity to
transitory things.

363.
He alone shall stem oblivion who, in the moments and effects of his exertions,
can both forget himself and make others forget him.

364.
He has convivial talents who makes the eater forget his meal; and he has
oratory who ravishes his hearers, whilst he forgets himself.

365.
Let me once more, in other words, repeat it -- he is the king of kings who
longs for nothing and wills but one at once.

366.
Spare the lover without flattering his passion: to make the pangs of love the
butt of ridicule, is unwise and harsh -- soothing meekness and wisdom subdue in
else unconquerable things.

367.
There is none so bad to do the twentieth part of the evil he might, nor any so
good as to do the tenth part of the good it is in his power to do. Judge of
yourself by the good you might do and neglect -- and of others by the evil they
might do and omit -- and your judgment will be poised between too much
indulgence for yourself, and too much severity on others.

368.
Fly him who, from mere curiosity, asks three questions running about a thing
that cannot interest him.

369.
The firm, without pliancy -- and the pliant, without firmness -- resemble
vessels without water, water without vessels.

370.
To him who is simple, and inexhaustible, like nature, simple and inexhausted
nature resigns her sway.

371.
He rules himself with power who can spontaneously repress his laughter; but he
who can hide emotions of love exerts still greater energy.

372.
Who loves from humor, egotism, or interest, will hate from the same motives;
and he, whose sympathies mere humors sway, shall have unstable friends and
constant enemies.

373.
How can he be pious who loves not the beautiful, whilst piety is nothing but
the love of beauty? Beauty we call the most varied One, the most united
variety. Could there be a man who should harmoniously unite each variety of
knowledge and of powers -- would he not be most beautiful? would he not be a
god?

374.
Incredible are his powers who desires nothing that he cannot will.

375.
The unloved cannot love.

376.
Let the object of love be careful to lose none of its loveliness.

377.
Bow to him who bows not to the flatterer.

378.
Bid farewell to all grandeur if envy stir within thee.

379.
We cannot be great if we calculate how great we and how little others are, and
calculate not how great others, how minute, how impotent ourselves.

380.
The prudent sees only the difficulties, the bold only the advantages, of a
great enterprise; the hero sees both, diminishes those, makes these
preponderate, and conquers.

381.
He loves unalterably who keeps within the bounds of love. Who always shows
somewhat less than what he is possessed of -- nor ever utters a syllable, or
gives a hint, of more than what in fact remains behind -- is just and friendly
in the same degree.

382.
Few can tell what he can operate who has economy of words without scarcity,
and liberality without profusion.

383.
He, who observes the speaker more than the sound of words, will seldom meet
with disappointments.

384.
Neither the anxious, who are commonly fretful and severe; nor the careless,
who are always without elasticity -- the serenely serious alone are formed for
friendship.

385.
Evasions are the common shelter of the hard-hearted, the false, and impotent,
when called upon to assist; the real great alone plan instantaneous help, even
when their looks or words presage difficulties.

386.
Who kindles love loves warmly.

387.
He who cannot perform, and scorns him who incessantly performs, is idiot and
knave at once.

388.
The powerful, who notices the exertions of an inferior, has something of the
character of Him who, in exchange for a relinquished boat, promised the owner
one of the twelve first thrones of heaven.

389.
He is more than great who instructs his offender whilst he forgives him.

390.
There is a manner of forgiving so divine, that you are ready to embrace the
offender for having called it forth.

391.
Expect the secret resentment of him whom your forgiveness has impressed with a
sense of his inferiority; expect the resentment of the woman whose proffered
love you have repulsed; yet surer still expect the unceasing rancour of envy
against the progress of genius and merit -- Renounce the hopes of reconciling
him: but know, that whilst you steer on, mindless of his grin, all-ruling
destiny will either change his rage to awe, or blast his powers to their
deepest root.

392.
He is not ignorant of man who knows the value and effect of words: and he, who
fears nothing less and attends to nothing more than words, has true philosophy.

393.
He has honesty, vigor, dignity, who in the first transports of invention
promises less than he will probably perform.

394.
Then talk of patience when you have borne him who has none, without repining.

395.
Who lies in wait for errors, neither to mend them in persons, nor to justify
his choice in things, is on a road where good hearts are seldom met.

396.
Volatility of words is carelessness in acts -- words are the wings of actions.

397.
Whatever is visible is the vessel or veil of the invisible past, present,
future. -- As man penetrates to this more, or perceives it less, he raises or
depresses his dignity of being.

398.
Let none turn over books or roam the stars in quest of God who sees him not in
man.

399.
He alone is good, who, though possessed of energy, prefers virtue, with the
appearance of weakness, to the invitation of acting brilliantly ill.

400.
Intuition (what the French call 'coup d'oeil') is the greatest, simplest, most
inexhausted gift a mortal can receive from heaven: who has that has all; and
who has it not has little of what constitutes the good and great.

401.
How can he be sincere or prudent who, without Omnipotence, pretends to confer
unbounded obligations?

402.
There is no end to the inconveniences arising from the want of punctuality.

403.
As the presentiment of the possible, deemed impossible, so genius, so heroism
-- the hero, the man of genius, are prophets.

404.
He, who goes one step beyond his real faith or presentiment, is in danger of
deceiving himself and others.

405.
The greater value you set upon what others sacrifice for you, and the less you
esteem what you resign for others, the nobler your nature, the more exalted are
you.

406.
He, who to obtain much will suffer little or nothing, can never be called
great; and none ever little, who, to obtain one great object, will suffer much.

407.
He has the sole privilege, the exclusive right, of saying all and doing all,
who has suffered all that can be suffered, to confer on others all the
pleasures they once rejected and which they can enjoy.

408.
He only sees well who sees the whole in the parts, and the parts in the whole.
I know but three classes of men -- those who see the whole, those who see but a
part, and those who see both together.

409.
You beg as you question; you give as you answer.

410.
As you hear so you think; as you look so you feel.

411.
Who seizes too rapidly drops as hastily.

412.
Who grasps firmly can hold safely, and keep long.

413.
He knows little of man who trusts him with much that cares for no one.

414.
Love sees what no eye sees; love hears what no ear hears; and what never rose
in the heart of man, love prepares for its object.

415.
Hatred sees what no eye sees: Enmity hears what no ear hears: and what never
rose in the murderer's breast, Envy prepares for him that is fortunate and
noble.

416.
Him, who arravs malignity in good nature and treachery in familiarity, a
miracle of Omnipotence alone can make an honest man.

417.
He, who sets fire to one part of a town to rob more safely in another, is, no
doubt, a villain: what will you call him, who, to avert suspicion from himself,
accuses the innocent of a crime he knows himself guilty of, and means to commit
again?

418.
I know no friends more faithful, more inseparable, than hard-heartedness and
pride, humility and love, lies and impudence.

419.
I have heard nothing but what is good of such an one, yet I cannot love him
heartily; that is, I can have no dependence on his taste, his love of order,
his rectitude -- because he suffers two ornaments, of dimensions exactly
similar, to hang together, the one two inches higher than the other.

420.
I will take upon me to create a world tomorrow, if today I can give rectitude
of heart to one pettyfogging attorney.

421.
As your hearty participation in the joys and griefs of others, so your
humanity and religion.

422.
The richer you are the more calmly you bear the reproach of poverty: the more
genius you have the more easily you bear the imputation of mediocrity.

423.
He, who gives himself airs of importance, exhibits the credentials of
impotence.

424.
He, who is always to be waited for, is indolent, neglectful, proud, or
altogether.

425.
There is no instance of a miser becoming a prodigal without losing his
intellect; but there are thousands of prodigals becoming misers: if, therefore,
your turn be profuse, nothing is so much to be avoided as avarice: and, if you
be a miser, procure a physician who can cure an irremediable disorder.

426.
Baseness and avarice are more inseparable than generosity and magnanimity.

427.
Avarice has sometimes been the flaw of great men, but never of great minds:
great men produce effects that cannot be produced by a thousand of the vulgar;
but great minds are stamped with expanded benevolence, unattainable by most.

428.
There are many who have great strength and little vigor; others who have much
vigor and little strength: strength bears what few can bear, vigor effects
what few can effect -- he is truly great who unites both in the same degree.

429.
Vigor, without strength, always makes others suffer; and strength, without
vigor, ourselves. Examine how these operate, and you will know yourself.

430.
He is much greater and more authentic, who produces one thing entire and
perfect, than he who does many by halves.

431.
He, who can rail at benevolence, has set his heel on the neck of religion.

432.
Who, in the presence of a great man, treats you as if you were not present, is
equally proud and little.

433.
He, who cannot discover, acknowledge, and esteem, the reasonable part of
incredulity and the respectable of superstition, wants much of three qualities
which make man man, and God God -- wisdom, vigor, love.

434.
Say what you please of your humanity, no wise man will ever believe a syllable
while I and mine are the two only gates at which you sally forth and enter, and
through which alone all must pass who seek admittance.

435.
Who, from motives of love hides love, loves ineffably and eternally.

436.
Who hides hatred to accomplish revenge is great, like the prince of hell.

437.
Who hides love to bless with unmixed happiness is great, like the king of
heaven.

438.
Let him not share the most remote corner of your heart, who, without being
your intimate, hangs prying over your shoulder whilst you are writing.

439.
Trust not him with your secrets, who, when left alone in your room, turns over
your papers.

440.
A woman, whose ruling passion is not vanity, is superior to any man of equal
faculties.

441.
He who has but one way of seeing every thing, is as important for him who
studies man as fatal to friendship.

442.
Who has written will write again, says the Frenchman; he who has written
against you will write against you again: he who has begun certain things is
under the curse of leaving off no more.

443.
He, who rather discovers the great in the little than the little in the great,
is not far distant from greatness.

444.
Harmlessness and genuine friendship are as inseparable as beam and reflection.

445.
He is not easily taught who is sometimes quick and sometimes slow in his
answers.

446.
The half-character, who has impudence enough to attempt domineering over the
whole one, is, of all tyrants, calumniators, and villains, the most
insufferable.

447.
Who asks two questions at once will easily give one answer for another;
frequently commit gross blunders; and seldom adhere to truth when he relates.

448.
Who always prefaces his tale with laughter is poisoned between impertinence
and folly.

449.
Thinkers are scarce as gold: but he, whose thought embraces all his subject,
pursues it uninterruptedly and fearless of consequences, is a diamond of
enormous size.

450.
Nothing is more impartial than the stream-like public: always the same and
never the same; of whom, sooner or later, each misrepresented character obtains
justice, and each calumniated honor: he who cannot wait for that, is either
ignorant of human nature or feels that he was not made for honor.

451.
You will sooner transpose mountains than without violence subdue another's
indolence and obstinacy: if you can conquer your own, depend on it you shall
accomplish what you can will.

452.
The obstinacy of the indolent and weak is less conquerable than that of the
fiery and bold.

453.
Who, with calm wisdom alone, imperceptibly directs the obstinacy of others,
will be the most eligible friend or the most dreadful enemy.

454.
He is both outrageously vain and malicious who ascribes the best actions of
the good to vanity alone.

455.
He is condemned to depend on no man's modesty and honor, who dares not depend
on his own.

456.
An insult offered to a respectable character were often less pardonable than a
precipitate murder -- he who can indulge himself in that may bear
assassinations on his conscience.

457.
Nothing is so pregnant as cruelty: so multiparous, so rapid, so ever-teeming a
mother is unknown to the animal kingdom; each of her experiments provokes
another, and refines upon the last -- though always progressive, yet always
remote from the end.

458.
Smiles at the relation of inhumanities betray, at least, a fund of inhumanity.

459.
He who avoids the glass aghast, at the caricature of morally debased features,
feels mighty strife of virtue and of vice.

460.
The silence of him who else commends with applause, is indirect but nervous
censure.

461.
Neither he who incessantly hunts after the new, nor he who fondly doats on the
old, is just.

462.
The gazer in the streets wants a plan for his head and an object for his heart.

463.
The creditor who humanely spares an ungrateful debtor, has few steps to make
toward the circle of saints.

464.
The creditor, whose appearance gladdens the heart of a debtor, may hold his
head in sunbeams and his foot on storms.

465.
If you mean to escape your creditor or enemy, avoid him not.

466.
Who purposely abuses the bounty of unconditional benevolence, has a seat
prepared for him at the right hand of the throne of hell.

467.
The frigid smiler, crawling, indiscreet, obtrusive, brazen-faced, is a
scorpion-whip of destiny -- avoid him!

468.
Nature bids thee not to love deformity; be content to discover and to do
justice to its better part.

469.
The rapid, who can bear the slow with patience, can bear all injuries.

470.
Absolute impartiality is not perhaps the lot of man: but where, open or hid,
bitter partiality dwells, there too dwells inward anarchy and insanability of
mind.

471.
He knows nothing of men who expects to convince a determined party-man: and he
nothing of the world who despairs of the final impartiality of the public.

472.
Who indiscriminately returns caresses for caresses, and flattery for flattery,
will, with equal indifference, forget them when they are passed.

473.
He alone is a man who can resist the genius of the age, the tone of fashion,
with vigorous simplicity and modest courage.

474.
To him who discovers not immediately the true accent of innocence, and reveres
it like an oracle -- show, as to all the world, your face, but lock your heart
for ever.

475.
Who gives a trifle meanly is meaner than the trifle.

476.
Distrust your heart and the durability of your fame; if from the stream of
occasion you snatch a handful of foam, deny the stream and give its name to the
frothy bursting bubble.

477.
If you ask me which is the real hereditary sin of human nature, do you imagine
I shall answer pride, or luxury, or ambition, or egotism? No; I shall say
indolence -- who conquers indolence will conquer all the rest.

478.
Assure yourself that he has not the most distant scent of human nature who
weens that he is able to alter it, or thinks to obtain that easily of others
which he can never obtain of himself.

479.
An entirely honest man, in the severe sense of the word, exists no more than
an entirely dishonest knave: the best and the worst are only approximations of
those qualities. Who are those that never contradict themselves? yet honesty
never contradicts itself: Who are those that always contradict themselves? yet
knavery is mere self-contradiction. Thus the knowledge of man determines not
the things themselves, but their proportions, the quantum of congruities and
incongruities.

480.
Who instantly, without evasion, gives a dispassionate refusal of what he can,
or will not give, will give to his most rapid yes the firmness of an oath.

481.
Trust him little who praises all, him less who censures all, and him least who
is indifferent about all.

482.
Who prorogues the honesty of today till tomorrow, will probably prorogue his
to-morrows "Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow."
to eternity.

483.
Whom every book delights which he reads none has instructed which he read.

484.
He who judges perversely on a clear simple subject, on which a promiscuous
number of impartial people have judged uniformly -- proves an obliquity of mind
which takes all weight from his opinion on any other subject.

485.
The cruelty of the effiminate is more dreadful than that of the hardy.

486.
Sense seeks and finds the thought; the thought seeks and finds genius.

487.
He who, silent, loves to be with us -- he who loves us in our silence -- has
touched one of the keys that ravish hearts.

488.
He who violates another's liberty is a tyrant and a slave at once.

489.
Fly him who affects silence.

490.
He is vain, proud, oppressive, who at and after every word he says, with open
rolling eye, examines to the right and left what features and what looks he
roused.

491.
Who knows the moment of ceasing knows the moment of beginning, and that of
proceeding. Judge of no man's prudence, experience, or genius, till you have
witnessed some of his fin^li.

492.
The more there is of gradation in virtue, the more dramatic the energies of
goodness and benevolence, the more sublime their character.

493.
No wheedler loves.

494.
Great minds comprehend more in a word, a look, the squeeze of a hand, than
vulgar men in day-long conversation, or the most assiduous correspondence.

495.
The more one gives, or receives, or sees, or comprehends, in little, the
greater, the more alive, the more human he.

496.
The poet, who composes not before the moment of inspiration, and as that
leaves him ceases -- composes, and he alone, for all men, all classes, all ages.

497.
He, who has frequent moments of complete existence, is a hero, though not
laurelled; is, crowned and without crowns, a king: he only who has enjoyed
immortal moments can reproduce them.

498.
The greater that which you can hide, the greater yourself.

499.
Three days of uninterrupted company in a vehicle, will make you better
acquainted with another than one hour's conversation with him every day for
three years.

500.
Where true wisdom is there surely is repose of mind, patience, dignity,
delicacy. Wisdom without these is dark light, heavy ease, sonorous silence.

501.
Him, whom opposition and adversity have left little, fortune and applause will
not make great. Inquire after the sufferings of great men and you will know why
they are great.

502.
He, whose sole silent presence checks pitiful conceits, enobles vulgar minds,
and calls forth uncommon ones, may lay claim to grandeur.

503.
Him, who makes familiarity the tool of mischief, moral precepts can as little
recall to virtue as medical prescriptions a decayed habit to health.

504.
He, who cannot forgive a trespass of malice to his enemy, has never yet tasted
the most sublime enjoyment of love.

505.
He, who forgives a trespass of sentiment to a friend, is as unworthy of
friendship as that friend.

506.
It is the summit of humility to bear the imputation of pride.

507.
He who sees, produces, honors what is respectable in the despised, and what
is excellent in misrepresented characters -- he, who prefers a cluster of
jewels, with one unique, and many trifling stones, to one composed-all of good,
but no one unique -- he, who in a book, feels forcibly its genius, its
unattainable part, is formed by nature to be a man and a friend.

508.
You may have hot enemies without having a warm friend; but not a fervid friend
without a bitter enemy. The qualities of your friends will be those of your
enemies: cold friends, cold enemies -- half friends, half enemies -- fervid
enemies, warm friends.

509.
Late beginners seldom attain the end without difficulty. There are few
privileged minds who defer long, and with rapidity perform better than the
considerate who have consulted time; but there are some who resemble torrents
swelled by delay; who, in those moments of pressure, not only exerts genius,
but gives to his labors their roundest finish, the neatest order, their most
elegant polish -- classes with those few mortals who have the privilege to do,
or leave undone, as they please. He is one of those whose faults carry their
atonement with them -- whom the offended and the envious with equal
astonishment applaud, and never permit themselves a farther doubt about their
royal prerogative.

510.
Learn the value of a man's words and expressions and you know him. Each man
has a measure of his own for every thing; this he offers you inadvertently in
his words. Who has a superlative for every thing wants a measure for the great
or small.

511.
He, who reforms himself, has done more toward reforming the public than a
crowd of noisy impotent patriots.

512.
If Pius the Sixth (I often said) be not in his person king of the emperor it
is foolish enough to go to Vienna; but if his person be the pope's pope, he may
go and do immortal acts. It is personally only we can act durably -- he who
knows this, knows more than a thousand polyhistors.

513.
He will do great things who can avert his words and thoughts from past
irremediable evils.

514.
He, who stands on a height, sees farther than those who are placed in a
bottom; but let him not fancy that he shall make them believe all he sees.

515.
He that can jest at love has never loved: "He jests at scars that never felt a
wound. Shakspeare.
"

516.
He, who is ever intent on great ends, has an eagle-eye for great means, and
scorns not the smallest.

517.
Who attempts to cover what can not be covered, is an idiot and hypocrite at
once.

518.
He is familiar with celestial wisdom, and seems instructed by superior
spirits, who can annihilate a settled prejudice against him.

519.
True love, like the eye, can bear no flaw.

520.
Spectacles on the eyes of the blind, and literature in the pedant's mouth, are
folly.

521.
The hottest water extinguishes fire, and the affected heat of a cold
character, friendship.

522.
Take from Luther his roughness and siery courage; from Calvin his hectic
obstinacy; from Erasmus his timid prudence; hypocrisy and fanaticism from
Cromwell; from Henry IV. his sanguine character; mysticism from Fenelon; from
Hume his all-unhinging subtilty; love of paradox and brooding suspicion from
Rousseau; naivete and elegance of knavery from Voltaire; from Milton the
extravagance of his all-personifying fancy; from Raffaelle his dryness and
nearly hard precision; and from Rubens his supernatural luxury of color: --
deduct this oppressive exuberance from each; rectify them according to your own
taste -- what will be the result? your own correct, pretty, flat, useful -- for
me, to be sure, quite convenient vulgarity. And why this amongst maxims of
humanity? that you may learn to know this exuberance, this leven of each great
character, and its effects on contemporaries and posterity -- that you may know
where d, e, f, is, there must be a, b, c: he alone has knowledge of man, who
knows the ferment that raises each character, and makes it that which it shall
be, and something more or less than it shall be.

523.
I have often, too often, been tempted, at the daily relation of new knaveries,
to despise human nature in every individual, till, on minute anatomy of each
trick, I found that the knave was only an enthusiast or momentary fool. This
discovery of momentary folly, symptoms of which assail the wisest and the best,
has thrown a great consolatory light on my inquiries into man's moral nature:
by this the theorist is enabled to assign to each class and each individual
their own peculiar fit of vice or folly; and to contrast the ludicrous or
dismal catalogue with the pleasing one of sentiment and virtue, more properly
their own.

524.
He, who is master of the fittest moment to crush his enemy, and magnanimously
neglects it, is born to be a conqueror.

525.
Pretend not to self-knowledge if you find nothing worse within you than what
enmity or calumny dares loudly lay to your charge.

526.
You are not very good if you are not better than your best friends imagine you
to be.

527.
You are not yet a great man because you are railed at by many little, and
esteemed by some great characters; then only you deserve that name when the
cavils of the insignificant and the esteem of the great keep you at equal
distance from pride and despondence, invigorate your courage and add to your
humility.

528.
Some characters of the utmost activity are much calmer than the most inactive:
distinguish always between indolence and calmness; calmness is the beginning
and end of useful activity; indolence the beginning, middle and end of uniform
apathy for all activity.

529.
A great woman not imperious, a fair woman not vain, a woman of common talents
not jealous, an accomplished woman who scorns to shine -- are four wonders just
great enough to be divided among the four quarters of the globe.

530.
He who freely praises what he means to purchase -- and he who enumerates the
faults of what he means to sell -- may set up a partnership of honesty.

531.
He, who despises the great, is condemned to honor the little: and he who is
in love with trifles, can have no taste for the great.

532.
He has a claim to prudence who feels his weakness and knows how to disguise
it; but he is great who, with a full sense of his strength, scorns to exert it.

533.
Depend not much upon your rectitude, if you are uneasy in the presence of the
good; nor trust to your humility if you are mortified when you are not noticed.

534.
He, who chooses to consider the ambiguous action of an enemy in its fairest
light, has some acquaintance with the heart of man, and is a friend to virtue.

535.
He, who is in want of witnesses in order to be good, has neither virtue nor
religion.

536.
When a prince, and he who has been frequently deceived, do not give themselves
entirely up to suspicion, they may be ranked amongst the truly great.

537.
Some are ambitious who have no idea of true honor -- they may be properly
called name-hunters: he is truly pitiable whose only wish is to be spoken of

538.
Attend to the accidental epithets which men of wit throw out on the mention of
a merely honest character, and you will have a guide to the knowledge of their
hearts.

539.
He, who hates the wisest and best of men, hates the Father of men; for, where
is the Father of men to be seen but in the most perfect of his children?

540.
He who always seeks more light the more he finds, and finds more the more he
seeks, is one of the few happy mortals who take and give in every point of
time: the tide and ebb of giving and receiving, is the sum of human happiness,
which he alone enjoys who always wishes to acquire new knowledge, and always
finds it.

541.
The executioner who, in the fatal moment, laughs in the criminal's face, must
be a wretch. What will you call the critic who debases himself to be both the
executioner and libellest of him he reviews?

542.
He, who adores an impersonal God, has none; and, without guide or rudder,
launches on an immense abyss that first absorbs his powers, and next himself.

543.
Let him, who wishes to conquer obstinacy, desire the contrary of what he means
to obtain.

544.
The enemy of art is the enemy of nature; art is nothing but the highest
sagacity and exertion of human nature; and what nature will he honor who
honors not the human?

545.
It is possible that a wise and good man may be prevailed on to game; but it is
impossible that a professed gamester should be a wise and good man.

546.
Where there is much pretension, much has been borrowed -- nature never
pretends.

547.
Do you think him a common man who can make what is common exquisite?

548.
He who believes every promise believes every tale, and is superstitious: he
who doubts every promise doubts every tale, and soon will be incredulous to his
own eye.

549.
Whose promise may you depend upon? his who dares refuse what he knows he
cannot perform; who promises calmly, strictly, conditionally, and never excites
a hope which he may disappoint.

550.
You promise as you speak.

551.
He, who is ashamed of the poor in the presence of the rich, and of the unknown
in the presence of the celebrated, may become a base enemy, but never a fast
friend.

552.
Avoid him who speaks softly, and writes sharply.

553.
The proportion of genius to the vulgar is like one to a million; but genius
without tyranny, without pretension, that judges the weak with equity, the
superior with humility, and equals with justice -- is like one to ten millions.

554.
To share a heavy burden merely to case another is noble -- to do it
cheerfully, sublime.

555.
Slow givers give meanly or with grandeur.

556.
Neither patience nor inspiration can give wings to a snail -- you waste your
own force, you destroy what remained of energy in the indolent, by urging him
to move beyond his rate of power.

557.
To enjoy blunders may proceed from a comic turn; but to enjoy blunders because
they make the blunderer contemptible, is a step toward the fiend-like joy that
fosters crimes as causes of perdition to others and of emolument to you.

558.
A perfidious friend will be the assassin of his enemy.

559.
He, who feels himself impelled to calumniate the good, need not much doubt the
existence of daemoniacs;

560.
Or he that of a fiend who renders bad for good, and enjoys the exchange.

561.
Indiscriminate familiarity admits of no intimate.

562.
Questions for no purpose, questions quicker than answers can be given,
questions after things that interest him not, mark an idiot.

563.
Your humility is equal to your desire of being unobserved in your acts of
virtue.

564.
There are certain light characteristic momentary seatures of man, which, in
spite of masks and all exterior mummery, represent him as he is and shall be.
If once in an individual you have discovered one ennobling feature, let him
debase it, let it at times shrink from him, no matter; he will, in the end,
prove superior to thousands of his critics.

565.
Truth, Wisdom, Love, seek reasons; Malice only causes.

566.
The man who has and uses but one scale for every thing, for himself and his
enemy, the past and the future, the grand and the trifle, for truth and error,
virtue and vice, religion, superstition, infidelity: for nature, art, and works
of genius and art -- is truly wise, just, great.

567.
The infinitely little constitutes the infinite difference in works of art, and
in the degrees of morals and religion; the greater the rapidity, precision,
acuteness, with which this is observed and determined, the more authentic, the
greater the observer.

568.
Make not him your friend who sneaks off when a superior appears.

569.
Call him both wise and great, who, with superior claims to notice from the
powerful and princely, can calmly suffer others to approach them nearer.

570.
Range him high amongst your saints, who, with all-acknowledged powers, and his
own steadfast scale for every thing, can, on the call of judgment or advice,
submit to transpose himself into another's situation, and to adopt his point of
sight.

571.
Think none, and least of all yourself, sincere or honest, if you tell the
public of a man what you would not dare to tell him in good company, or face to
face.

572.
No communications and no gifts can exhaust genius, or impoverish charity.

573.
Few possess the art to give exactly that which none but they can give; to give
directly then when want is fully rife; and to give only so, that the receivers
may enjoy and recollect with joy the moment of the gift -- he who can give so
is a god amongst men.

574.
You never saw a vulgar character disinterestedly sensible of the value of time.

575.
Distrust yourself if you fear the eye of the sincere; but be afraid of neither
God or man, if you have no reason to distrust yourself.

576.
Who comes as he goes, and is present as he came and went, is sincere.

577.
Save me from him who is inexhaustible in evasions when he is called upon to do
a good thing, and teems with excuses when he has done a bad one.

578.
He loves grandly (I speak of friendship) who is not jealous when he has
partners of love.

579.
Examine closely whether he who talks of illustration means to clear up or only
to glitter, dazzle, and consume.

580.
He knows himself greatly who never opposes his genius.

581.
Maxims are as necessary for the weak, as rules for the beginner: the master
wants neither rule nor principle; he possesses both without thinking of them.

582.
If you are destitute of sentiment, principle, genius, and instruction, you may
be supposed unfit for science and for virtue: but, if without genius you
pretend to excel; if without sentiment you affect to think yourself superior to
established principle; know that you are as much between fool and knave as you
are between right and left.

583.
Young men -- know, that downright decision, on things which only experience
can teach, is the credential of vain impertinence!

584.
Neatness begets order; but from order to taste there is the same distance as
from taste to genius, or from love to friendship.

585.
Believe not in the legitimacy or durability of any effect that is derived from
egotism alone -- all the miscarriages of prudence are bastards of egotism.

586.
"Love as if you could hate and might be hated;" -- a maxim of detested
prudence in real friendship, the bane of all tenderness, the death of all
familiarity. Consider the fool who follows it as nothing inferior to him who at
every bit of bread trembles at the thought of its being poisoned.

587.
"Hate as if you could love or should be loved;" -- him who follows this maxim,
if all the world were to declare an idiot and enthusiast, I shall esteem, of
all men, the most eminently formed for friendship.

588.
If you support not the measure you approve of by your voice, you decide
against it by silence.

589.
As you name ten different things so you name ten thousand; as you tell ten
different stories so you tell ten thousand.

590.
Distinguish with exactness, if you mean to know yourself and others, what is
so often mistaken -- the singular, the original, the extraordinary, the great,
and the sublime man. The sublime alone unites the singular, original,
extraordinary and great, with his own uniformity and simplicity: the great,
with many powers, and uniformity of ends, is destitute of that superior
calmness and inward harmony which soars above the atmosphere of praise: the
extraordinary is distinguished by copiousness, and a wide range of energy: the
original need not be very rich, only that which he produces is unique, and has
the exclusive stamp of individuality: the singular, as such, is placed between
originality and whim, and often makes a trifle the medium of fame.

591.
Forwardness nips affection in the bud.

592.
If you mean to be loved, give more than what is asked, but not more than what
is wanted; and ask less than what is expected.

593.
Whom smiles and tears make equally lovely, all hearts may court.

594.
Take here the grand secret -- if not of pleasing all, yet of displeasing none
-- court mediocrity, avoid originality, and sacrifice to fashion.

595.
He who pursues the glimmering steps of hope with steadfast, not presumptuous,
eye, may pass the gloomy rock on either side of which superstition and
incredulity spread their dark abysses.

596.
The public seldom forgive twice.

597.
Him who is hurried on by the furies of immature, impetuous wishes, stern
repentance shall drag, bound and reluctant, back to the place from which he
sallied: where you hear the crackling of wishes expect intolerable vapors or
repining grief.

598.
He submits to be seen through a microscope, who suffers himself to be caught
in a fit of passion.

599.
Venerate four characters; the sanguine, who has checked volatility and the
rage for pleasure; the choleric, who has subdued passion and pride; the
phlegmatic, emerged from indolence; and the melancholy, who has dismissed
avarice, suspicion, and asperity.

600.
All great minds sympathize.

601.
Who, by kindness and smooth attention, can insinuate a hearty welcome to an
unwelcome guest, is a hypocrite superior to a thousand plain dealers.

602.
Men carry their character not seldom in their pockets: you might decide on
more than half of your acquaintance, had you will or right to turn their
pockets inside out.

603.
Injustice arises either from precipitation or indolence, or from a mixture of
both; the rapid and the slow are seldom just; the unjust wait either not at
all, or wait too long.

604.
All folly, all vice, all incredulity, arise from neglect of remembering what
once you knew.

605.
Not he who forces himself on opportunity, but he who watches its approach, and
welcomes its arrival by immediate use, is wise.

606.
Love and hate are the genius of invention, the parents of virtue and of vice
-- forbear to decide on yourself till you have had opportunities of warm
attachment or deep dislike.

607.
There is a certain magic in genuine honesty and benevolence, which tinctures
and invests with fragrance whatever comes within its sphere; it embalms with
odor the insipid, and sheds perfume on rankness: struck with the unexpected
emanation, you are sometimes tempted to ask of some, from whence they come? but
wait an hour -- the charm is past, and insipidity or rankness reappear.

608.
Set him down as your inferior who listens to you in a tete-a-tete, and
contradicts you when a third appears.

609.
Each heart is a world of nations, classes, and individuals; full of
friendships, enmities, indifferences; full of being and decay, of life and
death: the past, the present, and the future; the springs of health and engines
of disease: here joy and grief, hope and fear, love and hate, fluctuate, and
toss the fullen and the gay, the hero and the coward, the giant and the dwarf,
deformity and beauty, on ever restless waves. You find all within yourself that
you find without: the number and character of your friends within, bears an
exact resemblance to your external ones; and your internal enemies are just as
many, as inveterate, as irreconcilable, as those without: the world that
surrounds you is the magic-glass of the world, and of its forms within you; the
brighter you are yourself, so much brighter are your friends -- so much more
polluted your enemies. Be assured then, that to know yourself perfectly you
have only to set down a true statement of those that ever loved or hated you.

610.
Him, who can resrain from diving into secrets of mere unimproving curiosity,
you may choose for the depositary of your inmost thoughts.

611.
He surely is most in want of another's patience, who has none of his own.

612.
He who believes not in virtue must be vicious; all faith is only the
reminiscence of the good that once arose, and the omen of the good that may
arise, within us.

613.
Avoid connecting yourself with characters whose good and bad sides are
unmixed, and have not fermented together; they resemble phials of vinegar and
oil, or pallets set with colors; they are either excellent at home and
intolerable abroad, or insufferable within doors and excellent in public: they
are unfit for friendship, merely because their stamina, their ingredients of
character, are too single, too much apart; let them be finely ground up with
each other, and they will be incomparable.

614.
The fool separates his object from all surrounding ones; all abstraction is
temporary folly.

615.
You, who assume protection and give yourself the airs of patronage, know that,
unattended by humanity or delicacy, your obligations are but oppressions, and
your services affronts.

616.
Let me repeat it -- He only is great who has the habits of greatness; who,
after performing what none in ten thousand could accomplish, passes on, like
Samson, and "tells neither father nor mother of it."

617.
There are moral risks as decisive of greatness of mind as the risk of Colombo,
or that of Alexander when he drank the cup whilst Philip read the letter; -- in
these there is less of boldness than of intuition: but seek not for them in the
catalogue of inferior minds.

618.
There is no middle path for him who has once been caught in an infamous
action: he either will be a villain or a saint; the discovery of his crime must
rankle, must ferment, through life within him; dead to honor, and infuriate
against society, he will either rush from plot to plot to indiscriminate
perdition, or, if he yet retain some moral sense, contrition and
self-abhorrence may kindle the latent spark into a blaze of exemplary sanctity.

619.
He is a poor local creature who judges of men and things merely from the
prujudices of his nation and time: but he is a knave, who, in possession of
general principles, deals wanton condemnation on the same narrow scale.

620.
A god, an animal, a plant, are not companions of man; nor is the faultless --
then judge with lenity of all; the coolest, wisest, best, all without
exception, have their points, their moments of enthusiasm, fanaticism, absence
of mind, faint-heartedness, stupidity -- if you allow not for these, your
criticisms on man will be a mass of accusations or caricatures.

621.
Genius always gives its best at first, prudence at last.

622.
Contemptuous airs are pledges of a contemptible heart.

623.
You think to meet with some additions here to your stock of moral knowledge --
and not in vain, I hope: but know, a great many rules cannot be given by him
who means not to offend, and many of mine have perhaps offended already;
believe me, for him who has an open ear and eye, every minute teems with
observations of precious import, yet scarcely communicable to the most faithful
friend; so incredibly weak, so vulnerable in certain points, is man: forbear to
meddle with these at your first setting out, and make amusement the minister of
reflection: sacrifice all egotism -- sacrifice ten points to one if that one
have the value of twenty; and, if you are happy enough to impress your disciple
with respect for himself, with probability of success in his exertions of
growing better, and, above all, with the idea of your disinterestedness -- you
may perhaps succeed in making one proselyte to virtue.

624.
A gift -- its kind, its value and appearance; the silence or the pomp that
attends it; the style in which it reaches you -- may decide the dignity or
vulgarity of the giver.

625.
Keep your heart from him who begins his acquaintance with you by indirect
flattery of your favorite paradox or soible.

626.
Receive no satisfaction for premeditated impertinence -- forget it, forgive it
-- but keep him inexorably at a distance who offered it.

627.
Actions, looks, words, steps, form the alphabet by which you may spell
characters; some are mere letters, some contain entire words, lines, whole
pages, which at once decypher the life of a man. One such genuine uninterrupted
page may be your key to all the rest: but first be certain that he wrote it all
alone, and without thinking of publisher or reader.

628.
Let the cold, who offers the nauseous mimickry of warm affection, meet with
what he deserves -- a repulse; but from that moment depend on his
irreconcilable enmity.

629.
Roughness in friendship is at least as disgusting as an offensive breath from
a beautiful mouth -- the rough may perhaps be trusty, sincere, secret -- but he
is a fool if he expects delicacy from others, and a hypocrite if he pretends to
it himself.

630.
The moral enthusiast, who, in the maze of his refinements, loses or despises
the plain paths of honesty and duty, is on the brink of crimes.

631.
A whisper can dispel the slumbers of hatred and of love.

632.
The poor -- who envies not the rich, who pities his companions of poverty, and
can spare something for him that is still poorer -- is, in the realms of
humanity, a king of kings.

633.
If you mean to know yourself, interline such of these Aphorisms as affected
you agreeably in reading, and set a mark to such as left a sense of uneasiness
with you; and then show your copy to whom you please.

END OF VOL. I.
BERRY AND ROGERS, No. 35, Hanover-Square, directly opposite the Bank, HAVE FOR
SALE,
A NEW and elegant assortment of plated buckles, men's fashionable round and
cocked hats, colored and white patent silk stockings, patent silk and cotton
do, ladies fine cotton hose, fans, sliders for ladies hair, fancy waistcoats,
gold and silver lace, gold and silver spangles, with thread for tambour work,
feathers of different colors, ladies beaver hats, jewelry, plated and
japanned ware, knives and sorks, mahogany knife-cases, penknives, scissars,
cork-screws, razors, pocket and ass-skin books, slates, guitars, fifes with
music for the same, cake blacking, cloth and shoe brushes, backgammon-tables,
chess boards and men, billiard-balls, dice, battledores and shuttle-cocks,
playing and message cards, Middleton's black lead pencils, spectacles,
mathematical instruments, gloves, canes, fiddle-strings, sealing-wax, best
quality; whips, spurs, boot garters, wax tapers, Reeve's patent colors,
glazier's diamonds, hair-ribbon, combs, gold and silver leaf, tooth brushes,
guns, pistols, swords, patent shot, battle gunpowder, bird cages, perfumery,
surveying compasses, traveling do, chains for surveyors.

Also the following GENUINE PATENT MEDICINES,
James's analeptic pills, Dr. Ruspini's famous stiptic, tooth-powder and
liquid, Anderson's pills, Steer's opodeldoc for sprains, rheumatism and
bruises; cephalic snuff for the headache, lozenges of toulo for colds, coughs
and consumptions; Hill's balsam of honey, jesuits drops, Turlington's balsam,
Stoughton's bitters, Hemet's pearl and pearl dentifrice for the teeth, essence
of lemons for taking out iron moulds, court plaster, gold beater's skins,
fever powders, etc. etc.

The following valuable PRODUCTIONS to be had of BERRY AND ROGERS, No. 35,
Hanover-Square:
SOAME Jennings on the Origin of Evil, 12mo. -- Internal Evidence, 12mo. --
Disquisitions, 12mo. -- Lectures, 12mo. Helvetius' on Man, 2 vols. 8vo. Va^el's
Laws of Nations, 8vo. Blair's Lectures, 3 vols. 8vo. Priestly's Lectures on
History, 8vo. Peter Pindar's Works, complete, 8vo. Morse's American Geography,
8vo. Gillie's History of Greece, 3 vols. 8vo. Gibbons's Roman History,
complete, 6 vols. 8vo. Jefferion's Notes on Virginia, with a Map of the States
of Virginia, Maryland, Delaware and Pennsylvania. Gordon's History of the
American War, on a fine paper, with a variety of Maps, 4 vols. 8vo. Sheridan's
Dictionary, 8vo. Reid's Essays on the Intellectual. Powers of Man. De L^lme on
the British Constitution. Blackstone's Commentaries, 4 vols. 12mo.
Likewise, Books in all languages, Bibles and Common Prayer Books, various
sizes, Testaments, Spelling Books, Watts's Psalms and Hymns, School Books, a
variety of little Books for the improvement of the rising generation.

AND STATIONARY Of every kind.


