Mr. FOSTER's ELECTION SERMON.

AN ELECTION SERMON; DELIVERED BEFORE The Honorable LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE of
VERMONT; CONVENED AT WESTMINSTER, OCTOBER 8th, 1789.

BY DAN FOSTER, A. M.

PRINTED IN WINDSOR, BY ALDEN SPOONER, MDCCXC.

WESTMINSTER, October 9th, 1789.
REVEREND SIR,
IN pursuance to a resolution of the Honorable Legislature, we present to you
their Thanks for your Election Sermon, delivered yesterday -- From a desire
that they, with others, may be farther favored with its instruction, they are
induced, through us, to request of you a Copy for the Press.

We are, Reverend Sir, with Sentiments of Esteem, Your most obedient Servants,
JOSEPH HUBBARD, LEMUEL CHIPMAN, SIMEON SMITH. Rev. DAN FOSTER.


SERMON, etc.
Deuteronomy. XXXII.47. For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life:
and through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land whither ye go
over Jordan to possess it.
MOSES gave an early and noble specimen of genuine patrio^ism, when he chose
rather to abide the fate of his nation, and take a part with them, than to be
reputed the son of Thermu^his the daughter of Pharaoh, though with the prospect
of ascending the throne of one of the most ancient, splendid and powerful
nations of the earth. And ever after he was divinely appointed to conduct the
Hebrews out of Egypt, to the day of this death; he manifested a warm and
constant affection to that people, and an animated desire to promote their
tranquillity and happiness.

BUT in nothing did Moses demonstrate his love to his nation more, than in that
wise system of laws which he appointed them, so admirably calculated to
subserve their greatest political interest and prosperity -- this he admonishes
them of in our text, the plain meaning of which is, "That religion, or a
practical attention to that system of moral and religious institutions revealed
from Heaven, will always promote the best interests of human society, and prove
the greatest social blessing to mankind." And it is an happy consideration,
that the religion GOD has been pleased to reveal to us, is not only rational,
entertaining and sublime in itself, and calculated to promote the tranquillity
of individuals, and their utmost mental pleasure -- but also to encourage and
perfect the order, harmony and happiness of human society.

THE benign aspect of religion upon human society, and national prosperity and
happiness, being principally intended by Moses in the text, I shall specially
insist on this idea in the subsequent discourse.

AND that religion is a great and inestimable social blessing to mankind, and
admirably adapted to render a nation peaceful and prosperous, may be confirmed
and illustrated, whether we consider the nature and tendency of religion, or
the holy, wise and just providence of GOD, which superintends all the affairs
of mankind.

I. THE nature and tendency of religion are such, as have the most benign and
friendly aspect upon civil society.

ALL those virtues and graces which are recommended in our holy religion, are
happily subservient to the most substantial interests of civil communities.

AN inviolable regard to truth and fidelity, justice and equity, so much
insisted upon, both in the Hebrew and Christian religion, is very necessary to
the well being of society -- as we should presently be convinced, by too sad
experience, were insincerity and falsehood, injustice and fraud, to be
substituted instead of those virtues, and introduced into general practice. --
Temperate and chaste affections toward our neighbors -- industry and
diligence in our respective occupations -- these are excellent virtues in
communities, and tend to render social life peaceful and happy.

THE Hebrew Lawgiver recommended a profound veneration for JEHOVAH, as the
creator, preserver and governor of the world; who is represented, in the
religious institution of the Hebrews, as superintending, by his wise, holy and
just providence, all the affairs of mankind; he commanded children and youth to
exercise a filial and honorable regard to their earthly parents and superiors,
affability toward equals, and courteousness to all; he required the Hebrews to
maintain a sacred regard to the lives and health of their neighbors -- to be
temperate and chaste in their affections and whole deportment -- not to intrude
upon each other's property -- to preserve an inviolable regard to truth in all
their social intercourse, especially in matters of witness -- to permit their
neighbor the unmolested and uncoveted possession and enjoyment of his wise,
his house, his field, his manservant, his maidservant, his ox, his ass, and
every part of his property. -- How excellently well qualified were these Mosaic
institutions to render the Hebrew civil state happy! to promote peace and good
order, union and tranquillity -- inspire friendship and mutual confidence -- and
to diffuse a spirit of piety toward GOD, and of justice and equity, truth and
fidelity, benevolence and charity, through all the politic body! With great
propriety therefore did Moses declare that Israel's attention to those laws he
had given them "was not a vain thing for them; because it was their life:" and
that "through this thing they should prolong their life, or days, in the land
whither they went over Jordan to possess it."

RELIGION is admirably adapted to soothe the passions, calm the resentments and
animosities, and meliorate the tempers of mankind, and prepare the human nature
to relish the sweets of society and friendship. But I wish to be a little more
diffusive.

First -- RELIGION enjoins upon Kings, Princes, and all Magistrates, to rule in
the fear of JEHOVAH, the Supreme Monarch of the universe; it teaches them that
they are accountable to the GOD of Heaven in their political characters, though
they may be called gods on earth; religion also renders a Magistrate august and
venerable in the eyes of the people, and therefore gives strength and stability
to his authority and laws; Many vicious Princes and Magistrates have indeed
obtained such a degree of authority over their people, as to compel them,
through fear and dread, to yield a temporary and hypocritical compliance with
their laws and government; but how preferable is that obedience and
obsequiousness of a people, who are allured and enticed to obey, by the shining
examples of virtue, religion and patriotism, which they daily have presented
them by their Princes and Rulers!

Secondly -- As religion teaches Princes and Magistrates to rule in the fear of
GOD, so also does it inform them that the emolument and happiness of the people
form the great law of reigning, and the grand design of the Magistrate's
authority. Religion, both Hebrew and Christian, teaches civil Rulers to promote
and cherish the social worship of GOD -- to found and endow schools and
seminaries of learning -- and to adopt and improve every wise and benevolent
measure for the encouragement of virtue and literature among their people. --
Literature and religion have generally been esteemed most worthy and important
objects of the attention of civil Rulers, even among Pagans.

How did the Kings and Magistrates of Assyria, Egypt, Greece and Rome endeavor
to cultivate letters and theology in their respective kingdoms and states!
Belus the second King of Babylon, Thyoth the second King of Memphis, in Egypt,
Jupiter King of Crete, Solon King of Athens, Numa Pompilius the second King of
Rome, were not only famous for their own learning and philosophy, they were
also eminent for the encouragement of literature among their subjects. And they
were equally zealous to establish and cultivate religion, and the public
worship of the DEITY among their people.

Thyoth, and Solon, and Numa, were so sensible of the advantages the civil
state derived from religion, that they formed laws for the regulation of
religious public services -- appointed an order of men, who should devote
themselves entirely to the study of theology, and the performance of the public
rights and services of it; and, to give the greater authority to their
religious institutions among their people, they pretended to have received them
from the Gods. Numa in particular, pretended that the goddess Egeria nightly
communicated to him the several parts of that religious economy which he
established among the Romans. And all history assures us, that religion,
mutilated and corrupted as it was, greatly promoted the peace and prosperity of
those nations where it was thus established. It struck the minds of the people
with reverence and awe; gave them a veneration for their Kings and Priests --
and persuaded them to cultivate the arts of peace and order among themselves.

IT is well known that the veneration which Kings and Magistrates have
generally sh^wn religion and the (...), has been improved as an objection
against revealed religion, as being a state engine or mere priestcraft.

IF by religion's being a piece of priestcraft, be meant, that religion was
invented by priests, the pretense is false, and contrary to the history of
religion in all nations; since that history informs us, that there were no
priests in any nation, till a national religion became established, and
generally received. If our modern freethinkers mean, that religion was the
invention of statesmen and politicians, when they call it a state engine, this
pretense is as far from truth and fact, as the other, and as contrary to
history. The most rational and probable conjecture, and that which is best
countenanced by the authentic history of religion in all nations, is, that GOD
himself instructed Adam, and the Antediluvians, in the principles of that
religion which he required of them, and showed them the manner of performing
all its rites and ceremonies. Noah came forth of the ark with the religion of
the old world, which his children learned of him. And the Chinese retain to
this day the principles of that religion which their great prophet Fobi, or
Noah, taught them. And that part of Noah's family which traveled westward,
and, by their descendants, settled Nineveh, Babylon, Greece, Rome, etc.
retained for many ages the religion of their progenitor. At length, however,
this ancient religion was corrupted, but never entirely lost among the nations.
And therefore religion never was invented, though it was greatly corrupted both
by priests and politicians.

IF the meaning be, that Kings and Princes, Statesmen and Politicians, have
universally, in all ages and nations, considered religion as signally
beneficial to the civil state; this indeed is very true; and they have ever
thought very justly of religion when they have thus considered it. But by what
management does it become an objection against religion, that it greatly
promotes the interests of communities! We have too much reason to believe that
such objections against religion originate in the same manner, that objections
against reason do in some men, according to the saying of Lord Bolingbroke,
"That when reason is against a man, then a man will be against reason." Reason
is against a man who is resolved to think and act unreasonably. So is religion
against men who are indisposed to comply with its precepts: and hence the
objection against it.

II. RELIGION, if it be kindly entertained, is of special service to the
people, in their political capacity, as well as to Magistrates.

1. RELIGION injoins upon the people obedience to legal government, and
conformity to wise and good laws: and this it does in a very humane and
generous way, by teaching men the design of civil polity and government, its
great utility, and even necessity, in the world; and that a wise and good
government is the ordinance of GOD, and on that account ought to be very
respectable among men. Religion informs of the great guilt they contract, who
resist a well regulated government; and the imminent danger they expose
themselves to; that, "Whosoever resists authority, resists the ordinance of
GOD;" and that "they who resist, shall receive to themselves damnation." --
Thus is religion very friendly to the civil state, as it teaches due subjection
and obedience to wise and good laws and government.

2. RELIGION tends to make men quiet and peaceable toward each other; as it is
designed and adapted to eradicate those corrupt passions and dispositions of
mankind, which are unfriendly to the peace and tranquillity of the State. --
Anger, envy, revenge, a seditious and divisive spirit, a peevish, fretful,
discontented temper, all which vices, as they are most unfavorable to the
welfare and prosperity of the public, are discountenanced and forbidden in our
holy religion. All deceit in contract, fraud, injustice, extortion and rapine,
are very expressly prohibited both in the laws of Moses, and of Jesus Christ.
Bribery, corruption and venality, a sour, unfriendly, uncharitable, malignant
temper and disposition -- evilspeaking and slander, than which no vices are
more prejudicial to the order and harmony of human society, and, together with
these, the whole black catalogue of unsocial passions and vices, are corrected
and condemned in the laws of the Mosaic constitution, and in the religion of
our divine Redeemer.

"THOU shall not raise a false report; put not thine hand with the wicked to be
an unrighteous witness. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil; neither
shall thou speak in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest judgment. Neither
shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause. If thou meet thine enemy's ox,
or his ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again, If thou
see the ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, and would
forbear to help him; thou shall surely help with him. Thou shall not wrest the
judgment of the poor in his cause. Keep thee far from a false matter; and the
innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked." Exodus
XXIII.1 -- 7.

3. IT is one great design, both of the Hebrew and Christian religion, to
implant in human nature all those sentiments, passions and affections, which
are most friendly to society; and to engage all the members of the politic body
in such practices as naturally tend to social felicity. Strict justice and
righteousness, both in sentiment and practice, in all contracts and dealings
one with another, is a great command of religion. -- "Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure. Just
balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I am
JEHOVAH your GOD, who brought you out of the land of Egypt."

AND how much do justice and righteousness tend to advance the honor and
welfare of a nation! -- Truth and fidelity, universal benevolence, love and
charity, a peaceable, quiet, placable temper, and a sincere desire to promote
the pleasure and happiness of our neighbor; are all of them great maxims of
revealed religion; and are every where inculcated by Moses, by our Savior, and
by his Apostles.

"AND if thou sellest ought unto thy neighbor, or buyest ought of thy
neighbor's hand, ye shall not oppress one another. And if thy brother be waxen
poor, and fallen in decay with thee; thou shall relieve him: yea, though he be
a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thee."

BUT as it happened to the religion of Noah, that, in a process of ages, it was
corrupted and ravished of most of its original purity and simplicity among the
nations; so likewise that of Moses shared the same fate, in the latter ages of
the Jewish state, by the mistaken glosses and interpretations of the Scribes
and Pharisees. And, as Moses was raised up to retrieve the character of, and
add perfection to, the ancient religion of Noah; so JESUS of Nazareth, the
great prophet like unto Moses, made it a principal part of his business on
earth, to restore the honor of those divine laws given to the Hebrews, and to
present them to mankind dressed in their native purity and simplicity, with the
most spiritual and sublime annotations upon them.

HENCE we find him repeating this expression, "Ye have heard that it has been
said by them of old time:" referring to the false comments of the Jewish
doctors upon the constitution of Moses.

FOR a specimen of our Savior's method of teaching divinity out of the laws of
Moses, permit me to recite a part of one of his lectures.

"YE have heard that it has been said by them of old time, thou shall not
kill: and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment." It seems,
by what follows, that the Hebrew doctors extended the prohibition no farther
than the outward act of murder, not comprehending therein the inward temper and
disposition of the heart: and therefore our SAVIOR adds his own comment. "But
I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall
be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca,"
i.e. you beggarly fellow; "shall be in danger of the council; but whosoever
shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire."

And instead of hating an enemy, which the Scribes admitted, our SAVIOR
commands, "to love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that
hate us, and to pray for them who despitefully use, and persecute us."

No wonder the Jewish state declined, when they had corrupted the laws of
Moses, however happy it might have been, if that nation had regarded them in
their true intention.

IF men should deal justly and uprightly one with another, if truth and
fidelity should influence all their mutual intercourse, if all should wish well
to all, and, according to their respective capacities and places, should
endeavor to promote the universal good -- if mankind should generally be
compassionate and merciful, both to the souls and bodies of their fellow men,
if they should refrain from all malevolent and evil speaking -- be very
delicate and tender in their treatment of persons and characters -- if they
should heartily love their country, and be willing, not only to sacrifice their
private resentments, but their personal interests also, to promote the public
weal and prosperity; how happy would human society be, and how near a
resemblance would it form to that bright world of harmony and friendship that
is above!

III. IF we reflect on the wise, holy and just providence of GOD, we shall see
reason to consider religion as most friendly to the happiness of social life.

FROM the partial and unequal distributions of divine providence toward
individuals, whether virtuous or vicious, in this world, it has been very
justly inferred, that the righteous governor of the universe designs some
future time and place, when and where he will rectify all the partial
administrations of his providence, and adequately reward the virtues, and
punish the vices of individuals, and cause the rectoral honor and dignity of
his moral government of mankind to appear, and be acknowledged by the assembled
universe.

ON this supposition, it is no objection against the rectitude of the moral
government of the world, that virtue, in individuals, should sigh and mourn, be
afflicted, and obliged to encounter the numberless ills of human life; whilst
vice is gay and sportive, free from pain, and regaling itself in all the
pleasures of sense. -- The prospect of that other world, where virtue will
triumph, and where vice, in its turn, will be doomed to weeping and woe, and to
endure the evils it has incurred here, clears up the scene, and vindicates the
honor and justice of divine administration. But with civil society, with
kingdoms and states, it is far otherwise; and a different method of reasoning
must be adopted. The future state, which religion reveals, knows no man in a
political, or national capacity; and therefore will not either reward, or
punish mankind in the social, but in the individual and personal character
only. Hence it is just and reasonable to inter a priori, that it has been, and
ever will be, the invariable maxim of the supreme moral government, to treat
all nations, and political societies, according to their public character,
being virtuous or vicious. And, if we revolve the history of mankind, we shall
surely find, that virtuous nations have ever been prosperous and happy, so long
as they retained their virtue; and that vicious (...), at one time or another,
have been signally punished, in the providence of almighty GOD.

WHEN the prophets foretold the fall and ruin of the Assyrian, Persian,
Egyptian, Greecian and Roman empires, they invariably alleged their national
corruptions and vices, as the cause of their national destruction.

WHEN Babylon was to be subverted, the prophet says, "A grievous vision is
declared unto me; the treacherous dealer deals treacherously, and the spoiler
spoileth. Go up, O Ela^, besiege, O Medid." Deceit, treachery, fraud and
rapine, were the national vices of the Babylonians; and therefore the Persians
and Meeds are divinely commissioned to go up, besiege and destroy Babylon; as
they afterward did under the conduct of Cyrus.

Tire was destroyed for her pride, presumption and luxury, "Who has taken this
counsel against Tire, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose
traffickers are the honorable of the earth? The Lord of Hosts has purposed it,
to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honorable
of the earth."

Egypt, and the Greek empire fell by their vices, as we are abundantly
informed, both by sacred and profane history. -- Rome flourished long, a
renowned ^eat both of arts and arms, a glorious empire, mistress and arbitress
of three fourths of the globe. And St. Austin observes, that the mighty
success, and long prosperity of the Romans, were owing to their eminent virtue,
and given them of God, as a reward for their distinguished justice, temperance,
and other national virtues. -- But when Rome became corrupt, her ancient virtue
gone, and luxury, intemperance, and all kinds of vices became prevalent
throughout the empire, she, in her turn, fell a prey to the Huns, Goths,
Vandals, and other northern nations; which gave occasion to the satyr of
Juvenal -- Seevior armis luxuria incubuit, victumque ulc^scitur orbem. Luxury
came upon us more cruel than our arms, and did revenge the vanquished world
with its charms Juvenal, sect. 6, ver. 20.
.

Moses told the Hebrews that, if they would adhere to those moral laws and
statures, which he had been divinely authorized to enact for them, it should be
their life; and should prolong their national prosperity and happiness in the
land of Canaan. And herein that great and good man acted, not as a wise and
able statesman only, but as a most affectionate patriot, and lover of his
nation: presenting Israel with a glorious scene of national dignity and
importance, tranquillity and happiness, and a golden age perpetuated, upon the
presumption of their future virtue and obedience; and a dreadful reverse of
fortune, in case of vice and disobedience. "And it shall come to pass," says
he, "if thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the LORD thy GOD, to
observe and to do all his commandments, which O command thee this day, that the
LORD thy GOD will set thee on high above all nations of the earth. And all
these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shall hearken
unto the voice of the LORD thy GOD. The LORD shall cause thine enemies that
rise up against thee, to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out
against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways. The LORD shall command
the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou set thy
hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the LORD thy GOD gives
thee. The LORD shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he has
sworn unto thee, if thou shall keep the commandments of the LORD thy GOD, and
walk in his ways. And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the name of JEHOVAH, and they shall be afraid of thee. And the LORD shall make
thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy
cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the LORD swear to thy
fathers to give thee."

BUT if the Hebrews rebelled against JEHOVAH, and became corrupt and vicious in
their national character and manners, how awfully should their fortune be
reversed! "If thou will not observe to do all the words of this law, that are
written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious name, JEHOVAH thy
GOD. Then the LORD will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy
seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of
long continuance. And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the
stars of Heaven for multitude; because thou would not obey the voice of the
LORD thy GOD. And it shall come to pass, that, as JEHOVAH rejoiced over thee to
do thee good, and to multiply thee; so JEHOVAH will rejoice over thee to
destroy thee, and to bring thee to naught: and ye shall be plucked from off the
land whither thou go to possess it. And the LORD shall scatter thee among
all people, from the one end of the earth, even unto the other; and there shall
thou serve other gods, which neither thou, nor thy fathers have known, even
wood and stone." Deuteronomy. XXVIII.

AND the history of the Hebrews informs, that these promises and threatenings
of Moses were perpetually verified in the state and circumstances of that
nation.

WHILST Israel were virtuous, and attended to the laws of JEHOVAH, they were
prosperous and happy, and a very respectable nation; when they degenerated, and
became corrupt and vicious, and disregarded the commandments of JEHOVAH, they
were disastrous and wretched, a scorn and derision among the nations which
dwelt around them, and a sorry prey to their enemies.

INDEED the divine administrations toward the Hebrews ever derived their
complexion from the moral character and conduct of that nation: and, although
their situation was somewhat different from that of other nations, being made a
theocracy, and placed under the more immediate inspection of JEHOVAH, as their
civil, as well as moral King and Governor; yet all other nations, as well as
the Hebrews, were under the moral government of JEHOVAH; were his creatures,
endued with reason, and indulged with many natural, civil and religious
privileges, sufficient for all the purposes of virtue, and of moral institution
and discipline; though much inferior to those which the Hebrews enjoyed. Hence
the reason why all the nations of the earth have ever been, and ever will be,
accountable to GOD, as a moral governor, in their national capacity. -- And as
GOD has ever treated all the nations of the earth, in every age, according to
their national character and conduct, and either blessed, or frowned upon them,
as they have been generally virtuous or vicious; so have we the highest reason
to believe he will invariably treat mankind in all succeeding ages and nations,
in the same manner, and by the same rule. It is a catholic and perpetual maxim
of revelation, verified by the experience of all ages and nations, that
"righteousness exalts a nation;" and that, "sin is the reproach of any
people."

RELIGION, in its own nature and tendency, is admirably calculated to render a
nation respectable and illustrious abroad, as well as prosperous and happy at
home: whilst sin, vice, immorality and dissoluteness of manners, as naturally
tend to fix a public indelible stigma and reproach upon a nation, and to fill
it with factions and divisions, render its internal circumstances wretched and
miserable, and bring it to an untimely death: for nations, politic bodies,
sicken, languish, and die, as well as natural bodies; and virtue is the health,
and causes the longevity of nations; whilst vice is their disease, and a sad,
though certain, presage of a premature political death.

WE have also seen that the providence of GOD, the supreme monarch of the
universe, favors virtuous, whilst it invariably frowns upon vicious, nations.

FROM the nature and tendency of religion therefore, and the just and holy
providence of GOD, we may with great truth and safety conclude, that all
political communities will be happy or miserable, as they shall be virtuous or
vicious.

I SHALL comprehend the improvement of the preceding discourse in a few
addresses, which are customary, and therefore decent and respectful, on such
occasions as the present.

1. THE Chief Magistrate in this commonwealth claims my first attention.

MAY it please your Excellency to indulge me a few minutes, whilst I make an
inference or two, which may specially refer to the office and duty of gentlemen
who fill the chief places of power and trust in the civil State.

1. THAT it is the peculiar and indespensable duty of civil Magistrates, to be
personally virtuous, is an inference, which, I doubt that your Excellency has
already anticipated. -- A wise magistrate would be virtuous, not only to
establish and adorn his own character, and to obtain the approbation of HIM,
who is infinitely greater and more illustruous than all the Kings and
Potentates of the earth; but from a rational and well regulated affection to
his country. A patriotic spirit will excite and animate him to a virtuous and
religious life. -- A vicious and dissolute Magistrate is a misshapen monstrous
character! He neither loves himself, his country, nor his GOD! He certainly can
be no true patriot, let his professions be what they may: Religion the glory
and safety of the State -- an irreligious profane Magistrate consulting and
designing the welfare of the State! how contradictious and absurd an idea! --
Virtue in high life has a commanding and sovereign influence. The examples of
the great may do much to cherish and promote religion; or, they may have a most
pernicious tendency, if vicious, to patronize and spread the contagion of vice
and evil manners: a Magistrate, therefore, should make it his great ambition
that his own character be fair and good, and that he present a noble and
enticing pattern of virtue and religion before all the people.

2. A WISE and good Magistrate will improve all the influence his station and
authority give him, to promote virtue and religion among the people.

IF religion be the life and glory of a nation, and the most important art of
prolonging the dignity and happiness of civil society; a wise and virtuous
Magistrate will most ardently wish to be an instrument of the promotion of
religion among his people; and will use his utmost prudent endeavors to advance
its reputation, render it fashionable, and cause it to be cherished and
cultivated.

SUCH a Magistrate will be concerned to procure for the DEITY, for his holy
words, his sabbaths, ordinances and worship, the solemn attention, the profound
respect and veneration, which are indisputably their due. He will wisely
improve his influence that a spirit of justice, fidelity, peace and charity
inspire all ranks and orders of men: and, in his exalted place, he will
maintain a constant regard to these worthy designs, in all the business of
legislation, and execution of the laws in the State: indeed the honor,
tranquillity and happiness of the community, in the constant practice of virtue
and religion, and entire security in the enjoyment of their persons and
properties, will costitute the noble design of the political life of a wise and
good Magistrate.

YOUR Excellency's known character, and the general suffrages of your brethren,
by which you have been many years continued in the chair of state, warrant my
belief, that your duty to GOD and this people has long warmed and animated
your heart; and, that what is suggested concerning the obligations of a
Magistrate, will be kindly accepted by you, Sir, though these things may be far
better conceived in your own mind, than I am able to express them.

BE pleased, Sir, to have patience with me a little farther, whilst I include
your Excellency in an address to the honorable General Assembly convened in
this house, at whose request I perform this part this day.

MAY it please his honor the Lieutenant governor, the honorable Counselors,
and the venerable Representatives of the State, in General Assembly convened,
to indulge me a little; whilst I, within the limits of my own province, suggest
a few things, which may claim your attention, as the Legislature of a great and
growing people, whom you most certainly wish to make respectable and happy.

I. THE honor and worship of the DEITY are surely objects of such magnitude and
importance, as may well demand your first attention.

No nation under heaven ever was politically happy, or prospered long, without
some practical reverence of GOD, and attention to his worship. The great
JEHOVAH has declared, "By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me
Princes rule, and Nobles, even all Judges of the earth." How then can a
Legislature of Theists, much less a Christian Legislature, discharge, either
their duty to GOD, or the trust reposed in them by the community, whilst they
neglect to adore and worship GOD themselves, or to improve their influence that
he be adored and worshipped by the people! -- An oath for confirmation, and the
termination of controversy, is a solemn appeal to GOD: if all reverence of GOD,
and sacred regard to religion, were extinguished, the solemnity of an oath is
absolutely gone, and, with its solemnity, its binding force and obligation are
at once taken away; and nothing then remains to issue, even civil causes, but
the sword! and we may depend, that the sword will not be sufficient for this
purpose long, after all religion is gone. Indeed reason, the nature of things,
and the experience of all ages, and of all nations, whether Pagan, Hebrew, or
Christian, conspire to demonstrate that religion is necessary to the very
being, as well as to the wellbeing of the civil State. To encourage and promote
religion and the worship of GOD, by wise and good laws, must therefore be the
indispensable duty of a Christian Legislature.

MAY I not, venerable Senators, address you as St. Paul did King Agrippa, with
the necessary variation? Believe ye this report of religion, and of your duty
concerning it? I know that ye believe.

2. As means for the encouragement of a reverential regard to GOD, and the
promotion of virtue and religion, a proper respect to the Lord's Day or
Christian Sabbath the local worship of GOD, and a learned and judicious
ministry, are objects which may well claim your attention. It has been the most
generally received opinion of all ages, and of all nations, that it is the duty
and interest of Magistrates to establish and promote the public worship of the
DEITY amongst their people.

IT would be treating you, honored Gentlemen, with unpardonable disrespect,
even to suppose that you hesitated, whether a serious regard to the Sabbath,
and the maintenance of social worship, were specially serviceable to the civil
interests of the State. You explode, worthy Senators, the too common cant
expression, that the Magistrate, as Magistrate, has nothing to do with
religion, or the public worship of the DEITY; nor do you suppose that your
obligations as men, are tendered void, by your being elected into places of
power and trust in the State -- as men, every one concedes, you are bound to
glorify GOD. You do not imagine that, being a Magistrate, liberates a man from
his obligations to glorify God; but rather that, as his exalted station gives
him greater advantages to glorify God, his obligations of this nature are
proportionably increased.

No man has lived forty years and not observed the salutary effects of keeping
the Sabbath, and attending public worship, in the families, societies, towns,
states, and kingdoms, where he has been acquainted.

ALL the wise nations, even of Pagan antiquity, not only framed laws and
institutions for the support of the social worship of the Gods, but also
appointed an order of men, who should devote their time and talents to
investigate and teach the doctrines and precepts of theology and ethics, and
perform all the public rites and ceremonies of religion.

Christian theology and ethics are undoubtedly as beneficial to the civil
interests of communities, as were the Pagan -- I need not repeat what has
already been said abundantly, of the happy tendency of the laws of Moses, and
of Jesus Christ, in the civil state -- Filling the public professions, both in
church and state, with men of learning and ability, is of infinite service to
the interests of both. -- Mere pretenders to divinity, law, or physic, ought to
be discountenanced by all, who wish to promote the public interest. We have,
and it is to be much lamented, some weak brethren, who would be as highly
gratified with the indigested, incoherent harangues of an illiterate pretender
in the pulpit, as with the best composed sermons of the most learned and able
divine! -- I cannot say that such weak infantile stomachs ought to be entirely
deprived of milk -- I wish they may not attempt to infringe the rights and
privileges of their adult brethren, who are both capable and desirous of eating
stronger meat.

3. THE cause of literature will, I doubt not, be thought worthy an eminent
place in your political deliberations.

Thyoth, and Solon, and Numa, those wise legislators of Gentile antiquity, and
a great number of others, who might be named, if needful, were zealous patrons
of literature and of learned men -- It was a maxim with the wise Romans -- That
it very much concerned the common good, that youth be well educated.

WHAT a figure, my political fathers, would America have made, in her great
national character, in the late war with Britain, without men of learning and
information at the head of public affairs! -- American pens were almost as
serviceable to our country's important cause, as American arms, in that
glorious struggle for liberty.

WE, who are now actors on the theater of life, shall soon be called off; -- a
new set of comedians will rise and take our places: -- And how will our
illiterate and uninformed children fill those places in church and state, which
the great arbiter, death, will quickly leave destitute! From our schools and
seminaries we expect our children to receive the rudiments of that literature
and information, which, when perfected by reading, study, conversation, and
traveling, may prepare them to appear with dignity and usefulness in the
pulpit, at the bar, on the bench, or in the physical department.

YOUR Honors are sensible there is a special call to the inhabitants of this
State, to encourage the education of our youth: the population of the State
most rapidly increasing -- towns planting, and churches forming in the
wilderness -- but few gentlemen of literature, and thorough education,
comparatively, yet settled among us -- a daily increase of employment in all
the learned professions, and in every branch of public business.

I MOST heartily wish, and humbly trust, respectable Senators, that the glory
of GOD, the honor of religion, and the welfare and prosperity of this rising
republic, may influence and animate all your deliberations, and give complexion
to all your laws and statutes.

GENTLEMEN of the Sacred Character claim my next address.

MY Reverend Fathers and Brethren, you have the happiness to reflect, that the
religion you preach is not only divine, as having all the credentials necessary
to authenticate its celestial original, but that it is also a religion which
wears a most favorable and benign aspect upon human society, and social life:
-- a religion in its own nature and tendency adapted to rectify the disorders
of the human heart -- to eradicate every unfriendly and unsociable sentiment,
passion, and affection; and to implant and cherish every generous and noble
sentiment, and every kindly social grace and virtue: -- a religion evidently
composing a principal part of Jehovah's vast and stupendous system of moral
government, which he originally designed, and has ever conducted, for the
perfection and happiness of man, as a rational and social being.

You also enjoy the sublime pleasure of the reflection that, whilst you endeavor
studiously to investigate, and faithfully to teach, the doctrines and precepts
of Christian Religion, you cooperate with the sacred Trinity, in conducting the
divine design of infinite love and grace to man!

FROM such reflections you may derive divine encouragement to fidelity, and
sufficient support under all the evils and temptations incident to man, or
peculiar to the clergyman.

IF the patience of this great and very respectable auditory be not quite gone,
I would address myself in the last place to this whole assembly present. -- My
brethren and friends, the subject which we have had under consideration
presents individuals in the civil State with many important motives and
arguments to persuade to the practice of virtue and religion.

I. THAT love of his country, which every one ought to cherish, may be improved
as a powerful motive to religion. Individuals are the constituent parts of
communities and nations: the real character of individuals, therefore, will
give complexion to the character of the nation, of which they are parts. A
virtuous nation, composed of vicious individuals, is an inadmissible solecism
in ethics. If we wish our dear native country happy, we must wisely resolve to
become personally virtuous. Virtue is necessary to the prosperity of our
country and nation -- national virtue is composed of that which the individuals
of any nation practice: love to our country therefore involves in it a due
respect to virtue: hence one who indulges himself in the practice of vice,
cannot, with truth and propriety, be called a lover of his country; because he
manifests a disregard to that which all history, both sacred and profane,
demonstrates to be necessary to its happiness.

2. AFFECTION to our dearest earthly connections and relatives, furnishes us
with another very engaging and tender motive to religion.

OUR wives, our children, and other dear connections and friends, whose
happiness is involved in that of their country, call loudly upon us, though
with the most alluring softness and delicacy, to put in practice religion,
which may insure the prosperity and happiness of our common country.

How can we have the (...) to assume the character of humane and generous, and
yet be deaf to the voice of such wise and sensible charmers!

WE may also consider, that, probably, many of our dearest connections, if not
in themselves, yet in their descendants, must abide the fate of their country
for ages yet to come: we hope to be perpetuated in our posterity to the latest
age -- do we not wish to leave our country to those dear parts of ourselves,
who may survive us, under the protection of Heaven, encircled by the kindest
paternal providence, and consequently in peace and prosperity!

Moses evidently did not confine his views to that generation which Joshua
introduced into Canaan, when he recommended religion to the Hebrews -- "And
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land whither ye go over
Jordan to possess it." -- If Moses has any respect to the longevity of the men
of that generation, yet, no doubt, he has a principal regard to the prosperity
and happiness of successive generations in that promised land -- and he plainly
informs them, that their obedience to GOD would prolong their political life:
i.e. they should continue a nation, and a happy nation too, so long as they
should maintain their integrity, and continue obedient to the commandments of
JEHOVAH.

How can we endure the thought of rendering the situation of our families, and
of those beings who have derived a momentary existence from us, wretched and
miserable, by conduct, which, at once, proclaims us berest of natural
affection, and of gratitude to GOD! -- And how will the reflection set upon our
minds when we come to die, that we have entailed the curse of Heaven upon our
country, and consequently upon those who may perpetuate our name for long ages
yet to come! that, by our vices, we have provoked the GOD of our fathers, and
sold our country and our posterity to foreign tyrants, who may burn and lay
waste this goodly land, carry our children captives, or chain them here to
vassalage and slavery, far more cruel than death! -- My friends, I fear we do
not consider what we are about, and what infinite and unutterable miseries we
are involving our country and our children in, whilst we are indulging
ourselves in vice!

3, ONCE more -- A proper regard to our own happiness, which is most intimately
connected with that of our country, ought to influence us to the love and
practice of religion.

WHO would choose to live in a country, in which tyranny and despotism on the
one hand, or anarchy and confusion on the other, had either enslaved the
people, or involved them in civil discords and dissentions, too intolerable
either to be borne, or easily removed! -- Yet irreligion and profaneness tend
directly to the introduction of these, or greater evils; for, as that man is
unfit to govern others, who cannot govern himself -- so that nation which is
enslaved to vice, is just prepared to be made a slave to foreign power.

MAY the objects which are dearest to us on earth -- may natural and parental
affection -- may the tender and delicate ties of friendship -- may love to that
country in which we first drew our vital breath, and in which we yet live --
may a proper respect to our own peace and pleasure whilst we live, and
especially a regard to that tranquillity of mind and manly assurance, which may
encourage and support us in a dying hour -- may any, may all these motives
conspiring, excite us to a timely and serious attention to the things of our
political peace, and persuade us to live in the practice of those graces and
virtues which are the honor and protection of a nation; and also to improve all
the power and influence of our respective stations and capacities, to recommend
religion to our families, our neighbors, and our country; that it may
universally prevail, and become as a munition of rocks, and an impregnable
bulwark to our nation.

Now unto the Supreme Monarch of the universe, "the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise GOD," be all honor, dominion and power, henceforth and
forevermore.

AMEN,

