SIR MATTHEW HALE'S AFFECTIONATE EPISTLES TO HIS CHILDREN. WITH DIRECTIONS
CONCERNING THE RELIGIOUS OBSERVATION OF THE LORD'S DAY. TO WHICH IS PREFIXED
THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

A NEW EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD. MDCCXC.

THE LIFE OF SIR MATTHEW HALE.
SIR Matthew Hale, a man of great learning and integrity, and Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench in the last century, was born at Alderly, in
Gloucestershire. November 1, 1609. His grandfather was Robert Hale, an eminent
clothier in the same county, where he and his ancestors had lived for many
descents, and were remarkable for their liberality to the poor. This Robert
acquired an estate of ten thousand pounds, which he divided equally amongst his
five sons, besides the portions be gave his daughters. His second son was
Robert Hale, a Barrister of Lincoln's Inn, who married Joan, the daughter of
Matthew Poyntz, of Alderly, Esquire. Of this marriage, the great man, the subject
of these memoirs, was the only issue. His father was a man of that strictness
of conscience, that he gave over the practice of the law, because he could not
understand the reason of giving color in pleadings, which he thought was to
tell a lie, and that, with some other things commonly practiced, seemed to him
contrary to that exactness of truth and justice which became a Christian, so
that he withdrew himself from the Inns of Court, to live on his estate in the
country. (A rare instance! and scarcely to be found nowadays.) But as the
care he had to save his soul made him abandon a profession by which he might
have raised his family much higher, so his charity made him not only deal his
alms largely while he lived, but at his death he left 20 l. per ann. to the
poor at Wotton, which his son confirmed to them with some additions.

Thus he was descended rather from a good than a noble family; and what was
wanting in the insignificant titles of high birth, and "the boast of heraldry,"
was more than made up in the worth of his ancestors. But he was soon deprived
of his father's care and instruction -- as his mother died when he was three
years old, so his father died when he was no more than five. But as Providence,
when it takes one blessing from us, or one friend, takes care to raise up
another for our comfort, so was he taken under the care of Anthony Kingscot,
Esquire. who was his next kinsman, after his uncles, by his mother.

Great care was taken of his education, and his guardian intended to breed him
a Divine, and being inclined to the Puritans, he was put to schools that were
taught by that party, and in the seventeenth year of his age he was sent to
Magdalen Hall, in Oxford. He was an extraordinary proficient at school, and for
some time at Oxford; but the players coming thither, by seeing so many plays,
he was so much corrupted, that he almost wholly forsook his studies, by which
he lost much time, which he was not only sensible of, but found his head filled
with vain images of things, which were unprofitable, if not hurtful to him;
therefore he resolved upon coming to London, never to see a play more; to which
he strictly adhered.

The corruption of a young man's mind in one particular, frequently brings on a
great many more after it; so now being taken off from following his studies,
and from that gravity which was before his characteristic, he now set himself
to many of the vanities incident to younger years, but yet he preserved his
purity, and a great probity of mind. He loved fine clothes, and delighted much
in company, and being of a strong and robust make, he was master of all those
exercises which require strength and agility of body. He learned to fence, in
which he became so expert, that scarcely any could master him in that art. One
of his teachers told him one day that he could now instruct him no more, for
that he was now better at his trade than he himself was; this Hale looked upon
as flattery, to make a discovery of which, he promised him the house he lived
in (for he was his tenant,) if he would hit him on the head, and bid him do his
best, for he would be as good as his word; after a little engagement, the
master being really superior, hit him on the head, and he perfomed his promise
freely. This instance showed a good judgment, and gave some hopes of better
things; and he was not unwilling at that rate to learn so early to distinguish
flattery from truth. He was now so taken up with martial matters, that instead
of being a scholar or divine, he resolved to be a soldier; and his tutor,
Obadiah Sedgewick, going to the Low Countries, Chaplain to the renowned Lord
Vere, he resolved to go along with him, and to trail a pike in the Prince of
Orange's army: but a happy stop was put to this resolution, which might have
proved fatal to himself, and deprived his country of the great example he gave,
and the useful services he did. He was engaged in a suit of law with Sir
William Whitmore, who laid claim to part of his estate, and his guardian being
a man of a retired temper, and not made for business, he was obliged to leave
the University, after he had been three years in it, and go to London to
solicit for his own business. Being recommended to Sergeant Glanvil for his
Counselor, and he observing in him a clear apprehension of things, and a solid
judgment, and a great fitness for the law, took pains to persuade him from
being a soldier, and to apply to the law; this had so good an effect on him,
that on the eighth of November, 1632, he was admitted into Lincoln's Inn, and
being sensible how much time he had lost, he resolved to redeem it, and
followed his studies with a diligence that scarcely could be believed, if the
signal effects of it did not gain it credit. He studied for many years at the
rate of sixteen hours a day; he threw aside all fine clothes, and betook
himself to a plain fashion, which he continued to his dying day. Yet he did not
at first break off from keeping too much company with some vain people, till a
sad accident drove him from it; for he and some other young students being
invited out of town to be merry, one of them called for so much wine, that
notwithstanding all Mr. Hale could do to prevent it, he carried his excess to
such an height, that he fell down dead before them. They were all much
affrighted at it, and did what they could to bring him to himself again. Mr.
Hale was so particularly affected, that he went into another room, fell on his
knees, and prayed earnestly to God, both for himself and friend, that he might
be restored to life again, and be forgiven for giving such countenance to
excess; and he then vowed to God, that he would never again keep company in
that manner, nor drink a health while he lived, and he most religiously
observed his vow.

This wrought an entire change on him: he now entirely forsook all vain
company, and divided himself between the duties of religion, and the studies of
his profession; in the former he was so regular, that for thirty six years
time, he never once failed going to church on the Lord's day; this observation
he made when an ague interrupted that constant course, and he reflected on it,
as an acknowledgment of God's great goodness to him, in so long a continuance
of his health.

Not satisfied with the law books then published, but resolved to take things
from the fountain head, he was very diligent in searching records, and with
collections out of the books he read, together with his own learned
observations, he made a most valuable common place book. He was early taken
notice of by the Attorney General Noy, who directed him in his studies, and
admitted him to such an intimacy, that he was called by many Young Noy. The
great and learned Mr. Seldom also soon found him out, and took such a liking to
him, that he not only lived in great friendship with him, but made him one of
his executors. Mr Seldom put him upon a more enlarged pursuit of learning,
which he had before confined to his own profession; so that he arrived in time
to a considerable knowledge in the civil law, in arithmetic, algebra, and other
mathematical sciences, as well as in physic, anatomy, and surgery. He was also
conversant in experimental philosophy, and other branches of philosophical
learning; and in ancient history and chronology. But above all, he seemed to
have made divinity his chief study, so that those who read what he has written
upon theological questions, might be inclined to think, that he had studied
nothing else. "It is incredible, says Dr. Burnet, that one man in no great
compass of years should have acquired such a variety of knowledge, and that, in
sciences which require much leisure and application. But as his parts were
quick, and his apprehension lively, his memory great, and his judgment strong,
so his industry was almost indefatigable. He rose always betimes in the
morning; was never idle; scarce ever held any discourse about news, except with
some few in whom he entirely confided. He entered into no correspondence by
letters, except about necessary business, or matters of learning, and spent
very little time in eating and drinking, for as he never went to public feasts,
so he gave no entertainments but to the poor. He followed our Savior's
directions, of feasting none but these, literally; and in eating and drinking,
he observed not only great plainness and moderation, but lived so
philosophically, that he always ended his meal with an appetite; by which he
not only lost little time when he dined, but was fit for any exercise of the
mind immediately after. By these means he gained a great deal of time, which
others for the most part waste unprofitably."

He took a strict account of his time, of which the reader will best judge by
the following scheme he drew for a diary, and which shows, by the imperfection
of the wording of them, they were only intended for his privacies; they are
here set down with the simplicity in which he writ for his private use.

MORNING. -- 1. To lift up the heart to God in thankfulness for renewing my
life. -- 2. To renew my covenant with God in Christ. 1st. By renewed acts of
faith, receiving Christ and rejoicing in the height of that relation. 2d.
Resolution of being one of his people doing allegiance. -- 3. Adoration and
prayer. -- 4. Setting a watch over my own infirmities and passions, over the
snares laid in our way. Petimus Iliatis. -- DAY EMPLOYMENT. There must be an
employment, two kinds. 1. Our ordinary calling to serve God in it. "It is a
service to God, though never so mean." Colos. 3 Here faithfulness, diligence,
cheerfulness. Not to overlay myself with more business than I can bear.

Our spiritual employments: mingle somewhat of God's immediate service in this
day. -- REFRESHMENTS. 1. Meat and drink, moderation seasoned with somewhat of
God. -- 2. Recreations, 1. Not our business. 2. Suitable. No games, if given to
covetousness or passion. -- IF ALONE. 1. Beware of wandering, vain, lustful
thoughts; fly from thyself rather than entertain these. -- 2. Let thy solitary
thoughts be profitable; view the evidences of thy salvation, the state of thy
soul, the coming of Christ, thy own mortality: it will make thee humble and
watchful. -- COMPANY. Do good to them. Use God's name reverently. Beware of
leaving an ill impression of ill example. Receive good from them if more
knowing. -- EVENING. Cast up the accounts of the day. If aught be amiss, beg
pardon. Gather resolution of more vigilance. If well, bless the mercy and grace
of God that has supported thee.

Our author passing from the extreme of vanity in his dress, to that of
neglecting himself too much, was once taken by a press gang, as a person fit
for the King's service; for he was a strong and a well built man; but some
coming by that knew him, and giving notice who he was, the press-men let him
go. This made him return to more decency in his clothes, but never to any
superfinity or vanity in them.

Once as he was buying some cloth for a suit of clothes, the draper, with whom
he differed about the price, told him, he should have it for nothing, if he
would promise him an hundred pounds when he came to be Lord Chief Justice of
England; to which he answered, That he could not with a good conscience wear
any man's cloth, unless he paid for it; so he paid the draper his price; and
carried away the cloth; yet the draper lived to see him advanced to that
dignity.

Some time before the civil wars broke out, he was called to the bar, and began
to make a figure in the world; but upon their breaking out, observing how
difficult it was to preserve his integrity, and yet live securely, he resolved
to follow those two rules of Pomponius Atticus, whom he proposed to himself as
a pattern, viz. "To engage in no faction, or meddle in public business, and
constantly to relieve and favor those that were lowest." He often relieved the
royalists in their necessities, which so ingratiated him with them, that he was
generally employed by them. He was one of the counsel to the Earl of Strafford,
Archbishop Land, and King Charles; as also to the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of
Holland, the Lord Capel, and the Lord Craven But being esteemed a plain honest
man, and of great knowledge in the law, he was entertained by both parties. In
1643, he took the covenant, and appeared several times with other lay persons
among the assembly of divines. He was then in great esteem with the Parliament,
and employed by them in several affairs for his counsel, particularly in the
reduction of the garrison at Oxford; being, as a lawyer, added to the
commissioners named by the Parliament, to treat with those appointed by the
King. In that capacity he did good service, by advising them, especially
General Fairfax, to preserve that famous seat of learning from ruin.
Afterward, though he was grieved at Charles's death, he took the oath called
the engagement; and on the 20th of January, 1651-2, was one of those appointed
to consider of the reformation of the law; and Cromwell knowing his great
abilities, never lest importuning him, till he accepted of the place of one of
the Justices of the Common Bench, for which purpose he was made Sergeant at
Law, on January 25, 1653-4. In that station he acted with integrity and
courage. He had at first great scruples concerning the authority under which he
was to act: and after having gone two or three circuits, he refused to sit any
more on the crown side. When Cromwell died, he excused himself from accepting
the mourning that was sent him, and also refused the commission offered him by
Richard. He did not sit in Cromwell's second Parliament in 1656; but in
Richard's, which met in January, 1658-9, he was one of the Burgesses for the
University of Oxford. In the Healing Parliament in 1660, which recalled King
Charles II. he was elected one of the Knights for the county of Gloucester, and
moved that a committee might be appointed to look into the propositions that
had been made, and the concessions that had been offered by Charles I. during
the late war, and from thence such propositions might be digested, as they
should think sit, to be sent over to the King at Breda. The King upon his
return recalled him in June to the degree of Sergeant at Law; and upon settling
the Courts in Westminster Hall, constituted him in November Chief Baron of the
Exchequer. When the Lord Clarendon delivered him his commission, he told him,
that "If the King could have found out an honester and fitter man for that
employment, he would not have advanced him to it; and that he had therefore
preferred him, because he knew none that deserved it so well." It is usual for
persons so promoted to be Knighted, but he desired to avoid having that honor
done him; which the Lord Chancellor observing, sent for him upon business one
day, when the King was at his house, and told his Majesty there was his modest
Chief Baron; upon which, he was unexpectedly Knighted.

He continued eleven years in that place, managing the court with singular
justice. It was observed by the whole nation how much he raised the reputation
and practice of it; and those who held places in it could declare not only the
impartiality of his justice, but his generosity, his vast diligence, and his
great exactness in trials. This gave occasion to the only complaint ever made
of him, "that he did not dispatch matters quick enough." But the great care he
used to put suits to a just and final end, made him slower in deciding them, --
so that causes tried before him were seldom, if ever, tried again.

But it will not seem strange that a Judge behaved himself as he did, who, at
the entry of his employment, set these excellent rules to himself, which are
copied from his own hand writing.

Things necessary to be had in continual remembrance.

1. That in the administration of justice, I am entrusted for God, the King,
and country; and therefore, -- 2. That it be done, 1. Uprightly. 2.
Deliberately. 3. Resolutely. -- 3. That I rest not upon mine own understanding
or strength, but implore and rest upon the direction and strength of God. -- 4.
That in the execution of justice, I carefully lay aside my own passions, and
not give way to them, however provoked. -- 5. That I may be wholly intent upon
the business I am about, remitting all other cares and thoughts as
unseasonable, and interruptions. -- 6. That I suffer not myself to be
prepossessed with any judgment at all, till the whole business and both parties
be heard. -- 7. That I never engage myself in the beginning of any cause, but
reserve myself unprejudiced till the whole be heard. -- 8. That in business
capital, though my nature prompt me to pity; yet to consider, that there is a
justice due to my country. -- 9. That I be not too rigid in matters purely
conscientious, where all the harm is diversity of judgment. -- 10. That I be
not biassed with compassion to the poor, or favor to the rich, in point of
justice. -- 11. That the popular or court applause, or distaste, have no
influence into any thing I do in point of distributing of justice. -- 12. Not
to be solicitous what men will say or think, so long as I keep myself exactly
according to the rule of justice. -- 13. If in criminals it be a measuring
cast, to incline to mercy and acquittal -- 14. In criminals that consist merely
in words, when no harm ensues, moderation is no injustice. -- 15. In criminals
of blood, if the fact be evident, severity is justice. -- 16. To abhor all
private solicitations, of what kind soever, and by whomsoever, in matters
depending. -- 17. To charge my servants, 1. Not to interpose in any business
whatsoever. 2. Not to take more than their known fees. 3. Not to give any undue
precedence to causes. 4. Not to recommend council. -- 18. To be short and
sparing at meals, that I may be the fitter for business.

He would never receive private addresses or recommendations from the greatest
persons, in any matter in which justice was concerned. One of the first Peers
in England went once to his chamber, and told him, "That having a suit in law
to be tried before him, he was then to acquaint him with it, that he might the
better understand it, when it should come to be heard in court." Upon which the
Lord Chief Baron interrupted him, and said, "He did not deal fairly to come to
his chamber about such affairs, for he never received any information of causes
but in open court, where both parties were to be heard alike;" so he would not
suffer his Grace to go on; so that the Duke went away very much dissatisfied,
and complained of it to the King as a rudeness that was not to be endured.

But his Majesty bid him content himself that he was not worse used, and said,
"He verily believed he would have used himself no better, if he had gone to
solicit him in any of his own causes."

Another instance occurred in one of his circuits, which also flowed from his
exactness to the rules he had set himself.

A gentleman had sent him a buck for his table, that had a trial at the
assizes; so when he heard his name, he asked, "If he was not the same person
who had sent him the venison?" and finding he was the same, told him, "he could
not suffer the trial to go on, till he had paid him for his buck:" To which the
gentleman answered, "That he never sold his venison, and that he had done
nothing to him, which he did not do to every Judge that had gone that circuit;"
which was confirmed by several gentlemen then present: but all would not do,
for the Lord Chief Baron had learned from Solomon, that "A gift perverteth the
ways of judgment;" and therefore, he would not suffer the trial to go on till
he had paid for the present; upon which the gentleman withdrew the record. When
he was counsel for Lord Craven, he pleaded with that force of argument, that
the then Attorney General, Edmund Prideanx, threatened him for appearing
against the government: to whom he answered, "He was pleading in defense of
those laws, which they declared they would maintain and preserve, and he was
doing his duty to his client, so that he was not to be daunted with
threatenings."

Sir Matthew Hale continued in his office of Lord Chief Baron till the 18th of
May, 1671, when on the death of the Lord Chief Justice, he was promoted to that
honor. And here he spent the rest of his public life and employment: but about
four years and a half after his advancement, he who had hitherto enjoyed a firm
and vigorous health, to which his great temperance, and the equality of his
mind, did not a little conduce, was on a sudden brought very low by an
inflammation in his midriff, which in two days broke the constitution of his
health to such a degree, that he never recovered it: he became so ashmatical*
that with great difficulty he could fetch his breath: that determined in a
dropsy, of which he afterward died. He understood physic so well, that
considering his age, he concluded his distemper must carry him off in a little
time; and he therefore resolved to have some of the last months of his life to
himself, that being freed from all worldly cares, he might be preparing for his
change; he was also so much disabled in his body, that he could hardly, though
supported by his servants walk through Westminster Hall, or endure the toil of
business: he had been a long time wearied with the distractions that his
employment had brought on him, and his profession was become ungrateful to him;
he loved to apply himself wholly to better purposes, as will appear by the
following paper, which he wrote on this subject.

1. If I consider the business of my profession, whether as an advocate, or a
judge, it is true, I do acknowledge, by the institution of Almighty God, and
the dispensation of his providence, I am bound to industry and fidelity in it:
and as it is an act of obedience unto his will, it carries with it something of
religious duty, and I may, and do take comfort in it, and expect a reward of my
obedience to him, and the good that I do to mankind therein, from the bounty
and beneficence, and promise of Almighty God; and it is true also, that without
such employments, civil societies cannot be supported, and great good redounds
to mankind from them, and in those respects, the consciousness of my own
industry, fidelity and integrity in them is a great comfort and satisfaction to
me. But yet this I must say concerning these employments, considered simply in
themselves, that they are very full of cares, anxieties, and perturbations. --
2. That though they are beneficial to others, yet they are of the least benefit
to him that is employed in them. -- 3. That they do necessarily involve the
party, whose office it is, in great dangers, difficulties, and calumnies. 4.
That they only serve for the meridian of life, which is short and uncertain. --
5. That though it be my duty faithfully to serve in them, while I am called to
them, and till I am duly called from them, yet they are great consumers of the
little time we have here, which, as it seems to me, might be spent in a pious
contemplative life, and a due provision for eternity. I do not know a better
temporal employment than Martha had, in testifying her love and duty to our
Savior, making provision for him; yet our Lord tells her, "that though she was
troubled about many things, there was only one thing necessary, and Mary had
chosen the better part."

By this the reader will see that he continued in his station upon no other
consideration, but the being set in it by the providence of God, he judged he
could not abandon the post which was assigned him, without prefering his own
private inclination to the choice God had made for him: but now that same
Providence, having by this great distemper, disengaged him from the obligation
of holding a place, which he was no longer able to discharge, he resolved to
resign it: this was no sooner surmised abroad, than it drew upon him the
importunities of his friends, and the clamor of the whole town, to divert him
from it, but to no purpose: so that he made applications to his majesty for his
writ of ease, which the king was very unwilling to grant him, and offered to
let him hold his place still (he doing what business he could in his chamber);
but he said, "He could not with a good conscience continue in it, since he was
no longer able to discharge the duties belonging to it."

His majesty deferred granting his request as long as possible; but at last
having wearied himself, and all his friends, with his importunate desires, and
growing sensibly weaker in body, he formally surrendered his office the 21st of
February, 28 Car. 1675-6. He had now nothing to do, but to prepare for that
change which is equally the lot of all human beings; he returned home with
cheerfulness, and calling all his servants of office together, dismissed them
with considerable presents. He lived only to December following; but all the
time was so ill, no hopes were given of his recovery; he still continued to
retire often, both for his devotion and studies At last, as the winter came on,
he saw, with great joy, his deliverance approaching; for besides being weary of
the world, and his longings for the blessings of another state, his pains so
increased, that no patience inferior to his could have borne them so meekly;
yet he expressed to the last such submission to the will of God, and such an
equal temper under his afflictions, that it was visible, what mighty effects
his philosophy and Christianity had on him in supporting him under such a heavy
and grievous load.

Not long before his death, the minister told him, "There was to be a sacrament
next Sunday at church, but he believed he could not come and partake of it;
therefore he would give it to him in his own house;" but he answered, "No, his
heavenly father had prepared a feast for him, and he would go to his father's
house and partake of it," which he, with the help of his servants, did.

He had some presages of his death, for he said, if he did not die on a certain
day, viz. 25th of November, he should survive a month longer; and he died that
day month.

He was twice married, first to Ann, daughter of Sir Henry More, of Flay, in
Berkshire, by whom he had ten children. He out lived them all, except his
eldest daughter and youngest son: and secondly to Ann, daughter to Mr. Joseph
Bishop, of Berkshire, by whom he had no issue.

SIR MATTHEW HALE'S EPISTLES TO HIS CHILDREN.
EPISTLE THE FIRST.
Dear Children,
I INTENDED to have been at Alderly this Whitsuntide, desirous to renew those
counsels and advices which I have often given you, in order to your greatest
concernment; namely, the everlasting good and welfare of your souls hereafter,
and the due ordering of your lives and conversations here.

And although young people are apt, through their own indiscretion, or the ill
advice of others, to think these kind of entertainments but dry and empty
matters, and the morose and needless interpositions of old men: yet give him
leave to tell you, that very well knows what he says, these things are of more
importance and concernment to you, than external gifts and bounties; wherein,
nevertheless, I have not been wanting to you according to my ability.

This was my intention in this journey; and though I have been disappointed
therein, yet I thought good, by letters and messages, to do something that
might be done that way for your benefit, that I had otherwise intended to have
done for your person.

Assure yourselves therefore, and believe it from one that knows what he says;
from one that neither can have any reason or end to deceive you, that the best
gift I can give you, is good counsel; and the best counsel I can give you, is
that which relates to your greatest import and concernment; -- namely, Religion.

And, therefore, since I cannot, at this time, deliver it to you in person, I
shall do it by this letter; wherein I shall not be very large, but keep myself
within the bounds proper for a letter; and those things only, at this time,
which may be most of present use and moment to you: and by your due observance
to these directions, I shall have a good character, both of your dutifulness to
God, your obedience to your father, and also of your discretion and prudence;
for it is most certain, that as religion is the best means to advance and
rectify human nature, so no man shall be either truly wise, or truly happy
without it, and the love of it; no, not in this life, much less in that which
is to come.

1. Therefore, every morning and evening, upon your knees, humbly commend
yourselves to Almighty God in prayer, begging his mercy to pardon your sins,
his grace to direct you, his providence to protect you; returning him humble
thanks for all his dispensations toward you; yea, even for his very
corrections and afflictions, entreating him to give you wisdom and grace to
make a sober, patient, humble, profitable use of them; and in his due time, to
deliver you from them; concluding your prayers with the Lord's Prayer. This
will be a certain means to bring your mind into a right frame; to procure you
comfort and blessing, and to prevent thousands of inconveniences and mischiefs,
to which you will be otherwise subjected.

2. Every morning read seriously and reverently, a portion of the holy
scripture, and acquaint yourself with the history and doctrine thereof: it is a
book full of light and wisdom, will make you wise to eternal life, and furnish
you with directions and principles to guide and order your life safely and
prudently.

3. Conclude every evening with reading some part of the scripture and prayer
in your family.

4. Be strict and religious observers of the Lord's day; resort to your parish
church twice that day, if your health will permit, and attend diligently and
reverently to the public prayers and sermons; he cannot reasonably expect a
blessing from God, the rest of the week, that neglects his duty to God, in the
due consecration of this day, to the special service and duty of God, which
this day requires.

5. Receive the Sacrament, at least, three times in the year, and oftener, as
there is occasion, in your parish church. The laws of the land require this,
and the law of your Savior requires it, and the law of duty and gratitude
requires it of you. Prepare yourselves seriously for this service beforehand,
and perform it with reverence and thankfulness: the neglect of this duty
procures great inconvenience and strangeness; and commonly the neglect hereof
arises from some conceited opinion that people inconsiderately take up; but
most ordinarily from a sluggishness of mind, and an unwillingness to fit and
prepare the mind for it; or to leave some sinful and vain course that men are
not willing to leave, and yet condemn themselves in the practice of it.

6. Beware of those who go about to seduce you from that religion wherein you
have been brought up hitherto. It is not unknown to any that observes the state
of things in the world, how many erroneous religions are scattered abroad in
the world; and how industrious men of all persuasions are to make proselytes.

And that you may know and observe the better, you shall ever find these
artifices practiced by them: 1. They will use all flattering applications and
insinuations, to be master of your humor, and when they have gotten that
advantage, they that seem before to serve you, will then command you. 2. They
will use all possible skill to raise in you jealousy and dislike toward those
who may otherwise continue and keep you in the truth; as to raise dislike in
you against your minister; nay, rather than fail, to raise dissension among
relations; yea, to cast jealousies and surmises among them, if it may be
instrumental to corrupt them. 3. They will endeavor to withdraw people from
the public ministry of God's word, encourage men to slight and neglect it; and
when they have once effected this, they have a fair opportunity to infuse their
own corrupt principles. 4. They will engage you, by some means or other, to
them; either by some real, but most ordinarily, by some pretended kindness or
familiarity; that in a little time, you shall not dare to displease them; you
must do and speak what they will have you, because some way or other you are
entangled with them, or engaged to them; and then they become your governors,
and you will not dare to disobey them.

These are some of those artifices whereby crafty and subtle seducers gain
proselytes, and bring men under captivity.

7. Be very careful to moderate your passions, especially of choler and anger;
it inflames the blood, disorders the brain, and, for a time, exterminates not
only religion, but common reason; it puts the mind into confusion, and throws
wildfire into the tongue, whereby men give others advantage against them; it
renders a man incapable of doing his duty to God, and puts a man upon acts of
violence, unrighteousness, and injustice to men: therefore keep your passions
under discipline, and under as strict a chain as you would keep an unruly
mastiff; look to it, that you give it not too much line at first. But if it
has gotten any fire within you, quench it presently, with consideration, and
let it not break out into passionate or unruly words and actions; but whatever
you do, let it not gangrene into malice, envy, or spite.

8. Send your children early to learn their catechism, that they take in the
true principles of religion betimes, which may grow up with them, and habituate
them both to the knowledge and practice of it; that they may escape the danger
of corruption by error or vice, being antecedently seasoned with better
principles.

9. Receive the blessings of God with very much thankfulness to him, for he is
the root and fountain of all the good you do, or can receive.

10. Bear all afflictions and crosses patiently; it is your duty, for
afflictions come not from the dust. The great God of heaven and earth is he
that sends these messengers to you, though possibly evil occurrence may be the
immediate instruments of them: you owe to Almighty God an infinite subjection
and obedience, and to expostulate with him, is rebellion; and as it is your
duty, so it is your wisdom, and your prudence: impatience will not discharge
your yoke, but it will make its gall the worse, and sit the harder.

11. Learn not only patience under your afflictions, but also profitably to
improve them to your soul's good; learn by them how vain and unprofitable the
world, and the pleasures thereof, are, that a sharp, or a lingering sickness
renders utterly tasteless. Learn how vain and weak a thing human nature is,
which is pulled down to the gates of death, and clothed with rottenness and
corruption by a little disorder in the blood, in a nerve, in a vein, in an
artery. And since we have so little hold of a temporal life, which is shaken
and shattered by any small occurrence, accident, or distemper: learn to lay
hold on eternal life, and of that covenant of peace and salvation, which Christ
has bought for all that believe, and obey the gospel of peace and salvation:
there shall be no death, no sickness, no pain, no weakness, but a state of
unchangeable, and everlasting happiness: and if you thus improve afflictions,
you are gainers by it; and most certain it is, that there is no more probable
way under heaven to be delivered from affliction, if the wise God see it fit,
than thus to improve it; for affliction is a messenger, and the rod has a
voice; and that is to require mankind to be the more patient, and the more
humble, and the more to acknowledge Almighty God in all our ways; and if men
listen to this voice of the rod, and conform to it, the rod, has done his
errand; and will either leave a man, or at least give a man singular comfort,
even under the sharpest affliction; and this affliction, which is but for a
moment, thus improved, will work for us an exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.

12. Reverence your minister; he is a wise, and a good man, and one that loves
you, and has a tender care and respect for you: do not grieve him either by
neglect or disrespect. Assure yourselves if there be any person that sets any
of you against him, or provokes or encourages any of you to despise or neglect
him, that person, whoever he be, loves not you, nor the office he bears; and
therefore, as the laws of the land, and the Divine Providence, has placed him
at Alderly, to have a care of your souls; so I must tell you, I do expect you
should reverence and honor him for his own, for your, and for his office sake.

And now I have written this long Epistle to you, to perform that office for me
that I should have done in person, if I could have taken this journey. The
epistle is long, but it had been longer had I had more time. And although
perchance some there be in the world, that, when they hear of it, will
interpret it to be but the excursions and morose rules of old age, unnecessary,
and such as might have been spared; yet, I am persuaded it will find much
better acceptance from you that are my children. I am now on the shady side of
threescore years; I write to you what you have often heard me in substance
speak: and possibly when I shall leave this world, you will want such a
remembrancer as I have been to you. The words that I now, and at former times
have written to you, are words of truth and soberness; and words and advices
that proceed from a heart full of love and affection to you all. If I should
see you do amiss in any thing, and should not reprove you; or, if I should find
you wanting counsel and direction, and should not give it you, I should not
perform the trust of a father; and, if you should not thankfully receive it,
you would be somewhat defective in the duty you owe to God, and me as children.
As I have never spared my purse to supply you according to my abilities, and
the reasonableness of occasions; so I have never been wanting to you in good
and prudent counsels; and the God of Heaven give you wisdom, constancy, and
fidelity in the observance of them.

I am, Your ever loving Father, MATTHEW HALE.
May 20.
EPISTLE THE SECOND. CONCERNING THEIR SPEECH.
CHILDREN,
I THANK God, I came well to Farrington this Saturday, about five of the clock:
and because I have some leisure time at my inn, I could not spend the time more
to my own contentment, and to your benefit, than by my letter, to give you all
good counsel: the subject whereof, at this time shall be concerning speech;
because much of the good or evil that befalls persons, does occasionally happen
by the well or ill-managing of that part of human conversation. I shall, as I
have leisure and opportunity, at other times, give you my directions concerning
other subjects.

And herein I shall advise you, first, how you are to entertain the speeches of
others, according to the diverse desires thereof. Secondly, how you are to
manage and order your own speech.

1st. As concerning the former, observe these directions.

1. Observe and mark as well as you may, what is the temper and dispositions of
those persons whose speeches you hear, whether they be grave, serious, sober,
wise, discreet persons; if they be such, their speeches commonly are like
themselves, and will deserve your attention and observation.

But if they be light, impertinent, vain, passionate persons, their speech is
for the most part according; and the best advantage that you will gain by their
speech, is but thereby to learn their dispositions, to discern their failings,
and to make yourselves the more cautious both in your conversation with them,
and in your own speech and deportment; for in the unseemliness of their speech,
you may discern and avoid the like in yourselves.

2. If any person, that you do not very well know to be a person of truth,
sobriety, and weight, relate strange stories, be not too ready or easy to
believe them, nor report them after him: and yet (unless he be one of your
familiar acquaintance) be not forward to contradict him; or if the necessity of
the occasion require you to declare your opinion of what is reported, let it be
modestly and gently, not too bluntly or coarsely; by this means, on the one
side, you shall avoid being abused by your too much credulity; on the other
side, you shall avoid quarrels and distaste.

3. If any man speak any thing to the disadvantage or reproach of one that is
absent, be not too ready to believe it, only observe and remember it; for it
may be, it is not true, or it is not all true, or some other circumstances
mingled with it, which might give the business reported a justification, or at
least an allay, an extenuation, or a reasonable excuse: in most actions, if
that which is bad alone, or seems to be so, be reported, omitting that which is
good, or the circumstances that accompany it, any action may be easily
misrepresented; be not too hasty therefore to believe a reproach, till you know
the truth, and the whole truth.

4. If any person report unto you some injury done to you by another, either in
words or deeds, do not be overhasty in believing it, nor suddenly angry with
the person so accused; for possibly it may be false or mistaken; and how
unseemly a thing will it be, when your credulity and passion carry you, upon a
supposed injury, to do wrong to him that has done you none; or, at least, when
the bottom and truth of the accusation is known, you will be ashamed of your
passion? Believe not a report, till the party accused be heard; and if the
report be true, yet be not transported either with passion, hasty anger, or
revenge, for that will be your own torment and perturbation: ever, when a
person is accused, or reported to have injured you, before you give yourself
leave to be angry, think with yourself, why should I be angry before I am
certain it is true? or, if it be true, how can I tell how much I should be
angry till I know the whole matter? Though, it may be, he has done wrong, yet
possibly it is not so much as is reported, or it was done by mistake, or, it
may be, he is sorry for it: I will not be angry till I know there be cause; and
if there be a cause, yet I will not be angry till I know the whole cause, for
till then, if I must be angry at all, yet I know not how much to be angry; it
may be, it is not worth my anger, or, if it be, it may be, it deserves but a
little. This will keep your mind and carriage, upon such occasions, in a due
temper and order; and will disappoint malicious or officious tale-bearers.

5. If a man, whose integrity you do not very well know, makes you great and
extraordinary professions and promises, give him as kind thanks as may be, but
give not much credit to it: cast about with yourself what may be the reason of
this wonderful kindness; it is twenty to one but you will find something that
he aims at, besides kindness to you: it may be he has something to beg or buy
of you, or to sell to you, or some such bargain that speaks out, at least his
own advantage, and not yours; and if he serve his turn of you, or if he be
disappointed, his kindness will grow cold.

6. If a man flatter and commend you to your face, or to one that he thinks
will tell you of it, it is a thousand to one, either he has deceived and
abused you some way, or means to do so: remember the fable of the fox,
commending the singing of the crow, when she had somewhat in her mouth that the
fox liked.

7. If a person be choleric, passionate, and give you ill language, remember,
1. Rather to pity him, than to be moved into anger and passion with him; for
most certainly, that man is in a distemper and disorder; observe him calmly,
and you shall see him in so much perturbation and disturbance, that you will
easily believe he is not a pattern to be imitated by you; and, therefore,
return not choler or anger, for angry words; for you do but put yourself in a
phrensy, because you see him so. 2. Be sure you return not railing,
reproaching, or reviling, for reviling, for it does but kindle more heat, and
you will find silence, or, at least, very gentle words, the most exquisite
revenge of reproaches that can be; for either it will cure the distemper in the
other, and make him see and be sorry for his passion, or it will torment him
with more perturbation and disturbance. But howsoever, it keeps your innocence,
gives you deserved reputation of wisdom and moderation, and keeps up the
serenity and composure of your mind; whereas passion and anger do make a man
unfit for any thing that becomes him, as a man, or as a Christian.

8. Some men are excellent in knowledge of husbandry, some of planting, some of
gardening, some in the mathematics, some in one kind, some in another: in your
conversation, learn, as near as you can, wherein the skill and excellence of
any person lies, and put him upon talk of that subject, and observe it, and
keep it in memory, or writing: by this means, you will glean up the worth and
excellence of every person you meet with, and at an easy rate put together that
which may be for your use on all occasions.

9. Converse not with a liar, or a swearer, or a man of obscene or wanton
language; for either he will corrupt you, or at least it will hazard your
reputation to be one of the like making; and, if it do neither, yet will fill
your memory with such discourses, that will be troublesome to you in aftertime,
and the returns of the remembrance of the passages which you long since heard
of this nature, will haunt you when your thoughts should be better employed.

Now, as concerning your own speech, and how you are to manage it; something
may be collected out of what goes before, but I shall add some things else.

1. Let your speech be true; never speak any thing for a truth, which you know,
or believe, to be false: it is a great sin against God, that gave you a tongue
to speak your mind, and not to speak a lie: it is a great offense against
humanity itself; for where there is no truth, there can be no society between
man and man; and it is an injury to the speaker; for besides the base
disreputation it casts upon him, it does in time bring a man to that baseness
of mind, that he can scarce tell how to tell truth, or to avoid lying, even
when he has no color of necessity for it; and in time he comes to such a
pass, that as another man cannot believe he tells a truth, so he himself scarce
knows when he tells a lie; and, observe it, a lie ever returns with discovery
and shame at last.

2. As you must be careful not to lie, so you must avoid coming near it: you
must no equivocate; you must not speak that absolutely, which you have but by
hearsay or relation; you must not speak that as upon knowledge, which you have
but by conjecture or opinion only.

3. Let your words be few, especially when your betters, or strangers, or men
of more experience or understanding, are present; for you do yourself at once
two great mischiefs. 1. You betray and discover your own weakness and folly. 2.
You rob yourself of that opportunity which you might otherwise have to gain
knowledge, wisdom, and experience, by hearing those that you silence by your
impertinent talking.

4. Be not over earnest, loud, or violent in talking, for it is unseemly; and
earnest and loud talking makes you overshoot and loose your business; when you
should be considering and pondering your thoughts, and how to express them
significantly, to the purpose, you are striving to keep your tongue going, and
to silence your opponent, not with reason, but with noise.

5. Be careful not to interrupt another in his talk; hear him out, you will
understand him the better, and be able to give him the better answer; it may
be, if you will give him leave, he will say somewhat more than you have yet
heard, or well understood, or that which you did not expect.

6. Always before you speak, especially where the business is of moment,
consider before hand, weigh the sense in your mind, which you intend to utter,
think upon the expressions you intend to use, that they may be significant,
pertinent, and inoffensive; and whereas it is the ordinary course of
inconsiderate persons to speak their words, and then to think, or not to think
till they speak: think first, and speak after, if it be in any matter of moment
or seriousness.

7. Be willing to speak well of the absent, if you do not know they deserve
ill: by this means you shall make yourself many friends; and sometimes an
undeserved commendation is not lost to the party to whom it is given: I have
known some men, that have met with an undeserved commendation, out of shame of
being worse than they have been reported, secretly to make up practices
answerable to their commendation, and so to make themselves as good as they are
reported.

8. Be sure you give not an ill report to any that you are not sure deserves
it; and in most cases, though a man deserves ill, yet you should be very
sparing to report him so: in some cases, indeed, you are bound, in honesty and
justice, to give that account concerning the demerit or default of a person
that he deserves; as, namely, when you are called to give testimony for the
ending of a controversy, or when the concealing of it may harden and encourage
a person in an evil way, or bring another into danger; in such cases, the very
duty of charity binds you to speak your knowledge; nay, your probable fear or
suspicion of such a person, so it be done for prevention of greater
inconvenience, and in love; and especially if the discovery be made to a person
that has a superintendance, care, or authority over the person complained of;
for this is an act of love and duty. But for any person, maliciously, busily,
and with intent to scandalize another, to be whispering tales and stories to
the prejudice of another, this is a fault; if you know any good of any person,
speak it as you have opportunity; if you know any evil, speak it, if it be
really and prudently done, for the good of him, and the safety of others;
otherwise, rather choose to say nothing, than to say any thing reproachfully,
maliciously, or officiously, to his prejudice.

9. Avoid swearing in your ordinary communication, unless called to it by the
magistrate, and not only the grosser oaths, but the lesser; and not only oaths,
imprecations, earnest and deep protestations: as you have the commendable
example of good men to justify a solemn oath before a magistrate, so you have
the precept of our Savior forbidding it otherwise.

10. Avoid scoffing, and bitter and biting jeering, and jesting, especially at
your friends' condition, credit, deformity, or natural defects of any person;
for these leave a deep impression, and are a most apparent injustice; were you
so used, you would take it inwardly amiss; and many times such an injury costs
a man dear, when he little thinks of it.

11. Be very careful, that you give no reproachful, bitter, menacing or
spiteful words to any person; nay, not to servants, or other persons of an
inferior condition; and that upon these considerations, 1. There is not the
meanest person but you may stand in need of him in one kind, or at some time or
other; good words make friends, bad words make enemies: it is the best prudence
in the world to make as many friends as you honestly can, especially when it
may be done at so easy a rate as a good word; and it is the greatest folly that
can be to make an enemy by ill words, which do not at all any good to the party
that uses them. 2. Ill words provoke ill words again, and commonly such ill
words as are gained by such a provocation, especially of an inferior, stick
closer, and wound deeper, than such as come unprovoked by ill language, or from
an equal. 3. Where faults are committed, they may, and by a superior, must be
reproved; but let it be done without reproaches, or bitterness, otherwise it
loses its due end and use, and instead of reforming the offense, exasperates
the offender, and makes him worse, and gives him the cudgel to strike again,
because it discovers your own weakness when you are reprehending another, and
lays you justly open to his reproof, and makes your own but scorned and
disesteemed: I press this the rather, because, most ordinarily, ill language is
the folly of children, and of weak and passionate people.

12. If there be occasion for you to speak in any company, always be careful,
if you speak at all, to speak latest, especially if strangers are in company;
for by this means, you will have the advantage of knowing the sense, judgment,
temper, and relations of others, which may be a great light and help to you, in
ordering your speech; and you will better know the inclination of the company,
and speak with more advantage and acceptance, and with more security against
giving offense.

13. Be careful, that you commend not yourselves: it is the most unuseful and
ungrateful thing that can be. You should avoid flattering of yourselves; it is
a sign your reputation is small and sinking, if your own tongues must be your
flatterers or commenders; it is a fulsome and unpleasant thing for others to
hear it.

14. Abhor all foul, unclean, and obscene speeches; it is a sign that the heart
is corrupt, and such kind of speeches will make it worse; it will taint, and
corrupt yourselves, and those that hear it, and brings disreputation to those
that use it.

15. Never use any profane speeches, nor make jests of scripture expressions:
when you use the names of God, or of Christ, or any passages or words of the
holy scripture, use them with reverence and seriousness, and not lightly,
vainly, or scurrilously, for it is taking the name of God in vain.

16. If you hear of any unseemly expressions used in religious exercises, you
must be careful to forget, and not to publish; or if you at all mention them,
let it be with pity and sorrow, not with derision or reproach.

17. Do not upbraid any, or deride any man, for a pious, strict, and religious
conversation; for if he be sincere, you dishonor God and injure him: if he be
an hypocrite, yet it is more than you know; or if you know him to be such, yet
his external piety and strictness is not his fault, but his dissimulation and
hypocrisy; and though his hypocrisy be to be detested, his external piety and
religion is to be commended, not derided.

18. Have as little conversation as possible with obstinate sinners, or persons
obstinately perverted in matters of religion; but especially converse not with
them in matters of religion, for instead of converting them by your persuasions
to the truth, you shall but harden them the more, and endanger yourself: they
are to be dealt withal, in these matters, only by persons of great abilities:
for a perverted, corrupted mind, and obstinate spirit, carries in it a
contagion, as infectious, and much more dangerous, than the plague in the body,
where their opinions meet with a young and weak opponent.

And thus, Children, at the time, and my remembrance would give me leave, I
have set down some observations concerning this subject, for your direction and
practice; what is wanting, you may abundantly supply, by reading the wise
counsels of Solomon, in his book of Proverbs.

Read these my directions often, think of them seriously, and practice them
diligently: though they seem but dry, and ordinary things, yet you will find
them useful in your conversation, which will be every day more evident to you,
as your judgment, understanding, and experience increase.

I have but little more to write at this time, but to wish and command you to
remember my former counsels that I have often given you: begin and end the day
with private prayers to God, upon your knees; read the scriptures often and
seriously; be attentive to the public worship of God in the church: keep
yourselves still in some good employment, for idleness is the devil's
opportunity, and the nursery of vain and sinful thoughts, which corrupt the
mind, and disorder the life. Let the girls take care of such business of my
family, as is proper for them: and their recreations may be, walking abroad in
the fields, in fair or frosty mornings; some work with their needle, reading,
setting of flowers, practicing their music, and such innocent and harmless
exercises. Let the boys be diligent at their books, and when they have
performed their tasks, I do not deny them such recreations, as many be healthy,
safe, and harmless. Be you all kind and loving one to another, honoring your
minister, not bitter or harsh to my servants, be respectful to all, bear my
absence patiently, cheerfully, and faithfully; do all things as if I were
present among you, and beheld you, for you have a greater Father than I am,
that always, and in all places, beholds you, and knows your hearts and
thoughts: study to requite the love, and care, and expense of your father for
you, with dutifulness, observance, and obedience to him: and account it an
honor, that God has given you an opportunity in my absence, by your care,
faithfulness, and industry, to pay some part of that debt, that by the laws of
nature and gratitude you owe unto me: be frugal in my family, but let there be
no want; provide conveniently for the poor that come to my door. And I pray God
to fill all your hearts with his grace, fear, and love, and let you see the
advantage and comfort of serving him; and that his blessing, and presence, and
comfort, and direction, and providence be with you, and over you all.

I am your ever-loving father, MATTHEW HALE.

EPISTLE THE THIRD. TO ONE OF HIS SONS AFTER HIS RECOVERY FROM THE SMALL POX.
SON,
ALTHOUGH, by reason of the contagiousness of your disease, and the many
dependents I have upon me, I thought it not convenient to come unto you, during
your sickness, yet I have not been wanting in my earnest prayers to Almighty
God for you, nor in using the best means I could for your recovery.

It has pleased God to hear my prayers for you, and, above means and hopes,
now to restore you to a competent degree of health, for which I return unto him
my humble and hearty thanks; and now you are almost ready to come abroad again;
therefore I have thought fit to write this little book to you, for these
reasons. 1. Because it is not yet seasonable for you to come to me, in respect
of these same reasons abovementioned, which have hitherto restrained my coming
to you. 2. Because at your coming abroad, you will be subject to temptations by
young and inconsiderate company, which, instead of serious thankfulness to God
for his mercy to you, might perchance persuade you to a vain and light jollity:
and I thought fit to send you these lines to prevent such inconsiderate
impressions, and to meet you just at your coming abroad, to season you with
more wise and serious principles. 3. Because you are even now come out of a
great and sore visitation; and, therefore, in all probability in the fittest
temper to receive the impressions of a serious epistle from your father.

And I have chosen to put it into this little volume, because it is somewhat
too long for a letter; and may be better preserved for your future use and
memory.

God Almighty has brought you to the very gates of death, and showed you the
tenor and danger of it; and after that he has shown you this spectacle of your
own mortality, he has marvellously rescued and delivered you from that danger,
and given you life, even from the dead, so that you are as a man new born into
the world, or returned to life again, which now you seem as it were to begin:
you have passed through those two great dispensations of Divine Providence,
those two great experiments, that God is pleased to use sometimes toward the
children of men: namely, correction, and deliverance; his rod and staff: and
therefore, in all reasonable conjecture, this is the most seasonable time to
give you a lecture upon both, and those admonitions which may render the one
and the other profitable to you: and this I shall endeavor to do in these
following lines.

1. You shall not need to fear that I intend to upbraid you with the errors of
your youth, or to expostulate with you touching them; for I do assure you, I do
from my heart forgive you all your follies and miscarriages; and I do assure
myself, that you have repented of them, and resolved against them for the time
to come, and that thereupon God Almighty has also fully forgiven what is past;
and this is a great assurance thereof to me, in that he has so wonderfully
restored you, and given you, as it were, a new life, wherein you may obey and
serve him better than ever you yet did; and therefore, if in this letter there
be any touches concerning former vanities, assure yourself they are not angry
repetitions, but only necessary cautions for your future ordering of your life.

The business of these papers is principally to commend unto you two general
remembrances, and certain results and collections that arise from them; they
are all seasonable for your present condition, and will be of singular use and
benefit to you, in the whole ensuing course of your life.

1. I would have you, as long as you live, remember your late sickness in all
its circumstances, and these plain and profitable inferences and advices that
arise from it.

2. I would have you remember, as long as you live, your great deliverance, and
the several circumstances of it, and those necessary duties that are incumbent
upon you in relation thereunto.

It is evident to daily experience, that while afflictions are upon us, and
while deliverances are fresh, they commonly have some good effect upon us; but
as the iron is no sooner out of the fire, but it quickly returns to its
coldness, and hardness; so when the affliction or deliverance is past, we
usually forget them, count them common things, attribute them to mean and
second causes; and so the good, that mankind should gather from them, vanishes,
and men grow quickly to be but what they were before they came; their sickbed
promises are forgot when the sickness is over.

And therefore I shall give you an account of your sickness, and of your
recovery: and let them never be forgotten by you; as often as those spots and
marks in your face are reflected to your view from the glass, as often as this
paper comes in your sight, nay, as often as you open your eyes from sleep,
which were once closed, and never likely to open again, so often, and more
often, remember your sickness, and your recovery, and the admonitions that this
paper lends you from the consideration of both.

1. Therefore, touching your late sickness, I would have you remember these
particulars. 1. The disease itself, in its own nature, is now become ordinarily
very mortal, especially to those of your age; look upon even the last year's
general bill of mortality, you will find near two thousand died Inoculation was
not introduced into England at that time: this salutary invention was brought
from Turkey about 1721, by Lady W. Montague, and first tried on criminals.
of that disease the last year: and had not God been very, very merciful to
you, you might have been one of that number with as great likelihood as any of
them that died of that disease. 2. It was a contagious disease, that secluded
the access of your nearest relations. 3. Your sickness rendered you noisome to
yourself, and to all that were about you, and a spectacle full of deformity, by
the excess of your disease beyond most that are sick thereof. 4. It was a
fierce and violent sickness: it did not only take away the common supplies of
nature, as digestion, sleep, strength, but it took away your memory, your
understanding, and the very sense of your condition, or what might be
conducible to your good; all that you could do, was only to make your condition
more desperate in case they that were about you had not prevented it, and taken
more care for you, than you did or could for yourself. 5. Your sickness was
desperate, insomuch that your symptoms, and the violence of your distemper,
were without example; and you were in the next degree to absolute rottenness,
putrefaction, and death itself.

Look upon the foregoing description, and remember that such was your
condition; you were as sad a picture of mortality and corruption, as any thing,
but death itself, could make: remember it; and remember also these ensuing
instructions, that may make that remembrance profitable and useful to you.

1. Remember, that "Affliction comes not forth of the dust, nor does trouble
spring out of the ground." -- Job v. 6. -- But this terrible visitation was
sent to you from the wise overruling providence of God; it is he that brings
down to the grave, and brings up again. It is true, that this disease may
seem common, but you may, and must know, that there was more than the common
hand of God in sending it upon you, in such a manner, and such a measure, and
at such a season, when you were grown up to a competent age and degree of
understanding, to make a due use of it, that you might see his justice in
afflicting you, and his goodness in delivering you from such danger.

2 Remember that Almighty God is of most infinite wisdom, justice, and mercy;
he has excellent ends in all the dispensations of his providence: he never
sends an affliction, but it brings a message with it; his rod has a voice
commanding us to search and try our ways, and to examine ourselves whether
there has not been some great sin against him, or neglect of duty to him; a
voice commanding us to repent of what is amiss, to be more watchful,
circumspect, and obedient to him; in the future course of our lives to fear to
offend him: and if a man hear this voice, God has his end of mercy and
goodness; and man has the fruit, benefit, and advantage of this affliction,
and commonly a comfortable issue of it; read often and attentively the 33d.
Job, from the beginning to the end.

3. Remember how uncertain and frail a creature man is, even in his seeming
strongest age and constitution of health; even then a pestilential air, some
evil humor in his blood, some obstruction, it may be, of a little vein, or
artery, a little meat ill-digested, and a thousand small occurrences may, upon
a sudden, without any considerable warning, plunge a man into a desperate and
mortal sickness, and bring a man to the grave. Remember, this terrible sickness
seized upon you suddenly, pulled down your strength quickly, and brought you to
the very brink of the grave: and though God has recovered you, you know not
how soon you may be brought into the like condition.

4. Remember, therefore, that you make and keep peace with God, and walk in his
fear in the days of health, especially after so great a deliverance; and that
for many reasons. 1. You know not whether you may not be overtaken with sudden
death, and then it will be impossible for you to begin that work. 2. If you
have sickness to give you warning of the approach of death, yet you know not
whether that sickness may not suddenly take away your senses, memory,
understanding, whereby you may be disabled to make your peace with God, or to
exercise any serious thoughts about it. 3. But if that sickness give you fair
warning, and take not away your understanding, yet your own experience cannot
choose but to let you know, that pain, and weakness, and distraction of mind,
and impatience, and unquietness, are the common attendants of a sickbed, and
render that season, at least, very difficult then to begin that greatest, and
solemnest, and most important business of a man's life. 4. But if your sickness
be not so sharp, but that it leaves you patience, and attention of mind for
that great business, how do you know whether your heart shall be inclined to
it? Repentance and conversion to God is his gift, though it must be our
endeavor: and though the merciful God never refuses a repenting, returning
offender; yet, how can a man, that, all the time of his health, has neglected
Almighty God, refused his invitations, and served his lusts and his sins,
expect reasonably, that God in the time of sickness, when the man can serve his
sins no longer, will give him the grace of repentance?

Whatever you do, therefore, be sure you make peace with God, and keep it in
the days of your health, especially after so great a deliverance from so
desperate a sickness.

5. Remember your condition is never so low, but that God has power to deliver
you, and therefore trust in him: but remember withal, that your condition is
never so safe and secure, but you are within the reach of his power to bring
you down. You are now, by the mercy of God, recovered from a terrible sickness;
think not with yourself that your turn is now served, and that you shall have
no more need of him, and therefore that you may live as you list, and never
regard your duty to him; deceive not yourself herein; remember that this
sickness, within two or three days, brought you upon your knees even from a
seeming state of health: the case is the same still, nay much worse, if this
affliction make you not better; Almighty God called you to love, to serve, and
obey him, by the still voice of his word, by the persuasion of your friends, by
the advices and reproofs of your father: and when these were not so effectual,
as I know you now wish they had been, he sent a messenger that speaks louder,
that would be heard, even this terrible sickness; and most certainly, if you
have heard the voice of this rod, as I am hopeful you have, and thereupon
entirely turned to your duty to God in all sincerity and obedience, it is the
happiest providence that ever befell you; and you will, upon sound conviction,
conclude with the Prophet, "It was good for me that I was afflicted." But on
the other side, if notwithstanding this voice of the rod, you shall after your
recovery return again to folly, and vanity, and excess, and harden yourself
against this messenger; know for certain, you are within the reach of the
divine justice and power; and if you walk contrary to him, he will walk
contrary to you, "and punish you yet seven times for your sins." [Levit.]
Therefore I give you that counsel that our Lord gave to him that he had healed,
"Behold thou art made whole, go thy way and sin no more, lest a worse thing
befall thee." There is no contesting with Almighty God; he is ready and easy to
be reconciled to the worst of men, upon humiliation and true repentance, but he
is not to be mastered or conquered by obstinacy and opposition: "Who has
hardened himself against him, and prospered?" Job ix. 5.

6. I would have you remember, that sickness, as well as death, does undeceive
mankind, and shows them where their true wisdom lies; when a young man
especially is in the full career of his vanity and pleasure, he thinks that
religion, and the fear of God, and walking according to his word, and the
serious practice of duties and religion toward God, prayer unto him, making
our peace with him, are pitiful, low, foolish, and inconsiderable matters; and
that those that practice them are a sort of brainsick, melancholy,
unintelligent persons, that want wit, or breeding, and understand not
themselves or the world, that they are mere empty fancies and imaginations,
whimsies, puritanism, and I know not what else; but on the other side, they
think they are brave men that live splendidly, deny themselves no pleasure, can
drink, and roar, and whore, and debauch, and wear the new fashions; it may be,
this gallant or wise man comes to be taken with a fit of sickness that tells
him he must die, death is at his door, his glass is almost out, and but a few
sands left in it; and then the man becomes quite of another judgment, he cries
out for his former foolishness, he finds his pleasures, and intemperance, and
excess, are not only perfect follies, but madness, vexation, torment: and
religion, and prayer to God, and devotion, and peace with God -- they are now
in request; and so now nothing but declamations against those courses, which in
his health he valued as the only wisdom; and nothing but promises of amendment,
and reformation of life, and devotion to God; so sickness has undeceived the
man, and given him a true and rectified judgment concerning wisdom and folly,
quite contrary to what he had before. Therefore I would have you to recollect
yourself, and if the violence of your disease left you at any time the use of
your reason, bethink yourself what opinion you then had of intemperance,
wasting of time, unlawful lust, or any of those sins that formerly pleased you
in your health, whether they did not appear to you in your sickness very vain,
foolish, vexing things, such as you wished never to have been committed: and on
the other side, what opinion you had in your sickness touching piety toward
God, hearing of his word, calling upon his name, redeeming of time, modesty,
temperance: whether those actions of your life past, that savoured of these,
were not comfortable, and contenting to you in your sickness; whether your
purposes, and promises, and resolutions of your sickbed, were not full of such
thoughts as these: if it please God to recover me, I will never be such a fool
as I have been: I will never drink to excess, mispend my time; I will never
keep such idle company as I have done; I will be more devout toward God, more
obedient to his word, more observant of good counsel; and the like: and if you
find it to be so, I must desire you to remember, that affliction is the school
of wisdom, it rectifies men's judgments; and I must again desire you to keep
your judgment right still, and let not the recovery of your health become the
loss of your wits; but in your health retain that wisdom your sickness taught
you, and practice what you then promised: "Remember, he is the wisest man that
provideth for his latter end."

7. Remember by your former sickness, how pitiful and inconsiderable a thing
the body of man is; how soon is the strength of it turned to faintness, and
weakness, and the beauty of it to ugliness and deformity, the consistency of it
to putrefaction and rottenness! and then remember how foolish a thing it is, to
be proud of such a carcass, to spend all, or the greatest part of our time in
trimming or adorning it: in studying new fashions, and devices, to set it out,
in spending our time and provisions in pampering it, in pleasing the appetite;
and yet this is the chief business of most young men of this age: learn
therefore humility and lowliness; learn to furnish thy noble and immortal part,
thy soul, with religion, grace, knowledge, virtue, goodness; for that it will
retain to eternity. How miserable is that man's condition, that, whilst
sickness has made his body a deformed, weak, loathsome thing, sin has made his
soul as ugly and deformed! The grave will heal or cover the deformity of the
former, but the soul will carry its ulcers and deformity without repentance,
into the next world: learn and remember, therefore, to have thy greatest care
for thy noblest part, furnish it with piety, grace, knowledge, the fear and
love of God, faith in Christ: and as for thy body, use it decently, soberly,
and comely, that it may be a fit instrument for thy soul to use in this life;
but be not proud of it, nor make it thy chiefest care and business to adorn,
much less to defile it.

8. Remember to avoid intemperance and sinful lusts; it is true, sickness and
diseases, and, finally, death, are by the laws and constitutions of our nature,
incident to all mankind: but intemperance, excess of eating and drinking,
drunkenness, whoring, uncleanness, and disorder, bring more diseases,
especially upon young men, and destroy more young, strong, healthy men, than
the plague or other natural, or accidental distempers; they weaken the brain,
corrupt the blood, decay and distemper the spirits, disorder and putrify the
humors, and make the body a very bag full of putrefaction; some diseases are,
as it were, specifical, and appropriate to these vices; other diseases are
commonly occasioned by them, by their inflammation and putrefaction of the
blood and humors: and all diseases, even those that are epidemical, natural,
or casual, yet are rendered by those vices far more sharp, lasting, malignant,
and incurable, by that stock of corrupted matter that lodges in the body, to
feed those diseases, and that impotency that these vices bring upon nature to
resist them; therefore if ever you expect to have, as well a sound body, as a
sound mind, carefully avoid intemperance and debauchery; the most temperate and
sober persons are subject to sickness, weakness, and diseases; but the
intemperate can never be long without them.

And thus I have done with the prospect of your disease, and at least many of
those profitable uses you may gather from the remembrance of it.

2. I shall now, in the second place, put you in remembrance of your
deliverance; touching which, you must remember, 1. That it was a great,
eminent, and extraordinary deliverance; you need no other evidence of it, than
by looking back upon the greatness and severity of your disease
beforementioned. 2. It was a deliverance by the immediate power and mercy of
that God that sent you the visitation.

The same hand inflicted the wound and effected the cure.
Una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit. If you had been delivered by the
immediate efficacy of means, yet you are blind if you see not, that the
efficacy of means, depends upon the providence of God; it is he that provides
it, and that makes the means effectual. But in this deliverance, God has
pleased to hedge up, as it were, your way from attributing it to means, and
has given you an indication, that it was done by his own immediate power, and
that he delivered you, above and beyond means. It is true, you had a very able
and careful physician, and very great attendance and care was used about you;
but when your physician, and all that were about you, began to despair of your
recovery; when means proved ineffectual; when the strength of nature was
exhausted and baffled by your disease; God Almighty, upon a sudden, and beyond
expectation, relieved you; and, as it were by his own hand, brought you back
from the very threshold of the grave: and thus he did, that you and all about
you, and all your relations, might take notice of it, that it was he that did
it.

And thus Almighty God has exercised toward you, two great experiments; the
first of his severity; the second of his mercy; and as your sickness and rod
had its voice, a loud and sharp voice, so your recovery and deliverance has
its voice, and I will, as shortly as I can, tell you what it is.

1. Remember this benefit; remember it was reached out unto you, from the mere
power, goodness and mercy of God: remember evermore, in your heart and soul, to
be thankful to him for it: remember, as long as you live, upon all occasions,
to acknowledge it; daily to return upon your knees humble thanks for it, to him
that had regard to you, and remembered you in your low estate; to him that
forgave your iniquities, and healed your disease; to him that did this for you,
when all means failed; that did it for you, when you had not the understanding
to call upon him for it; to him that did it for you, that deserved it not, for
you that had provoked him, and neglected him in the time of your health. This
God it was that delivered you; read often the 103d. Psalm attentively, and
apply it to your condition: it will do you good.

2. Remember to acknowledge this goodness of God with all humility; your
deliverance was not the purchase of your own power, nor of your own desert, it
was an act of the free undeserved goodness of God. What Almighty God said by
Moses unto the Israelites, Deuteronomy. ix. 4, 6, I shall say to you, with some
variation; -- Understand therefore that the Lord thy God has not given this
deliverance for thy righteousness; no, it is the mere effect of his own
goodness, and to give you opportunity to praise him, and serve him better than
ever you did before.

3. Remember, that although great deliverances require your great
acknowledgments, yet there is somewhat more required; namely, a real, practical
glorifying of God, by ordering your conversation aright, by serving him,
pleasing him, obeying him, living to his honor: this Almighty God expects, as
well as praises, and acknowledgments; as the end of God in afflictions is to
make men better; so the end of God in deliverances is to make men better; and
if we are not the better men by both dispensations, we do, as much as in us
lies, disappoint Almighty God in his design, and disappoint ourselves of the
benefit and advantage intended in both, and easily to be gained by both. This
therefore is the voice of this deliverance, it calls sweetly, and gently
indeed, but earnestly, and effectual, for amendment of life, and that upon two
great and moving arguments.

1. Your recovery, and great deliverance, calls for this from you, upon the
account of common ingenuity and good nature, which obliges a man to be
observant and dutiful to his benefactor. God Almighty is the greatest
benefactor, and has manifested himself such to you, upon a visible eminent
account; this is engagement enough, upon the account of common humanity, to be
dutiful and obedient to him; when therefore you are at any time, by the
temptation of your own corruption, or by the solicitation of evil persons,
solicited to evil actions, consider thus with yourself; -- is this a becoming
return to that God, that has thus wonderfully delivered me? is this the
requital that I shall make unto him for his mercy? shall I please the great God
of heaven and earth, that has thus delivered me, and done me more good than
all the world could ever do me, or than I can ever recompense? "Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O ye foolish people, and unwise? has he not made thee, and
established thee? Deuteronomy. xxxiii.

2. This his mercy calls for your obedience to God in an eminent manner upon
the account of common prudence and discretion; the benefit of your obedience to
him will be your own, your own happiness in this life, and in that to come;
there is no greater moral security against future dangers and troubles, than
obedience and reformation of life, upon great deliverances received; nor is
there any greater invitation of new troubles and mischiefs than ingratitude,
disobedience, and great sins after great mercies and deliverances; there is a
kind of certain and infallible connection, between great sins, after great
mercies received, and great judgments to follow; Ingentia beneficia, ingentia
peccata, ingentia supplicia Great favors, followed by great crimes, are
succeeded by great punishments.
.

Again, as I have formerly told you, you do not know how soon you may stand in
need of the same mercy and goodness of God, which you have formerly found; you
are never out of the reach of his power, and the necessity of his help;
whatever you do, therefore, never disoblige him by whom you live, and whose
extraordinary mercy you may stand in need of, you know not how soon; there is
nothing in the world does more provoke God than neglect, forgetfulness, or
wilful disobedience after signal mercies; these provoke the merciful God to a
severity of the highest kind, because the sweetest and most obliging call of
mercy and deliverance is neglected; read the first chapter of the Proverbs
attentively. And the merciful God has given us a plain rule and method, how he
may be served, obeyed, and pleased; he has given us a plain discovery of his
will in the Scriptures of both Testaments; read that often, you have it by you,
and you need not go far to find what is your Maker's will, and what that
obedience is that he requires, as the return of this, and all other his
mercies; yet I think it not amiss to mind you of some particulars, that may be
useful for you upon this occasion, and to direct you how particularly to
improve it, and so order your future life in some measure answerable to it.

1. I would have you make it your first business, after your recovery, to
consider the course of your life past, since you came to the age of discretion,
and see what has been amiss in it; whether you have not neglected religion,
and the duties of it, too much, as prayer, hearing the word preached, observing
the Lord's day, receiving the Sacrament, whether you have not been guilty of
intemperance, excess of drinking, wantonness, uncleanness, idleness, mispending
your time, and those supplies which have been allowed for your maintenance;
whether you have not too much delighted in vain, sinful, and disorderly
company, vanity and expense in apparel; and if such, or the like faults have
been, repent of them; be sorry for them, resolve against them; and let the
future course of your life be amended in relation thereunto. I have before told
you that your heavenly Father has forgiven you, and I have forgiven you,
neither do I mention those things to upbraid you for them, but that you, upon
the consideration of what has been amiss, may be thereby the better enabled to
rectify and set in order your future life; if this be done and practiced, I
will reckon your late sickness and distemper one of the greatest blessings that
ever befell you.

2. I would have you always keep a habit of the fear of God upon your heart;
consider his presence, order your life as in his presence; consider that he
always sees you, beholds and takes notice of you, and especially whether you
carry yourself answerable to this great deliverance: it is one of those talents
for which he will expect an account from you.

3. I would have you frequently and thankfully consider of the great love of
God in Jesus Christ, whom he has given to be the instructor and governor, and
sacrifice for the sins of you and all mankind: through whom, upon repentance,
you have assurance of the remission of your sins, and eternal life: and
frequently consider how great an engagement this is upon you, and all mankind,
to live according to such a hope, and such a mercy.

4. I would have you every morning read a portion of the Holy Scriptures, till
you have read the bible from the beginning to the end: observe it well, read it
reverently and attentively, set your heart upon it, and lay it up in your
memory, and make it the direction of your life; it will make you a wise and
good man: I have been acquainted somewhat with men and books, and have had long
experience in learning, and in the world: there is no book like the bible for
excellent learning, wisdom, and use: and it is the want of understanding, in
them that think or speak otherwise.

5. Every morning and every evening, upon your knees, with all reverence and
attention of mind, return hearty thanks to God for his mercy to you, and
particularly for this deliverance; desire his grace to enable you to walk in
some measure answerable to it; beg his providence to protect you, his grace to
direct you, to keep you from evil actions, and evil persons, and evil
occurrences; beg his pardon for your sins, and the continuance of his favor;
always concluding with the Lord's prayer.

6. Observe conscientiously the Lord's day to keep it holy; avoid idle company,
idle discourse, recreations, and secular employment, upon that day; resort that
day twice to the public prayers and sermon; go early to it, be attentive at it,
and keep your eyes and mind from roving after vain thoughts or objects; spend
the rest of that day, that is free from necessary occasions, in reading the
Scriptures or some good books of divinity.

7. Once every term, at least, come preparedly and reverently to the Holy
Communion, receive it with great reverence and thankfulness, and due
consideration to the end of its institution; renew your covenant with Almighty
God, that you made in baptism, and live soberly, righteously, and godly before
him, and beg his grace and strength to perform it.

And as those directions before do more especially relate to Almighty God, and
your deportment immediately toward him; so these that follow, more especially
relate to yourself and others, and your moral conversation. Therefore,

8. Be very moderate in eating and drinking; drunkenness is the great vice of
the time; and by drunkenness, I do mean, not only gross drunkenness, but also
tippling, drinking excessively or immoderately, or more than is convenient, and
necessary; avoid those companies that are given to it; come not into those
places that are devoted to that beastly vice, namely, taverns and alehouses;
avoid and refuse those devices that are used to occasion it, as drinking and
pledging of healths: be resolute against it, and when your resolution is once
known, you will never be solicited to it. The Rechabites were commanded by
their father not to drink wine, and they obeyed it, and had a blessing for it:
my command to you is not so strict; I allow you the moderate use of wine and
strong drink at your meals; I only forbid you excess, or the unnecessary use of
it, and those places and companies and artifices, that are temptations to it.

9. Avoid wanton and lascivious actions, speeches, and company: read proverbs
ii. 5, 6, 7, 9. An harlot hunts for the precious life of a man, and that vice
brings a ruin with it to the soul, body, and estate: if you cannot conveniently
contain yourself in a single life, and be of competent health, marry, but with
the advice and counsel of your father while he lives.

10. Be frugal of your time, it is one of the best jewels we have; and to that
end avoid idleness, it consumes your time, and lays you open to worse
inconveniences; let your recreations be healthy, and creditable, and moderate,
without too much expense of time or money; go not to plays, they are wasting of
time; value time by that estimate we would have of it, when we want it; what
would not a sick man give for those portions of time, and health, that he had
formerly improvidently wasted?

11. Be diligent in your study and calling; it is an act of duty to Almighty
God, that requires it, and it will be your wisdom and benefit; and it will be a
good expense of time, a prevention from a thousand inconveniences and
temptations that otherwise will befall a man; it will furnish you with knowledge
and understanding, give you the advantage and means of a comfortable and
plentiful subsistence, and make you a support, comfort, and benefit to your
friends and country.

12. Be frugal in your expenses; live within the compass of that exhibition
that God's providence, and your father's abilities shall supply you withal; it
is enough to maintain an honest provident man, and ten times more will not be
enough to a profuse mind; a frugal man will live comfortably, and plentifully,
upon a little, and a profuse man will live beggarly, necessitously, and in
continual want, whatever his supplies be.

13. In all your expenses, consider before hand; can I not be well enough
without this that I am about to buy? is there an absolute necessity for it? can
I not forbear till I am in a better condition to compass it? If I buy or
borrow, can I pay -- and when? -- and am I sure? -- will this expense hold out?
-- how shall I bring about the next quarter, or the next year? -- If young men
would but have the patience to consider, and ask themselves questions of the
like nature, it would make them considerate in their expenses, and provident
for the future; and these considerations will, in an especial manner, concern
you, in respect of your father's expenses for you, which though I have forgiven
and forgotten, I would have you remember with gratitude and caution.

14. The vanity of young men, in loving fine clothes and new fashions, and
valuing themselves by them, is one of the most childish pieces of folly that
can be, and the occasion of great profuseness and undoing of young men. Avoid
curiosity and too much expensiveness in your apparel: be comely, plain, decent,
cleanly -- not curious or costly: -- it is the sign of a weak headpiece, to be
sick for every new fashion, or to think himself the better in it, or the worse
without it.

15. Be careful, what company you consort with -- and much more careful, what
persons you grow intimate with. Choose sober, wise, learned, honest, religious
company: -- you will gain learning and wisdom, and improve yourself in learning
and goodness, by conversing with them: -- but avoid debauched, foolish,
intemperate, prodigal, atheistical, profane company, as you would avoid the
plague: -- they will corrupt and undo you: -- they are a sort of the most
pitiful fools in the world; and familiar acquaintance and conversation with
them will endanger to make you like them.

16. Weigh and consider your words before you speak them; and do not talk at
random or at a venture. Let your words be few, and to the purpose: -- be more
ready to hear others, than to speak yourself: -- accustom yourself to speak
leisurely and deliberately: -- it will be a means to make you speak warily and
considerately.

17. Be very careful to speak truth; and beware of lying. As lying is
displeasing to God, so it is offensive to man; and always, at the latter end,
returns to the reproach or disadvantage of him that uses it: -- it is an
evidence of a weak and unmanly mind. Be careful that you believe not hastily
strange stories; and be much more careful that you do not report them, though
at the second hand: -- for, if it prove an untruth, as commonly strange stories
prove so, it brings an imputation of levity upon him that reports it, and
possibly some disadvantage to others.

18. Take heed, what you promise: -- see that it be just, and honest, and
lawful, and what is in your power honestly and certainly to perform: and when
you have so promised, be true to your word. It is, for the most part the
fashion of inconsiderate and young men, especially that run in debt; they will,
with great asseverations, promise precise payment at this day, or that day,
when either they certainly know they cannot perform, or at least have no
probable assurance that they can do it; and when their turn is served, they are
as backward in their performance, as they were before liberal in their
promises. Breach of promises, and lying, are much of a nature, commonly go
together, and are arguments of an impotent and unmanly mind.

19. Beware of gaming; it is the suddenest consumption of an estate that can
be, and that vice seldom goes alone; commonly debauchery of all kinds
accompanies it: besides it makes a man of a wild, vast, and unsettled mind; and
such men are impatient of an honest calling, or of moderate or honest gain.

20. Run not in debt, either for wares sold, or money borrowed; be content to
want things that are not of absolute necessity, rather than to run upon the
score; such a man pays at the latter end, one third part more than the
principal comes to, and is in perpetual servitude to his creditors, lives
uncomfortably, is necessitated to increase his debts, to stop his creditors'
mouths, and many times falls into desperate courses.

21. Be respectful to all, familiar and intimate with few: be grateful to your
benefactors, especially to those who, under God, were instrumental for your
good, in your late sickness, and return your thanks to them; to your father,
that spared no cost for your recovery; to your doctor, that was exceedingly
diligent about you; to those that attended you in your sickness; to those that,
together with your father, often prayed to God for your recovery, and for a
blessing upon this affliction, whose names you shall, in due time, particularly
know; but above all, to Almighty God, who not only provided and blessed the
means, but saved and delivered you above all means and when means failed.

22. Lastly, I shall conclude with one advice more, without the observance
whereof, my labor in writing this long epistle will be probably fruitless: be
not wise in your own conceit; this is the unhappy error, and many times the
ruin of young men especially; they are usually rash, giddy, and inconsiderate,
and yet extremely confident of that which they have the least reason to trust;
namely, their own understanding, which renders them most ^^^erved from them
that are willing and best able to advise them, impatient of reproof, love to be
flattered, and so become incapable of good and wise counsel, till their follies
have reduced them to extreme straits and inconveniences; suspect therefore
your own judgment: advise often with your father, especially in all things of
moment; be glad of counsel, and be contented and willing to follow it; at least
till ripeness of age, observation, and experience have enabled you to advise
yourself; this is an easy, and ready, and cheap way of attaining wisdom, and
avoiding infinite inconveniences.

And thus I have in this long epistle, given you the means how you may improve
both your own sickness, and recovery, to the glory of God, and your own
benefit. I shall therefore conclude with two considerations that may the more
engage you to the use of both these dispensations.

1. The danger is great, if afflictions make not a man more humble and dutiful;
and the danger is yet greater, if any great deliverances and mercies do not
make a man more thankful and obedient to God; because it is the most obliging
method that the gracious God can use toward the children of men for that end,
in this life; and the neglect of that invitation adds ingratitude and contempt
to the neglect of it.

2. The benefit that you will receive by making a good use of these two
dispensations, in improving your dutifulness and obedience to God, will be
singular and excellent. 1. It will make you a wise man, by making you a good
and religious man: believe it from your father, who will not deceive you; nay,
believe it from a greater than your father, the very Spirit of Truth, who
cannot deceive you; the true fear of God, is the only true wisdom: Read Deuteronomy.
iv. 6; Job xxvii. 28; Psalm cxi. 10; Prove. i. 7; Prove. ix. 10; Eccls. xii. 13;
and very many more declarations there are of this great truth. 2. It will make
you a happy man, it will give you the favor and love of God, which is better
than life itself: you shall have his mercy to pardon you, his providence to
protect you, his wisdom to direct you, his goodness to bless you, and to
forgive and to forget whatever has heretofore been done amiss by you: this
will make all conditions comfortable to you; whether life or death, sickness or
health: by this means you may be a comfort to your father, a support to your
brothers and sisters, an instrument of good to your country, and attain an
honest, creditable, and competent subsistence in this world, and an everlasting
inheritance of glory and immortality in the world to come.

Thus I have given you a large letter of found and good counsel: set your heart
to it, and observe and remember it: we see how unstable our lives are; you nor
I know not how soon either, or both of us, may leave this world: it may be,
this may be the last paper of advice that your father may give you; but however
it shall please God to deal with you or me, touching our continuance in this
world, yet let me leave this with you, in the close of this letter; if I shall
find that these directions are dutifully observed, I shall be ready, from time
to time, freely to advise and direct you: and as I have passed by your former
extravagances, so I shall hereby have great assurance, that God has blessed
this visitation to you. But on the other side, if I shall find that you neglect
my counsels, that you make light of them, that you still pursue those courses,
that will certainly be bitterness in the end, I must then tell you, I shall
pray for you, and be sorry for you with my heart; but I shall not easily be
persuaded to give you any more advice, or counsels, where I find them despised
or neglected. In this paper there are many things omitted, which might have
been inserted; but the constant reading of the holy scriptures, will supply
unto you that defect; I have chosen only, in this paper, to mention such things
to you as are seasonable on this occasion. God Almighty has not been wanting
to you in admonition, correction, mercy and deliverance; neither has
your-father been wanting to you in education, counsel, care and expense; I pray
God Almighty to bless all unto you. This is the prayer of

Your loving father, MATTHEW HALE.

EPISTLE THE FOURTH. DIRECTIONS CONCERNING THE KEEPING THE LORD'S DAY.
ADDRESSED TO HIS CHILDREN.
CHILDREN,
I SENT you formerly diverse instructions concerning your speech, and how you
should manage it; and being now come well to F*****, from whence I wrote you my
former instructions, I intend to write something to you of another subject,
viz. your observation of the Lord's day, commonly called Sunday: -- and this I
do for these reasons: --

1. Because it has pleased God to cast my lot so, that I am to rest at this
place upon that day, and the consideration therefore of that duty is proper for
me and you: it is opus diei in die suo, the work fit and proper for that day.

2. Because I have found by long and sound experience, that the due observance
of this day, and of the duties of it, has been of singular comfort and
advantage to me; and I doubt not but it will prove so to you. God Almighty is
the Lord of our time, and lends it to us; and it is but just we should
consecrate this part of that time to him.

3. Because I find in the world much looseness and apostasy from this duty.
People begin to be cold and careless in it, allowing themselves sports and
recreations and secular employments in it, without any necessity; which is a
sad spectacle and an ill presage. It concerns me therefore (that am your
father) as much as I may, to rescue you from that sin, which the example of
others, and the inclination and inconsiderateness of youth, is otherwise apt to
lead you into.

I shall therefore set down to you particularly (and not in generals only)
these things -- 1. What is the reason and ground of your observation of this
day. 2. What things ought not to be done upon this day, which possibly may be
lawful upon another day. 3. What things may be done upon this day. 4. What
things are either fit or necessary to be done, in order to the sanctification
of this day.

Touching the first of these, viz. The reason of the observation and
sanctification of this day: -- and the reasons are these: --

1. It is a moral duty, that, since the glorious God gives me my time, I should
consecrate and set apart some portion of that time, in a special manner, to his
service.

2. And because the glorious God best knows, what portion of time is fit to be
peculiarly dedicated to his service, that so the morality of that time might be
determined unto some certainty, he has, by his express precept, given to his
ancient people, the Jews, limited one day of seven, to be that special portion
of time, which he would have peculiarly dedicated to his service, and so to
conclude into it the morality of that duty.

3. The seventh portion of time, under the old law given to the Jews, was
determined by the precept and command of God, in the fourth command; and
likewise by his own example, confined to the seventh day from the creation.

4. But our savior, Christ, who is the son of God, blessed for ever, and is
the Lord of the Sabbath, [ Matt. xii.] fulfilling the work of our redemption,
by his resurrection upon the first day of the week, and by his mission of the
Holy Ghost miraculously the first day of the week, and by the secret message of
the spirit to the apostles and primitive church, has translated the
observation of the seventh day of the week, to the first day of the week, which
is our Christian Sabbath.

Concerning the second -- It is certain that what is unlawful to be done upon
another day, is much most unlawful upon this; as excess and intemperance, and
the like sinful and unlawful actions. But further, there are many things, that
may be lawfully done on another day, which may not lawfully be done upon this;
and many that are not only lawful upon another day, but also fit and decent,
which are yet unfit to be done upon this day. Upon other days we may and must
employ ourselves in our secular and ordinary callings -- we may use bodily
exercises and recreations, as bowling, shooting, hunting, and diverse others --
we may study human learning: -- but I hold these to be not only unfit, but
unlawful to be used upon this day: and therefore remember it. Moderate walking
may thus far be used, so far only, as it enableth you to the more cheerful
performance of the duties of this day: and therefore I allow you to walk
soberly, about half an hour after dinner, to digest your meat, that you be not
drowsy nor indisposed, in the religious duties of the day. Feastings may be
seasonably used sometimes upon other days, but are unfit upon this. Let only
such provision be made upon this day, as may be necessary for the family and
the poor: and therefore I hold, that curiosities, baking of meats, and
superfluous provisions, upon this day, are to be avoided, as being an
unnecessary breaking of the rest of this day, and unbeseeming the solemnity of
it.

Thirdly, -- What things may be done this day, is a question of great latitude;
because circumstances are many, that do much diversify the actions of men, and
many times render them lawful or unlawful, according to those varieties of
circumstances. Therefore I shall shortly set down those things, that do not of
themselves directly tend to the sanctitication of this day, that yet may, and
sometimes must, be done upon this day. For there were many things, that were
strictly enjoined to the Jews in their observation of the Sabbath, which were
ceremonial, and concerned only that state, and do not oblige under the gospel;
as their dressing meat upon this day was prohibited to them, but not to us: and
many more things they did forbear and count unlawful, which in truth were not
only not forbidden, but enjoined and commanded; -- for which our Lord reproves
the Pharisees, who accounted it a breach of the Sabbath, to heal the sick, or
to pluck the ears of corn for necessary relief of hunger. Mat. xii.

Therefore -- 1. Works of absolute necessity, for man or beast, may be done
upon the Lord's day. And those I call works of necessity, which cannot be done
before this day, or after, without apparent danger; as, for instance, stopping
of the breach of a sea-wall -- supporting a house, that, upon a sudden tempest
or casualty, is ready to fall -- pulling out an ox or other beast, fallen into
a ditch -- preventing of a trespass, by a sudden accident, that may be
occasioned to my corn, or my neighbor's -- setting of a broken bone -- physic
to remove an imminent disease or pain -- milking of cows -- feeding of cattle
-- the necessary dressing of meat for the family -- and many more instances of
that kind. But yet there in wariness and integrity must be used; for otherwise
men, under the pretense of necessity, will take the liberty to do what they
please. Therefore take these cautions concerning necessity.

1. That is not a necessity, that excuses a work upon this day, which might
have been reasonably foreseen and done before the day; as, for instance, a man
has a necessity to dress meat for his family, which he might have provided on
the Saturday; and neglects it: -- this necessity will not justify him in
sending two or three miles to buy meat on the Sunday.

2. That is not a necessity, which may be forborne to be done, without any
absolute destruction or loss of the thing, until the morrow. If a rick of hay
be on fire, I may endeavor to quench it on the Lord's day: but if my corn be
cut and lying upon the ground, on the Saturday, though the weather be rainy or
inclining to wet, I may not make it into cocks, or fetch it home, upon the
Lord's day; because possibly Almighty God may send fair weather tomorrow: and
therefore, in my forbearance, I do two duties under one, viz. observe his law,
and rest upon his providence. Men have necessities many times, to serve their
case, and sloth, and fancies, when in truth there is none; but the business may
be deferred without any danger. If we would be more faithful in our obedience
to God, we should find many pretended necessities to vanish into mere
imaginations.

3. Works of charity -- relief of the poor -- administering physic upon an
apparent necessity -- visiting or comforting the afflicted -- admonishing the
disorderly -- persuading peace between neighbors offended -- and endeavoring to
compose differences which require not much examination, or cannot be deferred
without an apparent danger of greater mischief -- these are not only permitted,
but commendable, nay commanded, upon this day. But if the business require
examination, or may be deferred till tomorrow, then it is best to defer such
examinations, and treaties between offended parties, till another day; because
they will take away too much of the little precious portion of time of this
day, and may be as well done tomorrow.

As to the fourth, -- what is proper, fit, or necessary to be done, in order to
the sanctification of this day -- I will set down particularly; for generals
seldom produce any great effect, because every man is apt to construe them
according to his own mind and liking.

1. I would not have you meddle with any recreation, pastimes, or ordinary work
of your calling, from Saturday evening to Monday morning.

2. Rise at least three hours before morning sermon; and when you have made
yourself ready, and washed and fitted yourself for the solemnity of the day,
read two chapters in the bible; and then go solemnly to your private prayer,
and desire of God his grace to enable you to sanctify his day: and after your
private prayer, read another chapter; and let your reading be with attention,
observation, and your head uncovered.

3. When you are in the public worship and service of God, be uncovered all the
while of reading, praying, or preaching.

4. Kneel upon your knees at prayer; stand up at the reading of the psalms, and
at the first and second lesson, and the epistle and gospel, etc. -- so you
shall avoid offense.

5. Sit at the sermon, and be very attentive at your prayers, and in your
hearing. I recommend your writing the sermon, especially until you are one or
two and twenty years old; because young minds are apt to wander; and writing
the sermon fixes them, and makes them more attentive.

6. When the minister reads any psalms or lessons, turn to them in your
bible, and read along with him.

7. Be very attentive and serious at church: use no laughing, nor gazing about,
nor whispering.

8. Sing the psalms with the rest of the congregation.

9. Eat moderately at dinner -- rather sparingly than plentifully -- upon this
day; that you may be fit for the afternoon's exercise, without drowsiness or
dullness.

10. Walk half an hour after dinner in the garden, to digest your meat: then
retire to your chamber, to 'commune with your own heart' until church-time.

11. If you are well, be sure to go to church morning and afternoon; and be
there before the minister begin, and stay until he has ended: and all the
while you are at church, carry yourself gravely, soberly, and reverently.

12. After evening sermon, go up to your chamber, and read a chapter in your
bible; then examine what you have written of the sermon.

13 In all your speeches or actions of this day, let there be no lightness nor
vanity: but let your actions and speech be such as the day is, serious and
sacred, tending to learn or instruct in the great business of your knowledge of
God, and his will, and your own duty.

14. After supper, every one of you, going to bed, kneel down upon your knees,
and desire of God his pardon for what you have done amiss this day, and his
blessing upon what you have heard, and his acceptance of what you have
endeavored in his service.

15. Perform all this cheerfully, and uprightly, and honestly; and account it
not a burden to you: for assure yourselves, you shall find a blessing from God
in so doing. And remember, it is your father, that tells you so, and that loves
you, and will not deceive you.

And thus I have written to you of the observation of the Lord's day; wherein
though I have omitted many things, that might have been fit to be inserted, yet
you must consider, that I had but a small portion of time allowed me to write,
while I lay at an inn, and upon that day wherein I have performed those duties
which I now enjoin you. Let the original be laid up safely for your brother R
--; and every one of you take copies of it, that you may thereby remember the
counsels of,

Dear Children, Your loving Father, MATTHEW HALE,
October 20, 1662.
END.

