SCRIPTURAL RESEARCHES ON THE LICITNESS OF THE SLAVE TRADE, SHOWING ITS
CONFORMITY With the Principles of NATURAL AND REVEALED RELIGION, Delineated in
the SACRED WRITINGS OF THE WORD OF GOD By the REV. R. HARRIS.

Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life. John c. 5.
v. 39. LONDON: Printed for John Stockdale, opposite Burlington House,
Piccadilly. 1788.

FREDERICK-TOWN: (Maryland) Reprinted by JOHN WINTER, in Patrick-street, 1790.

TO The Worshipful the MAYOR, RECORDER, ALDERMEN, BAILIFFS, and other MEMBERS
of the COMMON COUNCIL Of the ancient and loyal BOROUGH and CORPORATION of
LIVERPOOL, The following SCRIPTURAL RESEARCHES On the licitness of the
SLAVE TRADE.

Are most respectfully inscribed BY Their most obedient And most humble
Servant, RAYMUND HARRIS.

PREFACE.
UNWILLING to incur the displeasure of every friend to justice, religion, and
humanity, I hasten to inform the Reader, who has cast an eye on the Title Page,
that, in attempting to establish the licitness of the SLAVE TRADE, nothing is
farther removed from my thoughts, than to set up as an advocate for injustice
and oppression: I am as much at enmity with both, as the most sanguine advocate
for African Liberty may be. I am well apprized, that acts of violence and
oppression, however authorized by numbers, however firmly established by long
use, and a kind of traditional attention to the sufferings of persons in an
abject condition of life, can never change the criminality of their nature.
Whatever is essentially incompatible with the sacred and inalienable rights of
justice and humanity, can claim no place in the catalogue of virtues, even of
the lowest rank; it must be forever branded with every mark of infamy and guilt.

FAR then from attempting the least encroachment on the rights of Virtue, my
sole drift in the present Tract is to examine with the utmost impartiality, the
intrinsic nature of the SLAVE TRADE: that is, whether the Trade itself
prescinding from every other incidental circumstance, which may have rendered
the practice of it hateful, or even criminal, be in its own nature licit or
illicit.

Now, it being evident in the first place, that the intrinsic morality or
immorality, licitness or illicitness of all human pursuits is essentially
inherent to the pursuits themselves, and not at all depending on our habits or
ideas of Right and Wrong, which are but too often influenced and darkened by
prejudice, interest, and other passions; and, it being equally evident on the
other hand, that the declarations of the Written Word of God are so many
ineontrovertible decisions, by which we are to judge of the intrinsic licitness
or illicitness of such facts as are registered in the Sacred Volumes; it
follows necessarily, that, one of those facts being undoubtedly the
SLAVE TRADE, no arguments can be so forcible and conclusive, toward evincing
the inherent lawfulness of it, as those Oracular decisions of the Word of God,
which give a possitive sanction to the Trade itself. -- It is then by enforcing
these unerring decisions only, the surest guide to direct our judgments in
forming a just estimate of the merits of the present Controversy, that I mean
to vindicate the licitness of the SLAVE TRADE; not by patronizing such crying
enormities and abuses, as are said to be perpetrated in this most ancient
commercial pursuit.

SHOULD the sanction of divine authority appear evident in favor of the
SLAVE TRADE, from the testimonies I shall produce in the series of my
Researches, I shall consider myself perfectly disingaged from the most distant
obligation of answering such objections, as are not grounded on the same divine
authority: an authority of that irresistible weight of conviction, that every
person, who has any pretensions to Religion, must immediately assent to,
however plausable or ingenious the opposite arguments may appear, when viewed
through the scanty light of mere human reason and sense.

THE scope of the following Researches being evidently to try the merits of the
present Controversy by the Sacred Canons of the Written Word of God, I can
expect conviction only from such persons, as are not so far destitute of every
sentiment of Religion and good sense, as to disbelieve the divine authenticity
of those Sacred Writings, in which the Finger of God has left in indelible
characters the visible impression of his Wisdom.

Now, as these Sacred Records contain transactions relative to the SLAVE TRADE,
as practiced in all the three religious Dispensations that have appeared in the
World since the formation of the first of men to the present time, I shall,
accordingly, divide my Scriptural Researches on that Trade, into three separate
Parts: in which I shall successively prove, that the SLAVE TRADE is perfectly
consonant to the principles of the Law of Nature, the Mosaic Dispensation, and
the Christian Law, as delineated to us in the Sacred Writings of the Word of
God.

I HAVE prefixed to the whole a few positions or Data, which I trust, will be
sound unquestonably true, and exactly conformable to sound reason; in order,
that I may not be interrupted in the sequel with unnecessary repititions of
general principles, nor be in the least constrained to enter into a formal
confutation of arguments which do not immediately affect my subject, and that
the Reader may see at one view the very fundamental principles of those
inferences, which I draw in vindication of the SLAVE TRADE from the Scriptural
passages I have selected in the course of my Researches, out of a greater
number of the same import I could easily produce.

THE Scriptural passages are literally transcribed from the Protestant Vulgar
Translation of the Bible; which, being the most generally received in these
Kingdoms, will, of course, have a greater weight of authority than any other
with the major part of my Readers. The Edition I use is that which was
published in London by John Bill and Christopher Barker in the year 1669.

WITH respect to composition, I can pretend to neither elegance nor style: a
Foreigner, unacquainted with the least element of the English Language till the
twenty-seventh year of his age, can have no claim to either: if he can but
arrange his periods with a tolerable degree of grammatical accuracy, and
express himself with sufficient clearness, method, and perspicuity, he has
reason to expect every indulgence from the native candor of an English Critic.

DATA.
I. THAT the Volume of the Sacred Writings, commonly called the Holy Bible,
comprehending both the Old and the New Testaments, contains the unerring
Decisions of the Word of God. II THAT these Decisions are of equal authority in
both the Testaments, and that that Authority is the essential veracity of God,
who is Truth itself. III. THAT, as there can be no prescription against the
authority of God, whatever is declared in any part of the Scriptural Records to
be intrinsically good or bad, licit or illicit, must be essentially so in its
own nature, however contrary any such declaration may be to the received
opinions of mankind for any length of time. IV. THAT, as the Supreme Legislator
of the World, is infinitely just and wise in all his decisions respecting Right
and Wrong, and is no ways accountable to his creatures for the reasons of his
conduct in the government of the World; so it must be a degree of presumption
highly criminal in any creature to refuse assent to those Decisions, only
because he cannot comprehend the hidden principles of that impartial justice
which characterises every decision of God. V. THAT no person can be supposed to
acknowledge in fact, that the Holy Scriptures are the infallible Word of God,
unless he acquiesces without reserve in every scriptural Decision, however
incomprehensible the reasons and motives of those Decisions may be to him. VI.
THAT every person, who professes to acknowledge the Holy Scriptures to be the
unerring Word of God, must consequently assent to every Scriptural Decision
without reserve, only because he believes them to be the declarations of God;
who, being Truth itself, can neither err himself, nor lead any one into error.
VII. THAT, if one or more Decisions of the Written Word of God give a positive
sanction to the intrinsic licitness of any human pursuit (for instance, the
Slave Trade,) whoever professes to believe the incontrovertable veracity of the
Written Word of God, essentially incompatible with the least degree of
injustice, must consequently believe the pursuit itself to be intrinsically
just and lawful in the strictest sense of the word. VIII. THAT no advantages
whatever attending the prosecution of an unlawful pursuit, nor any abuses
whatever committed in the prosecution of a lawful one, can so sar effect the
pursuits themselves, as to render the latter intrinsically criminal, or the
former essentially just. IX. THAT, as no private ^^^ational advantages whatever
can alter the inherent turpitude of a pursuit essentially unlawful; so no
arguments whatever, built solely on the strength of those advantages, will ever
justify the Slave Trade, till the same be proved essentially fair and lawful in
its nature. X. THAT, as no abuses or malepractices whatever, committed in the
prosecution of a lawful pursuit, can ever alter the intrinsic licitness of it;
so no arguments whatever, built solely on the strength of those abuses, will
ever evince the intrinsic deformity of the Slave Trade, any more than that of
any other lawful pursuit, where abuses are committed, unless the same be proved
essentially unjust and illicit. XI. THAT, if abuses and malepractices,
committed in the prosecution of a lawful pursuit, can be checked and prevented
by Legal Authority, the private and national advantages arising from that
pursuit, and the inconveniences attending the suppression of it, joined to its
intrinsic licitness, ought to have a very powerful influence toward not
abolishing the prosecution of that pursuit. XII. THAT, if abuses and
malepractices, though evidently subject to the control of the Legislature, are
to be considered as sufficient arguments to suppress the Slave Trade, without
any regard to its intrinsic licitness, every other branch of Trade, in which
abuses are committed, ought, on the same account, to share the same fate.
SECTION I. Scriptural Researches on the licitness of the Slave Trade, showing
its conformity with the principles of the Law of Nature delineated in the
Sacred Writings.
I. THAT period of years, which elapsed from the day on which God created Man
in bis own image Genesis, c. 1.5.27.
, to the day on which He gave his Laws to the Children of Israel on Mount Sinai
Exodus, c. 29. etc.
, is generally called the period of the Law of Nature. The exact duration of
this period is a matter of controvercy among the Learned. Archbishop Usher,
whose chronological accuracy in the computation of scriptural years is much
admired, reckons 2513 years between the Creation of the World and the
promulgation of the Mosaic Law. But be this as it may (for no difference in
computation can affect the subject of my present Researches), it is evident
from the tenor of the Sacred Records, that, between the creation of Adam and
the promulgation of the Mosaic Law, the Dispensation of the Law of Nature,
commonly called Natural Religion, or the Religion of Nature, was the only true
Religion in the World.

II. SIMPLE as the principles of this Religion may appear, directed chiefly to
worship One, Supreme, Eternal, Being, the Creator and Governor of all things,
and to choose and act in exact conformity to the inward dictates of sound and
unbiassed reason in every transaction of life, where Right and Wrong were lest
to the choice of man; it would be exceedingly difficult, as well as perfectly
extraneous to my present subject, to digest those principles into a regular
Code of those particular laws and duties, which constituted the whole system of
that Religion. I have not engaged to display the whole frame and structure of
Natural Religion. I am to show no farther, than that the principle laws of that
Religion, as far as we find them delineated in the sacred writings, not only
never forbade the Slave Trade, or hinted the most distant opposition to the
prosecution of it; but that, the same being frequently exemplisied in the
constant and uninterrupted practice of some of the most faithful observers of
the laws and principles of that Religion, under the visible protection of God,
whose favorites they were, the laws and principles themselves were in perfect
harmony with the practice of the Slave Trade. Two very singular instances of
this kind, verified in the conduct of two of the most distinguished Characters
within the above period of the Law or Nature, Abrabam and Joseph, will, I
flatter myself, be sufficient, without mentioning others, to justify my
assertion, and set the present Controversy in the clearest light of Scriptural
conviction.

ABRAHAM.
III. In every place of Scripture, where mention is made of this Veneranle
Patriarch, be is uniformly represented as a perfect pattern of every virtue.
The strongest faith in God Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.3. Galat. 3.6. James, 2.23
, the firmest reliance on his promises Ibid.
, and the readiest and most unreserved obedience to all his commands Genesis 22.
v. 1-13
; the most sympathizing bumanity to every fellow creature Genesis 18.23. etc.
, the strictest justice and integrity in all his dealings with men Genesis 21.22,
etc. Genesis 23.7, etc.
, and the utmost-disenterestedness of heart Genesis 14.22, 23
, infine, the greatest love of peace and harmony, Genesis 21, 22, etc. Genesis 13.7,
etc.
together with every other religious, donestic, and social virtue Genesis 18.19.
, are the distinguishing characteristics of his person.

IV. Owing, no doubt, to these exalted virtues, be is frequently represented in
Scripture in familiar intercourse with God Genesis 12.1, etc. Genesis 15.1, etc. Genesis
17.1, etc. Genesis 18, 1, etc.
who, in innumerable places of holy writ, styles himself emphatically "The GOD
of Abraham," is the most acceptable person be had on earth: be calls him His
Friend Isaiah, 41.8.
, and makes the most exatted panegyric of his virtues, when, appearing to his
son Isaac after the death of his Father, he speaks to him in the following
remarkable and comprehensive words: In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed; because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my
commandments, my ftatutes, and my laws Began, 26.4, 5.


V. NOR is his unimpeachable character, as a righteous man, less conspicuous in
the Writings of the New Testament; where, among many other testimonies of his
irreproachable life, the Son of God himself, who always speaks of him as one of
the most faithful servants of his Eternal Father, rebukes the Jews for having
so far departed from the rectitude of Abraham's conduct, as not to be entitled
to the appellation of his Children; for, If ye were Abraham's children, says
he, ye would do the works of Abraham John, 8.39.


VI. Now, it is very remarkable, that among the works of Abraham, the very
faithful, obedient, humane, just, disinterested, righteous, and virtuous
Abraham, who constantly obeyed the voice of God, kept his charge, his
commandments, his statutes, and his laws, and found such acceptance with him,
as to be admitted to the familiarity of his friendly intercourse; it is very
remarkable, I say, that there should be found among his works the practice of
dealing in human flesh, the practice of purchasing with money those of his own
species, and making them BondSlaves Genesis 17, 23.27.
, without the least intimation being ever given by any of the inspired Writers,
that his conduct in this particular, where the natural rights of justice and
humanity are said to be so essentially interested, was ever reproved, or even
discountenanced in the most distant manner by any private or public intimation
of God's displeasure!

VII. AND what can we reasonably conclude from this uniform silence of the
inspired Writers? but that the practice of purchasing slaves was never
accounted in the sight of God a violation of any of the laws of the Religion of
Nature. For, is it credible, or, rather is it possible for any one to believe,
consistently with the ideas we ought to entertain of the infinite holiness of
God, in whom dwells essentially the fullness of justice, that he would style
himself The God of Abraham, in preference to any other; that he would vouchsafe
to honor him with the appellation of His Friend; that he would bless in his
seed all the nations of the earth Genesis 22, v, 18.
; that he would declare he had obeyed his voice, kept his charge, his
commandments, his statutes, and his laws, without excepting any one; or that
Jesus Christ would have ever commended his works without any restriction
whatever, if the Slave Trade, so publicly and so constantly practiced by
Abraham, had been an iniquitous, unnatural pursuit, essentially opposite to the
sacred laws of Nature, to the natural rights of justice and humanity?

VIII. THE force of this powerful inference, considered even as a mere negative
argument in favor of the intrinsic licitness of the Slave Trade, carries such
an irresistible weight of conviction that it amounts, in my opinion, to a
positive approbation of it: it being otherwise impossible to reconcile the
justice of God with his own scriptural decisions concerning the essential
impartiality, and eternal unchangeableness of its nature.

IX. THAT this positive approbation, this sanction of Divine authority in
favor of the Slave Trade, so visible in the conduct of God, eyewitness to
every transaction of Abraham's life, is not a bare conjecture, or a mere
negative inference of a pastionate advocate for slavery, but the real intent
and meaning of the Written Word of God, will appear evident to the most zealous
advocate for African Liberty, who, divesting himself for a moment of every
prejudice, that the love of humanity may have created in his mind, will
dispassionately examine with me the striking circumstances of the following
Case. It is that of a BOND-SLAVE in the service of Abraham; which, as related
in the Sacred Writings, contains such interesting particulars, that, I flatter
myself, it will evince to demonstration, that the Slave Trade has the
indisputable sanction of Divine Authority, even when attended with
circumstances not of the most pleasing complexion to the eyes of humanity.

X. This very decisive fact is thus literally related in the xvith Chapter of
the Book of GENESIS.

1. Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an
Egyptian, whose name was Hagar, 2. And Sarai said unto Abram: Behold now, the
Lord has restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid: it may
be, that I may obtain children by her: and Abram hearkened to the voice of
Sarai. 3. And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid, the Egyptian, after Abram
had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to
be his wife. 4. And he went in unto Hagat, and she conceived: and when she saw
that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes. 5. And Sarai
said unto Abram: my wrong be upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom;
and when she saw she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the Lord judge
between me and thee. 6. But Abram said unto Sarai: behold, thy maid is in thy
hand; do to her as it pleases thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she
fled from her face. 7. And the Angel sound her by a fountain of water in the
wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur. 8. And he said: Hagar, Sarai's
maid, whence come thou? and whither will thou go? And she said: I flee from
the sace of my mistress Sarai. 9. And the Angel of the Lord said unto her:
return unto thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands. 10. And the Angel
of the Lord said unto her: I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall
not be numbered for multitude. 11. And the Angel of the Lord said unto her:
behold, thou art with child, and shall bear a son, and shall call his name
Ishmael; because the Lord has heard thy affliction.
XI. Enough have we for the present to observe on this portion of Hagar's
history, without proceeding to relate the treatment she received in her
Master's house some time after her return, -- Here we have a Handmaid, called
soon after a Bondwoman by God himself Genesis c. 21. v. 12.
; born in Africa, for she was an Egyptian by birth, and, consequently, an
African Slave; laboring under every natural disadvantage attending the
condition of a Bond-slave; bought by a stranger, transported from her native
country into a distant land, the Land of Canaan, where Abram dwelt; that is,
transported from Africa into Asia: separated for ever from her dearest
relations, friends and acquaintance, and obliged to wait at hand, and work for
the advantage of her Masters.

XII. The sterility of her mistress seemed rather to flatter Hagar with the
prospect of meliorating her condition, by becoming her Master's wife at the
solicitation of her Mistress; but the event proved the contrary, and
disappointed all her hopes; for not only she did not obtain her freedom by
becoming his wise, but finding she was with child by her master, and being, on
this account, not quite so respectful to her Mistress, as the latter expected
in quality of Abram's principal wife, she was so roughly handled by Sarai, with
the permission of Abram, that, unable to bear her treatment, she fled from her
house, left her service, and took refuge in the defart. What the correction
was, that Sarai inflicted on Hagar, is not particularly specified in the Sacred
History: the Hebrew word used upon the occasion, and rendered by the
Translators dealt hardly, has such an extent of signification, as may easily
convey the idea of a very cruel and oppressive treatment, which, in the actual
state of Hagar's pregnancy, must have rendered her affliction much more
intolerable and oppressive.

XIII. EVERY circumstance attending the wretched situation of this poor African
Slave, who, though legally married to her Master, is kept still in bondage, and
forced, as it were, out of his house and service in the condition she was in,
through hard usage and severity, though charged with no other crime, but being
not quite so respectful to her husband's first wife as she had been before her
marriage, seems to excite compassion, and justify her escape. Were Hagar's case
that of any African semale slave now in the West Indies, and were the same to
be tried before a jury composed of some of the present advocates for African
Liberty in this Island, one might decide almost to a certainty in whose favor
the verdict would be given: the Slave would most probably be declared free, and
both Master and Mistress severely reprimanded, if not also condemned in a heavy
pecuniary mulct: no other verdict would be consistent with the principles they
so publicly avow.

XIV. BUT did Hagar obtain the same favorable sentence at the impartial
Tribunal of God, when she pleaded her cause before the Minister of his justice,
whom he deputed to represent his Person? Did he approve of her conduct in
leaving her Master's house, and quitting his service?. Did he hint the most
distant reflection on the proceedings of Abram or her Mistress Sarai? Did he
signify to her, that her quality of Abram's wise, or the severity of Sarai's
treatment, even in her actual state of pregnancy, emancipated her from her
bondage, rescinded the original contract of her purchase, or that that contract
had been illicit and contrary to his laws, or that she might, on this account,
consider herself as no part of Abram's lawful property, but at full liberty to
dispose of her person as she thought best? -- NO: -- on the contrary, her
conduct was condemned by the Representative of God who ordered her in his name
to return to her Mistress, and submit herself under her hands; though at the
same time he assured her, that the Lord had heard her affliction.

XV. WERE all other scriptural evidences wanted in favor of the Slave Trade,
this Decree alone of the highest Court of Justice possible, this solemn
Sentence of the Supreme Judge of Right and Wrong, Who is no respecter of
persons, but, in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness,
is accepted with him, Acts, c, 10, v, 34, 35.
and who, in the case before us, had an intuitive and comprehensive knowledge
of every particular circumstance attending the claims of both the Parties, must
convince every impartial Reader, that the licitness of that trade is evidently
warranted by the written word of God; who, by the very act of deputing an
Angel, on purpose to command the fugitive Slave to return to her Master's
house, and submit herself under the hands of her Mistress, declared her to be
her Master's indisputable property, and the original bargain or contract, by
which he had acquired that property, to be just and lawful in its nature: that
is, that the Slave Trade, even when attended with circumstances not altogether
conformable to the feelings of humanity, is essentially consistent with the
sacred and inalienable rights of justice, and has the positive sanction of God
in its support; however displeasing those circumstances may be to his fatherly
Providence, as they appear to have been in the Case of Hagar; who, in
alleviation of her sufferings and affliction, was promised the honor of being
the Mother of a numerous progeny, branched out afterward into twelve powerful
kingdoms. Genesis c, 25, v, 16.


JOSEPH.
XVI. WHOEVER has the least acquaintance with the principal human Characters
exhibited in the Sacred Records, must readily acknowledge, that the character
of JOSEPH, great grandson to Patriarch Abraham, is one of the most amiable,
most upright, and instructive. He is there represented in every vicissitude of
fortune, acquiring in every station by his wisdom and virtue favor with God
and man. Genesis 39, 2-6. Ibid. 21-23. Ibid. c, 41, 37, etc.
. His virtue suffers no diminution whatever, but shines with greater luster, in
passing from the condition of a slave to that of Governor of all Egypt. His
fidelity to God, and to his Master Potiphar, is assailed by strong temptations,
which, in spite of youth and interest, he resists with the most exemplary
fortitude. Genesis 39, 7-12.
Thrown into the horrors of a dungeon through the artifice of a false woman,
whose honor he preserves at the expense of his own, his integrity and prudence
soon render him conspicuous even in that dark recess. Genesis 39, 21-23. Genesis 40,
1, etc.
Favored with the divine spirit of prophecy, and called (...) his Prophetic
Character into the presence of Pharaoh, the wise and extensive plan he forms to
save the Kingdom from the miseries of impending famine, raises him to that
height, where his abilities and virtues are eminently displayed in the public
service, and answer the purposes of the Providence of God in favor of his
chosen people. Genesis 40, 8-23. Ibid. c, 41, I, etc. Ibid. c, 45, 4, etc. Pf,
105. 16-24.
Enabled by despotic power to retain his unnatural brethren in that Egyptian
bondage, to which they had once consigned him, and gratify revenge by every
accumulation of disgrace, he not only genenerously forgives them the outrageous
treatment he had received, but he even effaces the very remenbrance of those
injuries which had produced his adversity; and, without recriminating his
adversaries, without retaliating their injuries, he extenuates in some measure
the guilt of a crime, which, by the inter position of Providence, had proved
subservient to a happy issue. Genesis c, 37, 23-28. Ibid. 45, 1-11.


XVII. EVERY feature of this most amiable Character is so perfectly finished,
so exactly conformable to the model of the strictest virtue, that the whole
Piece is one of the completest portraits of righteousness and humanity, that
has ever been exhibited to the World in any stage of religion. Christianity
itself can produce but few examplars, that will contend with him for
superiority (...) especially, when it is considered, that Joseph's innocence
and virtue, from his youth to his decrepit old age, retained, in the very heart
of infidelity itself, the same uniform luster and firmness, though beset at
different periods by such strong temptations to infidelity and vice, as are the
inseparable attendants of extreme adversity and prosperity. In a word: every
step of Joseph's conduct in every stage of his life met the approbation of God,
and was especially directed by his protecting hand; for, in the language of the
inspired writer, The Lord was with him; and that which he did, the Lord made it
to prosper. Genesis 39, 23.


XVIII. Now, if we examine the history of this eminent Personage, as described
in the Sacred Records, we shall soon find a second very remarkable instance of
the licitness of the Slave Trade, as practiced, not only without control, but
under the visible protection of God, by one of the strictest professors of the
Religion, of Nature, the laws and principles of which were the invariable rule
of his conduct: a man in high favor with the Almighty, the framer of those
very principles and laws; and who, in the inscrutable order of his fatherly
Providence, chose him the instrument and promoter of his glory, Pf. 105, 16-24.
imparted him the divine spirit of his wisdom, Genesis c, 40, 43.
led him, as it were, by the hand, in every step of his life, Genesis 39, 21-23.
and prospered whatever he undertook. Genesis 39, 23.
An instance, attended with circumstances of that singular nature and tendency,
as seems not only to fix the subject of the present Controversy in the best
point of view, but to ascertain, beyond the power of reply, the inherent
lawfulness of the Slave Trade.

XIX. THE fact, with all its attending circumstances, is thus described in the
XLVIIth Chapter of the Book of GENESIS.

13. And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore: so
that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan sainted by reason of the famine.
14. And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt,
and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought; and Joseph brought
the money into Pharaoh's house. 15. And when the money sailed in the land of
Egypt and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said:
give us bread; for why should we die in thy presence? for the money fails.
16. And Joseph said: give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if
money fail. 17. And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them
bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the
herds, and for the asses; and he fod them with bread for all their cattle, for
that year. 18. When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year,
and said unto him: we will not hide it from my Lord, how that our money is
spent; my Lord also has our herds of cattle; there is not aught left in the
sight of my Lord, but our bodies and our lands. 19. Wherefore shall we die
before thine eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and we
and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live
and not die, that the land be not desolate. 20. And Joseph bought all the land
of Egypt for Pharaoh: for the Egyptians sold every man his field; because the
famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh's. 21. And as for the
people, he removed them to cities, from one end of the borders of Egypt, even
unto the other end thereof. 22. Only the land of the Priests bought he not; for
the Priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion
which Pharaoh give them; wherefore they sold not their lands. 23. Then Joseph
said unto the people: behold, I have bought you this day, and your land, for
Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall fow the land. 24. And it shall
come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fisth part unto Pharaoh,
and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and
for them of your households, and for food for your little ones. 25. And they
said: thou have saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my Lord, and
we will be Pharaoh's servants. 26. And Joseph made it a law over the land of
Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fisth part; except the land
of the Priests only, which became not Pharaoh's.
XX. THE transactions related in this portion of Joseph's history, afford us a
considerable number of very pertinent reflections on the Slave Trade: the
following appear to me very remarkable.

1. HERE is a whole Nation of free and independent Africans, one only
description of men excepted, inhabiting the richest, the most populous, and the
most civilized part of Africa, or, perhaps, of any other part of the Globe, at
that period, all made Slaves in one day by a most explicit, deliberate, and
formal contract. 2. Allowing, the Kingdom of Egypt at that time to have
extended to farther than it does at present; that is, 600 miles from North to
South, and 250 from East to West, it must have contained, on the most moderate
computation, as many inhabitants, at least, as the Kingdom of Great Britain
does at this present time; Egypt was then the Emporium of the whole world,
where all arts and sciences, commerce, agriculture, and polity flourished in a
degree of perfection and rosine meat, superior, perhaps, to that of any part of
Europe in our days. Accordingly, the number of Africans purchased by Joseph in
one day, at the very moderate price of one year's maintenance per head,
including their land, amounted, at least, to seven or eight millions of
persons: a number not unequal, pershaps, to all the pruchases of the kind ever
made by English Merchants since the commencement of the Guinea-Trade. 3. The
happy condition of these Africans, prior to Joseph's purchase, is a
circumstance worth observing: it differed in every respect from that of most of
their present countrymen purchased by our European Merchants. The latter are
generally Slaves, or Captives, in their native land; the former were all free
and independent subjects: those, when purchased by our African Merchants are in
a state of absolute indigence and poverty; whereas the latter were all people
of property, and, indeed, of landed property; for it is very particularly
specified in the seriptural account, that the Egyptians sold every man his
field; that is, his landed estate. 4. The circumstance of transporting Slaves
from their native soil into a distant country, is also very obvious in the
conduct of Joseph, subsequent to the purchase he had made; for, as for the
people, says the Scripture, he removed them to cities, from one end of the
borders of Egypt, even unto the other end thereof; by which expedient he
deprived them of every prospect of ever reenjoying their respective paternal
Estates, and the places of their nativity. And, is it not more than probable,
that, in the execution of so extensive a plan, as removing so many millions of
inhabitants of every age, sex, condition, and rank, infants at the breast,
young children, old and decripit people, infirm and delicate, from one end of
the borders of so extensive a Country as Egypt, even unto the other end
thereof, many must have inevitably perished in passing through the scorching
sands of a Country desolate with famine, and parched up, as it were, by an
uninterrupted drought of six consecutive years, whatever wise regulations me
may naturally suppose were made by Joseph to accommodate such an extraordinary
number of Slaves? 5. This numerous multitude of free and independent Africans,
become now by contract menial Slaves to Pharaoh, are immediately sent by Joseph
to cultivate their Master's Estates throughout all Egypt, for the land became
Pharaoh's: so, that we may consider them with the utmost propriety, as so many
Slaves, transported from their native place, and sent by their Master, or his
Steward or Overseer, to work in his different Plantations, merely for their
keep; for all the land was the property of Pharaoh, and the portion of the
yearly produce of it, which they were allowed, is said to have been given them
only for seed of the field, for their food, those of their households, and their
little ones. 6. The last and most interesting circumstance, in my opinion,
attending this singular transaction, is the manner in which Joseph proceeded to
effect his purchase. For, in consequence of that prophetic spirit, with which
the Almighty had especially favored him, and by which he foresaw the wonderful
fertility of the and for seven years to come, and the extreme sterility of it
for as many years after, he engrossed all the corn that grew in Egypt during
the first seven years of plenty, and laid it up against the time of impending
famine Genesis c. 41, v. 47, 49, 55.56.
. When this began to rage in the land, he opened his stores, and made the
Egyptians pay ready money for their corn: being entirely drained of cash, for
Joseph gathered up all the money, that was found in the land of Egypt, he
refused to supply them with broad, unless they gave all their cattle in
exchange; which, accordingly, they did, for such proportion of corn as would
keep them one year: being now reduced to the last extremity, and entirely
destitute of provisions, as well as of every means of procuring them, save
their lands and persons, he availed himself of this favorable opportunity to
effect a purchase for which he had gradually paved the way: a bargain was
accordingly concluded between him and Pharaoh's subjects, by which he bought
all their lands and persons for as much corn, as would keep the latter the
space of one year; which, from the circumstance of giving them seed, wherewith
to sow the land, appears to have been the last of that septennial dearth. So,
that, even taking advantage of the extreme indigence of his fellow creatures,
when able to relieve them, in order to reduce them to the condition of Slaves,
was not deemed by this righteous, and inspired Man, with whom the Lord was, an
infraction of these sacred laws of Nature, which were the invariable rule of
his conduct.
XXI. How far Joseph's conduct in every stage of this remarkable transaction,
so favorable to the Slave Trade, may appear equitable or otherwise to the
present humane advocates for African Liberty, through the feeble light of mere
human reason and sense, I know not: this however is most certain, that there is
not so much as one JOT in the Sacred Writings of the Word of God, that seems to
disapprove in the most distant manner, any one part of his conduct, either in
this or in any other transaction of his long and holy life Genesis 50, 26.
On the contrary, in every place of Scripture, where this eminent Personage is
introduced, whether before or after this transaction, he is constantly
represented as one of the most faithful and acceptable servants of God, under
whose particular protection he lived and thrived Genesis 39, 21, 23.
by whose immediate direction he acted Gen, ibid, and ce, 40, 41.
; and who did nothing whatever, but the Almighty made it to prosper Genesis 39, 23.
The very transaction, we are speaking of, when rehearsed by one of the
inspired Writers Ps. 105, v. 16-24.
, a Man according to God's own heart 1 Kings, c, 15, 3.
, is so far from being taxed with the least intimation of guilt in any one
circumstance attending it, that the whole process, without any exceptions
whatever, is there represented as the effect of that Divine Wisdom, with which
he was inspired from above.

XXII. A FURTHER scriptural evidence, that the conduct of Joseph in purchasing
so many millions of his fellow creatures, and reducing them to the condition of
Slaves, met the entire approbation of God, and was therefore perfectly
consonant to the sacred laws of Nature, is that remarkable declaration of the
Word of God, registered in the First book of CHRONICLES, c. 5. v. 1 -- 3, which
assigns the true reason for transfering the right of Primogeniture, or
Firstborn, from the Family of Reuben; eldest son of Jacob, to the Family of
Joseph; which, as it is expressly mentioned in that place, was Reuben's
incestuous conversation with Bilhah, his Father's concubine Genesis 35, 22.
-- But is it credible, consistently with the essential justice of God, that he
should deprive Reuben's children of their Primogeniture or birthright, for
having once transgressed one of the Laws of Nature, and yet should at the same
time, even in preserence to Judah the Messiah's progenitor, give it to those of
Joseph, who, by the very act of enslaving so many millions of his
fellow creatures, and using them as he did, must have necessarily incurred the
horrid guilt of reiterated transgressions of several of those sacred Laws, if,
what is so confidently asserted be true, that the SLAVE TRADE, or the
purchasing of Slaves, is an iniquitous unnatural pursuit, and a crime of the
blackest die, in direct opposition to every principle of Nature? How could any
one in such chimerical supposition reconcile the visible partiality of God's
conduct with his own Scriptural declarations of the eternal and immutable
rectitude of his justice?

XXIII. ONE evidence more, drawn from the same scriptural source of conviction,
will, I hope, be sufficient to evince the irreproachableness of Joseph's
conduct in the transaction now before us. Every body knows, who knows any thing
of Scripture, that the speeches made to their Children by the holy Patriarchs
of old, prior to their departure from this world, called in the language of
Scripture Blessing the Children Genesis 27, v. 4, 7, 10, 12, 19. etc.
, were so many prophetic declarations of the Word of God, predicting to them
the future events that should distinguish them and their families, and
entailing upon them and their posterity that portion of happiness or misery, to
which their moral or immoral conduct entitled them. This being an undoubted
truth, lot us now examine with an attentive eye some of the most material
circumstances of that solemn Blessing, which Jacob bestowed on Joseph and his
Brethren a little before his death Genesis 49. V. 1, etc.
.

1. This Blessing was bestowed on Joseph and his Brethren about ten years after
Joseph had enslaved all the inhabitants of Egypt, excepting these of the
Sacerdotal Order Genesis 47.28.
2. Jacob in this Blessing reproaches Reuben, his eldest son, with the infamy
of his incestuous crime in the strongest terms; and declares, that, in
punishment of it, be should not excel, but should be as unstable as water. 3.
Simeon and Levi are branded by the holy Patriarch with being Instruments of
cruelty; he abhors their counsels; calls their company dishonorable; curses
the (...) of their anger, and the cruelty of their wrath, because in their
anger, says he, they slew a man; meaning Shechem the Hivite, and his father
Hamor, together with all his male subjects, whom they slew with the sword Genesis
34, v. 25, 26.
; and, as a punishment of their barbarous cruelty, he declares they should be
divided and scattered in the land of Promise. 4. When the Holy Patriarch comes
to bless his son Joseph, he expresses himself in the following emphatic and
divine strain. Joseph is a fruitful bough: even a fruitful bough by a well,
whose branches run over the wall. The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot
at him, and bated him: but his how whode in strength, and the arms of his hands
were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob: from thence is the
Shepherd, the stone of Israel; even by the God of thy father, who shall help
thee, and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lies under, blessings of the breast, and of the
wob. The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my
progenitors: unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, they shall he on
the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him, that was separate from
his brethren Genesis 49, v. 22-25.

IN these prophetic and beautiful expressions, exhibiting in the most pleasing
colors the personal character of Joseph, and the blessings entailed on his
posterity, literally fulfilled after wards, we can perceive nothing but what
necessarily supposes in Joseph the greatest innocence of heart, the most
unimpeachable rectitude of conduct, and the most gracious acceptance with his
Creator. No part of his conduct is here branded with disgrace, with the least
appearance of the smallest guilt, or with the most distant intimation of
reproof.

BUT, were the Slave Trade as criminal in its nature as it is pretended, were
it a pursuit hateful in the sight of God, and an attrocious encroachment on the
sacred rights of justice and humanity, would Jacob, or, rather, would God, who
spoke by his mouth, have over looked the attrocity of a crime big with such an
accumulation of guilt? Would he have engaged his word to be his help and
protection, and to bestow such a plenitude of blessings on the crown of his
head, as soon almost as he had concluded that Slave-contract we are speaking
of, and at the very time he was keeping in bondage so many millions of his
fellow creatures? Would God, I say, or could God, without a most glaring
opposition to the essential rights of his own justice, have acted thus in the
case of Joseph, and at the same time rebuke his brethren, Reuben, Simeon, and
Levy, in the severest terms, and inflict a lasting punishment on them and their
posterity (though the former had only one accusation against him, and the two
latter pleaded in justification of their violent proceedings the revenge due to
their sister Dinah, and the honor of their Father's house Genesis 34. v. 7, 30, 31.
), had not Joseph's recent conduct in reducing so many millions of free
Africans to the abject condition of Slaves, as well as every other transaction
of his life, been perfectly agreeable to the invariable tenor of those sacred
Laws, of which he alone was the Author and Judge?

To every one of these questions there is but one direct answer; which, as it
must necessarily be in the negative, must, of consequence evince to the meanest
capacity, that the Slave Trade has the indisputable sanction of God in its
support.

XXIV. I WILL not conceal, or even disguise, in favor of the cause I have
espoused, what, I apprehend, will be objected to the argument I have just
enforced, from the Scriptural account of Joseph's extensive purchase of African
Slaves. -- It will be objected, I presume, that Joseph purchase was not a
forcible purchase; that the Egyptians, whom he bought, offered themselves of
their own accord, and desired that he would buy them at a certain price Genesis
47. v. 19.
; and that, of course, the free and voluntary cession they made of their
liberties and persons justified Joseph's conduct, and rendered his contract
just and valid, without injuring the natural rights of justice and humanity;
which being far otherwise in the usual practice of the Slave Trade, in which
persons are sold and bought without their consent, the inferences drawn in
vindication of that Trade from the practice of Joseph, can have no weight of
conviction in support of the Slave Trade. -- No one, I trust, will tax me with
partiality to my cause from the statement of this argument against myself: I
have given it, I think, all the weight it is able to carry: how much it will
weigh in the scale of sound and unprejudiced reason, will soon appear from the
following considerations.

XXV. 1. I can by no means allow, that Joseph's purchase of Pharaoh's subjects
was not a forcible purchase in fact, and in strictness of language. It is true,
the Egyptians themselves, without any apparent explicit proposal on the part of
Joseph, desired him to buy them for bread: but did they ever think of making
that offer, whilst they had any bread to eat, or any means left for buying or
procuring it? Did not Joseph himself, prior to that offer, pave, as it were,
the way to it, by engrossing all the corn in the land of Egypt, and by selling
it to them for money and cattle, till they had neither money nor cattle to give
in exchange? -- Let us hear how they address themselves to him their petition
will best explain, how far their offer may be called voluntary on their part.
They came unto him the second year, says the sacred Writer, and said unto him:
We will not hide it from my Lord, how that our money is spent; my Lord also
has our herds of cattle: there is not aught left in the sight of my Lord, but
our bodies and our lands. Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and
our land? Buy us and our land for bread and we and our land will be servants
unto Pharaoh; and give us seed, that we may live and not die, that the land be
not desolate.

Is this the language of persons, who freely, voluntarily, of their own accord,
and without any compulsion whatever, offer themselves to sale? Is it not
evident from the very words of their own address, that, finding themselves
reduced to the last extremity of indigence, and seeing nothing before their
eyes but inevitable death or slavery, they were forced, through dread of the
former, to submit to the latter? And can there be a more forcible contract,
than that which is made only through fear of death, only to avoid inevitable
death? -- The cession then made by the Egyptians of their liberties and
persons, was neither in fact, nor in strictness of language, nor, indeed, in
conformity with the Scriptural account of the circumstances attending it, a
free and voluntary cession. Had not therefore Joseph had better grounds in the
principles of his Natural Religion, of which he was a most strict observer, to
assure himself of the justice of his contract, the cession of the Egyptians,
forcible in the strictest propriety of the word, would never have rendered his
Contract just and valid in the sight of God.

2. But even granting, for a moment, that the Egyptians did really make a free
and voluntary cession of their liberties and persons; I do not see, upon what
principle of reason their cession could justify Joseph's conduct and make his
purchase lawful, if, as it is so confidently asserted, the Slave Trade be
essentially unjust and illicit in its own nature. For, if to purchase those of
our own species be highly criminal in itself, be an unjust invasion on the
rights of justice and humanity, and directly opposite to the Sacred Laws of
Nature, how is it possible to conceive, that any cession whatever of the party
to be purchased should make that just and lawful in the sight of God, which by
his unalterable eternal laws is essentially the very reverse? Can human
agreements dispense in the laws of God? Whatever is essentially unjust and
illicit to purchase, must be as essentially unjust and illicit to sell. -- The
objection then grounded on the pretended voluntary cession of the Egyptians,
however plausible it may appear at first, is utterly inconclusive and ill
founded.

XXVI. I could easily produce a greater number of distinguished characters
within this period of the Law of Nature, whose uniform manner of acting, with
reference to the present subject, would afford me an additional number of
arguments in vindication of the Slave Trade. But as the Sacred Book, where
those great Patterns of every religious and social virtue are exhibited, is in
every body's hands, and, as I have sufficiently demonstrated, I think, from the
Scriptural account of two of the most eminent Characters within the same
period, that the Slave Trade has the indisputable sanction of Divine Authority,
and is in exact conformity with the principles of the Law of Nature, as
delineated in the Sacred Writings of the Word of God, I shall now proceed to
demonstrate in the subsequent Section, that it is equally conformable to the
principles of the Mosaic Law.

SECTION II. Scriptural Researches on the licitness of the Slave Trade, showing
its conformity with the principles of the Mosaic Law delineated in the Sacred
Writings.
1. THE Mosaic Law, called also the Written Law, and the Mosaic Dispensation,
succeeded the Dispensation of the Law of Nature: not, as if, by the publication
of the former Exodus c. 29, etc.
, the latter had been totally abrogated, or suffered the least relaxation in
any of its laws, which are of perpetual obligation; but because the Almighty
willing to establish a Covenant with his Chosen People, the Children of Israel,
added to the former obligations such other statutes, Laws, and ceremonies, as
were to distinguish them from every other Nation in the world. This Law is very
frequently called, even in Scripture, the Law of Moses Josh. c. 8, v. 31, 32.
Ibid. 23, 6. I. Kings, 2, 3. II. Kings, 23, 25.
and Moses is said to have been the Lawgiver or the Legislator of the Children
of Israel; not because it was framed by him, but because the Almighty delivered
it to them through his ministry, and he committed it to writing. How long this
Law was in force from the first promulgation of it, has been the subject of
much inquiry among the Learned: but, without entering now into a critical
discussion of this controverted point, we may safely venture to fix that
period, without either advantage or prejudice to the Subject of our Researches,
to the time of the Apostles Council held at Jerusalem, in which the Law of
Circumcision and other Legal observances were, by an express Decree of that
Council, declared unnecessary to Salvation, and consequently of no further
obligation Acts 15, 1, etc.
This Council, according to the computation of Archbishop Usher, was held in
the Year of the World 4055; and as the Law was promulged in the Year 2513,
according to the chronological computation of the same Author; it follows, that
the Law of Moses, or the Mosaic Dispensation, continued in force 1542 Years.

II. Now, before, I proceed to show, that the Laws and Principles of this
second Divine Dispensation of Religion, not only never prohibited the
Slave Trade, but gave, on the contrary, a positive sanction to the prosecution
of it; I judge necessary to apprize the Reader, that the arguments I mean to
enforce in vindication of the Slave Trade, as confined to this second period of
true Religion, shall be entirely grounded on such written laws and principles
of internal moral rectitude, as constituted the true morality of that Religion;
and not on such Legal observances and practices, as were peculiar to it, and
constituted only the ritual, typical, or ceremonial part of its frame. The
following decisive instances of the former sort, will, without producing
others, be sufficient, I hope, to establish my assertion, beyond the power of
reply.

EXODUS.
III. IT is singular enough, that the very first Law, or Judgment, in the
Scripture language, enacted by God himself immediately after he had delivered
the Ten Commandments to his People, should be respecting the Slave Trade; and
that also with the additional circumstance of not restraining them from
purchasing their own brethren, their own flesh and blood! These are the
Judgments, says God to Moses, which thou shall set before them. If thou buy an
Hebrew Servant, six years he shall serve, and in the seventh he shall go out
free for nothing. If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself; if he
were married, then his wife shall go out with him. If his Master have given him
a wife, and she have borne him sons and daughters; the wife and her children
shall be her Master's, and he shall go out by himself Exodus c, 21, v. 1 -- 4.


IV. HERE, it is evident in the first place, that, however limited the time was
of the Slavery of an Hebrew, he was yet in the strictest sense of the word a
true and real Slave for the time; for he was his Master's property, bought for
a certain price; and his Master, on this account, had an undoubted right and
power to sell him again to another person before the expiration of that time.
But, were the Slave Trade, or the purchasing of those of our own species, and
dealing in human flesh, a pursuit of that heinous and crying nature, as to be
essentially unlawful, essentially incompatible with the principles of reason,
nature, and true Religion, would God, Justice and Sanctity itself, have
authorized the practice of it with so positive, so manifest, so explicit a
sanction, I do not say for the space of six years, but even for a single
moment, at the very time he was making his Holy Covenant with his chosen
People, and teaching them the very principles of true Religion?

AGAIN: the Hebrew, thus bought by his Brother, and reduced to the condition of
a Slave, under the express sanction of God, was a Child of the Circumcision:
now, Circumcision, under the Mosaic Dispensation, was a solemn, religious Rite,
answering that of Baptism in the Christian Law: it was a token of the Covenant
between God and his People Genesis c, 17, v. 11.
, as essentially requisite in every male person, who hoped for acceptance with
God Genesis 17, 14.
, as is Baptism in the Covenant of the New Law. If then, notwithstanding the
prerogative of circumcision, which made the professors of the Mosaic Law true
Children of God, true believers, and members of his Church, a free circumcised
Israelite was still subject to the law of human bondage or slavery, and that
even under the dominion of one of his own Communion and Church; from what maxim
or principle of true Religion and justice does it follow, that a Slave, once
admitted into the Covenant of the New Law, acquires by his admission a right to
his emancipation from human bondage? that is, a right to deprive his Master of
his property?

IN fine; it is manifest from the very letter of the Law just quoted, that,
even in the Case of an Hebrew reduced to the condition of a Slave for a limited
time, the Master's purchase of that Slave was so essentially just and lawful in
every part of it, that, though, by an especial ordinance of God peculiar to
that People only, the Slave was to be released from bondage in the seventh
year, or the year of the Jubilee; yet the right of property, acquired by that
purchase, was declared by God to be so vested in the Master, that, if the
Master had given a wife to his Slave, that is, if the Slave had married a wife
during the time of his servitude with the consent of his Master, both she and
her children, if he had any by her, became the Master's property for ever: in
which case it is worth observing, that the Slave thus emancipated, though a
member of the true Church, was ordered to go out by himself, and leave his wife
and children behind. -- A separation this between husband and wife, father and
children, well deserving the particular attention of every religious and humane
advocate for African Liberty! -- And can any one after this entertain the most
distant doubt on the licitness of the Slave Trade, so positively, so
unequivocally, so strongly authorized by this written ordinance of the Word of
God?

LEVITICUS.
V. The farther I proceed in my Scriptural Researches, the stronger the
Evidences appear to me in favor of the Slave Trade. Indeed, I have every
encouragement given me in this Sacred Book of Leviticus to advance a step
farther, and maintain, that the Slave Trade, has not only the sanction of
Divine Authority, in its support, but was also positively encouraged (I had
almost said, commanded) by that Authority, under the Dispensation of the Mosaic
Law. The following plain and explicit words of one of the laws respecting that
Trade, and registered in this Book, can admit of no other construction.

Both thy bondmen and bond-maids, says the Supreme Law giver, which thou shall
have, shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bond-maids. Moreover, of the Children of the Strangers that do
sojourn among you; of them shall ye buy; and of their families that are with
you, which they be gat in your land: and they shall be your possession. And ye
shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you to inherit them
for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for ever Leviticus, c. 25, v.
44-46.


VI. Is there be meaning in language, or sense in words, here is certainly a
Law enacted by Divine Authority, which does not only give a most positive and
unexceptionable sanction to the licitness of the Slave Trade, but seems farther
to lay, as it were, an injunction on the Children of Israel to prosecute that
Traffic under no other restriction whatever, but that of confining their
purchases of perpetual Slaves to the heathen round about them, and the
Strangers, that sojourned among them; for the words of the Lawgiver evidently
imply more than a mere permission or leave: He does not say, speaking of the
Heathen and Sojourners, Of them May ye buy bondmen and bond-maids, but of them
Shall ye buy bondmen and bond-maids.

AGAIN: the words of this Law, and they are the words of God, do expressly
declare, that Slaves thus purchased from the Heathen and Sojourners among them,
shall be the Possession, that is, the real and lawful property, of the
purchasers: a property so strictly their own, that they shall bequeath it to
their Children at their death, as a part of their just and lawful inheritance,
a part of their paternal estate, an estate for ever, for they shall be your
bond men for ever, says the Law: that is an hereditary estate with all the
emoluments arising from it; and, consequently, with all the children born from
them, agreeable to the tenor of that Law of Exodus, which has been explained
in the IVth Number of this Section; for otherwise the children of a Heathen
Slave or a Stranger would have enjoyed a privilege, which an Hebrew Slave was
denied, though a Slave only for a limited time.

VII. FROM this most decisive, most explicit, and irrefragable authority of the
Written Word of God, visibly encouraging the prosecution of the Slave Trade,
and declaring in the most categorical language that words can devise, that a
Slave is the real, indisputable, and lawful property of the purchaser and his
heirs for ever, it necessarily follows by force of consequence, that either the
Slave Trade must be in its own intrinsic nature a just and an honest Trade, and
by no means deserving those harsh epithets and names with which it is so
frequently branded and degraded; or, that, if it does still deserve those
odious names and epithets in consequence of its intrinsic turpitude and
immorality, the Almighty did so far forget himself, when he made the above Law,
as to patronize a manifest in justice, encourage a most criminal violation of
his other laws, and give his sacred sanction to what humanity itself must for
ever abhor and detest. As there can be no medium betwixt these two unavoidable
inferences, and the latter is one of the most daring blasphemies that the human
heart can conceive, I leave the religious Reader to judge for himself, which
side of the Question is the safest to embrace.

JOSHUA.
VIII. THE prudent and well concerted stratagem of the inhabitants of Gibeon,
with all the circumstances attending its final issue, so minutely described in
the IXth Chapter of this Sacred Book, will, when viewed in its proper light,
add no small weight of Authority to the justice of the Slave Trade. The
Scriptural account of this entertaining transaction, long as it may appear to
some, cannot well be contracted, without injuring its beautiful texture: the
following is a literal transcript of it.

v. 3. And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto
Jericho, and to Ai, 4. They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had
been Ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and wine-bottles, old,
and rent and bound up: 5. And old shoes, and clouted upon their feet, and old
garments upon them: and all the bread of their provision was dry and moldy. 6.
And they went to Joshua, unto the Camp of Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the
men of Israel: we be come from a far country; now therefore make ye a league
with us. 7. And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites: peradventure ye dwell
among us, and how shall we make a league with you? 8. And they said unto
Joshua: we are thy servants, And Joshua said unto them: who are ye? and from
whence come ye? 9. And they said unto him: from a very far country thy servants
are come, because of the name of the Lord thy God; for we have heard of the
same of him, and all that he did in Egypt. 10. And all that he did to the two
Kings of the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, to Sihon King of Heshbon, and
to Og King of Bashan, which was at Ashtaroth. 11. Wherefore our Elders and all
the inhabitants of our country spoke to us, saying: take victuals with you for
the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them: we are your servants:
therefore now make ye a league with us. 12. This our bread we took hot for our
provision out of our houses; on the day we came forth to go unto you; but now
behold, it is dry, and it is moldy. 13. And these bottles of wine which were
filled, were new; and behold, they be rent; and these our garments and our
shoes are become old, by reason of the very long journey. 14. And the men took
of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord. 15. And
Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let them live: and
the Princes of the Congregation swars unto them. 16. And it came to pass at the
end of three days, after they had made a league with them, that they heard that
they were neighbors, and that they dwelt among them. 17. And the Children of
Israel journeyed, and came into their Cities on the third day: now their Cities
were Gibeo, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kirinth-jeari^^. 18. And the
Children of Israel smote them not, because the Princes of the Congregation had
sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel: and all the Congregation murmured
against the Princes. 19. But all the Princes said unto all the Congregation: We
have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch
them. 20. This we will do them; we will even let them live, lest wrath be upon
as, because of the oath which we swear unto them. 21. And the Princes said unto
them: let them live (but let them be hewers of wood, and drawers of water unto
all the Congregation), as the Princes had promised them. 22. And Joshua called
for them, and he spoke unto them, saying: wherefore have ye beguiled us,
saying, We are very far from you? when ye dwell among us. 23. Now therefore ye
are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and
hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the house of my God. 24. And they
answered Joshua, and said: because it was certainly told thy servants, how that
the Lord thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and to
destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you, therefore we were sore
afraid of our lives, because of you, and have done this thing. 25. And now,
behold, we are in thine hand: as it seems good and right unto thee to do unto
us, do. 26. And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the
Children of Israel, and they slew them not. 27. And Joshua made them that day
hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the Congregation, and for the Altar of
the Lord, even unto this day, in the place which he should chose.
IX. THE following observations seem to arise spontaneously from the
circumstances related in this interesting portion of Scripture.

1. The Gibeonites were in the number of those inhabitants of the Land of
Canaan, who, by the express command of God, were to be utterly proscribed, and
driven out of the Land, by the Children of Israel: Thou shall make no covenant
with them, nor with their Gods, said the Almighty to his People; they shall not
dwell in thy Land Exodus c. 23, v. 31-33.
2. To ward this impending doom, of which they were well apprized, as appears
from their reply to Joshua, they had recourse to a stratagem, which, for want
of Joshua consulting the divine Oracle, succeeded to the utmost of their
wishes; for they made a league, and a treaty of peace and amity with Joshua and
his People; and by virtue of this National Treaty, which was confirmed to them
with the solemn sanction of an oath, and never annulled, but rather ratified in
the sequel by God himself, they were exempted from the general doom, and became
in every sense of the word free allies and friends to the Children of Israel.
Indeed, the sentiments of Religion and humility, so visible both in their first
address and their reply to Joshua's charge, and their not joining in the
general league of the neighboring Kings, who all combined with one accord to
fight against Israel Josh. c. 9. v, 1, 2.
, speak a sense of repentance, which might have induced the Almighty to reverse
his sentence, and suffer their stratagem to succeed. 3. As soon as this was
discovered, we find, that the Gibeonites were all consigned by Joshua to
perpetual Slavery, unto this day; that is, with all their posterity;
notwithstanding the sentence of proscription, the only one that the Almighty
had pronounced against them, and was to be executed by Joshua, had been
entirely reversed; notwithstanding they had every claim, by virtue of the
recent Treaty they had so solemnly concluded with him and his people, to all
the privileges and franchises of free Allies.
X. To say, that the sentence of death pronounced against the Gibeonites in
several places of Scripture Exodus 23, 31-33. Deuteronomy. 7, 2, etc.
, was afterward changed by the Almighty into that of perpetual and hereditary
bondage or slavery, is to advance what is never to be found in any part of the
Sacred Records; from the whole tenor of which it appears manifest, that the
perpetual bondage, to which they were consigned with all their posterity, was
the sole act and deed of Joshua, suggested apparently by the Princes of the
Congregation of Israel, who, prior to Joshua's curse upon them, in order to
silence the murmurs of the multitude, had declared their intention of employing
the Gibeonites in the servile occupation of hewers of wood, and drawers of
water unto all the Congregation.

Now, had Joshua's sentence of perpetual bondage been only a commutation of
that of death, to which the Almighty had condemned the Gibeonites, had it not
been lawful in itself, on other accounts, to reduce the innocent as well as the
guilty to the condition of Slaves; the sentence of perpetual bondage pronounced
by Joshua, ought, one would imagine, to have extended no farther, than the
persons of the Gibeonites then living, any more than did the sentence of death,
in lieu of which that of perpetual bondage is said to have been substituted.
The slavery then of their innocent posterity, at least, cannot be said to have
been in lieu of death, to which certainly they had never been condemned.

IT being therefore evident from the uniform tenor of the Sacred Writings,
that neither the reduction of the Gibeonites then living, nor that of their
guiltless descendants, yet unborn, to perpetual Slavery, was ever condemned by
any mark or intimation whatever of God's displeasure, but manifestly ratified
in the sequel by several undoubted assurances of his divine approbation; it is
easy to conclude, whether the reducing of the innocent as well as the guilty
part of our fellow creatures to the condition of Slaves, or even to hereditary
bondage or Slavery, be in its own nature licit or illicit, criminal or just.

XI. As a mark of the Almighty's undoubted approbation of Joshua's conduct in
the transaction just before us, we find in the continuation of this history
Josh. c. 10.
that HE even secured to his People the possession of these Slaves, and their
posterity, by a most signal victory, which he enabled them to obtain over five
Kings of the Amorites; who, in consequence of the Gibeonites having made a
league and a treaty of peace with Joshua and his People, joined all their
forces against them, and made a vigorous attempt to invade this new acquisition
of the Children of Israel. The exertions of his divine power for securing to
his People this new acquired property of Slaves were so wonderfully great, that
he even fought in Person against the invaders; for The Lord, says the Sacred
writer, discomfitted them before Israel, and stew them with a great slaughter
at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goes up to Bethboron, and smote
them to Azekab, and unto Makkedab. And it came to pass, as they fled from
before Israel, and were in the going down to Bethboron, toat the Lord cast down
great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more
which died with bailstones, than they whom the Children of Israel slew with the
sword Josh. c, 10, v. 10, 11.


AND, in order to render the victory still more complete, and the part he took
in defending the rights of his people over the Gibeonites more visible to the
whole world, he even wrought a miracle of the most singular kind: for,
barkning, as the Sacred Page expresses it, unto the voice of a Man, that is, of
Joshua, who, in the heat of action, ordered the Sun to stand still upon Gibeon,
and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon, he stayed them both about a whole day,
until the People had avenged themselves upon their enemies Josh. c, 10, v. 12,
14.
, for attempting to destroy the inhabitants of Gibeon their bondslaves.

XII. IF these wonderful achievements of the power of God in favor of his
chosen People in the very case of protecting the persons, whom they had so
lately reduced to perpetual and hereditary bondage, are not to be considered as
so many evident testimonies of his divine approbation of the immediate object
of the Slave Trade, and a positive sanction to the licitness of it, but are
still consistent with any intrinsic moral turpitude inherent to the nature of
that Trade; the abettors of this opinion must necessarily maintain, that the
Supreme Ruler of the Universe, in direct opposition to his own essential
attributes and perfections, in manifest contradiction with his own moral laws
and commandments, and in vindication of ill-gotten property, displayed to the
World the most extraordinary exertions of his Omnipotence, and disturbed the
very course of Nature to make it subservient to the vilest of purposes,
injustice and oppression. As the inference is as blasphemous as it is
necessary, the very mentioning of it will, I flatter myself, be sufficient to
determine the judgment of any religious and candid Reader in favor of the
inherent moral licitness of the Slave Trade.

XIII. I HAVE, I think, sufficiently proved from the Scriptural Passages I have
produced in the series of this second part, that the Slave Trade has the
positive sanction of Divine Authority in its support, and is perfectly
consonant to the Principles of the Mosaic Dispensation delineated in the Sacred
Writings of the Word of God.

I HAVE, however, this one thing to observe before I proceed to the third part,
in order to preclude every avenue to groundless objections; that there is not a
Place in all the Writings of the Word of God, whether of the Old or of the New
Testament, that does so much as insinuate in the most distant manner, that the
Slaves bought either within the period of the Law of Nature, that of the Mosaic
Dispensation, or that of the Christian Law, were to serve during a certain
number of years and no longer, except the Hebrew Slaves; who, for reasons
peculiar only to that People, and not applicable even to Christian Slaves, were
to serve no longer than six years in the capacity of Bond, Slaves. In every
other case, the words Bond man, Bondwoman, Bond maid, Bond servant, Servant
under the yoke, imply, in the Scripture Language, perpetual and unlimited
bondage, bondage for life, both of the male and female reduced to that
condition, and even of their posterity or children, if they had any. Nor is
there one instance to be met with in the Sacred Volumes, of the manumission or
emancipation of a Slave of either sex, except of the Hebrew race, who ever
obtained release from bondage, on account of having served any determinate
number of years.

THE dismission of Hagar, bondwoman to Abraham, from her Master's house, is so
far from being an instance of this kind, that every circumstance attending her
discharge seems to prove the very reverse Genesis 21, v. 9-14.
She was sent away by Abraham, at the earnest solicitation of his wife Sarai,
whose counsel the Almighty ordered him to follow: but the reluctance he showed
to turn her out of his house, when it was first proposed to him by Sarai, for
the thing was very grievous in his sight (or, according to the Original, The
word was very bad in the eyes of Abrabam,) and the reason of her dismission,
evidently show that her discharge was not in consequence of any contract
whatever, by which she was bound to serve a determinate number of years and no
longer, there being not the least intimation given in the Sacred History of any
such contract or agreement, but because her son's behavior to Isaac, the
promised and right Heir of the Family, was exceedingly odious and very alarming
to Sarai, who, dreading the consequences of Ishmael's persecution of young
Isaac, for so the Apostle styles it Galat. c, 4, v. 29.
, insisted on his being cast out together with his mother Hagar.

XIV. THE Scriptural acceptance and extent of the word Bondage, and the
relatives to it, being thus fixed and ascert used from the very letter and
uniform tenor of Scripture itself, no arguments whatever, grounded on the true
and real sense in which that word and its relatives are used in the Sacred
Page, will ever evince, that a Slave, within the period of any of the Three
Dispensations of true Religion mentioned in the Sacred Annals of the Word of
God, not born an Hebrew, was ever bound by contract or otherwise, to serve only
a limited number of years, at the expiration of which he obtained his freedom,
and was left at liberty to choose for himself.

SECTION III. Scriptural Researches on the licitness of the Slave Trade,
showing its conformity with che principles of the Christian Dispensation
delineated in the Sacred Writings.
I. THE Christian Dispensation, called frequently the Christian Law, the Law of
Christ, the Christian Religion, the Law of Grace, the New Law, and the New
Covenant or the New Testament, is that most sublime and perfect System of Faith
and Morality, which the Eternal Wisdom of the Father, Christ Jesus our Lord,
both preached in Person, and sealed with his precious blood. As this New Law
and Gospel of salvation is to remain in full force until the consummation of
all things, or till time shall be no more, it is not in the power of any
creature to ascertain the exact time of its duration and existence from the
first promulgation of it; for Of that day, and that hour knows no man, no not
the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the SON, but the FATHER. Mark c, 13, v.
32.


II. THE principal transactions relative to this New Law are registered in the
several inspired Writings, that compose the Sacred Volume commonly styled The
New Testament. The principles and moral duties of perpetual obligation
respecting Right and Wrong, Justice and Injustice, registered in this Sacred
Volume, being evidently dictated by the Holy Spirit of God, and God himself,
cannot consistently with the essential infallibility of his eternal Wisdom,
bear the least opposition to the principles and moral duties of perpetual
obligation respecting, in like manner, Right and Wrong, Justice and Injustice,
dictated by the same infallible Spirit, and registered in the several inspired
Writings, that compose the Sacred Volume commonly styled The Old Testament,
comprehending such transactions, as relate to both the Natural and the Mosaic
Laws. Were it possible to be otherwise, God would not be consistent with
himself, and the Religion of the New Testament, instead of being the perfection
and accomplishment, would be the reproach and condemnation of both the former
Laws, Natural and Mosaic, on the truth of which its very existence depends.

III. FROM this undeniable position it follows necessarily, that, as the
Writings of both the Testaments have the same weight of Authority, essentially
incapable of contradicting itself, in support of those principles and
decisions, enacted and registered in their respective Records, concerning the
intrinsic morality or immorality of human actions, whatever is declared in the
One to be intrinsically good or bad, just or unjust, licit or illicit, must
inevitably be so according to the principles of the Other. If, therefore, the
Slave Trade appears, as, I trust it does, from the preceding train of
Scriptural arguments, in perfect harmony with the principles and decisions of
the Word of God, registered in the Sacred Writings of the Old Testament,
respecting the intrinsic nature of that Trade, this, of course, can bear no
opposition to, but must necessarily be in equal perfect harmony with, the
principles and decisions of the Word of God respecting Right and Justice,
registered in the Sacred Writings of the New.

THIS general but forcible argument, were it even unsupported by any collateral
evidences from the Writings of the New Testament, would be fully sufficient to
verify my third and last assertion respecting the Licitness of the Slave Trade,
as perfectly conformable to the principles of the Christian Dispensation.

IV. I HAVE been the more particular in bringing this last part of my
Scriptural Researches to this central point of view, as I have more than one
reason to apprehend, that several of my Readers will be apt to imagine, that,
by the establishment of the Christian Religion, the Law of Moses was wholly
abolished and annulled in every part of it, and to every intent and purpose,
both typical and moral, of its original institution; and that, of course, the
arguments drawn in vindication of the Slave Trade from the Writings of the Old
Testament, can have no weight of conviction or authority with persons, who are
subject to no other Laws and Ordinances, but those of a Dispensation, by which
that was entirely laid aside.

V. TRUE as this assertion is with respect to the ritual, typical, and
ceremonial part of the Mosaic Law, which, in this sense, is now utterly
abolished, and no longer obligatory to the Professors of the Gospel, it is not
less erroneous and false with respect to those fundamental principles of
righteousness enacted in that Law, which relate to the intrinsic morality or
immorality, licitness or illicitness of human actions; which, from the
invariable nature of Right and Wrong, Justice and Injustice, must be of
perpetual obligation, and as unchangeable as God himself; who never did, nor
ever could alter by any Dispensation whatever those eternal principles and
laws, which are the very basis and foundation of true Religion, and
consequently of the Religion of Christ.

WE have no less an authority in conformation of this indisputable Doctrine,
than the very words of the Son of God, who, in that divine Sermon on the Mount,
in which he gave his Disciples a most minute and circumstantial account of the
principles and tenets of his Gospel, condemned the above erroneous opinion in
the most explicit terms, and forbade them even to think of it: Think not, said
he, that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy
but to fulfill Mat. c, 5, v. 17.


It was on the principle of this Doctrine of the Son of God, and on purpose to
guard against every exception to arguments drawn from the writings of the Old
Testament in favor of the Slave Trade, which some persons would be apt to make
in consequence of the above erroneous opinion, that I especially apprized the
Reader in the second Number of the last Section, that the arguments I meant to
enforce in that Section in vindication of that Trade, would be entirely
grounded, as they certainly are, on such written and explicit laws and
principles of internal moral rectitude, as constituted the true morality of the
Mosaic Dispensation, and not on such Legal observances and practices, as were
peculiar to it, and constituted only the ritual, typical, or ceremonial part of
its frame.

VI. THE permanent and indefectible authority of the Old Testament, and the
necessary conformity of the New with the principles and declarations of the
former respecting the intrinsic nature of right and wrong, justice and
injustice, being thus firmly established and ascertained; I shall now prooced,
for argument's sake, to substantiate in a more particular manner the merits of
the present Controversy with reference to the principles and tenets of the New
Testament; which, from the unanswerable, though general, argument just
enforced, appears already to give; a sanction to the licitness of the
Slave Trade, the intrinsic morality of which is so evidently warranted by those
invariable principles and decisions of the Old, with which, as proved before,
it must necessarily agree.

VII. THAT there is nothing in the Writings of the New Testament, that can be
produced in justification of the Slave Trade. has been confidently asserted by
many, and from this Jupposed silence of the Inspired Writers, they have as
confidently concluded, that the professors of Christianity are not justifiable
in prosecuting a Trade, which, not having, in their opinion, the Sanction of
the New Testament, must of course be essentially opposite to the principles of
true Christianity, which forbids in the most explicit terms, and under the
severest punishments, all acts of injustice, unnaturalness, and oppression.

VIII. THE stronger this inference, founded indeed on a false supposition,
appears to the advocates for African Liberty against the licitness of the
Slave Trade, the more powerful the following arguments must appear to them;
which, from the same negative principle, not of supposed, but real, silence
respecting the pretended illicitness of it, amounting in fact to a positive
sanction in our Case, seem manifestly to evince, that the Slave Trade bears no
opposition whatever to the principles of the Christian Law.

1. IF the Writings of the New Testament mention nothing, as it is falsely
supposed, in vindication of the Slave Trade, neither do they in reality and
truth mention any thing in condemnation of it; if then the supposed silence of
the Inspired Writers respecting the licitness of that Trade, that is, their not
mentioning that Trade at all, as it is supposed, can be brought as an argument
of its moral inconsistency with the principles of true Christianity; the real
silence of the same respecting the pretended illicitness of it, that is, their
not condemning the Trade at all, though publicly practiced in their time, and
by the very persons whom they were deputed to teach the principles and duties
of Christianity, must be a stronger argument by far of the inherent moral
conformity of the Slave Trade with the principles and tenets of the Religion of
Christ: for it shows in the strongest light, that the first Teachers of
Christianity, who were also the Inspired Writers of the New Testament, never
considered the Slave Trade, or had been taught by their Master to consider it,
as an infraction of any of the principles or moral precepts of his Gospel. 2.
In effect; this constant and uniform silence of the Sacred Writers of the New
Testament in a matter of such public notoriety; I mean their never disapproving
the practice of a Trade, in which the rights of Christian justice and humanity
are said to be so materially injured, ought to attract the particular affention
of every impartial inquirer into the merits of the present Controversy. IT is
an absolute fact, attested by all Historians, both Sacred and Profane, that at
the very time that Christianity made its appearance in the World, as well as at
the time that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were employed in preaching
and propagating throughout the World his holy Gospel and Doctrine, both before
and after the same had been committed to writing, that is, before and after the
New Testament was written, that the practice of Slavery, or the Slave Trade,
was universally adopted by the very Nations to whom they brought the glad
tidings of salvation, and who, through faith, repentance, and obedience to the
maxims and doctrine they preached, were received into the Covenant of
reconciliation and grace; and yet it is not less certain from the constant
tenor of the Sacred Wrtings of the New Testament, that desisting from the
prosecution of the Slave Trade, or manumitting those who were in actual
bondage, was never declated by any of the Apostles or first Teachers of
Christianity to be a necessary term of Salvation or acceptance with God, or an
indispensable duty of a follower of Christ.

BUT were the Trade so diametrically opposite to the principles of
Christianity, as it is asserted, were it a most unjustifiable usurpation of the
sacred rights of justice and humanity, would the Apostles have suffered those
sacred rights to be thus invaded and trampled upon with impunity, without so
much as signifying to those, whom they were commissioned to teach the Gospel of
righteousness and peace, of love and charity, that it was in open contradiction
with the principles and precepts of that Gospel.

3. IN FINE: this manner of reasoning to prove the moral conformity of the
Slave Trade with the principles of the Christian Dispensation, acquires a
degree of irresistible force, when applied to the conduct of our Blessed
Savior in his public character of Founder and Teacher of the New Law; for
though he embraced every opportunity of reproving in the severest terms such
irreligious abuses as were practiced by the Jews, and of rectifying such false
glosses, traditions, and comments, as had been added by them to the Law of
Moses, yet he never once condemned, reproved, or even hinted the least
disapprobation of the practice of Slavery, so generally adopted in his time:
no, not even in his Divine Sermon on the Mount, in which he spoke on set
purpose of the most exalted duties of his Religion, entered into a minute and
most circumstantial detail of many reciprocal offices and duties he required of
his followers, and rectified some abuses, incomparably less criminal than would
be that of enslaving our fellow creatures, were this practice so very criminal
and unjust as is represented by some modern advocates for African Liberty Matt.
cc, 5, 6, 7.
4. THE fact is: that since neither the SON of God, being himself God, nor his
Disciples commissioned to teach his doctrine, could ever after the intrinsic
nature of Right and Wrong; once the practice of Slavery, or the Slave Trade had
been expressly declared by the FATHER essentially just and lawful in the Sacred
Writings of the Old Law, which, the SON did not come to destroy, but to fulfill
Matt. c, 5, v, 17.
, it was absolutely impossible, that either HE or his Disciples should declare
it unlawful and unjust in the Writings of the New, the principles of both the
Laws, respecting the intrinsic nature of Right and Wrong, Justice and
Injustice, being invariably the same,
IT follows then, that the argument drawn in favor of the Slave Trade from the
constant silence of the Inspired Writers of the New Testament respecting the
pretended illicitness of that Trade, that is, from their never mentioning any
thing against the licitness of it, which in the cirumstances above related,
would have been only a negative inference, though of considerable weight in
vindication of it, becomes now, from this last very material circumstance, a
most powerful positive argument, showing in the strongest light, that the
nature of the Slave Trade is perfectly consonant to the principles and tenets
of the Christian Law.

IX. THOUGH the argument built on the- supposed silence of the Inspired Writers
of the New Testament respecting the licitness of the Slave Trade, is very amply
comfuted by the preceding arguments drawn from the real silence of the same
Sacred Writers respecting the pretended illicitness of it, which are, indeed,
abundantly sufficient to eftablish beyond the power of cavil or reply this last
part of my Scriptural Researches; yet, lest any one should still persist in
maintaining the opinion so generally received, that there is nothing positive
in the Writings of the New Testament, that can be produced in justification of
the Slaven Trade, I think it expedient to select one or two principal instances
out of these Sacred Books, which, I flatter myself, will not only gratify his
curiosity, but serve to convince him in the plainest manner, that, however
general his opinion may be, it is not so evident as he has been taught to
believe.

1. EPISTLE to TIMOTHY.
X. AMONG the several instructions given in this EPISTLE by St. Paul to his
beloved Disciple Timothy for the Government of the Church of Ephesus, of which
he was Bishop, there are some concerning the general duties of that part of his
Flock, who were under the yoke of bondage or Slavery, that seem to claim our
particular attention. The instructions, here alluded to, are in the VIth
Chapter of this Epistle, and are the following: V. 1. Let as many servants as
are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all honor, that the name
of God, and his doctrine, be not blasphemed. 2. And they that have lieving
Masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren: but rather do
them service, because they are faithsul and beloved partakers of the benefit.
These things teach and exhort. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not
to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness, 4. He is proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmifings, etc.


XI. THE Apostle in these words describes two classes of Christian Slaves, or
Servants under the yoke of bondage: Slaves subject to unbelievers, and Slaves
subject to true believers or Christians; and, according to their respective
situations, he specifies the general duties belonging to each class.

1. THE former are exhorted to count their own Masters, though Infidels, worthy
of all honor: that is, they are exhorted to show their Masters, both in words
and actions, such unfeigned marks of honor, submission, and respect, as they
have a right to claim, for they are worthy of all honor, from the superiority
of their rank and station in life, and the authority they have acquired over
them by the possession of their persons. The reason for enforcing such dutiful
deportment is very powerful: you are to exhort them, says the Apostle to
Timothy, to behave in this becoming manner, that the name of God, and his
doctrine, be not blasphemed: that is, lest the unbelieving Masters, seeing the
contrary deportment in their Christian Slaves, attribute their insolent,
disrespectful, and disobedient conduct, to the principles and doctrine of their
religion, and thus being reproach and infamy upon both. 2. THE latter Class of
Christian Slaves, subject to Christian Masters, are earnestly exhorted, not
only not to be less respectful and obsequious to the latter for being their
brethren in Christ, and joint members with them of the same Communion and
Church, as if they were their equals in every respect, but an show, on this
very account, in their readiness and zeal to serve them, a superior degree of
submission and obedience to their lawful authority not considering themselves
upon a footing of natural equality with those whose Slaves they are, though
entitled at the same time to all the promises and spiritual franchi^^^ of true
Believers.
XII. From the tenor of these Apostolic instructions, confirmed by many other
similar declarations to the same effect, frequently occurring in the Writings
of the New Testament, I am naturally led to deduce the following consequences
in support of the licitness of the Slave Trade.

1. IT is then evident from the Doctrine of St. Paul, that Christians, however
entitled by Baptism to the Spiritual freedom of Children of God, and Heirs of
heaven, ought yet, when under the yoke of human bondage or slavery, consider
themselves under the strictest obligation of reverencing the authority of their
Masters, even of unbelieving Masters, and counting them worthy of all honor.
But were the Slave Trade, or the keeping of our fellow creatures in bondage,
unnatural and unjust, it could never be said, that Slaves were under the least
obligation in conscience to reverence and obey an unjust, an unnatural
authority; or that their Masters, who, by reducing them to that abject
condition, had trampled on the Sacred Rights of justice and humanity, were
worthy of all honor, or, indeed, of any shadow of honor, but, on the
contrary, of all dishonor and reproach. 2. IT is likewise evident from the
Apostle's doctrine, that the primitive Christians were not only not forbidden,
but expressly allowed by the principles of our Religion the purchasing of
Slaves, and keeping their fellow creatures, nay even their Fellow Christians,
under the yoke of bondage or Slavery; and from the circumstance of their Slaves
being so particularly cautioned not to consider themselves on the footing of
natural equality with their Masters, not to despise them and their authority
for being their equals in all spiritual seize and franchises, but to
show, on this very account, a greater degree of readiness and alacrity to
render them due service, their Masters are evidently declared to have had a
just and indisputable claim to that service, as their own lawful property.
XIII. NEITHER can it be said, that this doctrine, perhaps, novel to some of my
Readers, which Timothy is directed to teach and to exhort, was only the private
opinion of St. Paul; for he declares to him in express words, that it is a
doctrine according to godliness, the very doctrine of Christ himself, and not
to be contradicted by any one, without incurring the accumulated guilt of pride
and folly with a criminal train of attendants: If any man, says he, teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine, which is according to godliness, he is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of words, whereof
comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmifings, etc.

XIV. So far then from being true, that there is nothing in the Sacred Writings
of the New Testament, that can be produced in vindication of the Slave Trade,
the palpable evidence just produced in justification of that Trade from the
authentic words of One of the very principal inspired Authors of those Sacred
Writings, must convince every candid inquirer into the merits of the present
Controversy, that, if the Slave Trade, as demonstrated in the two preceding
Parts, appears so visibly warranted by the writings of the Old Testament, the
same is not less evidently authorized, but rater more explicitly vindicated
from every suspicion of guilt and immorality by the writings of the New: for,
they do not only declare in formal words, that the teaching of the licitness of
the Slave Trade, exemplified in the practice of the Primitive Christians, is a
Doctrine according to Godliness, and according to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, but they even stigmatize the Teachers of the
contrary doctrine arch epithets and appellations not of the most pleasing
sounds.

EPISTLE TO PHILEMON.
XV. PHILEMON, to whom St. Paul addresses this affectionate Epistle, was a rich
Colossian, and a Christian of distinguished merit. The character given of him
in-the first part of this Epistle, represents him as one of the most zealous
and fervent Christians of his time. His assiduity in promoting the interest of
Christianity in quality of Fellow Laborer with St. Paul Ep. to Phil. v. 1.
, his love and faith toward the Lord Jesus, and his generous unbounded charity
toward all the saints, or his fellow, Christians Ibid. v. 5.
, whom he relieved and comforted on all occasions Ibid. v. 7.
, gained him the confidence, esteem, and affection of the Apostle and of the
whole Church at large Ibid. v. 7.
.

XVI. THIS Primitive and exemplary Christian had in his service one Onesimus a
Slave, who, as it is very strongly intimated by St. Paul, having defrauded his
Master of some part of his property, and knowing the influence the Apostle had
over him, eloped from his Master's house, went to Rome, where St. Paul was then
in prison, was converted by him, and received into the Communion of the
Christian Church Ibid. v. 10.
; and having by his good services and christian conduct, gained the Apostle's
favor, he seems to have prevailed on him to write to his Master Philemon in
his behalf.

XVII. THE Letter, of which Onesimus himself appears to have been the Bearer,
is a masterpiece of eloquence, and one of the finest Compositions extant in
the Epistolary kind. Nothing can be more tender, more pressing, more animated
and persuasive: entreaties and authority, praises and recommendations,
religious motives and motives of personal gratitude and integrity, are most
inimitably well tempered and allayed together. In short; almost every word of
this very concise Epistle contains some argument or reason to effect a
reconciliation between Philemon and Onesimus, and to obtain from the Master the
readmission of his fugitive Slave into his house and service.

XVIII. THE following XIV Verses of this elegant Epistle, which seem to have a
more immediate connection than the rest with the subject of our present inquiry,
will afford me sufficient matter for such reflections, as will not only confirm
the doctrine enforced in this Section respecting the moral conformity of the
Slave Trade with the principles of the Christian Dispensation, but prevent me
from preceding any farther in my Scriptural Researches on this interesting
subject.

THE following is a literal transcript of the Contents of the Apostle's Letter
to Philemon from the VIIIth to the XXIId Verse.

8. Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which
is convenient; 9. Yet, for love's sake, I rather beseech thee, being such a one
as Paul the aged, and now also prisoner of Jesus Christ. 10. I beseech thee for
my son Onesimus, whom I have begotton in my bonds. 11. Which in time past was
to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and to me: 12. Whom I have
sent again: thou therefore receive him, that is mine own bowels. 13. Whom I
would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me
in the ^^nds of the Gospel. 14. But without thy mind would I do nothing, that
thy benefit should not be, as it were, of necessity, but willingly. 15. For
perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou should receive him for
ever: 16. Not now as a servant, but above a servant, I brother beloved,
especially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh and in the
Lord? 17. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself. 18. If
he has wronged thee, or owes thee aught, put that on mine account. 19. I,
Paul have written it with my own hand, I will repay it: albeit I do not say to
thee, how thou owe unto me even thine own self besides: 20. Yea, Brother, let
me have joy of thee in the Lord; refresh my bowels in the Lord. 21. Having
confidence in thy obedience, I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou will also do
more than I say.
XIX. THE following obvious remarks, adapted to the subject of our present
inquiry respecting the moral licitness of the Slave Trade, seem naturally to
arise from the tenor of this sacred portion of Scripture.

1. The Apostle declares in the first place, that, were he to act in the
plentitude of his. Apostolic commission and Authority, without any regard to
the dictates of his love and friendship for Philem on, he would not use the
style of a suppliant, as he does, but would peremptorily enjoin him to receive
his fugitive Slave into his house and service, which he is bound to do in
decency and duty: the word Convenient in the Original has both these meanings.
From which declaration it evidently, follows, that the Apostle was so far from
thinking, that Philemon had acted wrong or unjustly in keeping Onesimus in
bondage, when yet an unbeliever, that he assures him, on the contrary, he would
act in opposition to his duty, or unjustly, in not receiving him again, when
baptized, into his house and service. 2. This declaration acquires a superior
degree of force from the circumstance he subjoins to his request, as a powerful
inducement for Philemon to receive him again into his service. This
circumstance, alluding to the name of Onesimus, which in Greek is the same as
Profitable, is both beautiful and interesting. The Apostle owns, without
disguise, that Onesimus, in time past bad certainly been an unprofitable, or,
in Scripturelanguage, a bad Servant Matt. c, 25. v. 30.
: but, as he could now assure Philemon, that he was quite reclaimed, and become
profitable to both, he earnestly solicits his readmission, in order that he may
be enabled to make amends for his past negligence and inattention to his
service by his future diligence and assiduity. -- It was then Onesimus's duty
to have been useful and profitable to his Master Philemon, whilst under the
yoke of servitude; and it was an act of manifest injustice in him to have been
unprofitable and of no service. Philemon then had a just and undoubted right to
the service of Onesimus, as his Slave; or else Onesimus could never have been
taxed by the Apostle with acting the part of an unprofitable or bad servant, or
with any personal injustice, for neglecting a service, which Philemon had no
right or title to demand. 3. Again: to convince Philemon, how much Onesimus was
changed for the better since his elopement, and the great reformation that his
conversion to Christianity had wrought in his morals and conduct, he tells him,
how much he was inclined himself to keep him in his own service; intimating to
him in this delicate and gentle manner, that he could have no objection to
receive again into his service a person so well qualified, as Onesimus was
then, to be an Apostle's Servant: and he assures him further, that the only
reason that has prevented him from indulging his inclination to detain him, has
been his not having had his leave and consent for so doing; without which, says
he, he would never attempt to deprive him of his Slave. From this declaration
it appears in the strongest light, how very sacred and inviolable the acquired
rights of Masters over their Slaves, even of Christian Masters and Slaves, were
held by St. Paul, who would not by any means deprive Philemon of Onesimus,
however useful the latter was to him at that time, and whatever ascendency he
had over his Master, without having first obtained his express approbation and
consent: he would then, says he, receive Onesimus, as a benefit perfectly
gratuitous, as a free and voluntary gift made to him by Philemon of so valuable
a part of his property. 4. Till he obtains this consent, he sends Onesimus back
to his lawful Master, entreating him in the most pressing and affectionate
manner, to use him with all possible tenderness and regard: to consider him now
as a member of the Communion of the true believers, and consequently not in the
character of a common menial Slave, but as his own brother in Christ, though
still his property according to the flesh, which to him particularly ought to
be dearer then ever, as being now consecrated to God. -- And lest Philemon
should insist on Onesimus making due satissaction for having desrauded him of
his time, or other property, and should, on that account, use him with
severity, the Apostle engages to make him full reparation, and becomes himself
responsible for the whole: which is a manifest acknowledgement of Philemon's
right, as the lawful Master of Onesimus, to inflict due punishment on his
Slave.
XX. From these observations, so naturally flowing from the Contents of the
Apostle's letter to Philemon, these two necessary consequences seem as
naturally to follow.

1. Had St. Paul, who had been instructed in the principles of the Christian
Religion, not by men, but immediately by Christ himself Galat. c, 1, v. 1.
, whose chosen vessel he was to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings,
and the Children of Israel Acts c, 9, v. 15.
, been taught by his Divine Master, that the Slave Trade, or the purchasing of
Slaves, or keeping those already purchased in servitude or bondage, was an
unnatural, iniquitous pursuit, contrary to the Spirit of his Religion, he would
have certainly addressed himself to Philemon in a very different style from
that of his present Letter: and instead of acting the part of a Suppliant, the
part of an intercessor and Mediator, as he does, in soliciting of him the
readmission of a fugitive Slave, he would have assumed the style and tone of a
Master; would have severely condemned the unjustifiable conduct of Philemon in
detaining him in criminal bondage, contrary to the Laws of his holy Religion,
would have commended the spirited conduct of Onesimus in shaking off the heavy
yoke of servitude, would not have suffered him to return to his unnatural
Master Philemon, especially after he had converted him to Christianity, and
entitled him by Baptism to the glorious franchises and liberty of the Children
of God, and would not have stood on complimentary ceremonies, finding him
useful in his actual state of confinement, to retain him in his ministry,
without asking his pretended Master's leave, or without his consent. THIS, I am
confident, would have been the language and conduct of the Apostle, had he been
taught by his Divine Master, that the principles and Doctrine of the Gospel, he
was commissioned to preach, were in direct opposition to the practice of the
Slave Trade, to the practice of purchasing Slaves, or keeping those already
purchased in bondage or slavery.

2. But, since the Apostle, conformably to the instructions he had received
from his Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST, respecting every part of a Christian's
duty, expresses himself in this Epistle, as well as in every other, where he
speaks on this much misrepresented subject, in terms and language diametricatly
opposite to the sentiments just mentioned; we are forced to conclude, that,
since Philemon, as well as many other Primitive Christians, cotemporary with
the Apostles of Christ and first Teachers of Christianity, kept Slaves, even
Christian Slaves, in their service, in the very face of the whole Church, and
with the approbation and knowledge of the primitive Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, as has been demonstrated from some of the clearest testimonies of the
New Testament, the nature of the Slave Trade, being so visibly authorized by
the positive sanction of these Sacred Writings, must be essentially just and
lawful in its principles, and perfectly consonant to those of the Christian
Law.
XXI. EVIDENT as this conclusion appears from the Scriptural arguments enforced
in the course of this Section, I cannot close the Subject of these Researches,
without taking some notice of what, I apprehend, will be objected against it
from the Words of our Blessed Savior in his divine Sermon on the Mount, which
in the eighth Number of this Section I declared with particular stress to
contain nothing against the licitness of the Slave Trade. -- The Words, bear
alluded to, will, I presume, be thus retorted against it.

All things whatsoever, says our Blessed Savior, ye would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets Matt. c, 7,
v. 12.
: whatsoever things therefore we would not, that men should do to us, we are
not even so to do to them; but no person whatever would certainly wish, that a
fellow creature should reduce him to the condition of a Slave; therefore no
person whatever is to reduce a fellow creature to that condition.

XXII. HERE again I must observe, that no one can justly tax me with any
partiality to the Cause I have espoused: I have, I think, worded the argument
against it in terms as forcible, as the most zealous advocate for African
Liberty, could use. But unanswerable as the same may appear to them, it is but
a plausible argument at the best.

It is an Axiom in Logic, that An argument that proves too much, proves
nothing: the above is just such a one: for, by the same manner of reasoning,
one might equally conclude, contrary to the Law and the Prophets, and the
doctrine of the Christian Religion, that not only Slavery, but every other kind
of subordination of one man to another, ought not to be suffered to continue in
the world. -- The argument, if conclusive in the former case, must be equally
so in the latter: I enforce it thus: All things whatsoever, says our Blessed
Savior, ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is
the Law and the Prophets: whatsoever things therefore we would not that men
should do to us, we are not even so to do to them; but every person would
naturally wish not to be controlled by a fellow creature, not to be under any
subjection to him, but to be absolute master of his own actions; no person
therefore ought to keep a fellow creature under any control or subjection
whatever.

XXIII. SUCH is the consequence of wresting the natural and obvious meaning of
the maxims of Scripture, and applying them to purposes inconsistent with
Scripture itself. The Golden Maxim of our Divine Master, comprehending in two
words the whole perfection of a Christian, was certainly intended by him for
all stations in life, for of such was his Church to consist to the end of time:
from the Throne to the Cottage, in every walk of life, in bondage or at
liberty, every Christian is taught and directed To do unto others, as he would
be done unto; and, by a necessary consequence. Not to do unto others, as he
would not be done unto that is, every Christian is commanded to behave to his
neighbor, in whatever situation or circumstances in life Providence may have
placed them both, just as he would wish his neighbor would behave to him in
his situation, were his neighbor's situation and circumstances his own: so
that, to apply the Maxim to a particular Case (even the Case in question), no
Christian Master can be said to do unto others as he would be done unto, unless
he behaves to his Slave with the same tenderness, justice, and humanity, as he
would wish his Slave would behave to him, were the Slave his Master, and
himself the Slave; and, upon the same principle, no Slave can be said to do
unto others as he would be done unto, unless he serves his Master with the same
fidelity, submission, and respect, which he would expect from his Master, were
the latter his Slave, and himself the Master.

XXIV. THE Golden Maxim then, of doing unto others, as we would be done unto,
is so far from condemning in the most distant manner the prosecution of the
Slave Trade, that, when applied to the Case of Christian Masters and their
Slaves, it serves, on the contrary, to enforce their reciprocal duties in their
different spheres of life. Neither could it be otherwise, seeing, that the same
Divine Authority, on which the truth of the above Maxim is founded, has so
frequently given his sanction in the writings of both the Testaments to the
licitness of the Slave Trade.

XXV. I HAVE now, I think, verified in its full extent the assertion I engaged
to prove in the Title Page; that these Scriptural Researches on the licitness
of the Slave Trade, would show the moral conformity of that Trade with the
Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion delineated in the Sacred Writings
of the Word of God: and as I prefixed to the whole certain Positions or Data,
on the Truth of which the undeniable religious certainty of that moral
conformity is entirely founded, so I shall now annex to the whole a few
Corollaries or Consequences, which, from their necessary dependence on the
former Data, must convince every religious and candid Reader of the necessity
of acquiescing in the Scriptural Doctrine enforced in these Researches.

COROLLARIES.
I. SINCE the Sacred Writings of the HOLY BIBLE containing the unerring
Decisions of the Word of GOD, the Authority of which in both the Testaments is
founded on the essential veracity of GOD, who is TRUTH itself; it follows
necessarily, that, as there can be no prescription against that Authority,
which, in the several scriptural passages quoted in the series of the foregoing
Researches, has positively declared, that the Slave Trade is intrinsically good
and licit, this, by a necessary consequence, must be essentially so in its own
nature, however contrary such declaration may be to the received opinion of
some men for any length of time. II. SINCE the Supreme Legislator of the World
is infinitely just and wise in all his Decisions respecting Right and Wrong,
and is no ways accountable to his Creatures for the reasons of his conduct in
the government of the World; so it must be a degree of presumption highly
criminal in any creature to refuse assent to those particular Decisions, by
which he has so positively declared the intrinsic licitness of the Slave Trade,
only because he cannot account for that impartial justice, which characterizes
every Decision of God, from those hidden principles of Eternal Justice, in
comprehensible to him, which induced the Almighty to establish in the world,
that subordinate state of absolute subjection of some of his rational Creatures
to others. III. SINCE no person can be supposed to acknowledge in fact, that
the Holy Scriptures are the unerring Word of God, unless he acquiesces without
reserve in every Scriptural Decision, however incomprehensible the reasons and
motives of those decisions may be to him, and that on no other account, but
because he believes them to be the Declarations of God, who, being TRUTH
itself, can neither err himself, nor lead any one into error; it follows
necessarily, that whoever does not acquiesce in those Scriptural Decisions,
quoted in the series of the foregoing Researches, declaring in formal Words the
licitness of the Slave Trade, cannot be said to acknowledge in fact, that the
HOLY SCRIPTURES are the unerring WORD of GOD. IV. SINCE not only one, but
several Decisions of the Written Word of God, as appears from the foregoing
Researches, give a positive sanction to the licitness of the Slave Trade; it is
not from the principle of private or National advantages attending the
prosecution of it, which can never affect the intrinsic nature of any human
pursuit, that any one is to believe, that the Slave Trade is intrinsically just
and lawful in the strictest sense of the word, but from the incontrovertable
veracity of the written Word of God, whose Decisions they are, and who is
essentially incompatible with the least degres of injustice. V. SINCE no abuses
or male practices whatever, committed in the prosecution of a lawful pursuit,
can ever alter the intrinsic licitness of it; there being no other arguments,
that can be produced against the Slave Trade, but such as are built on the
strengts of such abuses as are said to be perpetrated in the prosecution of it;
no arguments whatever will ever evince any intrinsic moral turpitude in its
Nature, so explicitly declared just and lawful in the Sacred Writings of the
Word of God, notwithstanding the many abuses to which it was formerly subject,
and were formerly practiced as well as now. VI. SINCE no abuses or male
practices whatever, though of the greatest magnitude, committed in former times
in the prosecution of the Slave Trade Genesis 35, 22. Exodus 21, 8, 16, 20, 26, 27.
Levit. 19, 20. Jerem. 34. v. 8-18.
, ever induced the Almighty to prohibit or abolish that Trade, but only to
check by wholesome and coercive Laws the violence of unnatural masters Exodus
21, v, 7, 12, 10, 20, 21, 26, 27. Levit, 19, v. 20, 21, 22. Ibid. 25. v. 39-43.
, and to punish the transgressors with the greatest severity Jeremiah, c, 34,
v. 17-22.
; (...) there appears no reason whatever, why the abuses and male practices
said to be perpetrated in our days in the prosecution of the same Trade,
evidently subject to the control of the Legislature, should be deemed a
powerful inducement to proceed to the abolition of it.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT was the Author's design, when he first engaged to vindicate the licitness
of the Slave Trade from the Sacred Writings of the Word of God, to have
concluded his Researches with another Section, containing some Scriptural
Directions for the proper treatment of Slaves, together with some Exemplary
Punishments and Comminations registered in the (...) Repository of religious
Knowledge, for deterring the Conductors and Proprietors of Slaves from ever
infringing by any acts of violence and oppression the sacred bounds of that
Authority, with which they (...) entrusted for a time, and which they can never
trespass with absolute impunity: but the shortness of the time, (...) other
avocations have allowed him for completing, the (...) Vindication contained in
the three Sections of his Researches, having made it absolutely impossible for
him to execute the whole of his Original Design, he is obliged to offer it to
the Public in its present state.


