A CONCISE STATEMENT OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE ONLY TRUE CHURCH, ACCORDING TO
THE GOSPEL OF THE PRESENT APPEARANCE OF CHRIST. As held to and practiced upon
by the true followers of the LIVING SAVIOR, at NEW LEBANON, etc. TOGETHER WITH
A LETTER FROM JAMES WHITTAKER, Minister of the Gospel in this day of CHRIST 'S
second appearing -- to his natural relations in England. Dated October 9th,
1785.

Printed at Bennington, Vermont, By HASWELL and RUSSELL -- 1790.

A SHORT INFORMATION of what we believe of the dispensations of GOD'S-GRACE to
FALLEN MAN: And in what manner they have found acceptance with GOD, and
salvation from sin in former dispensations: with particular reference to the
present display of GOD'S grace unto us: And in what manner we find acceptance
with GOD, and hope of ETERNAL LIFE through our LORD JESUS CHRIST in obedience to
the gospel of his PRESENT APPEARANCE.

A CONCISE STATEMENT, etc.
1st. WE believe that the first light of salvation was given or made known to
the patriarchs by promise; and they that believed in the promise of CHRIST, and
were obedient to the command of GOD made known unto them, were the people of
GOD and were accepted of GOD as righteous, or perfect in their generations;
according to the measure of light and truth manifested unto them; which was as
waters to the ancles signified by Ezekiel's vision of the holy waters (chapter
47.) And although they could not receive regeneration or the fullness of
salvation, from the fleshly or fallen nature in this life; because the fullness
of time was not yet come, that they should receive the baptism of the HOLY
GHOST and fire; for the destruction of the body of sin, and purification of the
soul: but Abram being called, and chosen of GOD as the father of the faithful;
was received into covenant relation with GOD by promise; that in him (and his
seed which was CHRIST) all the families of the earth should be blessed, and
these earthly blessings, which were promised to Abram, were a shadow of gospel
or spiritual blessings to come: and circumcision, though it was a seal of
Abram's faith, yet it was but a sign of the mortification and destruction of
the flesh by the gospel in a future day. Observe, circumcision, or outward
cutting of the foreskin of the flesh, did not cleanse the man from sin; but was
a sign of the baptism of the HOLY GHOST and fire: which is by the power of GOD
manifested in diverse operations and gifts of the spirit, as in the days of the
apostles; which does indeed destroy the body of sin, or fleshly nature, and
purify the man from all sin both soul and body. So that Abram, though in the
full faith of the promise; yet, as he did not receive the substance of the
thing promised, his hope of eternal salvation was in Christ, by the gospel to
be attained in the resurrection from the dead.

2d. THE second dispensation was the law that was given of GOD to Israel, by
the hand of Moses; which was a further manifestation of that salvation which
was promised through CHRIST by the gospel, both in the order and ordinances
which was instituted and given to Israel, as the church and people of GOD
according to that dispensation; which was as waters to the ancles, Ezekiel
XLVII. by which they were distinguished from all the families of the earth.
For, while they were strictly obedient to all the commands, odinances, and
statutes, that GOD gave them, they were approbated of God according to the
promise for life; and blessing was promised unto them in the line of obedience:
Cursing and death, in disobedience: for GOD, who is ever jealous for the honor
and glory of his own great name, always dealt with them according to his word:
for while they were obedient to the command of GOD, and purged out sin from
amongst them, GOD was with them, according to his promise. But when they
disobeyed the command of GOD, and committed sin, and became like other people,
the hand of the LORD was turned against them; and those evils came upon them
which GOD had threatened; so we see that they that were wholly obedient to the
will of GOD made known in that dispensation, were accepted as just, or
righteous: yet, as the dispensation was short, they did not attain that
salvation which was promised in the gospel; so that as it respected the
new birth, or real purification of the man from all sin; the law made nothing
perfect, but was a shadow of good things to come; their only hope of eternal
redemption was in the promise of CHRIST, by the gospel to be attained in the
resurrection from the dead. Acts of the Apostle xxvi. 6, 7.

3d. THE third dispensation was the gospel of CHRIST'S first appearance, in the
flesh: and that salvation which took place in consequence of his life, death,
resurrection, and ascension at the right hand of the father being accepted in
his obedience, as the first born among many brethren; he received power and
authority to administer the power of the resurrection, and eternal judgment to
all the children of men: so that he has become the author of eternal salvation
to all that obey him; and as CHRIST has this power in himself, he did
administer power and authority to his church at the day of Penticost; as his
body: with all the gifts that he had promised them, which was the first gift of
the HOLY GHOST, as an in-dwelling comforter to abide with them forever: and by
which they were baptized into CHRIST'S death; death to all sin; and were in the
hope of the resurrection from the dead, through the operation of the power of
GOD, which wrought in them. And as they had received the substance of the
promise of CHRIST come in the flesh, by the gift and power of the HOLY GHOST;
they had power to preach the gospel in CHRIST'S name to every creature; -- and
to administer the power of GOD to as many as believed, and were obedient to the
gospel which they preached: and also to remit and retain sin in the name and
authority of CHRIST on earth: so that they that believed in the gospel, and
were obedient to that form of doctrine which was taught them; by denying all
ungodliness and worldly lusts; and became entirely dead to the law by the body
of CHRIST, or power of the HOLY GHOST, were in the travel of the resurrection
from the dead; or the redemption of the body. So that they who took up a full
cross against the world, flesh, and devil; and who forsook all for CHRIST'S
sake; and followed him in the regeneration, by persevering in that line of
obedience to the end; found the resurrection from the dead, and eternal
salvation in that dispensation: but as the measure of that dispensation was
only as water to the loins; the mystery of GOD not finshed; but there was
another day prophesied of, called the second appearance of CHRIST, or final and
last display of GOD'S grace to a lost world: in which the mystery of GOD should
be finished as he has spoken by his prophets since the world began: which day
could not come, except there was a falling away from that faith and power that
the church then stood in; in which time antichrist was to have his reign, whom
CHRIST should destroy with the spirit of his mouth and brightness of his
appearance: which falling away began soon after the apostles, and gradually
increased in the church, until about four hundred and fiftyseven years from
CHRIST'S birth (or thereabouts) at which time the power of the HOLY PEOPLE, or
church of CHRIST, was scattered or lost by reason of transgression: and
antichrist, or false religion, got to be established. Since that time the
witnesses of CHRIST have prophesied in sackloth or under darkness; and although
many have been faithful to testify against sin; even to the laying down of
their lives for the testimony which they held; so that GOD accepted them in
their obedience: while they were faithful and just to live or walk up to the
measure of light and truth of GOD, revealed or made known unto them, but as it
is written, that all they that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, shall suffer
persecution: and so it has been, and those faithful witnesses lost their lives,
by those falsely called the church of CHRIST: which is antichrist; for the true
church of CHRIST never persecuted any; but were inoffensive, harmless, separate
from sin: for the true church of CHRIST taking up their cross against the
world, flesh, and devil, and all sin, living in obedience to GOD they earnestly
contend for the same. Therefore it may be plainly seen and known, where the
true church of CHRIST is: but as it is written antichrist or false churches
should prevail against the saints and overcome them, before CHRIST'S second
appearance, 2 Thessalonians. 11.

3. Let no man deceive you by any means for that day shall not come except
there come a falling away first; and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition, Rev. xiii. 7. And it was given unto him to overcome them, and power
was given him over all kindreds, tongues, and nations; and this is the state
CHRIST prophesied the world of mankind should be in, at his second appearance,
Luke xvii. 26. And as it was in the day of Noe, so shall it be in the days of
the son of man, verse 30. Even so shall it be in the day when the son of man is
revealed: plainly refering to his second appearance to consume or destroy
antichrist, and make a final end of sin; and establish his kingdom upon earth:
but as the revelation of CHRIST must be in his people, whom he had chosen to be
his body, to give testimony of him and to preach his gospel to a lost world.

4th. THE fourth dispensation or day is the second appearance of CHRIST, or
final, or last display of GOD'S grace to a lost world, in which the mystery of
GOD will be finished and a decisive work, to the final salvation, or damnation
of all the children of men. (Which according to the prophecies rightly
calculated, and truly understood, began in the year of our Savior JESUS
CHRIST, 1747.) See Daniel and the Revelations. In the manner following, 1st. To
a number, in the manifestation of great light and mighty trembling by the
invisible power of GOD, and visions, and revelations, and prophecies; which has
progressively increased, with administration of all those spiritual gifts, that
was administered to the apostles at the day of Penticost: which is the
^^^forter that has led us into all truth: which was promised to abide with the
true church of CHRIST unto the end of the world, and by which we find baptism
into CHRIST'S death; death to all sin, become alive to GOD, by the power of
CHRIST'S resurrection, which works in us mightily; by which a dispensation of
the gospel is committed unto us; and woe be unto us if we preach not the gospel
of CHRIST. (For in finding so great a salvation and deliverance from the law of
sin and death in believing and obeying this gospel which is the gospel of
CHRIST, in confessing and forsaking all sin, and denying ourselves and bearing
the cross of CHRIST, against the world, flesh, and devil.) We have found
repentance of all our sins; and are made partakers of the grace of GOD wherein
we now stand: which all others in believing and obeying, have acceptance with
GOD, and find salvation from their sins as well as we; GOD being no respecter
of persons but willing that all should come to the knowledge of the truth, and
be saved. Thus we have given a short information of what we believe of the
dispensations of GOD'S grace to mankind, both past and present: and in what
manner the people of GOD have found justification, or acceptance with GOD,
which was and is still in believing and obeying the light and truth of GOD,
revealed or made known, in the day or dispensation in which it is revealed: for
as the wrath of GOD is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness or live in any
known sin against him; so his mercy and grace is toward all them that truly
fear him, and turn from all their sins, by confessing, and forsaking, and
repenting, which is the way and manner in which all must find the forgiveness
of their sins, and acceptance with GOD through our LORD JESUS CHRIST, or
finally fail of the grace of GOD; and that salvation which is brought to light
by the gospel. But to conclude, in short, as we believe, and do testify, that
the present gospel of GOD'S grace unto us is the day which in the scripture, is
spoken or prophesied of, as the second appearing of CHRIST to consume or
destroy antichrist, or false religion, and to make an end of the reigning
power of sin (for he that commiteth sin is the servant of sin and satan) over
the children of men: and to establish his kingdom, and that righteousness that
will stand forever: and that the present display of the work and power of God,
will increase until it is manifest to all; which it must be in due time: for
every eye shall see him; and he will reward every man according to his deeds;
and none can stand in sin or unrighteousness; but in that righteousness which
is pure and holy: even without fault before the throne of GOD which is obtained
by grace, through faith in obedience to the truth of the everlasting gospel of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, in denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts; by
confessing all sin, and taking up the cross of CHRIST, against the world,
flesh, and devil: we desire therefore, that the children of men would believe
the testimony of truth; and turn from their sins by repentance, that they might
obtain the mercy of GOD, and salvation from sin before it be too late.

A LETTER FROM JAMES WHITTAKER, Minister of the Gospel, etc.
I HAVE wrote to you a letter, in answer to a letter you wrote to me last
winter; wherein I have signified my mind partly to you: it remains now that I
declare unto you my whole heart; which I cannot tell at present but it will be
a final close between you and me, through time and eternity. Flattering titles I
am not about to use toward you or to sooth you with lies, but with the truth
will I come forth, whether you hear, or whether you forbear: be not so unwise
as the Scribes and Pharisees; who said to CHRIST, thou bear record of
thyself, thy record is not true: while I testify unto you what GOD has done for
my soul: blessed be GOD forevermore who has separated me from my mother's womb;
and made me a minister of the gospel in the day of CHRIST'S second appearance.
All earthly profits and pleasures; all earthly generation, and propagation
which are the delights of all men in their natural birth (professor and
profane) all these, I say, have I forsaken for CHRIST'S sake; and I have
already received an hundred fold in this present time, according as the holy
SON of GOD promised in the day of his first appearance; and much more
abundantly: A death to the man of sin have I found; a total spoiling of the
strong man's goods and redemption from the bondage of corruption; which is that
sordid propensity to, or ardent desire of copulation with women: which has not
been understood in that sense for many ages, but now is made manifest to all
them that believe and obey the gospel which GOD has committed to my trust. I
daily feel a fountain of love, life, joy, and heavenly glory flowing in my soul
like a river of living waters; pure and clean my soul is constantly replenished
with rich supplies from the heavenly glory; and my heart incessantly flows with
charity and benevolence to all mankind: with a broken heart GOD has blessed me;
and the image of the LORD of glory is formed in my soul: plenty of the dew of
heaven is distilled in my soul from day to day, and the divine nature does
insold me like a delightful sea of pleasant waters, full of glory. What think
ye? If I were to seek friends in this world, should I not cleave to my own
blood? Should I not make you the objects of my first pursuit? but I am weaned
from all terrestrial connexions; and in lieu thereof I have joined the host of
heaven: with open vision do I behold the angelic company of the spiritual
world; and join the melodius songs of the new Jerusalem. Why tell ye me of your
increasing and multiplying after the flesh? Your vessels are marred in the
potter's hand, and they must be made over again by regeneration; or go down to
the pit. Say ye it is a command to increase and multiply? but I say it never
was a command to corrupt the earth, and fill it with a double condemnation; and
then plead the command of GOD to increase and multiply, as though you had been
doing his will. GOD has given me the power to increase and multiply in its
true, typical, and evangelical sense, which I go forth to do: I have begotten
many thousands of children, and replenished them with many good things I hate
your fleshly lives, and your fleshly generation, and increasing, as I hate the
smoke of the bottomless pit: and your pleading the command of GOD to increase
and multiply, to cover your doleful corruptions; and inverting the order of
heaven. Think ye that I will look toward you, while you live after the flesh,
defiling yourselve with effeminate desires, and profaning the command of GOD
for a cover? It is in my power indeed to help you greatly in a temporal sense,
and many others who live as corrupt lives as you do this day; as much without
GOD in the world; but be it known unto you and all men that I will not do it;
except you forsake your wicked lives and serve the living and true GOD: which I
have no expectation you will do if I should nourish and cherish you as a tender
father does his children. Stay in England 'till you go down into your grave, as
long as you are for following natural generation and the course of this world:
I know that your greatest oppression is your living after the flesh, which is
your own choosing; and is the very reason why I will not help you, though I have
it in my power. Away! with your looking toward me for help, since you are sunk
in my soul for your disobedience to GOD and your lying hopes that you are in
favor with him; while you corrupt the law and trample the gospel under foot;
were it so indeed that you had it in your hearts to turn to GOD, and obey the
gospel; I would look toward you with charity and compassion, and would take
care of you, soul and body: but that is far from you, and it is in your hearts
to enlarge your liberty after the flesh; and to provide livings for yourselves
and postery: therefore you are but a stink in my nostrils: instead of your
having the pardon of your sins, you are deceived, and I feel that you are
powerless, alienated from the life of GOD and become carnal, sensual, unwise,
therefore as you have chosen your own ways: see what the god you serve will do
for you, and your false hopes what they will bring you to. All we that are of
that one community that worship GOD in spirit and rejoice in CHRIST JESUS,
being separated from all effeminate desires, and sensual pleasures, are in
possession of the only hope of eternal life: my GOD has delivered me, redeemed
my soul, filled it with heavenly glory, and the power of an endless life; as
well as made me able to help many in a temporal sense: and you might have been
sharers with me in all this unmeritted munificence, had you obeyed the gospel
with me. As therefore you have forsaken GOD, so I also forsake you; and will
never give you any encouragement to come into this land, 'till once for all you
resolve to turn to GOD, and obey the gospel. I feel the compassion of GOD to
warn you. What you are losing in this great day of the second appearance of the
SON OF MAN; you are losing no less than the only means of salvation that ever
will be offered again in this world. The power of the gospel does prosper in my
soul, in bowels of charity and compassion for the poor lost children of men:
and I would that you would be warned by a faithful friend, not to outstand the
day of GOD'S final visitation, for the sake of your false hopes, which will
leave yuor souls desolate and barren: or for the fading things of this life,
which are but vanity and vexation of spirit. O! that you would hearken! for
then there is the same door for your escape, as for the rest of the children of
men; at which door, if you enter, I feel to receive you with charity: and the
severity of this letter, is the charity of GOD for your souls; and his
abhorence of your false hopes.

James Whittaker


