A SERMON, DELIVERED BEFORE His Excellency the President, The Honorable
Senate, AND The Honorable House of Representatives, OF THE STATE OF NEW
HAMPSHIRE, AT THE ANNUAL ELECTION, Holden at Concord, on the first Wednesday in
June, M. DCC. XC.

BY JOHN C. OGDEN, A. M.

Rector of Queen's chapel in Portsmouth.

PRINTED AT CONCORD, BY GEORGE HOUGH, FOR THE GENERAL COURT.

M.DCC.XC.

State of Newhampshire. In the House of Representatives, June 3, 1790.
Voted, That messieurs Sherburne, Dow, and Abbott, with such of the honorable
Senate as they may join, be a Committee to wait upon the reverend Mr. OGDEN,
and return him the thanks of the Generalcourt, for his ingenious discourse this
day delivered before the Legislature; and request of him a copy for the press.

Sent up for concurrence, Thomas Bartlett,
Speaker. In Senate, the same day, read and concurred. Mr. Oliver Peabody, and
Mr. Green, joined.

J. Pearson, Secretary.



A SERMON.
NEHEMIAH v. 19. Think upon me, my God, for good -- according to all that I
have done for this people.
THESE words are the pious ejaculation of one of the first patriots whose life
adorns the page of history. They are the overflowings of a heart deeply
impressed with a sense of his duty to God, and looking only to the Almighty for
a reward for services done to a people, who were become dear by the ties of
blood, and the bands of religion. They are the devout address of no less a
personage than the truly illustrious Nehemiah, a favorite in the court of the
king of Persia, and cupbearer, an office of honor and profit among the eastern
nations.

A SHORT review of his history and virtues, will lead us to improve the text as
the foundation of a discourse, in which we may present the true patriot only in
the true christian -- portray his virtues as a pattern for all -- and make
those observations which are proper upon the occasion of our assembling
together and worshipping God on this day; and commending our country, our
rulers, and ourselves, to his guidance, and holy protection.

NEHEMIAH shines distinguished, for his anxious solicitude for his countrymen
-- for his liberality -- disinterestedness -- courage -- uniformity of
deportment -- and social virtues; but, above all, for his piety.

THE first of these immediately fired his soul to serve his friends and
kindred, as soon as he understood the desolate state of Jerusalem; and he could
not suppress his anxiety, even in the royal presence. The king, vigilant for
the felicity of so noble and faithful an attendant, asks the cause of his
dejection. The answer is full and sufficient -- Why should not my countenance
be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchers, lies waste, and
the gates thereof are consumed with fire? How unlike most of the world was this
man! being in place and prosperity themselves, they forget their best friends
and dearest relatives; they choose rather to rise upon the ruin of all these,
than to lose the enjoyments of a gay court -- the friendship of a chief
magistrate -- a splendid offi^^ -- lucrative post -- and great wealth.
Especially are they greedy to preserve these, where they have not the merit
requisite to gain them, as rewards for virtuous and noble actions.

THE liberality of Nehemiah appeared upon all occasions, particularly when he
supported the dignity of a governor, at a great expense, from his own privy
purse; refusing to accept any reward from the nation -- or even the sum which
had been paid to those who had gone before him in that station: nay, he
proceeded farther -- and, vigilant over those around him, restrained his
attendants from committing any plunder or spoil, or doing any injury to the
people.

HIS courage was displayed, when he opposed and confronted Sanballat and
Tobiah, who were exceedingly grieved when they heard that there was come a man
to seek the welfare of the children of Israel; and when he strengthened the
people, by exhorting them to unite their hands in building the walls, that they
might no longer be a reproach, and arming them and his servants: -- So also he
showed a fearless temper, when he gave a resolute answer to those who would
wish to insinuate, that he meant to rebel, and set himself up for the sovereign
of the country -- The God of Heaven will prosper us, therefore; we his servants
will arise and build: but you have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in
Jerusalem. Hearing their scoffings -- knowing their malice and secret plots, he
set a watch -- armed the laborers -- and, like an experienced general, gave
out his military orders. But a worse task, if possible, soon devolved upon him,
and tried his valor; for amidst all his cares and exertions, there arose a
murmuring among his own people, and they and their wives cried to him against
their brethren the Jews, who took the advantage of their distresses, and strove
to make themselves fortunes by involving them in debt, for even the necessaries
of life, and then gaining a mortgage on their property, to bring their sons and
their daughters into bondage -- pushing their oppression to that extremity, as
to put it totally out of their power to redeem themselves, because their lands
and their vineyards were in the hands of other men: they had been transferred,
so as to remove all possibility of extricating themselves from their
embarrassments; leaving them nothing but poverty, despair, and slavery, for the
future portion of their lives. Nehemiah, stung to the soul at hearing of all
these evils, soon resolved what to do: -- His honest heart, emboldened by a
consciousness of having framed no laws that would screen such unbecoming
conduct, and knowing that he had set a diametrically opposite example,
encouraged him without delay to rebuke the usurious oppressors, and oblige them
to bind themselves by a covenant, to restore their unjust gains; and lest they
should attempt to evade or protract this reformation, he called the pries^^ and
in their presence took an oath for the fulfillment, and shook his lap, and said,
So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labor, that performs
not this promise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied: and all the
congregation responded, Amen, and praised the Lord -- and the people did
according to this promise. But, that demon Avarice could not submit to be thus
foiled; and these nobles of Judah entered into a secret correspondence with
Sanballat, his enemy, and aided his artful machinations against Nehemiah --
they spread lies and false rumors, and hired prophecies, wishing to terrify
him by discovering his designs; nay, they had the effrontery to extol the good
deeds of his enemies in his presence; and in return, like genuine sycophants,
they carried his answers to their mischievous employers. But he passed firm and
undaunted through all these -- his big soul could not be shaken -- his honest
purposes could not be perverted: -- And who, my brethren, has not seen such
conduct, and such opposition arise, against almost every man, from the days of
Nehemiah unto this hour, who has attempted to stem the torrent of vice,
irreligion, and oppression, and lead others to the performance of those things
which are right?

HIS industry is seen, when he reconnoitres the walls and ruins, with a few
faithful men, by night -- in his appearing in person, exciting them to their
work -- in watching their enemies' motions -- in putting them into a posture of
defense: We made our prayer to God, says he, and I set the people with their
swords, their spears, and their bows; and I said unto them, Be not afraid of
them -- remember the Lord, who is great and terrible, and fight for your
brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your houses. This
industry also appeared in his attention to the reformation he made in the
abovementioned usurious practices, and to a reestablishment of religion. To
find false and treacherous brethren among the Jews themselves -- to contend
with men who were enlisted into the interest of foreigners -- who were bribed
into the service of idolatrous neighbors, and wished to behold their city and
country invaded, in order to give all possible interruption to Nehemiah and the
people -- was employment enough for one man to guard against: but he must be
industrious indeed, who could repel the assaults of apostate priests and false
prophets, with their frightful, enthusiastic predictions -- with their feigned
reports of meditated destruction from the hands of conspirators and assassins
-- with their attempts, by artful advice, to lead him to act the coward, to
flee for shelter to the temple, or put himself there into a place of safety --
and kindly, though treacherously, offering him their company. How excellent was
the answer of this firm faithful ruler, Should such a man as I flee, (a man in
public station) who is there that, being as I am, would go into the temple to
save his life? I will not go in.

HIS uniform deportment shone in all these cases; no shiftings; no waverings
from his purposes; no false pretenses or deceitful excuses, as popular passion,
clamor, or frenzy -- as ambition, avarice, or spleen, might lead. His eye was
fixed upon the darling object of his heart; he abode twelve years by the work
before he returned to Persia; and coming to Judea again, he proceeded in the
reformation he had begun, and returning a second time, he probably devoted the
remainder of his life to the service of God and his people: all fair means were
taken to recover the city from its ruin; and he had the unspeakable happiness
to behold it filled with inhabitants -- adorned -- fortified -- again
distinguished among the neighboring nations -- and restored in a good degree
to its former splendor.

HIS social virtues appeared, in that benevolent love to his countrymen, which
led him, without pecuniary reward or emolument, to begin and appear in his own
person at the head of this noble work; in his respectful and grateful attention
to the king his master; in his hospitality to those whom he entertained daily
at his table; in his sympathy for the suffering women and children; and in his
regard to the morals of the nation, by his attention to the reestablishment of
their religion: nay, all these virtues, and every one of his noble acts, are in
reality to be extolled, and can only entitle him to the applause of God, from
his real, unfeigned, and singular piety -- a piety, which ever led him, as in
our text, to appeal to God in every emergency, and having accomplished all, to
cry, Think upon me, my God, for good, and spare me according to the greatness
of thy mercy. Most men would have been intoxicated with the success, the
applause, the honor, and affection, which he met with; and been puffed up,
with the acclamations, and proofs of gratitude, which the world exhibited to
him: but as what he did was for the service of God and religion, he preferred
the approbation of Heaven before that of men. Humbled under the love, power,
and mercy of God, to sinful man, he prays the great Creator and Preserver of
all, to accept his good intentions, and forgive his imperfections. With the
assistance of Ezra he caused the law of God to be read and publicly explained
to the people, and directed them religiously to observe all its rites and
precepts, and ordained a solemn fast to ask the blessing of God. How pleasing
were the sensations of this great man's soul, when he beheld, in consequence of
his exertions, synagogues built through the land, and public worship attended
every Sabbath day! From thence the nation ever afterward maintained the
appearance of religion, and were preserved from idolatry.

HERE we have a most justly admired personage -- most highly to be extolled:
behold him, secure upon all emergencies, in the honest and best affections of
his people; -- constantly blessed by his countrymen; -- viewing, wherever he
turned his eye, the great success of his exertions. He lives rewarded in Heaven
with God, angels, and saints, and is enrolled in the first class of illustrious
patriots, princes, and statesmen, who have lived in the world; and will
continue to shine as a pattern to all such, in the present or future years,
unto the last period of time. That country must be blessed, which lives under
the administration of such a man; and that nation must be favored by God
indeed, which is ruled by a combination of such characters, where similar worth
and virtues are the excellencies that rouse the voice of gratitude and
affection, and lay honors and profit at their feet, and court and importune
their acceptance -- hung over with no empty titles, and dazzling by no borrowed
luster -- cursed by no injured innocent -- dreaded by no defenseless citizen:
such will live, will rise and prosper, wherever merit is a jewel, and virtue a
pearl of great price; while its enemies, pride, insolence, craft, duplicity,
and insidious smiles -- while they would deceive and betray our credulity, that
they may grasp us in their armed paw, and crush us with their devouring jaws --
may make our lives, honor, and prosperity, their sport and pastime -- are
spurned from our presence, and banished forever from our confidence.

NEHEMIAH is that noble character, in whom we see the likeness of the beloved
President of these States. Heaven has, in love, pointed them both to us, as
patterns by which to regulate our actions, each in his sphere, whether in
stations that are sacred or civil. These renowned men afford those
distinguished traits, which all may read, and know; upon which they may and
ought to form themselves -- from which they may gain just ideas, and a proper
knowledge of those characters whom they, by their free election, appoint to
govern themselves and others: Thus strengthening the bands of society, giving
dignity, energy, and stability, to government, and making life a blessing.

PERMIT me to congratulate every class of my hearers, and every individual in
these States, that a Washington has obeyed their summons, by an united
suffrage, and honored us by his cares and services. And while I do this, let
me also strive to persuade my countrymen, when they contemplate his character,
to imitate the conduct of those faithful followers of Nehemiah, who so
steadfastly abode by the good work he was striving to effect; and with warm,
honest hearts, and cheerful voices, to echo their answer to his address, by
crying, Let us rise up and build -- perfect the temple of religion, and the
edifice of liberty, which we have for a long time declared we wish to see
properly founded, and their structures rise into a fair and beautiful building,
united by the strongest ties of mutual affection and mutual interest: let us
not, at this stage of our affairs, and in days of peace, continue inactive, or
forget the work before us; but strive to make civilization a blessing -- to
preserve our national honor, by mitigating, as far as possible, the late
distresses occasioned by a long war -- by reforming all dissoluteness or
laxness of morals, and propagating of our holy religion; yielding to none in
our exertions on these heads -- proving that we are those patriots and
christians which we have professed and ought to be. This is a work to which
every man may contribute a share -- this is the errand for which we assemble in
our religious, benevolent, and social combinations -- in our state and national
legislatures. In vain do we summon our brethren from their private business,
and call our civil rulers, of every kind, from their homes and retirements,
unless we also combine in carrying into execution their just laws. And we ought
to guard our actions, that in no particular we forfeit our honor as Americans
-- our rights as men -- and, above all, our privileges as christians It is a
degeneracy of morals, which language cannot sufficiently describe, for us to be
sluggish, thoughtless, or selfish, who live in this age. It will be base indeed
for us to forget our duty to God and man, by not striving to fix the rights and
liberties of men on this continent, upon the firm foundations of law and good
morals. It would, pardon my repeating so painful a thought -- it would be vile
ingratitude in us, to the illustrious chief magistate of the Unitedstates,
should we call him to public station -- hail him welcome to the chair -- lift
up our voices of joy and gratitude for so auspicious an event as his acceptance
-- salute and address him from every quarter -- and thus to neglect, in the
smallest degree, to help forward his disinterested, industrious labors in our
cause, and we shall become monuments of ingratitude, and objects of abhorrence
to all eternity. We are to guard his honor, and our own, by ever selecting our
wisest and best men to be his fellow-helpers, in the organization of
government. Piety, wisdom, virtue, abilities, disinterestedness, firmness, are
to be the requisites to form his councils, and preserve our freedom. If
selfishness, if vices, if ignorance, and want of stability, should be indulged
in our public officers -- and places and preferments be their pursuit for
themselves and their friends, and these being gained, they may retire to enjoy
the spoil, and wallow in their illgotten wealth -- and thus give place for a
second, and a third, and perpetual succession of electing, resigning, and time
serving, regardless of expenses incurred in consequence, by leaving a people in
the midst of difficulties, or throwing a whole country idle: if by new
elections we shall be wretched and miserable soon, and evils accumulate thick
and fast upon us -- then patriotism, and virtue, and disinterestedness, will be
farces indeed; they will be prostituted as sounds to dazzle a mob, and degrade
the national honor. Or, should that amphibious animal, Insincere Duplicity,
with its ignorance and indolence, with its fair words and plausible pretenses,
with its smiles and graces, serpent like, wind itself into our hearts and
government -- and proud Haman, and saluting rebelling Absalom, rise to the
pinnacle of power, then will louder cries arise from injured citizens, lost
property and usurious oppression, than ever rang in the streets of Jerusalem:
then debauched youth, violated virgins, and abject vassals, will be enlisted
into the retinue of public office -- and no country rival us in wickedness.
Sharping, overreaching, and deceit, will be recommended by public examples,
and the world conclude themselves permitted to practice the same upon each
other by way of retaliation. And if pride, with its undermining art, with its
insolent followers stationed at every corner, and summoned at every sound of
his trumpet, may exert all its art to serve itself, to silence the voice of
injured worth, and the suitor for justice, and those who wish to preserve our
national innocence and purity, we are going down in a broad road to
destruction. We can all cry with Nehemiah, to an allseeing God, and appeal to
his mercy for time and eternity, because we have strove to do our duty; and can
honestly say, Think upon me, my God, for good, according as I have served my
generation, by thy will -- and done good to my people: then must we flourish
and continue to prosper.

UNDER the fullest impression of the importance of all these great truths and
duties, I am authorized to observe, that in no person can we find so important
a pattern to regulate our lives, to give our characters the finishing strokes,
and become as perfect as is possible for mortals to be, as in the great Author
and Founder of our religion, Jesus Christ the righteous, our great Mediator and
Advocate in heaven: -- Nehemiah, and all the renowned men, that ancient or
modern times ever produced, sink as the stars before the bright luminary that
rules the day, when the Sun of Righteousness arises with healing under his
wings, to those who fear God and keep his commandments. The great eternal Word,
the Son of God, who came down from Heaven to save and reform a world lying in
sin, has displayed unto us a glorious pattern of purest benevolence -- he has
opened a fountain, from which alone we can draw the purest draughts of that
heavenly excellence. The sight of impending calamities called forth his tears
for his countrymen, tho he was to have no share in them himself. His gospel
teaches us to love all mankind. His religion inculcates private friendship, and
public spirit -- confining both within their due bounds -- expanding our love,
not to an individual or a nation, but to all mankind. We all sprang from one
common ancestor* to teach us, that as we are all of one blood and one family,
so we ought to live in peace and love* and that seas and mountains are not to
be viewed as limits to our affection for others. We are all partakers of one
common nature, and the mutual benevolence this idea begets, inculcates also
that we love our neighbor who is our image. In this love, is involved, the
various ties which gratitude and blood join to the bands of society; and we are
to love our superiors, inferiors, and equals, so as to preserve a regard to
the honor and felicity of others also. On this ground, we rose above the
narrow dirty shell of selfishness, and are led to extend our prayers and
endeavors for the preservation and salvation of all; and to watch against all
unlawful incursions upon others from art, pride, insolence, and arbitrary power.

WE have one common country and kindred to provide for; and a little distance
of place, or long absence, are not to steel our hearts against seeking their
advantage; and in no better way can we do them a benefit, than by establishing
order, protecting innocence, promoting virtuous exertions, and sparing the
distressed. If we permit immoralities to pass unhurt, and bad examples to
poison the hearts of others, nothing can compensate for our folly. True
religion makes the real patriot, and the fear of God forms the honest man, and
if we confide only upon pretenses to patriotism and honor, without personal
virtue, experience clearly proves, we shall be foiled in our wishes, and robbed
of our rights, whenever ambition, lust, pride, revenge, or private profit, lead
another way. The piety of Moses, Nehemiah, and others, preserved their
countrymen, when all other things were of no avail. The prayer of the righteous
man avails much. It is the extending and preserving of religion, in these
states, that is acknowledged on all hands to be the only safeguard, and bulwark
to our liberties. A similarity of religion, language, and laws, have ever
availed much to spread peace and prosperity: and unless the first binds our
hearts in love, and restrains our unruly passions, we shall ever be exposed to
confusion and ^umult. The preservation of a religious, pure heart, is not less
important; but becomes much more so, in a country where all religions are most
justly tolerated, and ought and are promised to be protected; and all are to
enjoy every advantage, which law can afford to preserve, and whose professors
are each determined to defend and maintain their own privileges. Upon this
head, the conduct of our civil rulers in every part of this continent, for many
years, has been founded upon the purest justice, and most perfect policy, in
not only protecting and guarding all from spoil and incursions, but striving to
remove all cause of heartburnings, and jealousies, by preferring one before
another, either by an open or implied partiality; and while it is the duty, it
is happy that it is the interest, of every one to preserve it. Whilst "the path
of true piety is left without any political direction," and we profess to wish
it to continue so, let us beware of infidelity and Laodicean indifference; and
show our gratitude to God and our country, and prove our love to religion and
its professors, by each living up to the rules and professions of his own
order; and the emulation be, who shall best know, defend, and practice the
truth; reproving backsliders, false professors, gainsayers, and other
countries, for what we suppose to be defects in them, by our more pure
doctrine, and more perfect life and conversation. If we do not prove that we
are better men, better christians, and more genuine patriots, than foreign
professors are, in vain have we exulted, and in vain wish to see them free
also: if on the contrary, we abuse our liberty to licentiousness, and an
occasion for sin and useless innovation, we have but promoted misery to our
species, and our zeal for others will be suspected to arise from some evil
passion within -- or to speak more plainly, if we wish to see test acts
repealed abroad, and ecclesiastical power curtailed, let those to whom our
benevolent words and exertions are extended, see us living more soberly,
righteously, and godly, than they -- religion more extensively propagated by
our exertions -- and better supported and attended among ourselves, than with
them. Until we do this, they will retort the advice of the apostle as not
inapplicable to us, Study to be quiet, and mind your own business: or say, Thou
hypocrite, first remove the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see
clearly to take the mote out of thy brother's eye.

To the desire of encouraging the generous principle of protecting all
denominations of professors, I attribute the honor done me in calling me to
lead the devotions of this day -- and to preach before this assembly. So
singular a proof of christian charity and polite attention, in beginning a more
equal practice in New England, according to the opinion and wish of so large a
part of our country, demands my highest gratitude. It would, however, be
arrogance in me, to assume this honor as done to myself alone. I am happy to
know, and proud to receive it, as a tribute of affection, and good will, to the
communion of which I am a member. I declare, their united sentiments -- their
principles -- their words and actions -- demand, that I thank the honorable
the President and legislature of this state, for this mark of love, and
specimen of generosity: the first of its kind that has eve^ taken place in
these ^astern states. And* while our communion are thus noticed, let me ask the
same tenderness and attention to our christian brethren of every name. Good,
pious, sincere, learned men, are to be found in all communions. In every
nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted of him. If
God thus extends his care to all, let us not be inattentive to his will, nor
appear to limit his mercies or our favors by any unnecessary partialities; or
debar them an equal opportunity to inculcate the great duties we owe each
other. Morality and virtue are to be encouraged: and it is the glory and
interest of these states to cherish them in every person, and every shape. Our
conduct ought to banish every idea of superiority; leaving all, while they are
good and peaceable subjects, to possess their property and privileges, without
injury or distress, and to support and propagate true religion, as is most
agreeable to their consciences.

To help us in our exertions in spreading the blessings of religion, learning,
and liberty, in this state, we are happy to have a flourishing university --
endowed by public aid, and by the benevolent contributions of all parties --
by various grants and donations both at home and abroad, and by the assistance
annually given in the sums expended ther^ by students from all religious
denominations. This, under the guidance of governors and instructors, chosen
impartially from all, will tend to preserve equal liberty in our country --
encourage private generosity -- and fairly, justly, and honorably, open the
public purse; and the kind offices and fostering care of every real patriot.
And our academies, and inferior schools, being placed upon the same proper and
liberal foundation, will derive advantages to themselves, and diffuse extensive
benefits to the community, which will ever be liable to be lost by a contrary
practice; and should we ever be so unhappy as to give just cause of jealousy
and complaint upon this subject, which the first writers and advocates for the
rights of men, both in our country and in Europe, have so often and so boldly
taught and inculcated, with all possible zeal and eloquence; we must sully our
honor as a nation, our reputation as a state, and our characters as
christians. Our youth are ever to be educated with the most generous
sentiments, and ought not, by the early prejudice of education, to be drawn to
gain habits of thinking which may check the benevolent love and desire to serve
every man -- whether his color, or his creed, accords with that of his own or
not. These youth, in due time, will take the reins in matters both sacred and
civil; and by a wrong bias may be deprived of advantages to themselves, and
prevented doing good to their common country, from influence in early life,
that they may lament when too late; and blame the inattention of the
influential, who did not see to it, that they had more enlarged ideas, and more
generous sentiments; and in consequence behold themselves deprived of those
pleasing sensations, and perhaps those honors and profits, that generally fall
to the share of the most liberally and universally instructed and informed.
Should our colleges and schools in America become the property of religious
party, very many of our citizens must be subjected to great inconveniences, and
experience real injuries and infringements upon their liberties. A conduct like
this would be perverting the principles of the American revolution; it would be
laying the charge of innocent blood upon the land, by any method whatever to
oblige the sons and descendants of those who fought, bled and died, in the late
war, to either remain in ignorance, or be driven to so painful an alternative
as to receive an education where any thing inconsistent with equal liberty can
affect them -- where neglects, unfair advantages, the influence of instructors,
may warp them from their own, their parents and guardians principles.

ANY and every superiority in matters of religion or education, leaves our
patriots and their families and right to depend too much upon the precarious
foundation of having them preserved and defended by those who fled from the
very dangers in which their predecessors may have lost their lives -- or to
which their cowardice, or selfishness, might have caused them to turn their
backs: and making our heroes and statesmen but tools to effect party purposes,
and absurdly fix shackles upon themselves and their posterity. Here a thousand
thoughts crowd upon the mind, and draw forth the wish, to see the instruction
of our youth more generally under the public care than at present, that we may
not tremble for any of them, lest they lose those benefits in life, which their
fathers purchased with their deaths. Persecution consists in depriving us of
any right or honest enjoyment in life because of our religious tenets; and is
found in the licentious tongue -- in the assault upon the personal character --
and in all the shapes in which men tyrannize over each other's consciences. It
may be found as distressing to our felicity, and dangerous to our rights, in
other things, as in the inquisition of Spain and Portugal: and while we strive
to gain emancipation for slaves, we are to beware how we persecute freemen.
When at the closing scene of life -- when all things appear real -- a long
series of actions are to be reviewed; and amongst others, we shall examine how
we have performed our duty to our neighbors, and particularly our general
duties to society: how exquisite must be the sensation of the real christian
and patriot, who has contributed to do good -- to reform the manners -- and
preserve men in a just regard to each other's felicity! He can call upon God,
Think upon me, for good, according to all that I have done for this people:
sealing his will -- his lips -- and his life -- with this sentiment; as
Nehemiah does his book.

THIS day we see you, our civil fathers, collected together upon that
all-important business, the attendance upon the civil and religious concerns of
this people, in a thousand forms* may God prosper your consultations, for the
promotion of his glory, and the good of every individual in this state. To be
called fathers, is the most honorable epithet we can bestow upon the
benefactors of our species -- and to be political fathers, is the endearing
term which we trust our rulers in these states will ever consider as the
highest expression of love and veneration, that can be paid to them by us, her
citizens.

IN Nehemiah, I have depicted the leading traits in so important a character:
he was a father indeed to the nation of the Jews -- and was ever father more
gratified by the success of his labors and cares? -- May similar enjoyments
and honors be the share of the beloved President of this state -- of each of
the members of this legislature -- of every officer in this government -- and
of every one, who, in his sphere as a person in sacred, civil, or private life,
is striving to make our country prosperous.

NEHEMIAH did not accomplish his errand without piously following God's own
instituted mode, and calling in the assistance of Ezra, a minister and prophet
of the Lord, and that of the priests: -- and it is happy for us in this
country, that a similar aid is to be had from the ministers of religion, and
the teachers of virtue and morality, among christians of every name. Their
office, their piety, zeal, learning, and example, will gladly be afforded upon
all occasions, to enforce our duties to God and man, and especially the
necessity of obedience to the civil magistrate. With such united strength, the
power of the people expressed by the acts of their representatives, and the
influence of religion displayed in the lives and doctrines of spiritual guides,
we may look forward to happy times on earth, and for rewards and joys in
Heaven. May we all, in our stations, remember and practice upon the precepts
and examples of the great Founder of our religion, and Author of our salvation;
and never forget to imitate Abraham, Moses, Nehemiah, and the renowned of
ancient and modern times, who have shone as fathers and benefactors in their
day unto our race. But may we every day do something for the good of others,
and by our piety to God, obtain his applause at last, and sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, in the
kingdom of Heaven, enjoying the fullest draughts of love and benevolence, from
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God and Father of the spirits of
all flesh -- hearing no voice, through the boundless realms of being, but the
voice of love; under whose meek but powerful influences, may all the kingdoms
of the earth become the kingdoms of the Lord, and his Christ.

Now to the holy triune God, be ascribed all honor, glory, might, majesty, and
dominion, forever and ever.

AMEN.

