THE Power of Religion ON THE MIND, IN RETIREMENT, SICKNESS, AND AT DEATH;
EXEMPLIFIED IN THE TESTIMONIES AND EXPERIENCE Of MEN distinguished by their
GREATNESS, LEARNING, OR VIRTUE.

A NEW EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET NEAR THIRD
STREET. MDCCXC.

INTRODUCTION.
THE following small collection was made, and is now produced, with a view to
excite serious reflections on the unsatisfying and transitory nature of
temporal enjoyments; and to promote a fervent concern for the attainment of
that felicity which will be sure, complete, and permanent.

Piety and virtue, even when abstractedly considered, are truly amiable, and
appear worthy of our earnest pursuit; but, when recommended by the lives and
testimonies of eminent persons, who have known the world, and experienced the
emptiness of its honors, wealth, and pleasures, they derive additional weight,
and constrain us to acknowledge, that indeed it is our greatest happiness to be
religious.

It is one of the many favors which a wise and gracious Providence has
conferred upon mankind, that in every country, and perhaps in almost every
district throughout the earth, he has stationed some of his faithful servants,
or returning prodigals, as witnesses of his power and goodness, and as
encouragers to a life of true purity, piety, and beneficence.

The following pages exhibit a few of those striking examples, which, in the
quiet hour of reflection, may contribute to arrest the careless and wandering,
to animate the sincere and concerned, and to convince or discountenance those
who have been unhappily led to oppose the highest truths, and to forsake the
fountain of all their blessings.

May the consideration of these instances lead us to serious and timely
reflections on our own condition, and to a profitable communion with the
greatest and best of Beings, our divine and unerring Monitor; by which we shall
experience a growing concern, that the end of our existence may be fully
answered, and the favor of an Almighty Friend secured. May his gracious
protection be witnessed at the close of our day, when the shadows of the
evening shall approach, the glittering vanities of the world be obscured, and
all its friendships and resources be found unavailing.

In that awful hour, this great support will not only preserve us from being
distressed with mournful retrospects on the past, or with gloomy apprehensions
of what is to come, but will afford the truest consolation of mind, and enable
us to look forward, with animating hope, toward those happy regions of peace
and joy, which shall then be allotted for our perpetual inheritance.

CONTENTS.
Solomon. -- Ignatius. -- Justin Martyr. -- Emperor Charles the Fifth. --
Cardinal Wolsey. -- Sir Philip Sidney. -- Secretary Walsingham. -- Sir John
Mason. -- Sir Walter Raleigh. -- Louis, Duke of Orleans. -- Sir Henry Wotton.
-- Sir Christopher Hatton. -- Philip the Third, King of Spain. -- Gondamor, the
King of Spain's Ambassador. -- Cardinal Richlieu. -- Cardinal Mazarine. -- Sir
Thomas Smith, Secretary of State. -- Oxenstiern, Chancellor of Sweden. --
Doctor Done. -- Seldom. -- Grotius. -- Salmasius. -- A. Rivetus. -- Francis
Junius. -- Sir Henry Vane. -- Admiral Penn. -- Howard. -- Princess Elizabeth.
-- Bulstrode Whitlock. -- Anthony Lowther. -- Earl of Essex. -- Sir Robert
Boil. -- Sir Isaac Newton. -- John Lock. -- Joseph Addison. -- Henry, Prince
of Wales. -- Earl of Rochester. -- James Hervey. -- Lord Harrington. --
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham. -- Col. Gardener. -- Duncan Forbes, President of
Scotland. -- Chief Justice Hale. -- Earl of Marlborough. -- Conclusion.

THE Power of Religion, etc.
THE wise KING SOLOMON, who, at one season of his life, had flattered himself
with great enjoyments from the world; and who, better than most men, could
compute their amount, gives us the result of his experience in these memorable
lines: I said in my heart, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy
pleasure: and behold, this also is vanity. I said of laughter, it is mad; and
of mirth, what does it? I made me great works, builded houses, planted
vineyards, made gardens and orchards, planted trees in them of all kind of
fruit; I got me servants and maidens, also great possessions: I gathered me
silver and gold, and the peculiar treasures of kings and provinces; also men
and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments,
and that of all sorts. So I was great, and increased more than all that were
before me in Jerusalem, and whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them:
I withheld not mine heart from any joy. Then I looked on the works which my
hands had wrought, and behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit. After
this representation, he concludes all with, Fear God, and keep his
commandments, for this is the whole duty of man: for God shall bring every work
into judgment, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

IGNATIUS, who lived within the first hundred years after Christ (and who was
torn in pieces by wild beasts at Rome, for his religion) left this saying,
amongst others worthy of attention, behind him: There is nothing better than
the peace of a good conscience: intimating, there might be a peace to wicked
consciences, that are past feeling any thing to be evil, being hardened in the
wickedness of the world. And in his epistle to the churches at Ephesus,
Magnesia, Trallis, and Rome, upon his martyrdom, he triumphantly says, Now I
begin to be a disciple, I weigh neither visible nor invisible things, so that I
may gain Christ.

JUSTIN MARTYR, a philosopher, who received Christianity five and twenty years
after the death of Ignatius, declares in the relation of his conversion to the
Christian faith, That the power of godliness in a plain, simple Christian, had
that influence and operation on his soul, that he could not but betake himself
to a serious and strict life: and yet, before, he was a Cynic, a rigid sect:
and it gave him joy at his martyrdom, that he had spent his days as a serious
teacher, and a good example. Eusebius relates of him, That though he was also a
follower of Plato's doctrine, yet when he saw the Christians' piety and
courage, he concluded, No people so temperate, less voluptuous, and more set on
divine things; which first induced him to become a Christian.

CHARLES V. Emperor of Germany, King of Spain, and Lord of the Netherlands,
after three and twenty pitched battles, six triumphs, four kingdoms conquered,
and eight principalities added to his dominions (a greater instance than whom
can scarce be given) resigned up all his pomp to other hands, and betook
himself to a retirement; leaving this testimony behind him respecting the life
he spent in the honors and pleasures of the world, and that little time of his
retreat from them all; That the sincere study, profession, and practice, of the
Christian religion, had in it such joys and sweetness, as courts were strangers
to.

CARDINAL WOLSEY, the most absolute and wealthy Minister of State England ever
had, and who in his time seemed to govern Europe as well as England, when come
to the period of his life, left the world with this close reflection upon
himself: Had I been as diligent to serve my God, as I have been to please my
king, he would not have left me now in my gray hairs. A dismal reflection for
all wordly-minded men; but for those more especially, who have the power and
means of doing more than ordinary good in the world, and do it not, which seems
to have been the melancholy case and reflection of this great man.

Sir PHILIP SIDNEY, a subject indeed of England, but who, it is said, was
chosen king of Poland; whom Queen Elizabeth called her Philip; the Prince of
Orange, his master; whose friendship the Lord Brooks was so proud of, that he
would have it part of his epitaph, Here lies Sir Philip Sidney's friend; whose
death was lamented in verse by the then kings of France and Scotland, and the
two universities of England; repented so much at his death, of that witty
vanity of his life, his Arcadia, that, to prevent the unlawful kindling of
heats in others, he would have committed it to the flames himself. He left this
farewell amongst his friends: Love my memory, cherish my friends; their faith to
me may assure you that they are honest; but above all, govern your wills and
affections by the will and word of your Creator. In me behold the end of this
world, and all its vanities. And indeed, he was not much mistaken in saying so,
since in him was to be seen the insufficiency of all natural parts, acquired
learning, and civil accomplishments. His farewell seems spoken without terror,
with a clear sense, and sound judgment.

SECRETARY WALSINGHAM, an extraordinary man in Queen Elizabeth's time, toward
the conclusion of his days, in a letter to his fellow-Secretary Burleigh, then
Lord Treasurer of England, writes thus: We have lived enough to our country,
our fortunes, our sovereign: it is high time we begin to live to ourselves, and
to our God. Which giving occasion for some eourt-droll to visit, and try to
divert him, 'Ah!' said he, while we laugh, all things are serious round about
us; God is serious when he preserves us, and has patience toward us; Christ
is serious when he dies for us; the Holy Ghost is serious when he striveth
with us; the whole creation is serious in serving God and us: they are serious
in hell and in heaven; and shall a man that has one foot in his grave jest and
laugh?

A strong testimony to the superior excellency of religion, and to the vanity
and emptiness of worldly enjoyments, is given by Sir JOHN MASON, who, though
but 63 years old at his death, yet had flourished in the reigns of four princes
(Henry VIII. Edward VI. Queens Mary and Elizabeth) had been Privy Councillor to
them all, and an eyewitness of the various revolutions and vicissitudes of
those times. Toward his latter end, being on his deathbed, he spoke thus to
those about him, I have lived to see five Princes, and have been privy
councillor to four of them. I have seen the most remarkable things in foreign
parts, and have been present at most state transactions for thirty years
together; and I have learned this after so many years' experience; that
seriousness is the greatest wisdom, temperance the best physic, and a good
conscience the best estate; and were I to live again, I would change the court
for a cloister, my Privy Councillor's bustle for an Hermit's retirement, and
the whole life I have lived in the palace for an hour's enjoyment of God in the
chapel.

All things else forsake me, besides my God, my duty, and my prayers.

Sir WALTER RALEIGH is an eminent instance, being as extraordinary a man as
this nation has produced: in his person, well descended; of health, strength,
and masculine beauty; in understanding, quick; in judgment, sound; learned and
wise, valiant and skilful; an historian, a philosopher, a general, a statesman.
After a long life, full of experience, he drops these excellent sayings a
little before his death, to his son, to his wife, and to the world, viz. Exceed
not in the humor of rags and bravery; for these will soon wear out of fashion,
and no man is esteemed for gay garments, but by fools. On the other side, seek
not riches basely, nor attain them by evil means: destroy no man for his
wealth, nor take any thing from the poor; for the cry thereof will pierce the
heavens; and it is most detestable before God, and most dishonorable before
worthy men, to wrest any thing from the needy and laboring soul: God will never
prosper thee, if thou offendest therein; but use thy poor neighbors and
tenants well. A most worthy saying. But he adds, Have compassion on the poor
and afflicted, and God will bless thee for it: make not the hungry soul
sorrowful; for if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall
be heard of him that made him. Now, for the world, dear child, I know it too
well to persuade thee to dive into the practices of it: rather stand upon thy
own guard against all those that tempt thee to it, or may practice upon thee,
whether in thy conscience, thy reputation, or thy estate. Resolve that no man
is wise or safe, but he that is honest. Serve God; let him be the author of all
thy actions; commend all thy endeavors to him that must either wither or
prosper them: please him with prayer; lest if he frown, he confound all thy
fortune and labor, like the drops of rain upon the sandy ground. Let my
experienced advice and fatherly instructions sink deep into thy heart: so God
direct thee in all thy ways, and fill thy heart with his grace.

Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S Letter to his Wife after his Condemnation.
You shall receive, my dear wife, my last words in these my last lines. My love
I send you; that you may keep when I am dead; and my counsel, that you may
remember it when I am no more. I would not, with my will, present you sorrows,
dear wife; let them go to the grave with me, and be buried in the dust: and,
seeing that it is not the will of God that I shall see you any more, bear my
destruction patiently, and with an heart like yourself. First, I send you all
the thanks which my heart can conceive, or my words express, for your many
travails and cares for me; which, though they have not taken effect, as you
wished, yet my debt to you is not the less; but pay it I never shall in this
world. Secondly, I beseech you, for the love you bear me living, that you do
not hide yourself many days; but by your travails seek to help my miserable
fortunes, and the right of your poor child: your mourning cannot avail me who
am but dust. Thirdly, you shall understand, that my lands were conveyed, bona
fide, to my child; the writings were drawn at Midsummer was a twelvemonth, as
diverse can witness; and I trust my blood will quench their malice who desired
my slaughter, that they will not seek to kill you and yours with extreme
poverty. To what friend to direct you, I know not, for all mine have left me in
the true time of trial: most sorry am I, that, being surprised by death, I can
leave you no better estate; God has prevented all my determinations; that
great God, which works all in all. If you can live free from want, care for
no more, for the rest is but vanity. Love God, and (...) times; in him shall
you find (...), and endless comfort: when you have travailed and wearied
yourself with all sorts of worldly cogigitations, you shall sit down by sorrow
in the end. Teach your son also to fear and serve God, whilst he is young, that
the fear of God may grow up in in him; then will God be an husband to you, and
a father to him; an husband and a father that can never be taken from you. Dear
wife, I beseech you, for my soul's sake, pay all poor men. When I am dead, no
doubt but you will be much sought unto; for the world thinks I was very rich:
have a care of the fair pretenses of men; for no greater misery can befall you
in this life, than to become a prey unto the world, and after to be despised.
As for me, I am no more yours, nor you mine: death has cut us asunder, and God
has divided me from the world, and you from me. Remember your poor child, for
his father's sake, who loved you in his happiest state. I sued for my life, but
God knows, it was for you and yours that I desired it: for know it, my dear
wife, your child is the child of a true man, who in his own respect despises
death, and his misshapen and ugly forms. I cannot write much; God knows how
hardly I steal this time, when all are asleep: and it is also time for me to
separate my thoughts from the world. Beg my dead body, which living was denied
you; and either lay it in Sherborne, or in Exeter church, by my father and
mother.

I can say no more; time and death call me away. The everlasting God, powerful,
infinite, and inscrutable; God Almighty, who is goodness itself, the true light
and life, keep you and yours, and have mercy upon me, and forgive my
persecutors and false accusers, and send us to meet in his glorious kingdom. My
dear wife, farewell! bless my boy, pray for me, and let my true God hold you
both in his arms.

Yours that was, but not now mine own, WALTER RALEIGH.


Behold wisdom, resolution, nature, and grace! how strong in argument, wise in
counsel, firm, affectionate, and devout. O that heroes and politicians would
make him their example in his death, as well as magnify the great actions of
his life! Doubtless, had he been to live over his days again, with his
experience, he had made less noise, and yet done more good to the world and
himself. It is a sorrowful reflection, that men hardly come to know themselves,
or the world, till they are ready to leave it.

LOUIS, Duke of Orleans, thus expressed the delight he found in piety and
devotion. I know by experience, that sublunary grandeur and sublunary pleasure,
are delusive and vain, and are always infinitely below the conceptions we form
of them: but on the contrary, such happiness, and such complacency may be found
in devotion and piety, as the sensual mind has no idea of.

Sir HENRY WOTTON thought it the greatest happiness of his life, To be at
leisure to be, and to do, good. Toward his end, when he reflected on past
times, he was used to say, though a man esteemed sober and learned, How much
time have I to repent of, and how little to do it in!

Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON, a little before his death, advised his relations to be
serious in the search after The will of God in the holy word: for,' said he,
'it is deservedly accounted a piece of excellent knowledge to understand the
law of the land, and the customs of a man's country: how much more so to know
the statutes of heaven, and the laws of eternity, those immutable and eternal
laws of justice and righteousness; to know the will and pleasure of the great
Monarch and universal King of the world: I have seen an end of all perfection,
but thy commandments, O God, are exceeding broad.

Whatever other knowledge a man may be endued with, could he by a vast and
penetrating mind, comprehend all the knowledge of art and nature, of words and
things; could he attain a mastery in all languages, and sound the depth of all
arts and sciences; could he discourse of the interest of all states, the
intrigues of all courts, the reason of all civil laws and constitutions, and
give an account of all histories; and yet not know the author of his being, and
the preserver of his life, his sovereign, and his judge; his surest refuge in
trouble; his best friend, or worst enemy; the support of his life, and the hope
of his death, his future happiness, and his portion for ever; he does but, with
a great deal of knowledge, go down to destruction.

PHILIP the THIRD, King of Spain, seriously reflecting upon the life he had
lived, cried out upon his deathbed; Ah! how happy were I, had I spent these
twenty-three years, that I have held my kingdom, in a retirement. Declaring to
his confessor, My concern is for my soul, not for my body. I lay all that God
has given me, my dominion, power, and my life, at the feet of Jesus Christ my
Savior.

GONDAMOR, Ambassador in England from that King, and held the ablest man of his
time, took great freedom as to his religion, in his politics, serving his ends
by those ways that would best accomplish them. Toward his latter end, he grew
very thoughtful of his past life, and after all his negotiations and successes
in business, said to one of his friends, I fear nothing in the world more than
sin; often declaring, He had rather endure hell than sin; so clear and strong
were his convictions, and so exceeding sinful did sin appear to him, upon a
serious consideration of his ways.

CARDINAL RICHLIEU, after he had given law to all Europe for many years,
confessed to old Peter de Moulin, the famous French Protestant, That, being
forced upon many irregularities, by that which they call reason of state, he
could not tell how to satisfy his conscience for several things, and therefore
had many temptations to doubt and disbelieve a God, another world, and the
immortality of the soul, thereby to relieve his mind from any disquiet, but in
vain; so strong,' he said, 'was the notion of God on his soul, so clear the
impression of him upon the frame of the world, so unanimous the consent of
mankind, so powerful the convictions of his own conscience, that he could not
but taste the power of the world to come, and so live as one that must die, and
so die, as one that must live for ever. And being asked one day, 'Why he was so
sad?' he answered, The soul is a serious thing, it must be either sad here for
a moment, or be sad for ever.

CARDINAL MAZARINE, was reputed the most cunning statesman of his time, and
gave great proofs of it in the successes of the French crown under his
ministry. His aim was the grandeur of the world, to which he made all other
considerations submit: but, poor man! he was of another mind a little before
his death: for, being awakened by the smart lashes of conscience, which
represented his soul's condition to be very dismal, with astonishment and tears
he cried out, O my poor soul, what will become of thee? Whither will thou go?
And spoke one day thus to the Queen Mother of France; Madam, your favors have
undone me: were I to live again, I would be a capuchin, rather than a courtier.

Sir THOMAS SMITH, Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth, a quarter of a year
before his death, sent to his friends, the Bishops of Winchester and Worcester,
and entreated them to draw him, out of the word of God, the plainest and
exactest way of making his peace with him; adding, That it was great pity, men
considered not for what end they were born into the world, till they were ready
to go out of it.

OXENSTIERN, Chancellor of Sweden, was a person of the first quality, station,
and ability in his own country; and his share and success, not only in the
chief ministry of affairs in that kingdom, but in the greatest negotiations of
Europe, during his time, made him no less considerable abroad. Being visited in
his retreat from public business, by Commissioner Whitlock, Ambassador from
England to Queen Christina, in the conclusion of their discourse, he said to
the Ambassador, I have seen much and enjoyed much of this world, but I never
knew how to live till now. I thank my good God, who has given me time to know
him, and to know myself. All the comfort I have, and which is more than the
whole world can give, is -- feeling the good Spirit of God in my heart, and
reading in this good book (holding up the bible) that came from it. And further
addressed himself thus to the Ambassador: You are now in the prime of your age
and vigor, and in great favor and business; but all this will leave you, and
you will one day better understand and relish what I say to you; and then you
will find that there is more wisdom, truth, comfort, and pleasure, in retiring
and turning our heart from the world, to the good Spirit of God, and in reading
the bible, than in all the courts and favors of princes. This I had, says W.
Penn, as near as I am able to remember, from the Ambassador's own mouth, more
than once. A very edifying account, when we consider from whom it came; one of
the greatest and wisest men of his age, while his understanding was as sound
and vigorous, as his experience and knowledge were great.

DOCTOR DONE, a person of great parts and learning, being upon his deathbed,
and taking his solemn farewell of his friends, made this weighty declaration to
them: I repent of all my life, but that part of it which I spent in communion
with God, and in doing good.

SELDOM, one of the greatest scholars and antiquaries of his time, and one who
had taken a diligent survey of what knowledge was possessed by the Jews,
Heathens, and Christians; at last, toward the end of his days, in a conference
with Bishop Usher, declared, That notwithstanding he had been so laborious in
his inquiries, and curious in his collections, and had possessed himself of a
treasure of books and manuscripts upon all ancient subjects; yet he could rest
his soul on none, save the scriptures: and above all, that passage lay most
remarkably upon his spirit, Titus ii. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. For the grace of God
that brings salvation, has appeared unto all men; teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world; looking for that blessed hope and glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. And, indeed, it is one of the most comprehensive
passages in the scriptures; for it comprises the end, means, and recompense of
Christianity.

HUGO GROTIUS is much celebrated for his great learning and universal
knowledge: 'a light,' say the statesmen; 'a light,' say the churchmen too;
witness his Annals, and his book, De Jure Belli et Pacis; also his Christian
Religion, and elaborate Commentaries. After all, he winds up his life and
choice in this remarkable saying; I would give all my learning and honor for
the plain integrity of John Urick: who was a religious poor man, that spent
eight hours of his time in prayer, eight in labor, and but eight in meals,
sleep, and other necessaries. And to one that admired his great industry, he
returned this by way of complaint: Ah! I have consumed my life in laboriously
doing nothing. And to another, that inquired of his wisdom and learning, what
course to take -- he solemnly answered, 'Be serious.'

SALMASIUS, a famous French scholar, after his many volumes of learning, by
which he had acquired great veneration among men of books, confessed that he
had mistaken true learning, and that in which solid happiness consisted, and
exclaimed thus against himself: Oh! I have lost a world of time; time, that
most precious thing in the world! whereof, had I but one year more, it should
be spent in David's psalms, and Paul's epistles. Oh! Sirs, said he to those
about him, mind the world less, and God more: The fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is understanding.

A. RIVETUS was a man of great understanding, and much reverenced in the Dutch
nation. After a long life of study in search of divine knowledge, being on his
deathbed, and conversing upon heavenly things, he brake forth in this manner:
God has taught me more of himself in ten days sickness, than I could obtain by
all my labor and studies. Plain and simple are the means to the knowledge of
God and his holy will, when we come to be in earnest, and our hearts are
sincerely concerned to know and obey it; The wayfaring man, though a fool (in the
world's wisdom) shall not err therein.

FRANCIS JUNIUS, an ingenious person, who has written his own life, as he was
reading Tully de Legibus, fell into a persuasion, Nihil curare Deum, nec sui,
nec alieni; till in a tumult at Lions, the Lord wonderfully delivered him from
imminent death; so that he was forced to acknowledge a divine Providence
therein: and his father hearing of the dangerous ways that his son was misled
into, sent for him home, where he carefully and piously instructed him, and
caused him to read over the New Testament, of which himself writes thus: When I
opened the New Testament, I first lighted upon John's first chapter, In the
beginning was the word, etc. I read part of the chapter, and was suddenly
convinced, that the divinity of the argument; and the majesty and authority of
the writing did very much excel all the eloquence of human writings: my body
trembled, my mind was astonished, and was so affected all that day, that I knew
not where and what I was. Thou wast mindful of me, O my God, according to the
multitude of thy mercies, and calledst home thy lost sheep into the fold. And,
as Justin Martyr of old, so he of late declared, That the power of godliness in
a plain, simple Christian, wrought so upon him, that he could not but take up a
strict and a serious life.

Sir HENRY VANE possessed abilities of the first rate, and an extensive
knowledge of mankind. In his youth, he was much addicted to company, and
promised little to business; but reading a book called The Signs of a Godly
Man, and being convicted in himself that they were just, but that he had no
share in any one of them, he fell into such extreme anguish and horror, that
for some days and nights he took little food or rest. This at once dissolved
his old friendships, and made those religious impressions and resolutions,
which neither university, courts, princes, nor parents, nor any losses nor
disappointments that threatened his new course of life, could weaken or alter.
And though this laid him under some disadvantages for a time, yet his great
integrity and abilities broke through that obscurity; so that those of very
different sentiments did not only admire him, but very often desired him to
accept the most eminent negotiations of his country; which he served, according
to his own principles, with great success, and a remarkable self-denial. This
great man's maxim was, Religion is the best master, and the best friend; for it
makes men wise, and will never leave them, that never leave it; which he found
true in himself: for as it made him wiser than those that had been his
teachers, so it made him firmer than any hero, having something more than
nature to support him; which was the judgment, as well of foreigners, as of
others, who had the curiosity to see him die: Making good some meditations of
his own, viz. The day of death is the judge of all our other days; the very
trial and touchstone of the actions of our lives. It is the end that crowns the
work, and a good death honoreth a man's whole life. The fading corruption and
loss of this life is the passage into a better. Death is no less essential to
us, than to live, or to be born. In flying death, thou fliest thyself; thy
essence is equally parted into these two, life and death. It is no small
reproach to a Christian, whose faith is in immortality, and the blessedness of
another life, to fear death much, which is the necessary passage thereunto.

ADMIRAL PENN, after thirty years employment in several places of eminent trust
and honor, upon serious reflection, not long before his death, spoke to one of
his sons in this manner: Son William, I am weary of the world; I would not live
over my days again, if I could command them with a wish; for the snares of life
are greater than the fears of death. This troubles me, that I have offended a
gracious God, who has followed me to this day. O, have a care of sin! That is
the sting both of life and death. Three things I commend to you: First, let
nothing in this world tempt you to wrong your conscience; I charge you, do
nothing against your conscience: so will you keep peace at home, which will be
a feast to you in the day of trouble. Secondly, whatever you design to do, lay
it justly, and time it seasonably; for that gives security and despatch.
Lastly, be not troubled at disappointments; for if they may be recovered, do
it; if they cannot, trouble is vain. If you could not have helped it, be
content: there is often peace and profit in submitting to Providence; for
afflictions make wise. If you could have helped it, let not your trouble exceed
instruction for another time. These rules will carry you with firmness and
comfort through this inconstant world.

A noble young man of the family of HOWARD, having in health too much yielded
to the temptations of youth, when laid upon a sickbed, which proved his
dying-bed, fell under the power and agony of great convictions. He mightily
bewailed himself in the remembrance of his former extravagancies; and cried
strongly to God to forgive him, abhorring his former course, and promising
amendment, if God renewed life to him. However, he was willing to die, having
tasted of the love and forgiveness of God; and warned his acquaintance and
kindred that came to see him, To fear God, and forsake the pleasures and vanity
of this world; and so willingly yielded his soul from the troubles of time, and
frailties of mortality.

PRINCESS ELIZABETH of the Rhine, claims a memorial in this collection; her
virtue giving greater luster to her name, than her quality, which yet was of
the greatest in the German empire. She chose a single life, as freest of care,
and best suited to the study and meditation she was always inclined to: and the
chief diversion she took, next to the air, was in some such plain and
housewifely entertainments, as knitting, etc. She had a small territory, which
she governed so well, that she showed herself fit for a greater. She would
constantly, every last day in the week, sit in judgment, and hear and determine
causes herself; where her patience, justice, and mercy, were admirable:
frequently remitting her forfeitures, where the party was poor, or otherwise
meritorious. And, which was excellent, though unusual, she would temper her
discourses with religion, and strangely draw concerned parties to submission
and agreement; exercising not so much the rigor of her power, as the power of
her persuasion. Her meekness and humility appeared to me extraordinary; she did
not consider the quality, but the merit, of the people she entertained. Did she
hear of a retired man, hid from the world, and seeking after the knowledge of a
better, she was sure to set him down in the catalogue of her charity, if he
wanted it. I have casually seen, says W. Penn, I believe, fifty tokens sealed
and superscribed to the several poor subjects of her bounty, whose distances
would not suffer them to know one another, though they knew her, whom yet some of
them had never seen. Thus, though she kept no sumptuous table in her own court,
she spread the tables of the poor in their solitary cells; breaking bread to
virtuous pilgrims, according to their want, and her ability. Abstemious in
herself, and in apparel void of all vain ornaments. I must needs say, that her
mind had a noble prospect: her eye was to a better and more lasting inheritance
than can be found below; which made her often despise the greatness of courts,
and learning of the schools, of which she was an extraordinary judge. Being
once at Hamburgh, a religious person, whom she went to see for religion's sake,
telling her, It was too great an honor for him to have a visitant of her
quality come under his roof, that was allied to so many great kings and princes
of this world: she humbly answered, If they were godly, as well as great, it
would be an honor indeed; but if you knew what that greatness was, as well as
I, you would value less that honor. Being in some agony of spirit, after a
religious meeting we had in her chamber, she said, It is a hard thing to be
faithful to what one knows: O, the way is strait! I am afraid I am not weighty
enough in my spirit to walk in it. She once withdrew, on purpose to give her
servants the liberty of discoursing us, that they might the more freely put
what questions of conscience they desired to be satisfied in; for they were
religious: suffering both them and the poorest of her town, to sit by her in
her own bedchamber, where we had two meetings. I cannot forget her last words,
when I took my leave of her: Let me desire you to remember me, though I live at
this distance, and that you should never see me more: I thank you for this good
time; and know and be assured, though my condition subjects me to diverse
temptations, yet my soul has strong desires after the best things. She lived a
single life till about sixty years of age, and then departed at her own house
in Herwerden, in the year 1680, as much lamented, as she had lived beloved, by
the people: to whose real worth, I do, with a religious gratitude, for her kind
reception, dedicate this memorial.

W. PENN.

BULSTRODE WHITLOCK was a man in high office, and of very great abilities; a
scholar, a lawyer, a statesman; in short, he was one of the most accomplished
men of the age. In his retirement from the world, being visited by a friend,
he, among other serious observations, expressed himself thus: I have ever
thought there has been but one true religion in the world, and that is the work
of the Spirit of God in the hearts and souls of men. There have been, indeed,
diverse forms and shapes of things, through the many dispensations of God to men,
answerable to his own wise ends, in reference to the low and uncertain state of
man in the world. The old world had the Spirit of God, and the new world has
the same Spirit, both Jew and Gentile, and it strives with all: and they, who
have been led by it, have been the good people in every dispensation of God to
the world. And I myself must say, that I have felt it from a child to convince
me of my evil and vanity; and it has often given me a true measure of this poor
world, and some taste of divine things; and it is my grief that I did not more
early apply my soul to it: for I can say, that since my retirement from the
greatness and hurries of the world, I have felt something of the work and
comfort of it, and that it is both ready and able to instruct, and lead, and
preserve those who will humbly and sincerely hearken to it. So that my religion
is, the good Spirit of God in my heart; I mean what that has wrought in me and
for me.

ANTHONY LOWTHER, of Mask, was a person of good sense, of a sweet temper, a
just mind, and of a sober education. When of age to be under his own
government, he was drawn, by the men of pleasure of the town, into the usual
freedoms of it, and was as much a judge as any body, of the satisfaction which
that way of life could yield; but some time before his last sickness, with a
free and strong judgment, he would frequently upbraid himself, and contemn the
world for those unseasonable, as well as unchristian, liberties that so much
abound in it. These sentiments increased, by the instruction of a long and
sharp sickness: and caused him earnestly to breathe after the knowledge of the
best things, and the best company, losing as little time as he could, that he
might redeem the time he had lost. He testified often, with a lively relish, to
the truth of religion, from the sense he had of it in his own breast:
frequently declaring, He knew no joy comparable to that of being assured of the
love and mercy of God. And as he often implored it with strong convictions, and
deep humility and reverence, so he had frequently tastes thereof before his
last period; pressing his relations and friends, in a most serious and
affectionate manner, To love God, and one another more, and this vile world
less. And of this he was so full, that it was almost ever the conclusion of his
religious discourses with his family. He sometimes said, That though he could
have been willing to have lived, if God had pleased, to see his younger
children nearer a settlement in the world; yet he felt no desire to live longer
in the world, but on the terms of living better in it. For that he did not only
think virtue the safest, but the happiest way of living: commending and
commanding it to his children upon his last blessing.

Extract of a Letter, written by the EARL of ESSEX, to his particular friend,
the EARL of SOUTHAMPTON, some time before his death.
WITH respect to your natural gifts and abilities, remember, First, that you
have nothing which you have not received. Secondly, that you possess them, not
as a lord over them, but as one who must give an account for them. Thirdly, if
you employ them to serve this world, or your own worldly delight, which the
prince of this world will seek to entertain you with; it is ingratitude, it is
injustice, yea, it is persidious treachery. For what would you think of such a
servant of yours, who should convert your goods, committed to his charge, to
the advantage or service of your greatest enemy? And what do you less than this
with God; since you have all from him, and know that the world, and the princes
thereof, are at continual enmity with him? Therefore, if ever the admonition of
your truest friend shall be heard by you; or if your country, which you may
serve in so great and many things, be dear unto you; if your God, whom you must
(if you deal truly with yourself) acknowledge to be powerful over all, and just
in all, be feared by you; yea, if you be dear unto yourself, and prefer an
everlasting happiness before a pleasant dream, out of which you must shortly
awake, and then repent in the bitterness of your soul: if any of these things
be regarded by you, then, I say, call yourself to account for what is past;
cancel all the leagues you have made without the warrant of a religious
conscience; make a regular covenant with your God, to serve him with all your
natural and spiritual, inward and outward gifts and abilities: and then he, who
is faithful and cannot lie, and has promised to honor those who honor him,
will give you that inward peace of soul, and true joy of heart, which, till you
have, you will never rest; and which, when you have, you shall never be shaken;
and which you can never attain to any other way.

ESSEX.

The Hon. ROBERT BOIL, that most exact searcher into the works of nature, and
who saw atheism and infidelity beginning to show themselves in the loose and
voluptuous reign of King Charles the Second, pursued his philosophical
inquiries with religious views, to establish the minds of men in a firm belief,
and thorough sense, of the infinite power and wisdom of the great Creator.

This account we have from Dr. Burnet, who was intimately acquainted with him,
and who says, It appeared from those who conversed with him on his inquiries
into nature, that his main design in that (on which as he had his own eye
constantly, so he took care to put others often in mind of it) was to raise in
himself and others, vaster thoughts of the greatness and glory, and of the
wisdom and goodness of God. This was so deep in his thoughts, that he concludes
the article of his will, which relates to the Royal Society, in these words,
Wishing them a happy success in their attempts to discover the true nature of
the works of God; and praying that they, and all other searchers into physical
truths, may cordially refer their seize, to the glory of the great Author
of Nature, and to the comfort of mankind.

In another place the same person speaks of him thus: He had the profoundest
veneration for the great God of heaven and earth, that I ever observed in any
man. The very name of God was never mentioned by him, without a pause and
visible stop in his discourse.

Of the strictness and exemplariness of the whole course of his life, he says:
I might here challenge the whole tribe of libertines, to come and view the
usefulness, as well as the excellence of the Christian religion, in a life that
was entirely dedicated to it.

The veneration he had for the holy scriptures appears, not from his studying
them with great attention, and exhorting others to do the same; but more
particularly, from a distinct treatise which he wrote on purpose to defend the
scripture style, and to answer all the objections which profane and irreligious
persons have made against it. And his zeal in propagating Christianity in the
world, appears by many and large benefactions to that end.

The great NEWTON is universally acknowledged to be the most profound
philosopher that this, or perhaps any other, nation has produced: the vastness
of his mental powers has excited the admiration of the greatest geniuses in
Europe. This excellent person is well known to have been a firm believer, and a
serious Christian. His discoveries concerning the frame and system of the
universe were applied by him to demonstrate the being of a God, and to
illustrate his power and wisdom in the creation. He applied himself also, with
the utmost attention, to the study of the holy scriptures, and considered the
several parts of them with uncommon exactness; particularly, as to the order of
time, and the series of prophecies and events relating to the Messiah. Upon
which head, he has left behind him an excellent discourse, to prove that the
famous prophecy of Daniel's weeks, which has been so industriously perverted by
the deists of our times, was an express prophecy of the coming of the Messiah,
and fulfilled in Jesus Christ.

The celebrated JOHN LOCK, whose sound judgment and accurate talent in
reasoning, are so much commended, even by the skeptics and infidels of our
times, showed his zeal for the Christian religion, first, in his middle age, by
publishing a discourse on purpose to demonstrate the reasonableness of
believing Jesus to be the promised Messiah; and after that, in the latter years
of his life, by a very judicious commentary upon several of the epistles of the
apostle Paul. The scriptures are every where mentioned by him with the greatest
reverence; and he exhorts Christians, to betake themselves in earnest to the
study of the way to salvation, in those holy writings, wherein God has revealed
it from heaven, and proposed it to the world; seeking our religion where we are
sure it is in truth to be found, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.
And, in a letter written the year before his death, to one who asked this
question, What is the shortest and surest way for a young man to attain to the
true knowledge of the Christian religion? his answer is, Let him study the holy
scriptures, especially the New Testament. Therein are contained the words of
eternal life. It has God for its author; salvation for its end; and truth,
without any mixture of error, for its matter. A direction that was copied from
his own practice, in the latter part of his life, and after his retirement from
business; when, for fourteen or fifteen years, he applied himself especially,
to the study of the scriptures, and employed the last years of his life hardly
in any thing else. He was never weary of admiring the great views of that
sacred book, and the just relation of all its parts. He every day made
discoveries in it that gave him fresh cause of admiration.

The death of this great man was agreeable to his life. For we are assured by
one that was with him when he died, and had lived in the same family for seven
years before, that, the day before his death, he particularly exhorted all
about him to read the scriptures; that he desired to be remembered by them at
evening prayers; and being told that, if he chose it, the whole family should
be with him in his chamber, he answered, he should be very glad to have it so,
if it would not give too much trouble: that an occasion offering to speak of
the goodness of God, he especially exalted the care which God showed to man in
justifying him by faith in Jesus Christ; and returned God thanks in particular
for having blessed him with the knowledge of that divine Savior.

About two months before his death, he drew up a letter to his friend ANTHONY
COLLINS, and left this direction upon it, To be delivered to him after my
decease.

The following is a copy of it.
I KNOW you loved me living, and will preserve my memory when I am dead. All
the use to be made of it is, that this life is a scene of vanity which soon
passes away, and affords no solid satisfaction but in the consciousness of
doing well, and in the hopes of another life. This is what I can say upon
experience, and what you will find to be true, when you come to make up the
account.

Adieu, I leave my best wishes with you.

JOHN LOCK.


The admired ADDISON has also given abundant proof of his belief of
Christianity, and his zeal against unbelievers, in his evidences of the
Christian religion. His writings on religious subjects discover a pious and
solid frame of mind; and his general conduct in life gives us a convincing
proof, that what he wrote were the genuine feelings of his heart. But his
virtue shone out brightest at the point of death; for, after a long and manly,
but vain, struggle with his distempers, he dismissed his physicians, and with
them all hopes of life; but with his hopes of life he dismissed not his concern
for the living, but sent for a youth nearly related, and finely accomplished,
yet not above being the better for good impressions from a dying friend. He
came; but life now glimmering in the socket, the dying friend was silent. After
a decent and proper pause, the youth said, Dear Sir! you sent for me: I
believe, and hope you have some commands; I shall hold them most dear. May
distant ages not only hear, but feel, the reply! Forcibly grasping the youth's
hand, he softly said, See in what peace a Christian can die. He spoke with
difficulty, and soon expired. Through divine grace, how great is man! through
divine mercy, how stingless death!

HENRY, Prince of Wales, eldest son to King JAMES the First, of whom others say
many excellent things, had but little to say for himself at last. A person whom
he loved, and who had been the companion of his diversions, being with him in
his sickness, and asking him, 'How he did,' was, amongst many other sober
expressions, answered thus: Ah, Tom! I in vain wish for that time I lost with
thee, and others, in vain recreations. So vain were recreations, and so
precious was time to a prince, and no ordinary one neither, upon a dying-bed.
But why wished he, with others, for more time, but that it might be better
employed? Thus has the holy Spirit of God in men, throughout all generations,
convinced them of their vanity and folly upon their dying-beds, who before were
too much occupied with temporal pursuits to mind the great concerns of a vast
eternity: but when their days were almost numbered; when mortality hastened on
them; when the revelation of the righteous judgment was at the door, and all
their worldly recreations and enjoyments must be parted with, O then! the holy
witness had room to plead with conscience: then nothing but an holy, strict,
and severe life, was valuable; then all the world for a little time, though
before they had given all their time for a little of a vain world. But if so
short a representation of the inconsistency of the vanities of the world, with
the Christian life, could make so deep an impression, as it has upon numbers at
that awakening period; to what a noble stature had they been grown in pious and
heavenly knowledge; and how much greater had their rewards been, if they
contentedly had foregone those perishing entertainments of the world betimes,
and given their minds to the tuition and guidance of that universal grace and
holy Spirit of God, which had so long shined in darkness, uncomprehended of it,
and which was at last but just perceived to give a sight of what they had been
doing all their days!

JOHN, Earl of ROCHESTER.
An illustrious and instructive instance of the power of religion upon the
mind, in the time of sickness and death, is JOHN, Earl of Rochester; descendant
of a great family, of a liberal education, and great personal accomplishments;
who, by his sincere repentance, and happy death, appeared to be (as it is
judiciously expressed of him) a very great man every way; a great wit, a great
scholar, a great poet, a great sinner, and a great penitent.

Such he is described to be by two eminent men, who personally knew him, and
attended him in his last sickness. And herein God has shown the freeness of his
mercy, to save one who seemed to have made a covenant with death, and to be at
an agreement with hell. Somewhat similar to the apostle Paul, though before a
blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious; yet obtained mercy, that in him Christ
Jesus might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them that should
hereafter believe on him to everlasting life, 1 Timothy 1. ver. 13.16. so he was,
as it were, struck to the ground, by a light from heaven, and a voice of
thunder round about him; insomuch, that now the scales fell from his eyes, as
they did from Paul's; his stony heart was opened, and streams of tears gushed
out, the bitter, but wholesome, tears of true repentance.

He had advanced to an uncommon height of impiety, having been an advocate in
the black cause of Atheism. He had raked too in the very bottom of the jakes of
debauchery, and had been a satyrist against virtue. But when, like the prodigal
in the gospel, he came to himself, great horror filled his mind, and forced
sharp and bitter invectives from him, against himself; terming himself the
vilest wretch that ever the sun shined upon; wishing he had been a beggar, a
link-boy, or a crawling leper in a ditch, or had lived in a dungeon, rather
than have offended the Lord as he had done.

Being at one time under great trouble of mind, and his conscience full of
terror, he told the person who attended him, that, When, on his journey, he had
been arguing with greater vigor against God and religion, than he had ever done
in his lifetime before, and that he resolved to run them down, with all the
arguments and spite in the world; but, like the great convert, Paul, he found
it hard to kick against God: for his heart was at that time struck so
powerfully, that he argued as much for God and virtue, as ever he had done
against them.

He had such tremendous apprehensions of the Divine Majesty, mingled with such
delightful contemplations of his nature and perfections, and of the amiableness
of religion, that he said, I never was advanced thus far toward happiness, in
my life before, though, upon the commission of some sins extraordinary, I have
had some checks and warnings considerable from within; but still struggled with
them, and so wore them off again. One day at an Atheistical meeting at the
house of a person of quality, I undertook to manage the cause, and was the
principal disputant against God and piety; and, for my performances, received
the applause of the whole company. Upon which my mind was terribly struck, and
I immediately replied thus to myself, Good God! that a man who walks upright,
who sees the wonderful works of God, and has the use of his senses and reason,
should use them to the defying of his Creator! But though this was a good
beginning toward my conversion, to find my conscience touched for my sins, yet
it went off again; nay, all my life long, I had a secret value and reverence
for an honest man, and loved morality in others. But I had formed to myself an
odd scheme of religion, which would solve all that God, or conscience, might
force upon me; yet I was not ever well reconciled to the business of
Christianity, nor had that reverence for the gospel of Christ, which I ought to
have had.

This state of mind continued till the 53d chapter of Isaiah was read to him,
together with some other parts of the sacred scriptures; when it pleased God to
fill his mind with such peace and joy, in believing, that it was remarkable to
all about him.

And he frequently desired those who were with him, to read the 53d of Isaiah
to him, upon which he used to descant in a very affectionate paraphrase,
applying the weighty sentences thereof to his own humiliation and comfort.

Oh! blessed God! can such an horrid creature as I am, be accepted by thee, who
have denied thy being, and contemned thy power? Can there be mercy and pardon
for me? will God own such a wretch as I?

And in the middle of his sickness he said, Shall the unspeakable joys of
heaven be conferred on me? Oh! mighty Savior! never, but through thine infinite
love and satisfaction! O, never, but by the purchase of thy blood! adding, That
with all abhorrence he did reflect upon his former life; that sincerely, and
from his heart, he repented of all that folly and madness which he had
committed.

His faith was very remarkable in embracing the Christian religion; and he
justly condemned That foolish and absurd philosophy, which the world so much
admired, propagated by the late Hobbes, and others, which had undone him, and
many more of the best parts of the nation.

His faith rested alone on Christ for salvation, and therefore appeared to be
of the right kind. He would often entreat 'God to strengthen his faith,' crying
out, Lord, I believe; help mine unbelief.

He had a growing esteem for the holy scriptures, and evidently saw their
divine usefulness and excellency: For, having spoken to his heart, he
acknowledged, that all the seeming absurdities and contradictions, fancied by
men of corrupt and reprobate judgments, were vanished; and the excellency and
beauty appeared, being come to receive the truth in the love of it.

Satan, the grand adversary of souls, used to assault him with many temptations
and evil suggestions, and many things prejudicial to that religious temper of
mind, with which God had now endued him. One night especially, the Tempter did
make no little use of his fiery darts, by casting upon him lewd and wicked
imaginations: but, I thank God,' said he, 'I abhor them all, and by the power
of his grace, which I am sure is sufficient for me, I have overcome them. It Is
the malice of the Devil, because I am rescued from him, and it is the goodness
of God that frees me from all my spiritual enemies.

There are many proofs of the sincerity of his faith, and the soundness of his
repentance; among others, I shall single out those that follow.

His hearty concern for the pious education of his children; wishing his son
might never be a wit, as he explained it, one of those wretched creatures, who
pride themselves in ridiculing God and religion, denying his being or his
providence: but that he might become an honest man, and of a truly religious
character, which only could be the support and blessing of his family.

He left a strict charge to the persons in whose custody his papers were, to
burn all his profane and lewd writings (as being only sit to promote vice and
immorality, by which he had so highly offended, and shamed, and blasphemed that
holy religion into which he had been baptized) and all his obscene and filthy
pictures, which were so notoriously scandalous.

He protested, he would not commit a known sin to gain a kingdom: and sent
awful messages to his companions in iniquity.

He advised a gentleman of character, who came to see him on his deathbed, O!
remember that you contemn God no more. He is an avenging God, and will visit
you for your sins; and will, I hope, in mercy touch your conscience, sooner or
later, as he has done mine. You and I have been friends and sinners together a
great while, therefore I am the more free with you. We have been all mistaken
in our conceits and opinions; our persuasions have been false and groundless;
therefore God grant you repentance.

And seeing the gentleman the next day, he said, Perhaps you were disobliged by
my plainness with you yesterday; I spoke the words of truth and soberness. And
striking his hand upon his breast, said, I hope God will touch your heart.

He laid his commands on the persons who attended him, To spread abroad, and
let all men know, if they knew it not already, how God had disciplined him for
his sins, by his afflicting hand; that his sufferings were most just, though he
had laid ten thousand times more upon him. That he had laid one stripe upon
another, because of his grievous provocations, until he had brought him home to
himself. That his former visitations had not had that blessed effect he was now
sensible of. That he had formerly some loose thoughts and slight resolutions of
reforming, and designed to be better; because even the present consequences of
sin were still pestering him, and were so troubleblesome and inconvenient to
him. But now he had other sentiments of things, and acted upon other principles.

That none, whom he had been the instrument of drawing into sin, might lose the
benefit of his sincere, though late repentance, he subscribed the following
recantation, and ordered it to be published to the world.

For the benefit of all those whom I may have drawn into sin, by my example and
encouragement, I leave to the world this my last declaration, which I deliver
in the presence of the great God who knows the secrets of all hearts, and
before whom I am preparing to be judged; that from the bottom of my soul I
detest and abhor the whole course of my former wicked life: that I think I can
never sufficiently admire the goodness of God, who has given me a true sense of
my pernicious opinions, and vile practices; by which I have hitherto lived
without hope, and without God in the world; have been an open enemy to Jesus
Christ, doing the utmost despite to the holy Spirit of grace; and that the
greatest testimony of my charity to such is, to warn them in the name of God,
and as they regard the welfare of their immortal souls, no more to deny his
being or his providence, or despise his goodness; no more to make a mock of
sin, or contemn the pure and excellent religion of my ever blessed Redeemer,
through whose merits alone, I, one of the greatest of sinners, do yet hope for
mercy and forgiveness. Amen.

J. ROCHESTER. Delivered and signed in the presence of
ANN ROCHESTER. ROBERT PARSONS.




We shall now attend him to his bed of languishing and death, and view the
power of religion upon his mind, in that important season. He seemed to have no
desire to live but to testify the truth of his repentance, and to bring glory
to God. If God,' says he, should spare me yet a little longer time here, I hope
to bring glory to his name, proportionably to the dishonor I have done him, in
my whole life past; and particularly by endeavors to convince others, and to
assure them of the danger of their condition, if they continued impenitent; and
to tell them how graciously God has dealt with me.

And when he came within the nearer views of death, about three or four days
before it, he said, I shall now die. But, O, what unspeakable glories do I
feel! what joys, beyond thought or expression, am I sensible of! I am assured
of God's mercy to me, through Jesus Christ. O! how I long to die, and to be with
my Savior.

HERVEY, when on a sickbed, to a FRIEND.
MY health is continually upon the decline, and the springs of life are all
relaxing. My age is removing, and departing from me as a shepherd's tent.
Medicine is baffled; and my physician, Dr. Stonehouse, who is a dear friend to
his patient, and a lover of the Lord Jesus, pities, but cannot succor me.

Now I apprehend myself near the close of life, and stand, as it were, on the
brink of the grave, with eternity full in my view; perhaps my dear friend would
be willing to know my sentiments in this awful situation. At such a juncture
the mind is most unprejudiced, and the judgment not so liable to be dazzled by
the glitter of worldly objects.

I have been too fond of reading every thing valuable and elegant that has been
penned in our language, and been peculiarly charmed with the historians,
orators, and poets of antiquity: but was I to renew my studies, I would take
leave of those accomplished trifles; I would resign the delights of modern
wits, amusement and eloquence, and devote my attention to the scriptures of
truth. I would sit with much greater assiduity at my Divine Master's feet, and
desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

JOHN, LORD HARRINGTON, was the eldest son of that Lord Harrington to whom King
James the First committed the education of his eldest daughter, the Princess
Elizabeth.

He had excellent natural endowments, and had acquired a considerable stock of
useful learning; but was mostly eminent for his knowledge in the work of his
salvation.

He manifested a principle of true life in his heart, by his love to all who
were truly godly. And such were his bowels of compassion, that he gave the
tenth part of his yearly income to charitable uses.

At the beginning of his last sickness, he strongly apprehended that death
would be the end of it, and accordingly prepared for the grave.

He declared his faith in, and undoubted hope of, salvation by Christ; and
said, with much cheerfulness, That he feared not death, in what shape soever it
might assail him. In the midst of many heavenly things, which dropped from time
to time from his mouth, he desired to be dissolved, and to be at home with the
Lord, declaring, not above two hours before his death, That he still felt the
comfort and joys of assured salvation, by Christ Jesus. And when the hour of
his departure was come, he said, O, that joy! O, my God! when shall I be with
thee? And with the like words, expressive of a tender, heavenly frame of mind,
he peacefully expired.

From the younger VILLIERS, DUKE of BUCKINGHAM, on his deathbed, to Dr. W --.
DEAR DOCTOR,
I ALWAYS looked upon you to be a person of true virtue, and know you to have a
sound understanding; for, however I may have acted in opposition to the
principles of religion, or the dictates of reason, I can honestly assure you, I
have always had the highest veneration for both. The world and I shake hands;
for I dare affirm, we are heartily weary of each other. O, what a prodigal have
I been of that most valuable of all possessions, Time! I have squandered it
away with a profusion unparalleled; and now, when the enjoyment of a few days
would be worth the world, I cannot flatter myself with the prospect of half a
dozen of hours. How despicable, my dear friend, is that man who never prays to
his God, but in the time of distress? In what manner can he supplicate that
omnipotent Being, in his afflictions, whom, in the time of his prosperity, he
never remembered with reverence?

Don't brand me with infidelity, when I tell you, that I am almost ashamed to
offer up my petitions at the throne of Grace, or to implore that divine mercy
in the next world, which I have scandalously abused in this.

Shall ingratitude to man be looked upon as the blackest of crimes, and not
ingratitude to God?

Shall an insult offered to the king be looked upon in the most offensive
light, and yet no notice taken when the King of kings is treated with indignity
and disrespect?

The companions of my former libertinism would scarcely believe their eyes,
were you to show them this epistle. They would laugh at me as a dreaming
enthusiast, or pity me as a timorous wretch, who was shocked at the appearance
of futurity; but whoever laughs at me for being right, or pities me for being
sensible of my errors, is more entitled to my compassion, than resentment. A
future state may well enough strike terror into any man, who has not acted well
in this life; and he must have an uncommon share of courage indeed, who does
not shrink at the presence of God. The apprehensions of death will soon bring
the most profligate to a proper use of his understanding. To what a situation
am I now reduced? Is this odious little hut a suitable lodging for a prince? Is
this anxiety of mind becoming the character of a Christian? From my rank, I
might have expected affluence to wait upon my life; from religion and
understanding, peace to smile upon my end: instead of which I am afflicted with
poverty, and haunted with remorse; despised by my country, and, I fear,
forsaken by my God.

There is nothing so dangerous as extraordinary abilities: I cannot be accused
of vanity now, by being sensible that I was once possessed of uncommon
qualifications, especially as I sincerely regret that I ever had them. My rank
in life made these accomplishments still more conspicuous; and, fascinated by
the general applause which they procured, I never considered the proper means
by which they should be displayed. Hence, to procure a smile from a blockhead
whom I despised, I have frequently treated the virtuous with disrespect; and
sported with the holy name of heaven, to obtain a laugh from a parcel of fools,
who were entitled to nothing but contempt.

Your men of wit generally look upon themselves as discharged from the duties
of religion, and confine the doctrines of the gospel to people of meaner
understandings. It is a sort of derogation, in their opinion, to comply with
the rules of Christianity: and they reckon that man possessed of a narrow
genius, who studies to be good.

What a pity that the holy writings are not made the criterion of true
judgment; or that any person should pass for a fine gentleman in this world,
but he that appears solicitous about his happiness in the next.

I am forsaken by all my acquaintance, utterly neglected by the friends of my
bosom, and the dependants on my bounty: but no matter! I am not fit to converse
with the former, and have no ability to serve the latter. Let me not however be
wholly cast off by the good. Favor me with a visit as soon as possible. Writing
to you gives me some ease, especially on a subject I could talk of for ever.

I am of opinion this is the last visit I shall ever solicit from you; my
distemper is powerful; come and pray for the departing spirit of the poor,
unhappy

BUCKINGHAM.

Col. JAMES GARDENER, a person of distinguished character, was for many years
of his life greatly addicted to sensual pleasures. With a strong constitution
of body, great flow of animal spirits, fine personal accomplishments, and a
large circle of polite connexions, he seemed as amply qualified as most men, to
range in the field of animal enjoyments, and to extract from them all they were
capable of yielding. Yet this complete sensualist, in the meridian of his joys,
bitterly experienced That even in laughter their hearts are sorrowful, and the
end of their mirth is heaviness.

Being at one time congratulated, by some of his dissolute companions, on his
distinguished felicity, and a dog happening at that time to come into the room,
he could not forbear groaning inwardly, and saying to himself, 'Oh! that I were
that dog!' Such was then his happiness; and such perhaps is that of hundreds
more, who bear themselves highest in the contempt of religion, and glory in
that infamous servitude which they affect to call liberty.

His continual neglect of the great Author of his being, of whose perfections
he could not doubt, and to whom he knew himself to be under daily and perpetual
obligations, gave him, in some moments of involuntary reflection, inexpressible
remorse; and this, at times, wrought upon him to such a degree, that he
resolved he would attempt to pay him some acknowledgments. Accordingly, for a
time, he did it; repeating, in retirement, some passages out of the Psalms, and
perhaps other scriptures, which he still retained in his memory; and owning, in
a few words, the many mercies and deliverances he had received, and the ill
returns he had made for them. But these strains were too devout to continue
long in a heart as yet quite unsanctified: for how readily soever he could
repeat acknowledgments of the divine power, presence, and goodness, and own his
follies and faults; he was stopped short by the remonstrances of his conscience,
as to the flagrant absurdity of confessing sins he did not desire to forsake,
and of pretending to praise God for his mercies, when he did not endeavor to
live in his service, and to behave in such a manner as gratitude, if sincere,
would plainly dictate.

At length it pleased the Author of all good, so to visit his soul, that
heartily joining therewith, he became a sincere penitent, and continued the
remainder of his days, a bright and steady example of virtue and goodness. His
gratitude to God for his singular deliverance, his continued sense of the
friendship of so gracious a Being, and his unshaken hope of eternal happiness,
filled his heart with unutterable peace and joy; and caused abundant compassion
for those unhappy persons who prefer the transient amusements of a day, to the
highest of all enjoyments, the perpetual love and favor of an Almighty friend.
Many of his letters, and particularly the following ones to his wife and to an
intimate acquaintance, testify his favored state of mind, and how great was his
enjoyment in communion with the Father of Spirits.

I bless God, I was never better in my life; and I wish I could be so happy as
to hear the same of you; or rather (in other words) to hear that you had
obtained an entire trust in God. That would infallibly keep you in perfect
peace; for the God of truth has promised it. Oh! how ought we to be longing to
be with Christ, which is infinitely better than any thing we can propose here!
To be there, where all complaints shall be for ever banished: where no mountain
shall separate between God and our souls. And I hope it will be some addition
to our happiness, that you and I shall be separated no more; but that, as we
have joined in singing the praises of our glorious Redeemer here, we shall sing
them in a much higher strain through an endless eternity. -- Speaking of one of
his children, who, he had heard, made a commendable progress in learning, he
expressed his satisfaction in it, and adds, But how much greater joy would it
give me, to hear that he was greatly advanced in the school of Christ! Oh! that
our children may be but wise to salvation; and may grow in grace, as they do in
stature!

What would I have given this day, upon the road, for paper, pen, and ink, when
the Spirit of the Most High rested upon me! Oh! for the pen of a ready writer,
and the tongue of an angel, to declare what God has done this day for my soul!
But, in short, it is in vain to attempt it: all that I am able to say, is only
this, that my soul has been for some hours joining with the blessed spirits
above, in giving glory, and honor, and praise, unto him that sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. My praises began from a renewed view
of him, whom I saw pierced for my transgressions. I summoned the whole
hierarchy of heaven to join with me; and I am persuaded, they all echoed back
praise to the Most High.

Such were the elevations of his mind; yet, there are many who will be inclined
to censure them as the flights of enthusiasm.

But when we consider the scriptural phrases of walking with God; of having
communion with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ; of Christ's coming to them
that open the door of their hearts to him, and supping with them; of God's
shedding abroad his love in the heart by his Spirit; of his coming with Jesus
Christ, and making his abode with any one that loves him; of making us glad by
the light of his countenance; and a variety of other equivalent expressions, we
shall see reason to judge very favorably of the declarations contained in these
letters.

If habitual love to God; firm faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; a steady
dependence on the divine promises; a full persuasion of the wisdom and goodness
of all the dispensations of Providence; a high esteem for the blessings of the
heavenly world; and a sincere contempt for the vanities of this, can properly
be called enthusiasm, then was Colonel Gardener indeed one of the greatest
enthusiasts our age has produced; and in proportion to the degree in which he
was so, he must be esteemed one of the happiest of mankind!

How often (says the ingenious and pious Grove) are good thoughts suggested,
heavenly affections kindled and inflamed! How often is the Christian prompted
to holy actions, drawn to his duty, restored, quickened, persuaded, in such a
manner, that he would be unjust to the Spirit of God, to question his agency in
the whole! Yes, O my soul, there is a Supreme Being, who governs the world, and
is present with it; who takes up his more special habitation in good men, and
is nigh to all who call upon him, to sanctify and assist them! Have thou not
felt him! O! my soul! like another soul, actuating thy faculties, exalting thy
views, purifying thy passions, exciting thy graces, and begetting in thee an
abhorrence of sin, and a love of holiness? And is not all this an argument of
his presence, as truly as if thou did see him?

The dying Advice of DUNCAN FORBES, late LORD PRESIDENT of SCOTLAND.
I WILL conclude with that which is the most important of all things, and which
alone will carry every thing else along with it; which is to recommend, in the
most solemn and serious manner, the study and practice of religion to all sorts
of men, as that which is both the light of the world, and salt of the earth.
Nothing does so open our faculties, and compose and direct the whole man, as an
inward sense of God; of his authority over us; of the laws he has set us; of
his eye over us; of his hearing our prayers; assisting our endeavors; watching
over our concerns; of his being to judge, and reward or punish us in another
state, according to what we do in this. Nothing will give a man such a
detestation of sin, and such a sense of the goodness of God, and of our
obligations to holiness, as a right understanding and firm belief of the
Christian religion. Nothing can give a man so calm a peace within, and such a
firm security against all fears and dangers without, as the belief of a kind,
wise Providence, and of a future state. Integrity of heart gives a man courage
and confidence that cannot be shaken. A man is sure that by living according to
the rules of religion, he becomes the wisest, the best, and the happiest
creature that he is capable of being. Honest industry, the employing of time
well, a constant sobriety, an undefiled purity and chastity, with a quiet
serenity, are the best preservatives of life and health; so that take a man as
an individual, religion is his guard, his perfection, his beauty, and his
glory. This will make him a light in the world, shining brightly, and
enlightening many round about him.

Thus religion, if truly received and sincerely adhered to, would prove the
greatest of all blessings to a nation. But, by religion, I understand something
more than the receiving of some doctrines, though ever so true, or the professing
of them, and engaging to support them, not without zeal and eagerness. What
signify the best doctrines, if men do not live suitably to them; if they have
not a due influence upon their thoughts and their lives? Men of bad lives, with
sound opinions, are self-condemned, and lie under a highly aggravated guilt.

By religion, I do not mean an outward compliance with forms and customs, in
going to church, to prayers, to sermons, and to sacraments, with an external
show of devotion; or, which is more, with some inward forced good thoughts, in
which many satisfy themselves, while these have no visible effect on their
lives, nor any inward force to subdue and rectify their appetites, passions,
and secret designs. Those customary performances, how good and useful soever,
when understood and rightly directed, are of little value when men rest on
them, and think because they do them, they have acquitted themselves of their
duty; though they continue still proud, covetous, full of deceit, envy, and
malice. Even secret prayers, the most effectual means, are designed for a
higher end; which is to possess our minds with such a constant and present
sense of divine truths, as may make these live in us, and govern us, and draw
down such assistance, as to exalt and sanctify our natures.

So that, by religion, I mean such a sense of divine truth as enters into a
man, and becomes a spring of a new nature within him; reforming his thoughts
and designs; purifying his heart; sanctifying and governing his whole
deportment, his words as well as his actions; convincing him that it is not
enough, not to be scandalously vicious, or to be innocent in his conversation,
but that he must be entirely, uniformly, and constantly, pure and virtuous,
animated with zeal to be still better and better, more eminently good and
exemplary.

This is true religion, which is the perfection of human nature, and the joy
and delight of every one that feels it active and strong within him. It is
true, this is not arrived at all at once, and it will have an unhappy alloy,
hanging long even about a good man; but, as those ill mixtures are the
perpetual grief of his soul, so that it is his chief care to watch over, and to
mortify them, he will be in a continual progress, still gaining ground upon
himself; and as he attains to a degree of purity, he will find a flame of life
and joy growing up in him. Of this I write with a greater concern and emotion,
because I have felt this the true, and indeed, the only joy which runs through a
man's heart and life. It is that which has been for many years my greatest
support. I rejoice daily in it. I feel from it, the earnest of that supreme joy
which I want and long for; and I am sure there is nothing else which can afford
any true and complete happiness.

CHIEF JUSTICE HALE, a man of great piety, wisdom, and learning, has given in
his life and writings, an encouraging testimony to the power and excellency of
religion.

True religion (says he) teaches the soul a high veneration of Almighty God, a
sincere and upright walking as in the presence of the invisible, all-seeing
God; it makes a man truly love, honor, and obey him, and therefore careful to
know what his will is; it renders the heart highly thankful to him, as his
Creator, Redeemer, and Benefactor; it makes a man entirely depend on him, seek
him for guidance, direction, and protection, and submit to his will with all
patience and resignation of soul; it gives the law, not only to his words and
actions, but to his very thoughts and purposes, that he dares not entertain
thoughts unbecoming the sight and presence of that God, to whom all our
thoughts are legible. It crusheth all pride and haughtiness, both in a man's
heart and carriage, and gives him an humble frame of soul and life, both in the
sight of God and men; it regulates and governs the passions of the mind, and
brings them into due moderation and frame; it gives a man a right estimate of
this present world, and sets the heart and hopes above it, so that he never
loves it more than it deserves; it makes the wealth, and the glory of this
world, high places, and great preferments, but of low and little value to him;
so that he is neither covetous nor ambitious, nor over solicitous concerning
the advantages of them. It makes him value the love of God, and peace of
conscience, above all the wealth and honor in the world, and to be very
diligent to keep it inviolably; he performs all his duties to God in sincerity
and integrity; and, whilst he lives on earth, his conversation, his hopes, his
treasures, are in heaven, and he endeavors to walk suitably to such a hope.

Of the inward direction and assistance of the Spirit of God, to the soul, he
declares as follows:

Those who truly fear God have a secret guidance from a higher wisdom than what
is barely human, namely, the Spirit of Truth and Wisdom, that does really and
truly, but secretly, prevent and direct them. Any man that sincerely and truly
fears Almighty God, and relies, and calls upon him for his guidance and
direction, has it as really as a son has the counsel and direction of his
father; and though the voice be not audible, nor the direction always
perceptible, or discernible, to sense, yet it is equally as real as if a man
heard the voice saying, This is the way, walk in it.

And this secret direction of Almighty God is principally seen in matters
relating to the good of the soul; yet it may also be found in the concerns of
this life, which a good man, that fears God, and begs his direction, shall very
often, if not at all times, find.

I can call my own experience to witness that, even in the external actions of
my whole life, I was never disappointed of the best guidance and direction,
when I have, in humility and sincerity, implored the secret direction and
guidance of the Divine Wisdom.

The observation of the secret admonition of the Spirit of God in the heart, is
an effectual means to cleanse and sanctify thy heart, and the more it is
attended to, the more it will be conversant with thy soul, for thy instruction.
-- In the midst of thy difficulties it will be thy counselor; in the midst of
thy temptations it will be thy strength, and grace sufficient for thee; in the
midst of thy troubles it will be thy light and thy comforter: only beware thou
neglect not the voice of this Spirit; it may be, thy neglect may quench it, and
thou may never hear that voice more.

It is impossible for thee to enjoy that which must make thee happy, till thou
art deeply sensible of thy own emptiness and nothingness, and thy spirit
thereby brought down and laid in the dust. -- The Spirit of Christ is an
humbling spirit, the more thou have of it, the more it will humble thee; and it
is a sign that either thou have it not, or that it is yet over-mastered by thy
corruptions, if thy heart be still haughty.

Watch, therefore, the secret persuasions, and dissuasions of the Spirit of
God, and beware thou quench it not, nor grieve it; be sure thou observe this
voice -- this wind that blows where it lists, if shut out, resisted, or
grieved, may happily never breathe upon thee again, but leave thee to be hardened
in thy sins; but if observed and obeyed, thou shall be sure to have it thy
monitor and director, upon all occasions; when thou go out, it will lead
thee, when thou sleep, it will keep thee, and when thou awakest, it will
talk with thee.

Of the vicissitude of temporal enjoyments, and of his own experience thereof,
he gives a striking testimony in the following lines.

I HAVE, in the course of my life, had as many stations and places as most men.
I have been in almost continual motion; and although, of all earthly things, I
have the most desired rest, and retiredness, and fixed, private station, yet
the various changes that I have seen and found, the public employments, that,
without my seeking, and against my inclination, have been put upon me, and many
other interventions, as well private as public, have made a literally my
experience, that I have had no continuing city, or place of habitation. When I
had designed unto myself a settled mansion in one place, and had fitted it to
my convenience and repose, I have been presently constrained by my necessary
employments, to leave it, and repair to another: and when again I had thoughts
to find repose there, and had again fitted it to my convenience; yet some other
necessary occurrences have diverted me from it; and thus, by several
vicissitudes, my dwellings have been like so many inns to a traveller, though of
some longer continuance, yet almost of equal instability and vicissitude. This
unsettledness of station, though troublesome, yet has given me a good and
practical moral; namely, that I must not expect my rest in this lower world,
but must make it as the place of my journey and pilgrimage, not of my repose
and rest, but must look further for that happiness. And truly, when I consider,
that it has been the wisdom of God Almighty to exercise those worthies, which
he left us patterns to the rest of mankind, with this kind of discipline in the
world, I have reason not to complain of it, as a difficulty or an
inconvenience, but to be thankful to him for it as an instruction and document,
to put me in remembrance of a better home, and to incite me to make a due
provision for it; even that everlasting rest which he has provided for them
that love him; and by pouring me thus from vessel to vessel, to keep me from
fixing myself too much upon this world below. But the truth is, did we consider
this world as becomes us, even as wise men, we may easily find, without the
help of any such particular discipline of this nature, that this world below
neither was intended for, nor indeed can be, a place of rest, but only a
laboratory to fit and prepare the souls of the children of men, for a better
and more abiding state; a school, to exercise and train us up in habits of
patience and obedience, till we are fitted for another station; a little narrow
nursery, wherein we may be dressed and pruned, till transplanted into a better
paradise. The continual troubles and discomposures, sicknesses, and calamities,
that attend our lives; the shortness and continued vexations occurring in them;
and finally, the common examples of death and mortality of all ages, sexes, and
conditions of mankind, are a sufficient instruction to convince reasonable men,
who have the seriousness and patience to consider and observe, that we have no
abiding city here. And on the other side, if we will give ourselves but the
leisure to consider the great wisdom of Almighty God, who orders every thing in
the world to ends suitable and proportionable; the excellence of the soul and
mind of man; the great advances and improvements his nature is capable of; the
admirable means, which the merciful and wise God has afforded mankind, by his
works of nature and providence, by his word and instruments, to qualify him for
a nobler life than this world below can yield, we shall readily confess, that
there is another state, another city to come, which it becomes every good, and
wise, and considerate man, to look after, and fit himself for. And yet, if man
look upon the generality of mankind, with a due consideration, they will appear
to be like a company of distempered people. The greatest part of them make it
their whole business, to provide for a rest and happiness in this world, they
make these vain acquests of wealth and honor, and the preferments and pleasures
of this world, their great, if not their only, business and happiness; and,
which is yet a higher degree of frenzy, they esteem this the only wisdom, and
judge the careful provision for eternity, the folly of a few weak, melancholy,
fanciful men: whereas it is truth, and in due time it will evidently appear,
that those men, who are most solicitous for their attaining of their
everlasting rest, are the only true wise men, and so shall be acknowledged by
those that now despise them. Wis. 5.4. We fools accounted his life madness, and
his end to be without honor. How is he numbered among the children of God, and
his lot is among the saints!

A Letter from JAMES, EARL of MARLBOROUGH, a little before his death, in the
battle at sea on the coast of Holland, etc.
I BELIEVE the goodness of your nature, and the friendship you have always
borne me, will receive with kindness the last office of your friend. I am in
health enough of body, and, through the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, well
disposed in mind. This I premise, that you may be satisfied, that what I write
proceeds not from any fantastic terror of mind, but from a sober resolution of
what concerns myself, and an earnest desire to do you more good after my death,
than my example (God of his mercy pardon the badness of it!) in my lifetime
may do you harm. I will not speak aught of the vanity of this world: your own
age and experience will save that labor; but there is a certain thing that
goes up and down the world, called religion, dressed, and pretended
fantastically, and to purposes bad enough, which yet, by such evil dealing,
loses not its being. The great good God has not left it without a witness,
more or less, sooner or later, in every man's bosom, to direct us in the
pursuit of it, and for the avoiding of those inextricable disquisitions and
entanglements with which our own frail reason would perplex us. God, in his
infinite mercy, has given us his holy word, in which, as there are many things
hard to be understood, so there is enough plain and easy, to quiet our minds,
and to direct us concerning our future being. I confess to God and you, I have
been a great neglecter, and, I fear, despiser of it; God, of his infinite
mercy, pardon me the dreadful fault! But, when I retired myself from the noise
and deceitful vanity of the world, I found no true comfort in any other
resolution, than what I had from thence; I commend, from the bottom of my
heart, the same to your, I hope, happy use. Dear Hugh, let us be more generous
than to believe we die as the beasts that perish; but with a Christian, manly,
brave resolution, look to what is eternal. The only great and holy God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, direct you to an happy end of your life, and send us a
joyful resurrection. So prays your true friend,

MARLBOROUGH.

The following Account of an affecting, mournful exit, is related by Dr. YOUNG,
who was present at the melancholy scene.
THE sad evening before the death of that noble youth, whose last hours
suggested these thoughts, I was with him. No one was there but his physician,
and an intimate whom he loved, and whom he had ruined. At my coming in, he
said, You and the physician are come too late. -- I have neither life nor hope.
You both aim at miracles. You would raise the dead.

Heaven, I said, was merciful, or I could not have been thus guilty. What has
it not done to bless, and to save me? I have been too strong for Omnipotence! I
have plucked down ruin. I said, the blessed Redeemer -- Hold! hold! you wound
me! -- That is the rock on which I split -- I denied his name.

Refusing to hear any thing from me, or take any thing from the physician, he
lay silent, as far as sudden darts of pain would permit, till the clock struck.
Then with vehemence; Oh, time! time! It is fit thou should thus strike thy
murderer to the heart. -- How art thou fled for ever! -- A month! -- Oh, for a
single week! I ask not for years. Though an age were too little for the much I
have to do.

On my saying, We could not do too much: that heaven was a blessed place -- So
much the worse. It Is lost! it is lost! -- Heaven is to me the severest part of
hell!

Soon after I proposed prayer. Pray you that can. I never prayed. I cannot pray
-- Nor need I. Is not heaven on my side already? It closes with my conscience.
Its severest strokes but second my own.

His friend being much touched, even to tears, at this (who could forbear? I
could not) with a most affectionate look, he said;

Keep those tears for thyself. I have undone thee. -- Do weep for me? that is
cruel. What can pain me more?

Here his friend, too much affected, would have left him.

No, stay, thou still may hope; -- therefore hear me. How madly have I
talked! How madly have thou listened, and believed! but look on my present
state, as a full answer to thee, and to myself. This body is all weakness and
pain; but my soul, as if stung up by torment to greater strength and spirit, is
full powerful to reason; full mighty to suffer. And that, which thus triumphs
within the jaws of immortality, is, doubtless, immortal. -- And, as for a
Deity, nothing less than an Almighty could inflict what I feel.

I was about to congratulate this passive, involuntary confessor, on his
asserting the two prime articles of his creed, extorted by the rack of nature;
when he thus, very passionately:

No, no! let me speak on. I have not long to speak. -- My much injured friend!
my soul, as my body, lies in ruins; in scattered fragments of broken thought.
Remorse for the past throws my thought on the future. Worse dread of the future
strikes it back on the past. I turn, and turn, and find no ray. Did thou feel
half the mountain that is on me, thou would struggle with the martyr for his
stake; and bless heaven for the flames; -- that is not an everlasting flame;
that is not an unquenchable fire.

How were we struck! yet, soon after, still more. With what an eye of
distraction, what a face of despair! he cried out:

My principles have poisoned my friend; my extravagance has beggared my boy; my
unkindness has murdered my wife! -- And is there another hell? -- Oh! Thou
blasphemed, yet indulgent, LORD GOD! Hell itself is a refuge, if it hides me
from thy frown.

Soon after, his understanding failed. His terrified imagination uttered
horrors not to be repeated, or ever forgot. And ere the Sun (which I hope has
seen few like him) arose, the gay, young, noble, ingenious, accomplished, and
most wretched Altamont expired.

If this is a man of pleasure, what is a man of pain? How quick, how total is
the transit of these Phaetontiades! in what a dismal gloom they set for ever!
how short, alas! the day of their rejoicing! For a moment they glitter, they
dazzle. In a moment, where are they? Oblivion covers their memories. Ah! would
it did! Infamy snatches them from oblivion. In the long-living annals of infamy
their triumphs are recorded. Thy sufferings still bleed in the bosom (poor
Altamont!) of the heart-stricken friend: for Altamont had a friend. He might
have had many. His transient morning might have been the dawn of an immortal
day. His name might have been gloriously enrolled in the records of eternity.
His memory might have left a sweet fragrance behind it, grateful to the
surviving friend, salutary to the succeeding generation. With what capacities
was he endowed, with what advantages, for being greatly good. But with the
talents of an angel, a man may be a fool. If he judges amiss in the supreme
point, judging right in all else, but aggravates his folly; as it shows him
wrong, though blessed with the best capacity of being right.

Such, so fatal, when abused, are the greatest blessings of heaven. Heaven
grant his agonies were an expiation of the past; not a presage and sad specimen
of the future. That his surviving companions and admirers may never suffer the
same, give me leave to speak to them, while this affecting object is (or might
be) in their sight.

Ye staunch pursuers of pleasure, opening in full cry on its burning scent! who
run yourselves out of breath, health, credit, estate, and often life, after
that you cannot catch! for a moment slacken your speed, and cool the fervor of
your chase. It is a friend that calls, and he is his own, that hears.

If there is a scene on earth, in which you can find greater advantage, than in
that to which you have been invited, do not come; if there is not, indulge me
in a few words, which may not be soon forgot: at least, they will recur to your
thoughts, they will recur to your feeling hearts, when your present jovial
chase is over; when pleasure is no more.

It will be grateful to your friend deceased, whom you were always willing to
oblige, if, with his accomplishments, you remember his faults; for then you
will not forget your own; but read, in his deep distress, a strong caution
against them. Affords not the rock on which he split, a solid basis for your
safety? Has he not well remarked where mischief lies? See you not the wreck of
that gallant first-rate? or rather, is he not a beacon, lighted up by kind
Providence, to guide you safe through the dangerous voyage of human life?

He once, as you now, imagined himself, in this life, immortal. Was he not
mistaken? He has taken his final flight; whither, who can tell? If you continue
yours in the same fatal track, who is he that cannot tell where the folly must
end? Smitten, transfixed, when most secure, from the most towering heights, he
dropped at once into depths of distress, not to be fathomed by man. In gaiety
of heart defy not the danger. Are there not more arrows in the same quiver? and
are not you as fair and tempting a mark? more tempting, if unadmonished, and
mounting still over his forgotten tomb. And whom dare you tempt? an Archer that
never missed his mark.

But you, from your gay pavilion, embowered in roses, see no threatening
prospects; no dangers of death. -- Oh, Sirs! Death delights to lie hid in
thickets of roses! How often the gayest fall first in his snare! yet even this
is too gentle, too mild, to answer the good will of Heaven; it cannot keep the
world in awe.

What uncommon fortitude is needful to bear prosperities unhurt? It is now
sunshine with you; and you think all is well. It is the season of indulgence --
but seasons will change. You that are now all social comfort, gathered close in
glad clusters, and (like embodied birds of passage, bound for new climes) on
your impatient wing for new delights! what will you do, when each of you,
severed from the rest, an unexperienced, unexpected recluse, lies sorely
pained; dreading worse; none to converse with, but the two greatest strangers,
his own heart, and Him who made it; and neither at peace with him? Say, ye
strangers to care, and abounders in mirth! what will he do, when he finds
himself still subsisting in a state, where none of those pleasures, for which
alone he wished to subsist, can possibly any longer subsist with him? when the
dark matter at the center will not be more foreign to him, than that which now
beats high in his pulse, and flushes in his cheek; and stings him on to
schemes, that laugh at such lectures as these? when he finds himself led by the
soft hand of pleasure, to those dismal gates, which she herself will never,
never, never enter?

AN APPENDIX CONTAINING SOME EXTRACTS FROM THE WRITINGS OF PIOUS AND EMINENT
MEN, AGAINST THE ENTERTAINMENTS OF THE STAGE, AND OTHER VAIN AMUSEMENTS.

AN APPENDIX CONTAINING SOME EXTRACTS, etc.
From the PRINCE of CONTI.
'IT is impossible to consider the business of a player, and to compare it with
the Christian profession, without being sensible that there is nothing more
unworthy of a child of God, and of a member of Jesus Christ than this
employment. I do not speak of the gross irregularities only, and the dissolute
manner in which the women appear on the stage, because those who justify plays,
always separate those disorders from them in their imagination, though they are
never separated in effect. I speak only of that which is absolutely inseparable
from them. It Is an employment, the end of which is the diversion of others;
where men and women appear on a theater, to represent the passions of hatred,
anger, ambition, revenge, and chiefly that of love. They must express them as
lively, and as naturally, as is possible for them; and they cannot do so, if
they do not, in some manner, excite them in themselves, and if their souls do
not take all the changes which we see in their faces. Those then who represent
a passion, must be, in some measure, touched with it whilst they represent it;
and it is not to be imagined, that they can presently efface from their minds
that impression, which they have voluntarily excited in it, and that it does
not leave a great disposition to that same passion which they have been so
willingly sensible of. Thus, plays are, even in their nature, a school, and an
exercise of vice, since it is an art in which one must necessarily excite in
himself vicious passions. And if we consider that the lives of players are
employed in this exercise, that they pass it entirely, either in learning by
themselves, or rehearsing among one another, or in representing to spectators
the image of some vice; and that they have scarce any thing in their minds but
these follies; we shall easily see, that it is impossible to join this
employment with the purity of our religion. And thus, it must be owned, it is a
profane employment, and unworthy of a Christian; and that, by consequence, it
is not allowable for others to contribute to maintain them in a profession
contrary to Christianity, or to authorize it by their presence.'

-- 'Those deceive themselves extremely, who think that plays make no ill
impression on them, because they do not find them excite any formed evil
desire. -- There are many degrees before one comes to an entire corruption of
mind, and it is always extremely hurtful to the soul, to destroy the ramparts
which secured it from temptation.

One does not begin to fall when the fall becomes sensible; the failings of the
soul are slow, they have progressions and preparations; and it often happens,
that we are overcome by temptations only by our having weakened ourselves in
occasions, which seemed of no importance; it being certain that he who despises
little things, shall fall by little and little.'

-- 'It must not be imagined that these wicked maxims, of which plays are full,
are not hurtful, because people do not go there to form their sentiments, but
to divert themselves; for they do not fail of making impressions,
notwithstanding, without being perceived. -- The opinion that the chimera of
honor is so great a good, that it must be preserved, even at the expense of
life, is what produces the brutal rage of the gentlemen of France. If those who
fight a duel were never spoken of but as fools and madmen, as indeed they are;
if that phantom of honor, which is their idol, was never represented but as a
chimera and a folly; if care was taken never to form any image of revenge, but
as of a mean and cowardly action; the resentment which men feel upon an affront
would be infinitely weaker; but that which exasperates and renders it the more
lively, is the false impression, that there is cowardice in bearing an affront.
Now, it cannot be denied, that plays, which are full of these evil maxims, do
greatly contribute to fortify that impression, because the mind being by them
transported, and entirely out of itself, instead of correcting those
sentiments, abandons itself to them without resistance, and delights to feel
the motions they inspire, which dispose it to produce the like upon occasion.'

-- 'Plays and romances not only indispose the soul for all acts of religion
and piety; but they give it a disgust, in some measure, to all serious and
ordinary actions. As nothing is represented in them but gallantries, or
extraordinary adventures, and the discourses are far distant from such as are
used in serious affairs, one insensibly takes from them a romantic disposition
of mind: the head is filled with heroes and heroines, and women seeing the
adorations which in them are given to their sex (of which they find the image
and practice in companies of diversion, where young men talk to them what they
have learned in romances, treating them as nymphs and goddesses) have that sort
of life so much impressed on their minds, that the little affairs of their
family and housewifery become insupportable to them; and when they return to
their houses, with minds thus evaporated and filled with these follies, they
find every thing there disagreeable, and especially their husbands, who, being
taken up with their affairs, are not always in the humor of paying them those
ridiculous complaisances which are given to women in plays, in romances, and in
the romantic life.'

-- 'The need which men have of diversion, is not by far so great as is
thought, and it consists more in imagination, or in custom, than in a real
necessity. Those who are employed in bodily labor, have only need of a bare
cessation from it. Those who are employed in affairs toilsome to the mind, and
but little laborious to the body, have need to recollect themselves from that
disposition which those sort of employments naturally cause, and not to
dissipate themselves yet more, by diversions which extremely engage the mind.
It is a jest to fancy that one has need to pass three hours in filling the mind
with follies at a play. Those who find in themselves this need, ought to look
on it, not as a natural weakness, but as a vice of custom, which they must cure
by serious employployments.'

-- 'If the soul abandons itself to these false pleasures, it loses the relish
of spiritual ones, and finds nothing but disgust for the word of God. These are
those sour grapes, of which the prophet says, They benumb, and set on edge, the
teeth of whose who eat them. -- That is to say, when one feeds himself with the
vain pleasures of the world, the spiritual senses become stupefied, and
incapable of relishing, or understanding, the things of God. Now, among the
pleasures of the world, which extinguish the love (...) the word of God, it may
be said, that plays and romances hold the first rank; because there is nothing
more opposed to truth, and that the Spirit of God, being a spirit of truth, can
have no part with the vanities of the world.'

-- 'There will be many persons ready to assert, that they have never received
any ill impression from comedy; but I maintain, either that they are very few
in number, or that they are not sincere, or that they have not reflected enough
on themselves to perceive it, or else, that the only reason why comedy has not
corrupted their manners, is, because it found them already corrupted, and that
they had left it nothing to do in this matter.'

-- 'God does not impute to us the coldness which proceeds from the withdrawing
of his light, or merely from the heaviness of this body; but, no doubt, he
imputes to us that, to which we have contributed, by our negligence and our
vain diversions. It is his will that we should esteem nothing so much as the
gracious gift, which he has made us of his love, and that we should be careful
to preserve it by giving it nourishment. This command he has intimated to us in
the persons of the priests in the ancient law, whom he ordains always to
maintain the fire on the altar, and to take care to put wood upon it, every day
in the morning. This altar is the heart of man, and every Christian is the
priest, who ought to be careful to nourish the fire of charity on the altar of
his heart, by putting wood every day upon it; that is to say, maintaining it by
the meditation of divine things, and by exercises of piety. Now, if those who
go to plays have yet any sense of piety, they cannot disown that plays deaden,
and entirely extinguish devotion; so that, they should not doubt, God judges
them extremely guilty, for having made so little account of his love, that
instead of nourishing and endeavoring to augment it, they have not feared to
extinguish it by their vain diversions; and that he will impute to them as a
great sin, the abatement or the loss of their love to him. For if a dissipation
of the goods of the world, and of earthly riches, by luxury and gaming, is no
little sin, what must be judged of a dissipation of the goods of grace, and of
that precious treasure the scripture speaks of, which we ought to purchase, by
the loss of all the goods, and all the pleasures of this life?

From CHIEF JUSTICE HALE.
'Beware of too much recreation. Some bodily exercise is necessary, for
sedentary men especially; but let it not be too frequent, nor too long. Gaming,
taverns, and plays, as they are pernicious, and corrupt youth, so, if they had
no other fault, they are justly to be declined, in respect of their excessive
expense of time, and habituating men to idleness and vain thoughts, and
disturbing passions and symptoms, when they are past, as well as while they are
used.

CLARKE, in his essay on study, speaking of plays and romances, says, 'By what
I have seen of them, I believe, they are generally very indiscreetly and
foolishly written in a way proper to recommend vanity and wickedness, rather
than discredit them; they have a strong tendency to corrupt and debauch the
mind with silly, mischievous, notions of love and honor, and other things
relating to the conduct of life.'

The following are taken from the Works of WILLIAM LAW.
CAN any one think that he has a true Christian spirit, that his heart is
changed as it ought to be, whilst he is diverting himself with the polished
lewdness, profaneness, and impure discourses of the stage? Can he think that he
is endeavoring to be holy, as Christ is holy, to live by his wisdom, and be
full of his spirit, so long as he allows himself in such entertainments? For
there is nothing in the nature of Christian holiness, but what is contrary to
the spirit and temper of these diversions.'

-- 'You own that God has called you to great purity of conversation; that you
are forbid all foolish talking and filthy jestings, as expressly as you are
forbid swearing; and that you are told to let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth; and yet you go to a house of corrupt communication; you hire
persons to entertain you with ribaldry, profaneness, rant, and impurity of
discourse, who are to present you with poisonous sentiments, and lewd
imaginations, dressed up in elegant language, and to make wicked, vain, and
impure discourse more lively and delightful, than you could possibly have it in
any ill company. Is not this sinning with a high hand, and grossly offending
against the plainest doctrines of scripture?'

-- 'As prejudices, the force of education, the authority of numbers, the way
of the world, the example of great names, may make people believe, so the same
causes may make people act, against all sense and reason, and be guilty of
practices which are utterly inconsistent with the purity of their religion.'

-- 'The pleasures and diversions of people are certain means for judging of
the state of their minds: nothing can please or affect us, but what is
according to our nature, and which finds something within us that is suitable
to itself. Had we not inward dispositions of tenderness and compassion, we
should not find ourselves softened with miserable objects. In like manner, had
we not in our nature lively seeds of those disorders which are acted upon the
stage; were there not some inward corruption, that finds itself gratified by
the irregular passions that are there represented, we should find no more
pleasure in the stage than blind men find in pictures. If impure speeches, if
wanton amors, if wild passions, and immoral rant, can give us any delight, is
it not past all doubt, that we have something of all these disorders in our
nature?'

-- 'There is no doctrine of our blessed Savior that more concerns all
Christians, or is more essential to their salvation, than this:' Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 'Now take the stage in its best
state, when some admired tragedy is upon it; are the extravagant passions of
distracted lovers, the impure ravings of inflamed heroes, the joys and torments
of love, and refined descriptions of lusts; are the indecent actions, the
amorous transports, the wanton address of the actors, which make so great a
part of the most sober and modest tragedies; are these things consistent with
this Christian doctrine of purity of heart?'

-- 'All people who enter into these houses of entertainment, or contribute the
smallest mite toward them, must look on themselves, as having been, so far,
friends to the most powerful instruments of sensuality, and to be guilty of
contributing to an open and public exercise of splendid impurity and
profaneness. When we encourage any good design, either with our consent, our
money, or presence, we are apt to take a great deal of merit to ourselves; we
presently conclude that we are partakers of all that is good and praiseworthy
in it, of all the benefit that arises from it, because we are contributors
toward it. A man does not think that he has no share in some public charity,
because he is but one in ten thousand that contributes toward it; but if it be
a religious charity, and attended with great and happy effects, his conscience
tells him that he is a sharer of all that great good to which he contributed.
Now, let this teach us, how we ought to judge of the guilt of encouraging any
thing that is bad, either with our consent, our money, or our presence. We must
not consider how much our single part contributes toward it, how much less we
contribute than several thousands of other people; but we must look at the
whole thing in itself; and whatever there is of evil in it, or whatever evil
arises from it, we must charge ourselves with a share of the whole guilt of so
great an evil.

-- 'People of fashion and quality have great advantage above the vulgar; their
condition and education give them a liveliness and brightness of parts, from
whence one might justly expect a more exalted virtue. How comes it then, that
we see as ill morals, as little religious wisdom, and as great disorders among
them, as among the most rude, uneducated part of the world? It is because the
politeness of their lives, their course of diversions and amusements, and their
ways of spending their time as much extinguish the wisdom and light of
religion, as the grossness and ignorance of the dullest part of the world. --
Any way of life that darkens our minds, that misemploys our understanding, that
fills us with a trifling spirit, that disorders our passions, that separates us
from the spirit of God, is the same certain road to destruction, whether it
arises from stupid sensuality, rude ignorance, or polite pleasures. Had any
one, therefore, the power of an apostle, or the tongue of an angel, it would be
well employed, in exposing, and dissuading from, those ways of life, which
wealth, corruption, and politeness, have brought among us. We indeed only call
them diversions; but they do the whole work of idolatry and infidelity, and
fill people with so much blindness and hardness of heart, that they neither
live by wisdom, nor feel the want of it, but are content to play away their
lives with scarce any attention to the approaching scenes of death, judgment,
and eternity.'

IT must appear evident to every sober and unprejudiced mind, that the
sentiments of these virtuous and enlightened men, against such dangerous ways
of spending our time, are, indeed, solid and awakening truths. Let us,
therefore, as rational beings, Christians, who are traveling toward a better
country, and are called to renounce the vanities of this perishing world,
assert the dignity of our nature, and act conformably to the excellence of our
destination. A few fleeting years will bring us all to the verge of an awful
scene, where the vain diversions and pastimes of this world will appear in
their true light, a most lamentable abuse of that precious time and talent,
with which we have been entrusted, for the great purpose of working out our
soul's salvation. At that solemn period, the great business of religion, a
pious and virtuous life, dedicated to the love and service of God, will appear
of inestimable value, and the only thing worthy the pursuit of reasonable
beings. Happy, therefore, will it be for us, if we become wise in time, take up
the cross to all ensnaring pleasures, for the few remaining days of our lives,
and steadily persevere, under the Divine aid, in fulfilling the various duties
assigned us, and in making suitable returns to the Author of all good, for the
unmerited blessings which he has abundantly poured forth upon us. In these
exalted employments, we shall experience the noblest pleasure, and feel no want
of empty and injurious entertainments, to occupy our minds, or to fill up our
time. We shall abhor the pretense of acquiring moral and refined sentiments,
from such polluted mixtures, and feel ourselves deeply concerned to
discountenance, by our example and influence, those splendid engines of
impiety, and dissipation.

THE END.
BOOKS SOLD BY Joseph Crukshank.
GILBERT'S Law of Evidence: a necessary work for those whose offices require
them to examine witnesses. Gibson's Treatise on Practical Surveying: wherein
every thing that is useful and curious in that art is fully considered and
explained. With alterations and amendments particularly adapted to the use of
American surveyors. Robertson's Traverse Tables, constructed to every quarter
degree of the quadrant. Reid's Essay on the nature and cure of the consumption
of the lungs. Milton's Paradise Lost. History of Joseph, a poem. By Eliz. Row.
Young Gentleman and Lady's Monitor and Teacher's Assistant: being a collection
from the best modern writers; calculated to improve the understanding, rectify
the will, purify the passions, and to direct the minds of youth to the pursuit
of proper objects. Art of Speaking: in which are given rules for expressing
properly the principal passions and humors, which occur in public speaking.
Young's Night Thoughts. A small Collection of Poems: containing, Pope's Messiah
and Universal Prayer, Parnell's Hermit, Cotton's Fireside, Blair's Grave,
Gray's Elegy, written in a country churchyard, Merrick's Benedicite
paraphrased, Goldsmith's Traveller and Deserted Village. Ash's Grammatical
Institutes: or an easy introduction to English grammar; to which is added, An
Essay on Punctuation. Latin Grammar: for the use of the college in
Philadelphia. Chapone's Letters on the Improvement of the Mind -- on the first
principles of religion, on the study of the Holy Scriptures, on the regulation
of the heart and affections, on the government of the temper, on economy, on
politeness and accomplishments, on geography and chronology, and on the manner
and course of reading history. The Task: a poem in six books; to which is
added, Tirocinium, or a review of schools. By William Cowper, esquire Fordyce's
Sermons to young Women. Moore's Fables for the Female Sex: to which is added,
Dr. Langhorne's Fables of Flora. Lord Chesterfield's Advice to his Son, on men
and manners: to which is annexed, The Polite Philosopher: or an essay on the
art which makes a man happy in himself, and agreeable to others. Advantages and
Disadvantages of the Marriage State, as entered into with religious or
irreligious persons. Gesner's Death of Abel. Pocket Farrier: showing how to use
a horse on a journey, and what remedies are proper for common accidents that
may befall him; with directions for purchasing a horse, in which rules are laid
down for discovering the perfections and blemishes of that animal. Bartlet's
Farrier's Repository of elegant and approved receipts for the diseases of
horses. Whittenhall's Latin Grammar. Adminiculum Puerile: or fundamental
exercises for schoolboys.

