AN ENQUIRY INTO THE EFFECTS OF SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS UPON THE HUMAN BODY, And
their INFLUENCE upon the HAPPINESS of SOCIETY.

By BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. Professor of CHEMISTRY in the University of
Philadelphia.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by THOMAS BRADFORD, in Front-street, four Doors from the
Coffee House.

An ENQUIRY into the EFFECTS of SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS upon the HUMAN BODY, etc.
BY spirits I mean all those liquors which are obtained by distillation from
the fermented juices or substances of any kind. These liquors were formerly
used only in medicine. -- They now constitute a principal part of the drinks of
many countries.

Since the introduction of spirituous liquors into such general use, physicians
have remarked that a number of new diseases have appeared among us, and have
described many new symptoms as common to old diseases. Spirits in their first
operation are stimulating upon the system. They quicken the circulation of the
blood, and produce some heat in the body. Soon afterward, they become what is
called sedative; that is, they diminish the action of the vital powers, and
thereby produce langour and weakness.

The effects of spirituous liquors upon the human body in producing diseases
are sometimes gradual. A strong constitution, especially if it be assisted with
constant and hard labor, will counteract the destructive effects of spirits
for many years, but in general they produce the following diseases:

1. A sickness at the stomach, and vomiting in the morning. This disorder is
generally accompanied with a want of appetite for breakfast. It is known by
tremors in the hands, insomuch that persons who labor under it are hardly able
to lift a teacup to their heads 'till they have taken a dose of some cordial
liquor. In this disorder, a peculiar paleness, with small red streaks, appear
in the cheeks. The flesh of the face at the same time has a peculiar fullness
and flabbiness which are very different from sound and healthy fat.

2. An universal (...). This disorder begins first in the lower limbs, and
gradually extends itself throughout the whole body. I have been told that the
merchants in Charleston, in South Carolina, never trust the planters when
spirits have produced the first symptom of this second disorder upon them. It
is very natural to suppose, that industry and virtue have become extinct in
that man whose legs and feet are swelled from the use of spirituous liquors.

3. Obstruction of the liver. This disorder produces other diseases such as an
inflammation, which sometimes proves suddenly fatal -- the jaundice -- and a
dropsy of the belly.

4. Madness. It is unnecessary to describe this disease with all its terrors
and consequences. It is well known in every township where spirituous liquors
are used.

5. The Palsy and 6. the Apoplexy complete the group of diseases produced by
spirituous liquors. I do not assert that these two disorders are never produced
by any other causes, but I maintain that spirituous liquors are the most
frequent causes of them, and that when a predisposition to them is produced by
other causes, they are rendered more certain and more dangerous by the
intemperate use of spirits.

I have only named a few of the principal disorders produced by spirituous
liquors. It would take up a volume to describe how much other disorders natural
to the human body are increased and complicated by them. Every species of
inflammatory and putrid fever is rendered more frequent and more obstinate by
the use of spirituous liquors.

The danger to life from the diseases which have been mentioned is well known.
I do not think it extravagant therefore to repeat here what has been often
said, that spirituous liquors destroy more lives than the sword. War has its
intervals of destruction -- but spirits operate at all times and seasons upon
human life. The ravages of war are confined to but one part of the human
species, viz. to men, but spirits act too often upon persons who are exempted
from the dangers of war by age or sex; and lastly, war destroys only those
persons who allow the use of arms to be lawful, wheareas spirits insinuate
their fatal effects among people whose principles are opposed to the effussion
of human blood.

Let us next turn our eyes from the effects of spirits upon health and life to
their effects upon property; and here fresh scenes of misery open to our view.
Among the inhabitants of cities, they produce debts -- disgrace and bankruptcy.
Among farmers they produce idleness with its usual consequences, such as houses
without windows -- barns without roofs -- gardens without enclosures -- fields
without fences -- hogs without yokes -- sheep without wool -- meagre cattle --
feeble horses -- and half clad dirty children without principles, morals or
manners. -- This picture is not exaggerated. I appeal to the observations of
every man in Pennsylvania, whether such scenes of wretchedness do not follow
the tracks of spirituous liquors in every part of the state.

If we advance one step further and examine the effects of spirituous liquors
upon the moral faculty, the prospect will be still more distressing and
terrible. The first effects of spirits upon the mind show themselves in the
temper. I have constantly observed men who are intoxicated in any degree with
spirits to be peevish and quarrelsome; after a while they lose by degrees the
moral sense. They violate promises and engagements without shame or remorse.
From these deficiences in veracity and integrity, they pass on to crimes of a
more heinous nature. -- It would be to dishonor human nature only to name them.

Thus have I in a few words pointed out the effects of spirituous liquors upon
the lives, estates and souls of my fellow creatures. -- Their mischiefs may be
summed up in a few words. They fill our church yards with premature graves --
they fill the Sheriff's docket with executions -- they crowd our jails -- and
lastly they people the regions -- but it belongs to another profession to show
their terrible consequences in the future world.

I shall now proceed to combat some prejudices in favor of the use of
spirituous liquors.

There are three occasions in which spirits have been thought to be necessary
and useful.

1. In very cold weather. 2. In very warm weather. And 3. In times of hard
labor.
1. There cannot be a greater error than to suppose that spirituous liquors
lessen the effects of cold upon the body. On the contrary, I maintain that they
always render the body more liable to be affected and injured by cold. The
temporary warmth they produce is always succeeded by chilliness. If any thing
besides warm clothing and exercise is necessary to warm the body in cold
weather, a plentiful meal of wholesome food is at all times sufficient for that
purpose. This by giving a tone to the stomach invigorates the whole system,
while the gentle fever created by digestion adds considerably to the natural
and ordinary heat of the body, and thus renders it less sensible of the cold.

2. It is equally absurd to suppose that spirituous liquors lessen the effects
of heat upon the body. So far from it, they rather increase them. They add an
internal heat to the external heat of the Sun; they dispose to fevers and
inflammations of the most dangerous kind; they produce preternatural sweats
which weaken, instead of a uniform and gentle perspiration which exhilarates
the body. Half the diseases which are said to be produced by warm weather, I am
persuaded are produced by the spirits which are swallowed to lessen its effects
upon the system.

3. I maintain with equal confidence, that spirituous liquors do not lessen the
effects of hard labor upon the body. Look at the horse -- with every muscle of
his body swelled from morning 'till night in the plough or the team, does he
make signs for spirits to enable him to cleave the earth, or to climb a hill?
-- No. -- He requires nothing but cool water and substantial food. There is
neither strength nor nourishment in spirituous liquors. If they produce vigor
in labor, it is of a transient nature, and is always succeeded with a sense of
weakness and fatigue. These facts are founded in observation; for I have
repeatedly seen those men perform the greatest exploits in work both as their
degrees and duration, who never tasted spirituous liquors.

But are there no conditions of the human body in which spirituous liquors are
required? Yes, there are; 1st. In those cases where the body has been exhausted
by any causes, and faintiness, or a stoppage in the circulation of the blood
has been produced, the sudden stimulus of spirits may be necessary. In this
case we comply strictly with the advice of Solomon, who confines the use of
"strong drink" only to him "that is ready to perish!" And 2dly. When the body
has been long exposed to wet weather, and more especially if cold be joined
with it, a moderate quantity of spirits is not only proper but highly useful to
obviate debility, and thus to prevent a fever. I take these to be the only two
cases that can occur in which spirituous liquors are innocent or necessary.

But if we reject spirits from being part of our drinks, what liquors shall we
substitute in the room of them? For custom -- the experience of all ages and
countries, and even nature herself all seem to demand drinks more grateful and
more cordial than simple water.

To this I shall reply, by recommending in the room of spirits in the first
place,

1. CIDER. This excellent liquor contains a small quantity of spirit, but so
diluted and blunted, by being combined with an acid and a large quantity of
sacharine matter and water, as to be perfectly inoffensive and wholesome. It
disagrees only with persons subject to the rheumatism, but it may be rendered
inoffensive to such people by extinguishing a red hot iron in it, or by
diluting it with water. It is to be lamented that the late frosts in the spring
often deprive us of the fruit which affords this liquor. But the effects of
these frosts have been in some measure obviated by giving an orchard a
north-west exposure, so as to check too early vegetation, and by kindling two
or three large fires of brush and straw to windward of the orchard the evening
before we expect a night of frost. This last expedient has in many instances
within the compass of my knowledge, preserved the fruit of an orchard, to the
great joy, and emolument of the ingenious husbandman.

2. BEER is a wholesome liquor compared with spirits. The grain from which it
is obtained is not liable, like the apple, to be affected with frost, and
therefore it can always be procured at a moderate expense. It abounds with
nourishment -- hence we find many of the common people in Great Britain endure
hard labor with no other food than a quart or three pints of this liquor, with
a few pounds of bread a day. I have heard with great pleasure of breweries
being set up in several of the principal county towns of Pensylvania, and I
esteem it a sign of the progress of our state in wealth and happiness, that a
single brewer in Chester county sold above 1000 barrels of beer last year.
While I wish to see a law imposing the beaviest taxes on whisky distilleries, I
should be glad to see breweries (at least for some years) wholly exempted from
taxation.

3. WINE is likewise a wholesome liquor compared with spirits. The low wines of
France I believe could be drank at a less expense than spirits in this country.
The peasants in France who drink these liquors in large quantities, are a
healthy and sober body of people. Wines of all kinds yield by chemical analysis
the same principles as cider, but in different proportions, hence they are both
cordial and nourishing. It is remarked that few men ever become habitual
drunkards upon wine. It derives its relish principally from company, and is
seldom like spirituous liquors drank in a chimney corner or in a closet. The
effects of wine upon the temper are likewise in most cases directly opposite to
those that were mentioned of spirituous liquors. It must be a bad heart indeed
that is not rendered more cheerful and more generous by a few glasses of wine.

4. VINEGAR and WATER sweetened with sugar or molasses, is the best drink that
can be contrived in warm weather. I beg leave to recommend this wholesome
mixture to reapers in a particular (...). It is pleasant and cooling. It
promotes perspiration, and (...) putrefaction. Vinegar and water constituted
the only drink of the soldiers of the Roman republic, and it is well known that
they marched, and fought in a warm climate, and beneath a load of arms that
weighed sixty pounds. (...), a wealthy farmer in Palestine, we find treated his
reapers with nothing but bread dipped in vinegar. Say not that -- spirits have
become necessary in harvest from habit and the (...) of the country. The custom
of (...) this liquid fire is a bad one, and the habit of it may be broken. Let
half a dozen farmers in a neighborhood combine to allow higher wages to their
reapers than are common, and a sufficient quantity of (...) of the liquors I
have recommended, and they may soon abolish the practice of giving them
spirits. They will in a little while be delighted with the good effects of
their association. Their grain will be sooner and more carefully gathered into
their barns, and an hundred disagreeable scenes of sickness and contention will
be avoided, which always follow in a greater or less degree the use of
spirituous liquors. Under this head, I should not neglect to recommend
butter-milk and water, or sour milk, (commonly called bonneclabber) and water.
It will be rendered more grateful by the addition of a little sugar. PUNCH is
likewise calculated to lessen the effects of heat, and hard labor upon the
body. The spirit in this liquor is blunted by its union with the vegetable
acid. Hence it possesses not only the constituent parts, but most of the
qualities of cider, and wine. To render this liquor perfectly innocent and
wholesome, it must be drank (...) -- in moderate quantities -- and only in warm
weather.

There are certain classes of people to whom I beg leave to suggest a caution
or two upon the use of spirituous liquors.

1. Valitudinarians, especially those who labor under disorders of the stomach
and bowels, are very apt to fly to spirits for relief. Let such people be
cautious how they repeat this dangerous remedy. I have known many men and
women, of excellent characters and principles, who have been betrayed by
occasional doses of gin or brandy to ease the cholic, into a love of spirituous
liquors, insomuch that they have afterward fallen sacrifices to their fatal
effects. The different preparations of opium are a thousand times more safe and
innocent than spirituous liquors in all spasmodic affections of the stomach and
bowels. So apprehensive am i of the danger of contracting (...) spirituous
liquors, by accustoming the stomach. (...), that I think the fewer medicines we
exhibit (...) the better.

2. Some people from living in countries subject to the intermitting fever,
endeavor to fortify themselves against it by two or three glasses of bitters
made with spirits every day. -- There is great danger of men becoming (...)
from this practice. Besides, this mode of preventing intermittents is by no
means a certain one. A much better security against them is to be found in the
Jesuits bark. A tea-spoonful of this excellent medicine, taken every morning
during the sickly season, has in many instances preferred whole families in the
neighborhood of rivers and mill-ponds from fevers of all kinds. Those who live
in a sickly part of the country, and who cannot procure the bark, or who object
to taking it, I would advise to avoid the morning and evening air in the sickly
months -- to kindle fires in their houses on damp days, and in cool evenings
throughout the whole summer, and to put on woollen clothing about the first
week in September. The last part of this direction applies only to the
inhabitants of the middle states. These cautions I am persuaded will be more
effectual in preventing autumnal fevers than the best preparations that can be
made from bitters in spirits.

3. Men who follow professions that require a constant exercise of the mind or
body, or perhaps of both, are very apt to seek relief from fatigue in
spirituous liquors. To such persons I would beg leave to recommend the use of
TEA instead of spirits. Fatigue is occasioned by the obstruction of
perspiration. Tea, by removing perspiration, removes fatigue, and thus
invigorates the system. I am no advocate for the general or excessive use of
tea. -- When drank too strong it is hurtful, especially to the female
constitution; but when drank of a moderate degree of strength, and in moderate
quantities with sugar and cream or milk, I believe it is in general innocent,
and at all times to be preferred to spirituous liquors. One of the most
industrious schoolmaster. I ever knew, told me that he had been preserved from
the love of spirituous liquors by contracting a love for tea in early life.
Three or four dishes drank in an afternoon, carried off the fatigue of a whole
day's labor in his school. This gentleman lived to be 71 years of age, and
afterward died of an acute disease in the full exercise of all the faculties
of his mind.

To every class of my readers, I beg leave to suggest a caution against the use
of TODDY. I acknowledge that I have known some men who by limiting its strength
constantly by measuring the spirit and water, and who by drinking it only with
their meals, have drank toddy for many years without suffering in any degree
from it; but I have known many more who have been insensibly led from drinking
toddy for their constant drink, to take drams in the morning, and have
afterward paid their lives as the price of their folly. I shall select one
case from among many that have come within the compass of my knowledge, to show
the ordinary progress of intemprance in the use of spirituous liquors. A
gentleman, once of a fair and sober character, in the city of Philadelphia, for
many years drank toddy as his constant drink. From this he proceeded to drink
grog -- after a while nothing would satisfy him but slings made of equal parts
of rum and water, with a little sugar. From slings he advanced to raw rum --
and and from common rum to Jamaica spirits. Here he rested for a few months;
but at last he found even Jamaica spirits were not strong enough to warm his
stomach, and he made it a constant practice to throw a table-spoonful of ground
pepper into each glass of his spirits, in order (to use his own expressions)
"to take off their coldness;" it is hardly necessary to add, that he soon
afterward died a martyr to his intemperance.

I shall conclude what has been said of the effects of spirituous liquors with
two observations. -- 1. A people corrupted by strong drink cannot long be a
free people. The rulers of such a community will soon partake of the vices of
that mass from which they are secreted, and all our laws and governments will
sooner or later bear the same marks of the effects of spirituous liquors which
were described formerly upon inviduals. I submit it therefore to the
consideration of the Legislature of Pennsylvania, whether more laws should not
be made to increase the expense and lessen the consumption of spirituous
liquors, and whether some mark of public infamy should not be inflicted by law
upon every man convicted before a common magistrate of drunkenness.

The second and last observation I shall offer is of a serious nature. It has
been remarked that the Indians have diminished every where in America since
their connection with the Europeans. This has been justly ascribed to the
Europeans having introduced spirituous liquors among them. Let those men who
are every day turning their backs upon all the benefits of cultivated society,
to seek habitations in the neighborhood of Indians, consider how far this
wandering mode of life is produced by the same cause which has scattered and
annihilated so many Indian tribes. -- Long life, and the secure possession of
property, in the land of their ancestors, was looked upon as a blessing among
the ancient Jews. -- For a son to mingle his dust with the dust of his father,
was to act worthy of his inheritance; and the prospect of this honor often
afforded a consolation even in death. -- However exalted my countrymen, your
ideas of liberty may be, while you expose yourselves by the use of spirituous
liquors to this consequence, of them, you are nothing more than the pioneers,
or in more slavish terms, the, "hewers of wood" of your more industrious
neighbors.

If the facts that have been stated, have produced in any of my readers who
have suffered from the use of spirituous liquors a resolution to abstain from
them hereafter, I must beg leave to inform them that they must leave them off
suddenly and entirely. No man was ever gradually reformed from drinking
spirits. He must not only avoid tasting, but even smelling them, until long
habits of abstinence have subdued his affection for them. To prevent his
feeling any inconveniences from the sudden loss of their stimulus upon his
stomach, he should drink plentifully of camomile or of any other bitter tea, or
a few glasses of sound old wine every day. I have great pleasure in adding,
that I have seen a number of people who have been effectually restored to
health -- to character -- and to usefulness to their families and to society by
following this advice.


