Mr. Strong's Election Sermon.

A SERMON, DELIVERED IN PRESENCE OF HIS EXCELLENCY SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, ESQUIRE.
L.L.D. GOVERNOR, And the Honorable the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the STATE of
CONNECTICUT, Convened at HARTFORD, on the Day of the ANNIVERSARY ELECTION. MAY
13th, 1790.

BY NATHAN STRONG, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN HARTFORD.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. M.DCC.XC.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, in America, holden at
Hartford, on the second Thursday of May, A.D. 1790.
ORDERED, That Colonel Thomas Seymour and Captain Jonathan Buli, return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Nathan Strong, of Hartford, for his
Sermon delivered at the General Election, on the 13th Day of May 1790, and
request a Copy thereof that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by George Wyllys, Sec.

ELECTION SERMON.
ROMANS, xiii. 7, 8, 9. Render therefore to all their dues: tribute, to whom
tribute is due; custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor to whom
honor. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves
another has fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou
shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou
shall not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
THIS passage, which is a summary of the laws of Religion, may also be
considered as a summary of those political and social duties, by which a nation
is made happy. The chapter in connection is the best political dissertation
that was ever penned. Without entering into a comparison of the several kinds
of government, which men have erected, the writer confines himself to general
truths and duties, which are necessary in all of them, are founded in the
nature of society, and approved by reason and experience.

HE begins the chapter with asserting the divine origin of civil government.
The powers that be are ordained of God, whoever resists the power resists
the ordinance of God. Infinite wisdom suffers us to choose our own form of
government, and designate the instruments by whom it shall be executed; but the
ordinance is still the LORD'S, and to refuse obedience is sinning against
heaven. -- Nor has any man a right to complain, as the institution was
designed for human good, and there is an easy way of reconciling our own
interest with all the powers of a well regulated government. For rulers are not
a terror to good works but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the
power? do thou desire it to be a blessing and not an evil to thee? do that
which is good and thou shall have praise of the same. For he is the minister of
God to thee for good. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath
but conscience sake.

AFTER asserting the divine origin and the necessity of civil government, in
some of the kinds practiced by men; the Apostle recapitulates, in our text, the
principal duties by which society is united, protected and made happy, and sums
up his description in these words, And if there be any other commandment, it is
briefly comprehended in this saying thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
-- If there be any political duty, not otherwise expressly commanded, we may
find it in the great law of christian love; this law directs rulers and
subjects in every possible connection, and will make them faithful in their
respective places. On reviewing the connection of the chapter, it appears that
the Apostle designed our text, as a collection of political maxims, by which
society may be preserved, and the great end of government be promoted under
whatever form or constitution it subsists: and on further attending to the same
maxims, we find they are the essential laws of religion, which were early given
to men as a rule of duty, and their present and future well being. I think this
is a clear proof, that religion and a well regulated civil government are
subjects which cannot be separated. A good ruler or a good subject will not
suffer these laws to go out of his view. Happiness is the great end designed by
all social institutions; for this, the laws and duties of religion are enjoined
on creatures by the wisdom of their maker; for the same end men have organized
government, and defined its powers and duties; both have relation to the social
capacities and enjoyments of connected minds, and aiming at the same end, must
in a considerable degree procure it by the same means. So far as religion and
government deviate from each other, one or the other of them deviates from the
nature of men, and the effects of their social relation.

HAPPINESS cannot subsist without love and justice, between those who are
brought into connection by the supreme providence. The blessedness of a perfect
world, and the perfection of divine government, are represented to us by the
abundance of these virtues. We have no reason to suppose that systems of virtue
or law, essentially different, are necessary for the good government of the
heavenly and earthly societies; as they both aim at the same thing, the
happiness of rational minds in union with each other. There is not an idea, in
the world, more dangerous to society, or more debasing to civil government,
than this, that it stands on a basis of human wisdom and will, apart from those
great religious obligations, which direct the manner and duties of intercourse
in all worlds.

RELIGION, or love, holiness and righteousness, the names by which it is
commonly called in the sacred oracles, is the constitution and law of the
supreme government, by which the Almighty is glorified, and his creatures
connected in blessedness; and the nature of intelligent beings admits not a
safe introduction of other principles; depart from these and we act no longer
like reasonable men or like christians.

OUR apprehensions of a perfect and glorious society must be defective, as we
have not the aid of experience; but in accounting to ourselves for the
blessedness and stability of its orders, we always conceive the perfect
exercise of religion, as a cause sufficient for the effect. If the laws of
religion are sufficient to render the divine government most glorious and
happy; and if the practice of religion will give a future perfection to the
heavenly life, why are not the same principles and practice, the strength and
safety of men's government in this world. The LORD our GOD governs according to
the nature of things, and his administration always ends well; and are not men,
when they act for him in the temporary authorities of the world, most like to
succeed, to support their own dignity, and be a blessing to others, when they
adopt in their administration and act from the same principle.

A RULER needs religion much more than his unofficered brethren, to support his
mind under trials, and to guard him against temptations. When the respectable
citizen rises from private into public life, he must expect to exchange
quietness for trouble; honor, though alluring, has its bitterness and its
dangers; enemies before unknown, will rise up; the jealous will sift all his
actions, and what man can be so guarded as to have all his behavior escape
censure? The ambitious, thinking him in the way of their own progress, will be
his enemies. To support the mind under these evils, and lead it into the
exercise of prudence and patience, religion is necessary.

To hold great power and places of confidential trust is a state of temptation,
which every man cannot resist, and those who are wise will not accept a call to
public service, until by examination, they find in their hearts fixed
principles of fidelity. A bad man may seek elevation, but it is only a good man
who can bear it; many shine in adversity, which cools the appetites and
unsocial passions; but to shine in prosperity; to be humane and just in the
circle of a court; to be true and honorable in the treatment of all mankind; to
be righteous and honest when power gives opportunity for oppressing, the
assistance of fixed religious principles are certainly necessary. If religion
be necessary to assist us in the common duties of life, it is more necessary
where duties are multiplied and enlarge.

POLITICAL elevation is generally esteemed honorable, but it is not always
attended with honor, for this depends not on the elevation itself, but on the
principles and conduct of the person who is raised. What is true honor but the
esteem and love of mankind on virtuous reasons? He who renders to all their
dues -- who preserves himself from a transgression of GOD' laws, by injuring
the purity, interest or reputation of others, and performs the political and
brotherly duties enjoined in the command -- thou shall love thy neighbor as
thyself; he has an honor which enemies cannot long stain, nor time wipe away.
But a profusion of knowledge, and the glare of great abilities, without fixed
principles of love to GOD and men, are like a song, the sounds die away and the
pleasing surprise of the mind departs.

HAVING made these general remarks on the usefulness of religion in civil
society, and in the character of one who rules men; that we may see its
efficacy in the clearest manner, let us more accurately trace its nature and
effects in the mind.

WE are now to consider the formation of a character, which will be uniformly
supported through life, and where a steady practice evidences some habitual
dispositions, that cannot be subverted by every slight temptation.

THE great end of political associations is best answered where there is the
most perfect union, and those principles are most essential to government,
which have the greatest tendency to produce union. The interests of
individuals, are by the emergencies of time thrown into many situations. We
live with many others whose passions are complicated, various and pointed to
their own personal ends. Every lesser district, every family, and individual in
the family, has interests of its own. If these private interests have a
supreme influence the utmost evils will ensue. It is the business of government
to hold the balance between them, to check the overbearing and point them to a
common good, and for this it needs the assistance of some pervading social
bond, and this bond can be no other than religion.

BUT few minds are so enlightened in the institution of nature and the supreme
wisdom which formed it, as to see that a pursuit of the general good will be an
eventual advancement of each man's private good; and where there is this
enlarged understanding if the heart be corrupt, the passions will rebel.

IN all rational society there needs some cementing principle of the heart, by
which the minds who compose it may be united, have one interest, one common
good, and one happiness.

MANY philosophers, and politicians of renown in their times, have enquired for
this bond of union without success, and seduced by their own reasoning, have
substituted art, corruption or power.

CHRISTIAN love in its comprehension of virtues, is the supreme tie of social
connection. This is the same as the Apostle means, when he says -- owe no man
any thing, but to love one another -- and if there be any other command, it is
briefly comprehended in this saying, thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
-- He that loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law; he will exercise all
the varieties of love as they are modified in the actions of justice, truth,
integrity and beneficence; he will render to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, and honor to whom
honor; he will reverence the property, peace and reputation of all mankind; and
by his divine love he will be made happy in doing good to others. -- Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy strength and with all
thy mind, and thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself, are the two greatest
laws of an enlightened policy, in every community of reasonable creatures; this
is religion (...) heart, and the visible practice of it is that religion in
life, by which a man becomes a good ruler, or a good subject, according as GOD
is pleased to place him. These first laws of religion are as excellent for
earth as for Heaven; and as good a directory in civil administration, as in
christian living.

I WOULD not be understood that the holy scriptures are a code of civil law,
nor that they superceed its necessity, nor that the religion of CHRIST
determines the most proper constitution of nations. The divine law and gospel
have in view a more comprehensive object, the government, the glory and
happiness of the creation; still they embrace those moral and religious
principles, in all their varieties, on which the happiness and stability of
lesser societies must depend. -- Public peace is the fruit of union -- union is
the result of christian love and religion. When every man regards the welfare
of his brother and of the whole, the political body is strong, full of energy
and happiness.

THESE are the most permanent and safe principles on which society can be
organized, and all others are liable to an easy dissolution. Power (...)
constrain a kind of order in the state, but its very appearance is gloomy, and
it is destitute of happiness. Fear which awes cannot sweeten the heart and
feelings of mankind; the subject compelled to quietness by a dread of severity,
at the same moment wishes revolt, and the pleasant amities of living are all
denied. -- The selfish passions may be variously addressed, and a system of
human art constructed; But to how many casualties it is subject and how often
annihilated in a moment, the history of empires is full of witness. Justice,
truth, righteousness and mercy are the solid basis of empire, and these are but
branches of religion or christian love. To these permanent principles of
society nothing may be opposed, and the necessity which men sometimes urge is
but a delusion. All the virtues of a pious and good life, ought to be the
object of national encouragement. These reconcile the heart of the subject to
the welfare of the whole and of his brethren. They make a ruler the friend and
father of his country; and might the heart of every citizen be inspired with
these principles, the art and exercise of government would become extremely
simple, and each one would be influenced by his feelings, to act in the sphere
of his duty. Coercion or an artful address to the passions of different orders
of men would fall into disuse, for it is only through human degeneracy, that these
subsidiary aids can produce any benefit.

I AM sensible that human nature must be taken by the civil governor as he
finds it, and that there is not in the world a sufficiency of true religion to
effect so happy a state as is described; but still he ought not to let these
great principles of society go out of view, and if he does, will certainly
injure the public.

IT is not uncommon for some, on observing men's corruption, to embrace
dangerous opinions on this subject. Aiming at a wise and deep policy, they
substitute collusion, intrigue, and an artful address to the passions and
interests of parties, in the place of love, justice and truth. They insinuate
that religion and its institutions have nothing to do with government and civil
policy, and that the moral obligations which may be a fit subject for the
exhortation of a clergyman, cannot be very stricly consulted by those who
manage the civil interests of mankind. When any collection of people are so
corrupt, that they will not bear reproof and the corrective restraint of
government, that people ought, to be disbanded and feel the correction of their
own vices; and that which ought to be done the natural operation of things will
speedily effect. Such representations as I just mentioned, may sometimes
proceed wholly from corruption of heart; an ambitious man, who knows himself
destitute of religious principles, must be unwilling to have their usefulness
in society generally acknowledged; but very often I believe they proceed from
an ignorance of human nature, and the nature of society. Tho the arts of
corruption may succeed with a man for a few times, a loss of public confidence
will put it out of his power to repeat them often. Let him that rules over men
be just; ruling in the fear of the LORD, is a law of perpetual usefulness, and
derives its fitness from the nature of society indeed religion is the best bond
of society, and being such is the best support of government.

THO a distinction is made in the state, between the civil and Ecclesiastical
departments, neither of them is independent of the other. Civility and the good
order of political regulations are a great advantage to religion; religion and
its institutions are the best aid of government, by strengthening the ruler's
hand, and making the subject faithful in his place, and obedient to the general
laws.

THO the author of our holy religion assumed no temporal authority, and gave no
opinion on the several kinds of government, or the temporal jurisdictions of
men; yet he established as first principles in his church, those laws which are
essential to the peace of every state; on which every kind of authority must
stand, which can be a blessing to the people; or which nerve the hand of
government and protect the liberties of mankind. Hence we find that wherever a
just understanding of christianity has obtained, and its duties been
practiced, they have had a benign influence on the liberty of nations: And
where a contrary effect has been aided by what men called religion, as was the
case in the Papal Hierarchy, it was owing to a subversion of the true
principles of christianity. A spurious superstructure was raised by the
corruption of men, falsely called by the name of religion, and not calculated
to refine either the affections or practice of the people, but to aid a secular
power by terrifying men, while those who were first in church and state shared
their spoils.

THE religion of JESUS, with no weapons in its hand but those of truth and
love, silently subverts oppression; makes the people regular in discharging
their duties, and rulers upright and humane in their administration; and there
needs no other means to subvert the tyrannies of the world, than the universal
spread and practice of this religion.

WHEN as subjects, we find that religion assists, us in doing all enjoined
duties, and reconciles us to the interest of the public and our neighbors, we
must suppose, that it will give equal assistance to those whom GOD appoints
to be in authority over us; and that their manners ought to be adorned by
obedience to the divine law. We feel sure that religion will guard them against
temptations -- lead them to a sound policy -- to liberal feelings -- to a
paternal regard of the people, and an unduanted support of justice.

IF there be not a mistake in these leading propositions, the following
important conclusion must be received; that without religion no society
whatever can long subsist in peace, or those who are members of it have reason
to rejoice in the connection.

THE supreme will commands religion, for its usefulness to his connected
creatures. He saw that by this, the minds he created would become happy, and be
joined in a communion, that makes the advantage of each one, matter of joy to
the whole, and the dignity and perfection of the whole, an object of delight to
each individual. He saw that thus the intelliligent kingdom would have one
spirit, one interest and one happiness. On what other foundation can rational
and useful union subsist in this world? In both cases the subjects are the same
and have the same powers, faculties and capacities. Do not those persons
therefore act unnaturally, and against the laws of existence, who attempt the
establishment of any society on other principles beside those of religion? are
not their expectations of its permanency without reason? Have we not always
found the spirit of religion our best assistance in the duties and connexions
of life? Have we not found our families happy, in the same proportion, as its
spirit and orders reigned in them? Or looking back on the civil state, can we
recollect a single instance of public injustice, or the semblance of it, or the
extraordinary prevalence of any immorality, which was not followed with great
evils? The law of GOD and nature can never be repealed.

THE conclusion extends itself still further; First, that it is the right; and
Secondly, that it is the duty of civil rulers to protect religion.

First, it is their right. It is a plain maxim of reason, that the civil state
is vested with all necessary powers of self-preservation. If it be lawful for
mankind to combine in a political union, they have right to perpetuate the
establishment; and as the passions of men are, there can be no comfortable
living without such establishments. To deny civil government the right of
protecting religion, and suppressing irreligion, is denying it the most
essential means of self-preservation. All kinds of vice militate against the
state, and religion in the modification of its virtues are its safeguard. To
organize the civil state, and appoint a number of the people to be rulers; to
commit the public to their charge and make them responsible for its well-being;
and then to deny them the means and power of protecting and encouraging
religion, is a severe requirement. If any man accepts the charge, under this
restriction he promises beyond human performance.

Secondly, IT is the duty of rulers to protect and encourage religion, and of
the people to assist them in doing it. The public weal is the most sacred of
all earthly betrustments. Every man when called to office, has an opportunity
to refuse this care, if he thinks himself incapable, or finds that his heart is
not honest enough to do it with fidelity; but when the trust is accepted, the
obligations to a faithful performance are most sacred. No light causes will
execuse either the civil, or religious minister of the public, for
unfaithfulness in the duties of his office. The happiness of an individual is
dear, and the forfeit of it more bitter than can be described; how much more
dear the aggregate happiness of the public body? Entering into society, we
deposit our property lives, friends and happiness, in the hand of the public;
the public recommit this trust to the care of rulers, and give them a right and
power to see it inviolably preserved. If religion and its institutions be the
most certain means to preserve, is it not their duty to protect and encourage
virtue and piety? Or can any man be called faithful in his appointment, who
has neglected to give this encouragement, both officially and in the private
example of his life? He has had the visible dignity, but with a consciousness
of unfaithfulness, can he feel honorable to himself, or be so vain as to
suppose that he is respected in the hearts of the people? Under a conviction of
the truth I have urged, can he look back upon himself with a peaceful
conscience? The parent who has been a fearer of the Lord, and a faithful
subject and citizen, when he sees his family corrupted by such irreligion as
the state ought to suppress, has reason to complain, that his expense and
allegiance have not been repayed by that guardian care, which he had a right to
expect from the civil power, which alone can stop the sources and punish the
instruments of corruption.

MAY I be suffered to suggest another serious truth. The government is the
LORDS; men are the instruments of providence in arranging its powers and
duties, and appointing proper persons to execute them; the government is still
the LORD'S. He commits his creatures to such of their brethren, as are supposed
to have most wisdom and discreetness. The whole earthly state, is designed as a
school of instruction, and correction to mature such virtues, as will make men
perfectly happy in another life. This is one end of government, for we cannot
disconnect time and eternity. This great people are placed in the hands of
their rulers, by Almighty GOD their tender Father and Savior. He sits supreme
King and expects fidelity from all; every care and exertion that such religion
be encouraged, as will secure present and eternal happiness. Could we keep
alive a sense of divine things, and the connection between this and another
world, these truths would make a deep impression on all our hearts.

By commending religion to the protection of the state, and the practice of its
leading characters, I do not mean to urge an intolerant and persecuting spirit,
which is very different from a tender care of piety. Many differences of
opinion in a land of Christian light, are concerning the non-essentials and the
ritual of religion. Several of these matters, the great head of the Church when
he was on earth, did not think proper to determine. Their propriety often
depends on local or temporary circumstances, or on the particular construction
and feelings of different minds. Such differences when conscientiously
maintained, have not a dangerous effect either on the essentials of religion,
or good order of the state; and government may tolerate them with safety. If we
look through the christian sectaries, who differ in ceremonies and words, candor
will perceive, that the greatest number of them unite, in the weighty matters
of faith, piety, religion and justice, toward GOD and toward men. A diffusion
of knowledge is now advancing a liberal spirit. May the Great Head of the
Church hasten the period, when those who think alike, concerning a divine love,
justice, faith and truth, may join their hands and hail a future meeting in
Heaven, where ceremonies and modes of expression will not separate, brethren.
Experience has taught, that tolerancy in these things is the most powerful
means of union; and a conscientious government will find little difficulty in
determining when to encourage and coerce.

BUT while we speak of a liberal spirit, let not immorality and irreligion
think they have a right to our tenderness. Liberality is a divine affection of
the heart, a love of the truth and of men, and cannot be pleased with vice.
True liberality is christian love, and delights in GOD and in all the virtues
he commands, and is most mistaken by such persons, as triumph in vice over
the social obligations: If there be who speak with lightness of a most perfect
and glorious providence; if there be, who think they may treat the religion of
their brethren with lightness; if there be a few, either so odd or weak in
their way of thinking, as not to see in our sacred books, truths most favorable
to society, and a most glorious description of the Almighty, his justice and
goodness; if there be, who live wicked and immoral lives, they ought not to
think it consistent either with the dignity or safety of the state to protect
their sins. A delirious man is to be pitied, but for his sake a nation cannot
change its institutions: An immoral man is a subject of our forgiveness and
prayer as christians, and of our neighbourly offices as citizens; but must not
expect, that the venerable public, with suffer him to sport with the principles
of their existence.

OUR subject admits a variety of practical inferences, on which I may not
enlarge. It instructs us all how to be good citizens: Every man is a member in
the political body; and every member has a place in which it may be useful. If
any are not useful, it is their fault; for divine wisdom has so organized the
body, there is a place, a business and a duty for all. The man who does his
duty, be his service what it may, deserves well of the state. No order,
profession or employment, may say to another, there is no need of thee. All
will do well if they respect the great principles of religion, if their hearts
possess divine love, and their practice be in obedience to the law of GOD; and
without these a man's character will be defective, whether he move in a high
sphere, or has a humble place in the state. Religion will make us contented
with such place and employment as providence appoints, and authorize us to
think of ourselves we are not useless. The want of religion, if it does not
make a person entirely useless, yet in a great measure destroys him to mankind;
and our rising admiration of his useful accomplishments, dissolves in tears of
sorrow for degenerate human nature.

OUR subject reproves all those vices injurious to society, and none is more so
than a party spirit. Partial affection for local districts and their interests,
must breed opposition, and the general good will be forgotten in interested
altercation. But of all party intrigue, that is the most open insult on the
dignity of a free state, and most threatening to its happiness, when offices
are bartered for emolument, and dignities divided by private influence. Such
things religion forbids, and decency with a sigh turns her face from the scene.

RELIGION forbids, and when it prevails among a people will prevent, the cruel
practice of privately slandering the reputation of elevated characters. To
wound in the dark is an easy thing, and a small capacity influenced by a bad
heart can do it effectually. Unfounded jealousies, are as dangerous to the
public as to those who suffer them, and by being often repeated, shake the
foundation of government, and place the worthy and unworthy, on the same level
of confidence in the minds of the people.

RELIGION is the best friend of men's liberties and properties. Undert his
influence, government will be just to all its engagements, and the interest of
every citizen stand secure, on the basis of equity and justice. Where the
spirit and practice of religion reigns, the sigh of oppression will cease, and
men no longer groan under the power of their brethren. A great part of the
happiness of the world, must be attributed to the humane influence of the
religion of JESUS, and the remainder of oppression is a witness how imperfectly
his doctrines are understood, and how little there is of his spirit, even in
the countries which are called christian. On the ground of prophetic assurance
we expect a day, in which this religion shall fill the earth, and when it
happens, there will be no traffic in the bodies and souls of men; oppression
and slavery will cease and the image of the Creator in reason and
understanding, will be allowed as evidence of a right to the privileges of his
family.

OUR subject recommends to the rulers of the state, an encouragement of all
those institutions, by which religion and science are diffused among the
people. It is the manner of divine wisdom, to work by means regularly
established. When the institutions of religion fall into disrepute, we have no
right to expect, that the spirit of piety will prevail among the people. The
visible orders of religion are an enclosure, which holds its friends together;
and under an idea of tolerancy many have run into an opposite extreme of
opinion, that in all cases where men pretend conscience, they ought to be
exempted from the direction of law. To argue much on these matters may not be
salutary, but I think a little attention will determine the point; for when we
look on those districts within the United States, in which all legal protection
has been denied to the institutions of religion, we can easily trace the
political evils, jealousies and confusion which have ensued.

SCIENCE is friendly to religion and good order, and on this ground claims
protection from government. The expenses of education are the most economical
deposit which can be made for the liberties of our offspring. Men of
information will neither forfeit, nor quietly submit to the loss of their civil
rights; but the ignorant are ensnared by their brethren. Much therefore is due
to the minds of our youth, who will fill the first offices in the state and in
the church and be the only pillars of order, when a few years have laid this
honorable and pious Assembly in the dust.

IF religion and science are the strength of the state, and the preservation of
public liberty, we ought to reflect with gratitude on the goodness of GOD, in
furnishing so many characters eminent in both. When we look on this collection,
it calls to our remembrance many of our fathers, who, by their piety and
wisdom, were pillars in our Israel; and who now receive a more permanent reward
than men can give. It is but a small return, which even a grateful people can
make to the fidelity of their rulers; but tho we cannot reward, an
acknowledgement of the obligation is beautiful, and must encourage their hearts
in doing us good. The chief officers of the state, who are gathered before the
LORD on this occasion, to bless his name and ask his presence, have a right to
our dutiful address.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

THE GOD of our fathers who has all power and dominion, has been pleased to
put an important trust into your hands, and select you as the instrument of
exercising his government, and dispensing his favor to this people. Tho an
elevated station among men, cannot divest you of the weaknesses of humanity;
tho we make no doubt, but in the presence of a higher ruler you feel in
yourself all the imperfections of a creature; yet you will indulge us in
returning our thanks, for many benefits you have rendered to the state, and
especially for the undeviating testimony you have borne in favor of religion,
both by your precept and example. Much is in the power of your excellency; tho
the Gods of the people must die like men, and be soon reduced to a level with
their brethren, yet they have a weighty influence on public opinion and
practice, and the happiness of many, perhaps even for another world, stands or
falls with them. Impressed with this truth, we look to our first Magistrate to
do more than any other man can do. You stand in the place of the LORD to this
people -- they consider you clothed with an authority from Heaven -- they have
confidence in your singular art of presiding with united firmness and
moderation -- through a good opinion of your judgment, as well as an
inclination men have to imitate the great, they will be strongly impelled by
your example. While subordinate orders of men in the state have their sphere of
duty and influence, we look to you, Sir, to be the most decided and powerful
friend of that religion and righteousness, which is the true wisdom of
government, and will establish our prosperity on a permanent basis. To our
rulers, and chiefly to your care, we have committed every thing that is dear to
us on earth; our lives, properties, liberties and happiness, hoping that by a
mild administration, you may be able to preserve the betrustment; but if
severity be at any time necessary, to restrain the invasions of vice, we shall
pray without ceasing, that the GOD of Heaven will give you wisdom to use the
sword he has put into your hand. The honor of being first among many is great;
but much greater is the honor of being faithful to GOD who has given this
appointment, and of exercising it like a good man; and while we gratefully
acknowledge the dignity of your station, we beseech the most high to make you a
christian indeed, and fill your heart with the comforts of undefiled religion.
The reward which we cannot give, your Excellency will find in living near to
GOD, in feeling your dependence on his grace through the Redeemer, and in adoring
his holiness. When wearied with the cares of State, in the retirement of
devotion you will feel and say, it is good to be here. And when Almighty GOD
takes you from this people and the honorable trusts he has give you on earth,
may you dwell forever in his love.

MAY I likewise be permitted to express the public regard and expectations, to
the Honorable Lieutenant Governor, the Council, and House of Assembly.

HONORABLE GENTLEMEN,

THIS annual presentment before GOD, of the Rulers and chief Estates of the
land, is an event which must interest the feelings of a pious mind. It cannot
fail to enkindle in us a reverent devotion, when we behold the princes, the
heads of families and representatives of the people, addressing our heavenly
King for his blessing and direction. This anniversary of worship is a solemn
engagement before GOD, that the government shall be according to his will; that
a respect for his institutions shall be maintained, and religion encouraged. If
you, who are the honorables of the land, countenance virtue and justice; if
piety is conspicuous in your lives; if industry, temperance, justice and a fear
of GOD, are patronized by the laws you enact; if you appoint persons of wisdom
and discreet goodness to execute the laws of the State; good order will prevail
and vice be ashamed: But without this aid from you, Honorable Gentlemen, there
is reason to expect that licentiousness will break over every barrier, dishonor
GOD who has so often protected this people and their fathers, and induce a
general wretchedness. The experience of all people witnesses the sacred truth,
that righteousness exalts a nation; and it is also a truth as certainly
known, that the manners of a people, do in a great measure take their
complexion from public measures. When we consider how much your respectable
body can do for GOD, and the eternal interest of men, we must earnestly solicit
your care, to preserve the purity of the people, to encourage good living, and
reward by your confidence in them, such men as fear the LORD and obey his law.

THE local situation of your honorable body, in every part of the State; your
opportunity for personal observation of the manners in every district; -- the
force of your example, united with legislative authority, will essentially aid
you in doing what is requested. The harmony of the people and peace of the land
follows the harmony and union of their Rulers; and when the citizens see that
every kind of vice is discountenanced by those in dignified stations, it will
be a powerful guard of their principles and manners. To stand the guardians of
public happiness is a solemn situation, and one in which every man needs to be
divinely assisted. -- Honorable Gentlemen, may the GOD of wisdom make you
skilful to govern and wise unto eternal peace.

THE sons of Aaron are also before the LORD. The sanctity of their profession,
and its near connection with my subject, naturally calls my address to them:

REVEREND FATHERS AND BRETHREN,

THE duty incumbent on all christian citizens, piety toward GOD, and
righteousness and love to men, is doubly incumbent on us. We are consecrated to
the service of religion, and under the most solemn vows. There is every reason,
that we use a greater diligence than other men, in promoting a divine knowledge
of GOD and his Son, love, faith, vital piety, experimental religion and a good
practice. If those who act in the civil department, are judged guilty for
spiritual negligence; how much greater is the criminality of a gospel minister,
who is expressly set apart as a watchman for the souls of men. From the
advantage to be derived in this life, we have the same inducement as other men,
to urge the power and practice of godliness; national prosperity is a motive
which will animate the heart of every good man. Tho not clothed with civil
power, we are connected with the state. Wise men of every profession, know the
salutary influence of an enlightened and pious clergy, on the civil system, and
therefore much is expected from us; and much may be done to advance justice and
peace, encourage obedience to the laws, and stengthen the hand of government.
But more weighty considerations are drawn from another world. The souls of this
people are to be happy or wretched forever, and of this happiness or misery we
are the messengers. To describe the perfections and will of GOD; to assert his
government, and declare his wrath against sin; to publish the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST, and explain its peculiar doctrines, which are full of holiness and
love; to urge a christian faith and practice; to encourage men by the glory
promised to godliness, and awaken them by the terrors of the LORD prepared to
avenge iniquity; to be an example to the church in humility, sobriety and every
grace, are our peculiar duties; and we cannot excel in them without much labor
and prayer. For the right performance of these duties, there is a peculiar
necessity that we take much care of our own hearts, and be personally warmed
with love to GOD and men. Whatever assists us to love religion, will furnish us
with ministerial accomplishments, especially to abound in prayer, will comfort,
enlighten and assist us in every duty, and give us a happy preparation, through
divine mercy, for that immortality which we preach to others. Let us be united
in a fervent charity, and in supplication for an outpowering of the spirit, on
us and on our churches, and when our LORD comes he will make us perfect unto
eternal peace.

MY Brethren of every character, let us resolve here before the LORD that we
will serve him. Blessed are the righteous; but one sinner destroys much good,
and disturbeth his land. This honorable legislature are the anointed ones of
the LORD; it is our duty to pray that they may be endowed with wisdom, to give
them reverence, and to honor all the Judges and ministers of justice in the
land. Our political happiness in a great degree depends on our own conduct, for
a vicious people cannot be a happy one.

ESPECIALLY let us endeavor by faith and patience, by charity and good works,
to obtain the promises, and secure to ourselves a habitation not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens. How precious are these moments of time, and who
can describe how much depends on a right improvement of them? The soul which
remains in sin shall die; but for the pure in heart, there is reserved an
inheritance, incorruptible, undefiled, and that sadeth not away.

AMEN.
PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.


