A SERMON, etc.

A SERMON, ON TEMPORAL AND SPIRITUAL SALVATION: DELIVERED IN CHRIST-CHURCH,
PHILADELPHIA, BEFORE THE PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI.

BY WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. PROVOST of the COLLEGE and ACADEMY of PHILADELPHIA.

PREPARED AND PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY.

PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF T. DOBSON. M, DCC, XC

AT a Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Pennsylvania Society of the
Cincinnati, held at the house of General Walter Stewart, June 28th, 1790.
Resolved, That as the Fourth of July will be on Sunday next, a Sermon be
delivered in celebration of American Independence in lien of an Oration; and
that the Reverend Dr. William Smith, Provost of the Colloge of Philadelphia, be
requested to prepare and deliver one before the Society on said day -- General
Stewart, and Colonel Francis Johnston are appointed to wait on Dr. Smith for
this purpose.

Extract from the Minutes, RICHARD FULLERTON, Sec.

AT an annual meeting of the Pennsylvania Society of the Cincinnati, held in
the City of Philadelphia, July 5th, 1790.
On motion, Resolved, That the thanks of the Society be given to the Reverend
Dr. William Smith, for the Sermon delivered by him, on the Anniversary of
American Independence -- and that the Honorable Thomas Mc. Kean, General Walter
Stewart, and the Reverend Dr. William Rogers, wait on Dr. Smith, and request
him to furnish the Society with a copy for publication.

Extract from the Minutes, RICHARD FULLERTON, Sec.

A SERMON, etc.
ISAIAH, lii. 12. The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the Salvation of our God.
ALTHOUGH it be our unspeakable felicity, as a civilized and Christian people,
to have in our hands the New Testament -- the GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST -- that
fullness of divine light and knowledge and love, to which no addition is
expected or promised to be made in our present mortal state; yet we are to
adore that Providence which has given us the Old Testament also, containing
the law and the prophets -- the dealings of the Almighty with his own people,
the JEWS, under a government erected by himself; and from whose history,
lessons are to be derived highly instructive to mankind, in all ages and
conditions of society.

The various changes in the fortune of that people, who were alternately lifted
up and cast down in the hands of Jehovah, are recorded for our learning, by the
sovereign will of him, who is not the God of the JEWS only, but also of the
GENTILES; and are "profitable (as all Scriptures are) for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness."

In the chapter from which our rapturous text is taken, the sublime and
evangelical Prophet congratulates his nation, not only upon a recent
deliverance from many temporal evils, a restoration from a cruel captivity, and
a succeeding happy change of their condition as a people; but, borne
triumphantly forward, by the Spirit which rested upon him, to future shining
periods of Freedom and Happiness under the Gospel, he holds forth to them, and
to the whole world with them, the glorious prospect of a double deliverance and
salvation (which should take place, to the very "ends of the earth,") as well
from all temporal evil and bondage, as from spiritual evil and the cruel
bondage of sin!

"Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Sion! put on thy beautiful garments, O
Jerusalem; for henceforth there shall no more come unto thee, the uncircumcised
and the unclean. My people shall know my name; they shall know, in that day,
that I am he that does speak: Behold it is I!"

"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings; that publishes peace; that brings tidings of good, that publishes
salvation; that faith unto Zion, thy God reigns! Break forth into joy, sing
together ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Lord has comforted his people,
he has redeemed Jerusalem."

"The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and ALL
THE ENDS OF THE EARTH shall see the SALVATION of our GOD!"

How divinely luminous, how sweetly evangelical, how richly instructive, and
how triumphantly accordant to the solemnities of this day, are our Text and
Context! To no period under the LAW, to no former period under the GOSPEL, can
we look for the full explanation, or near accomplishment, of the Prophecy
before us! To the present ERA, and to the happy circumstances under which we
are now assembled, we are called to turn our meditations, and to seek for a
more ample commentary upon this prophecy; wherein there is a twofold WORK of
the Lord to be considered -- for which, He has made bare his holy arm in the
eyes of all the nations --

I. "To deliver a people who were oppressed, to restore and comfort them, and
to make their waste places sing for joy."

II "To accompany this deliverance with tidings of good things," the universal
overtures of PEACE and SALVATION; till the happy land shall become the last and
most glorious stage and theater of gospel knowledge.

Here then, in this divine work for which the Lord has made bare his holy arm,
in the eyes of all the nations, even to "the ends of the earth," the
inhabitants of these American States appear to be brought into the midst of the
great Drama. They mourned under "oppression" and wrong; but now they are
"restored and comforted." Their land was desolated; but now "their waste places
sing for joy." They have heard "the tidings of good things." The gospel is
preached unto them. They rejoice in this preaching. They exult and cry out in
the words of our prophecy, as quoted by St. Paul --

"How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things;" that publish peace and salvation, and say unto
Zion, thy God reigns!"

BUT our Prophet further explains himself, on this last diffusion of the
Gospel, by connecting with it the greatest temporal felicity, in strains
further applicable to our present circumstances, and worthy of our most earnest
attention.

"The Lord himself shall be an everlasting light unto the world. They who
follow that light shall become a righteous people, and inherit the land for
ever, as a branch of his planting, whereby he may be glorified. A LITTLE ONE
(among such a people) shall become a THOUSAND, and A SMALL ONE A GREAT NATION!"
This he has promised, and this he will perform; "he will hasten it;" yea, he
is now hastening it in his own blessed way! a little one is becoming a
thousand, and small ones are becoming great nations. The auspicious Era is at
hand, and its blessings almost within our grasp! The anticipation of them ought
to fill us with a holy fervor, and be as a portion of divine fire to animate us
in the remaining duties of this day, which (as has been already stated) regard
a temporal as well as spiritual SALVATION.

Although, to commemorate a temporal deliverance and salvation, on each annual
return of this day, be the principal design of the illustrious band of
Citizens, Soldiers, and Patriots, by whose appointment I stand here; yet I have
their authority to say, that they join with every sincere Christian, in this
great and respectable assembly, in considering it as their indispensible duty,
never to separate the commemoration of temporal, from that of spiritual,
blessings and deliverances. They are indeed inseparable in their nature; and
these Patriots and Soldiers appear in this sacred place to manifest to the
world, that in their consideration, the Joy of this day, as often as it shall
return, ought not to be a noisy and tumultuous joy, shouts of triumph, a
display of the spoils of enemies, trophies of victory, the mere glare and
parade of external show, illuminations, feastings and the like, (which, as
emblems and remembrancers, may on proper occasions be allowable and fit); But
it should be a religious JOY, the joy of the heart before the LORD, mixed with
a holy and reverential fear; rejoicing indeed, but our rejoicing should be with
"trembling;" lest we follow the example of Israel, who, when they saw the great
work which the Lord did for them upon the Egyptians, feared the Lord and Moses,
and commemorated their deliverance with songs of joy, saying, "Who is like unto
thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods; glorious in majesty, doing wonders?" Yet soon
did they forget their deliverer; and, for the punishment of their ingratitude,
were scattered among the nations which knew not GOD.

THAT these UNITED STATES might never fall into the like forgetfulness of the
great work which the Lord has done for them, in their establishment as a FREE
and INDEPENDENT NATION, nor incur the punishment due to such ingratitude; to
perpetuate those Friendships, which, as the strong arm of a Giant, had
contributed so much to the mighty Atchievment; and to unite more closely in
offices of Love and Charity to distressed brethren -- were the great objects
for which the SOCIETY OF CINCINNATI was established. But the account of their
Institution can be given, in no language superior to their own.

Having lived, say they, in the strictest habits of amity through the various
stages of a war, unparalleled in many of its circumstances -- in the moment of
triumph and separation, when we were about to act the last pleasing,
melancholy, scene in our MILITARY DRAMA -- pleasing, because we were to leave
our country possessed of INDEPENDENCE and PEACE; melancholy, because we were to
part, perhaps, never to meet again; it was impossible not to wish such
friendships to be CONTINUED -- it was impossible to forget the dangers by which
they were cemented -- it was impossible not to indulge a desire to convey to
their posterity, a perpetual memorial of the blessings procured by their happy
labors, and to make provision for alleviating the distresses of such of their
brethren as had suffered more immediately and eminently in the general cause.

Under those impressions, "when it pleased the Supreme Governor of the universe
to give success to their arms, and finally to establish the UNITED STATES, free
and independent, the SOCIETY of CINCINNATI was instituted; gratefully to
commemorate the important event; to inculcate, to the latest ages, the duty of
laying down, in PEACE, the arms assumed for public defense, by forming an
institution which recognizes that most important principle; to continue the
mutual friendships which commenced under the pressure of common danger; and to
effectuate the acts of beneficence, dictated by the spirit of brotherly
kindness, toward those officers and their families who might be under the
necessity of receiving them."

With these principles, retiring into the shade of private life, holding up the
character of that illustrious Roman, LUCIUS QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS for their
example and model, they assumed his NAME, having "PATRIOTISM, FRIENDSHIP and
CHARITY," as the basis of their INSTITUTION and ORDER; a foundation more
honorable, than could be derived from all the wealth and grandeur of the
proudest Monarchs.

Against an Institution, founded on such pure and patriotic principles, why
should even a suspicion have ever arisen, as if it had been intended to
"destroy that Equality of rank in Society, to attain which its Founders had
suffered every hardship of WAR and WANT; freely relinquishing the ARMS which
were in their hands, and retiring into private life unrewarded, and wholly
dependent on the justice and liberality of their country?"

With a noble spirit, gentlemen, you have ascribed those suspicions, although
wholly unjust, to that holy Jealousy which freemen ever ought to maintain for
the preservation of their rights; and you condescended to reform the
Constitution of your society by a removal of amendment of every article which
could continue the least ground of such jealousy; thereby gaining a Victory
over yourselves (if possible), more heroic and magnanimous, than all the former
examples of your heroism and magnanimity.

In the institution of your Order, as well as in all your conduct during the
war, you have so far adorned the character which I had long since conceived of
the good SOLDIER and PATRICT, that I am almost most tempted (you will forgive
the vanity) of assuming to myself some part of the merit -- at least of hinting
the foundation of the Order of the CINCINNATI.

From a sermon delivered in this place, in the midst of the late war, ( viz. on
the Feast of St John the Evangelist 1778,) before your illustrious General and
President, now the President, of the United States, you will give me leave to
quote a Passage, viz.

No government is to be considered of divine original, but as it resembles
GOD's own government; round whose throne, justice and mercy wait. And all
governments must be so far divine, as the LAWS rule, and every thing is
ordered, under God, by free and common consent.

To contend for such governments, with a holy, enlightened and unquenchable
zeal, is the highest temporal glory. Wherefore, we dwell with rapture upon the
Records of former renown, and contemplate with veneration those transcendent
scenes of Heroism; in which we behold the BRAVE and the FREE wearing upon their
swords the Fate of millions; while the divine GENIUS of VICTORY, espousing
their cause, hovers over their heads with expanded wing; reaching forth the
immortal wreath that is to surround their triumphant brow; and smiling upon the
decisive moment that is to fix the happiness of unborn generations!

They who (from a sense of duty to God and their country, seeking that LIBERTY
and PEACE which Heaven approves), have thus acted their part, whether in more
elevated or inferior stations, form the first class in the roll of Worthies.
And when they descend again into private life, casting behind them vain pomp
and fastidious pride, to mingle with their fellow citizens in all the tender
charities and endearing offices of society and humanity, their characters, if
possible, become still more illustrious. Their very maims and scars are nobly
honorable. The respect, which they command, grows with their growing years; and
as they descend to the horizon of life, it is like the Sun in serene and
setting glory -- with orb more enlarged and mitigated, though less dazzling and
splendid. Even their garrulous old age, while it can only recount the feats of
former days, will be listened to with attention; or should they survive all the
active powers both of body and mind, yet still, like some grand structure,
tottering and crumbling beneath the hand of time, they will appear majestic
even in ruins, and venerable in decay!

And, when at last the messenger, DEATH, who comes to all, shall come to them,
undaunted they will obey his summons; in conscious hope of being speedily
united and beatified with their com-patriots and forerunners, in the mansions
of endless bliss.

Such, to name no more, was the In a note annexed to this sermon, which was
dedicated to General WASHINGTON, a short account was given of the life and
character of CINCINNATUS.
character of CINCINNATUS in ancient times, rising awful from the Plough to
SAVE his COUNTRY, and, his COUNTRY SAVED, returning to the Plough again, with
increased dignity and luster. Such too, if we divine aright, will future ages
pronounce the character of a WASHINGTON to have been. But his presence on this
occasion, as He was present as a MASON
a brother, forbids me to add more -- Seek to derive virtue from his example;
let your principles animate you with intrepidity in the hour of Danger, and
humanity in the moments of Triumph.

Thus far on that occasion -- And now gentlemen, having said all that seems
necessary to your as a distinct body, and respecting your honorable claim to
the title of CINCINNATI, I trust that I shall obtain an equal attention from
you to my second head of discourse; in which you and every member of the
community here assembled are alike interested. Nay, as examples, to lead the
attention of others to that SPIRITUAL SALVATION, which remains to be more fully
treated of, perhaps you are more interested than others; and more may be
expected from you, as you have nobly avowed the principle -- That the SOLDIER'S
glory cannot be completed, without acting well the part of the GOOD CITIZEN and
GOOD CHRISTIAN!

But, before I proceed further -- It having been declared, that the great
design of the Cincinnati on this day is to commemorate the blessings of
religious and civil Liberty; and the Churches in this city, having for some
years past, made use of a particular Service composed for that purpose; it may
seem strange that the said service has been omitted on the present occasion.
To this I am instructed, by the Right Rev. Bishop and Pastor of this Church, to
answer -- That, although such a service was, with a pure, a pious, and
patriotic design, proposed by a Convention of our Church some years ago, yet it
was never received into general use; nor did it appear that any other religious
denomination of Christians in the Union, were disposed to follow the example,
or to make a similar provision for commemorating the day. This, however, would
have had but little weight with us, if it had been considered by the members of
our Church as a religious rather than a political institution. But being
convinced by the remarkable scarcity of worshippers, which attended the
Service, on former returns of this day, that the multitude were too much drawn
off, by the external parade of shows and rejoicings, from an attention to
religious duties (except when the day fell on Sunday) -- What was originally
introduced as a proposal, is now omitted in an authoritative Liturgy
established by the late general Convention of our Church. The religious
observation of the day, however, will always be encouraged, as it is on the
present occasion, when a similar disposition shall call for it.

I proceed now to consider more fully that spiritual Salvation, which Almighty
God, after "having made bare his holy arm," to rescue us from temporal
calamity, has promised to extend "to all the ends of the earth."

By this Salvation, as mentioned in our text, I need scarcely observe to a
christian audience, that we are to understand the knowledge and practice of the
blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ; to which is annexed not only the promises of
temporal happiness in this life, but the rich reward of eternal happiness in
the life to come. To be convinced of the sufficiency of the blessed Gospel, for
the great purposes of this mighty salvation, is the chief wisdom of man. For
therein is contained that wisdom, which is of God; that true knowledge, without
which all else, that is called knowledge, is nugatory and vain! The further we
carry our enquiries into the works of Nature and Providence, the more we are
convinced of their greatness, and our own insufficiency to comprehend them: the
length, the breadth, and the depth, far out measure our scanty line, without
deriving help from on high. We find many things of the utmost importance for us
to know, which yet baffle all our efforts, and elude our most eager researches.

The creation and various revolutions of the world which we inhabit, the fall
and redemption of man, the last judgment and an eternal world to come -- these
are grand and interesting concerns, in which no wisdom of our own could
instruct us, unless the Lord had been pleased to reveal himself concerning them.

Can we, then, neglect or despise that heavenly system of truth, by which he
has made himself known to us in those great points? Shall we not rather take
it to our bosoms, search into its depths, and reverence it as containing the
words of eternal life; as being the richest legacy which heaven could give or
man receive?

In all the majesty of truth, and beauties of holiness, the blessed Gospel
delivers to us those laws, by which we are to live here, and be judged
hereafter. Containing doctrines the most rational and sublime, precepts the
most benevolent and salutary, a style the most rich and powerful, in all the
variety of language and coloring, and sharper than a two-edged sword -- this
heavenly book was given to purify the heart and affections; to enlighten and
exalt the understanding; to awaken and guide the conscience; to confirm our
hopes and remove our fears; to banish ignorance and superstition; to cast down
the idols of the nations; to mitigate or destroy lawless power; to check the
rage of barbarism; to humanize the hearts of men, and call them off from a vain
dependence upon external worship and ceremonies, to a trust in the living God;
obedience to his moral laws and the voice of conscience within; repentance from
past offenses; an acceptable, rational and elevated devotion of heart, a
longing after immortality; an exaltation to the life of angels, the joy of God,
and happiness unspeakable and full of glory!

All our other Knowledge, all that is called Philosophy, will avail us but
little, without the divine finishing of this wisdom of the Spirit of God, which
teaches all things.

"For whether there be tongues they shall cease, or whether there be [human]
knowledge it shall vanish away." But the sublime knowledge of the gospel will
be for ever new. It will lead us to that Salvation of God, promised in our
text. It will be the endless subject of our enquiries and of our praises, and
will constitute a Philosophy, the Mavelous of which Eternity cannot exhaust,
nor the longest periods of duration bring to decay.

Such, then, being, the nature and end of the gospel of Christ, how triumphant
is the assurance given in our text, that "the Lord has made bare his holy arm
in the eyes of all the nations" of this immense continent, and that his promise
has gone forth "to these ends of the earth," that they "shall see the
salvation of GOD," and exult in the full blaze of Gospel-day!

The prospect opens, it extends itself upon us; and the whole Analogy of things
aids the interpretation of Prophecy. Turning our thoughts to the ways of
Providence, as recorded in sacred as well profane History, and pondering upon
the fate of Christian States and Empires -- how they have, in their turns,
enjoyed the pure Light of the Gospel and all its blessed concomitants -- true
Liberty, equal Laws, security of Property, Wisdom, Magnanimity, Arts and
Sciences, and whatever can adorn or exalt human nature -- how they have
flourished or decayed, according to the due use or corrupt abtuse of those
mighty blessings; marking the progress of Religion and Civilization through the
Old World, and impartially examining the prophecies which relate to the coming
in of "the fullness of the Gentiles," and extending "their glory, like a flowing
stream," to the ends of the earth, compared with the circumstances in which we
now stand -- surely, on such a review, we are justified in cherishing a strong
Hope, a well-grounded Persuasion, that the day has already dawned, (nay that
its meridian is near at hand) when "all the ends of the earth" shall, with Us,
behold the Salvation of our GOD.

With the Sun, those mighty blessings still pursued a Western Course, till they
reached the utmost verge of the old world -- that Ultima Thule, from whence
many of us and our fathers sprang. Long did they illumine that favored land,
and while they shone in noontide glory there -- (O memory, why starts the
involuntary tear!) while they shone in noontide glory there -- at the time
ordained by God, our Fathers crossed the vast Ocean. They brought the Bible,
the blessed charter of their Salvation, in their hands, and therewith the
rudiments of learning and science, dispelling the long, long, night of darkness
in which these American Regions were involved; and laying the foundation of a
New and glorious Era in the Gospel progress, onwards toward the setting sun.
A radiant morn of light and happiness then dawned upon this benighted land,
yielding the joyous earnest of a future resplendent day. That dawn was,
however, overcast; the morning loured and our Sun was hid in clouds for a
while; but, blessed be God, he was not commanded, for our unworthiness, to
revert from his destined course, and measure back his former way. The clouds
were dispersed, our Sun broke forth with renewed vigor, sending forward his
bright beams to the farthest West, and calling all the "the Ends of the Earth"
to behold the salvation of our God.

To speak without further metaphor, the goodness of the Almighty, supporting
the inhabitants of these United States, not only through former trials and
perils, but now blessing us with peace, liberty, and safety in all our borders
-- appears to call upon us, and to have preserved us, as chosen instruments for
planting and disseminating a "new empire of sound Religion and Liberty, Wisdom,
Virtue, Arts and Sciences, to the outmost ends of the New World; at a time when
they are drooping or dead in most countries of the Old World, which once
enjoyed their brightest splendour.

The prosecution of this great design -- the diffusing of heavenly Knowledge,
and Liberty, and Arts and Sciences, unto the extremest bounds of America, I
have ever considered as the first and greatest work for which we were sent into
it, and for which the Almighty has hitherto prospered us; making the
"wilderness and the solitary places glad through us, and the desert to rejoice
and blossom as the rose." To look forward to that glorious Era, when heavenly
Wisdom and Virtue, and all that can civilize, adorn, and bless mankind, shall
cover this whole continent, as the waters cover the sea -- to attend to the
times and the seasons, and to dwell upon the many prophecies which predict its
near approach -- to contribute my share toward the advancement of it, and to
possess the minds of the rising generations of youth, who are to be principal
actors in the work, with the great the animating Idea, that Heaven has yet
mighty blessings in store for the inhabitants of this land, of every clime and
every color -- this has been my joy, and this my labor from my earliest
years. The contemplation of the subject has often filled my soul with
raptures, approaching almost to enthusiasm, some sparks of which I feel even
yet working in my bosom; and oh! that I could now strike them forth into an
enlivening flame upon this auspicious occasion, perhaps the last of the kind
which I can ever embrace, to declare once more, my full persuasion, that unless
we are zealously instrumental in this great work of Civilization, all our other
works and blessings -- the happiness of climate and fruitfulness of soil, our
zeal and struggles for liberty, our best plans of civil government, our most
absolute national independence, all will be of little effect -- for still we
Depend on the living God, who has set eternal bounds between Right and Wrong,
and whose Almighty arm holds the fate of empires and nations, suspended in the
balance.

Should we, as a people, neglect the call which is given us, for contributing
our utmost endeavors to render this land, a land of Knowledge and Virtue as
well as of Freedom; should we imagine that we were sent into it only to eat the
fruits thereof, to wrest from the former lords of the soil, by us called
Savages, the possessions which they held from age to age, without seeking to
improve their condition as well as our own; should we refuse to "undo the heavy
burden. to break every yoke, and let the oppressed go free" -- justly might we
fear that the good providence of God would punish us for our unworthiness, and
raise up other instruments for the accomplishment of his of his own eternal
purposes of love, for Civilizing as well as Christianizing this immense
continent.

You call this day a Jubilee, in every year, to rejoice before the Lord, and
return thanks for the blessings of Freedom. Remember the command givenby him to
the Jews, in the like case. When they caused the trumpet of the jubilee to
sound, "they were to loose the bands of wickedness, to proclaim Liberty through
out the land to all the inhabitants thereof; not to Oppress one another, but to
fear the Lord and do his statutes, and keep his judgments;" and then they had
the gracious promise, "that the land should yield her fruit, and they should
eat their fill, and dwell therein in safety."

Certain it is, that the neglect of God's mercies, and counteracting the
gracious purposes of his providence, are offenses grievous in his sight.
Certain it is, that National sins are the causes of National misery, and that
the corruption of the members leads to a dissolution of the whole body.

Where are now the Nations and Empires of ancient renown? Where is the Jewish
nation, which is more immediately addressed in our text? Where the Assyrian,
the Macedonian, the Grecian, the Roman, once so celebrated among mankind, at
whose voice the surrounding nations trembled? Alas! are they not fallen --
fallen -- fallen! -- sunk into that abyss of shame and misery, where the ghosts
of departed empires stalk about in sad lamentation of their former glory! Their
desolation and ruin followed their departure from the path of virtue and
honor; and, of what they once were, only the imperfect memorial remains!

Be wise, then, be instructed, ye rising American States! Let it be your
glorious contention which of you shall stand foremost in making liberal
provisions for the advancement and support of Freedom and Virtue; without
which, neither the Ordinances of Religion, nor the Laws can be duly
administered; nor the civil Duties of life fulfilled; nor the Manners of a
people improved; nor their happiness for any length of time secured. But by
wise establishments for the Instruction of Youth, the Advancement of the Arts
and Sciences, the encouragement of Industry, and the maintenance of religion
and morality -- this shall become a great and happy land!

Transported at the thought, I am borne forward to days of distant renown! In
my expanded view, these United States rise, in all their ripened glory, before
me. I look, through, and beyond, every yet peopled region of the New World, and
behold period still brightening upon period. Where one continuous depth of
gloomy wilderness now shuts out even the beams of day, I see new States and
Empires, new Seats of Wisdom and Knowledge, new Religious Domes, spreading
around The general sentiments in this concluding address were published in a
poem by the author near forty years ago, and have been occasionally introduced
into former public addresses by him, but have not before been published at
large, or in the present form.
. In places now untrod by any but Savage beasts, or Men as savage as they, I
hear the voice of happy labor, and behold towery cities growing into the skies!

Lo! in this happy picture I behold the native Indian, exulting in the works of
Peace and Civilization! His bloody Hatchet he buries deep under ground, and his
murderous Knife, he turns into a Pruning Hook, to lop the tender vine and teach
the luxuriant shoot to grow. No more does he form to himself a heaven after
death, (according to the poet) in company with his faithful dog, behind the
cloud-topt hill, to enjoy solitary quiet, far from the haunts of faithless men;
but, better instructed by Christianity, he views his everlasting inheritance, a
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

Instead of recounting to his offspring, round the blazing fire, the bloody
exploits of their ancestors, and wars of savage death, showing barbarous
exultation over every Deed of Woe, methinks, I hear him pouring forth his
Eulogies of praise to the memory of those who were the instruments of Heaven,
in raising his tribes from darkness to light; in giving them freedom and
civilization, and converting them from Violence and Blood, to Meekness and Love!

Amongst those who shall be celebrated as the instruments of this great work, I
hear the names of every good Citizen and Christian, who is a friend to mankind,
and to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and especially, methinks, I hear your names,
ye illustrious Patriots, who, having asserted your Own and your Country's
Rights, cheerfully join in every laudable endeavor for conveying those Rights
to Posterity, and bringing "the utmost Ends of the Earth to see the Salvation
of our GOD."

Hasten, O Almighty Father, hasten this blessed period of thy Son's Kingdom,
which we believe, shall come; and the praise and glory shall be to thy name,
for ever and ever. AMEN.

PROPOSALS FOR PRINTING BY SUBSCRIPTION, A BODY OF SERMONS, Upon the most
important Branches of Practical CHRISTIANITY.
By WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. Provost of the College and Academy of Philadelphia.
To these proposals is prefixed a Preface, addressed to the General Convention
of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United states of America -- from
which the following is an Extract.

"It has been suggested, that the Cause of Religion and Truth Might be much
promoted by the Publication of a sufficient Number of Sermons or Discourses,
digested, as near as possible, into a System or Body of Divinity; comprehending
the most useful and important Articles of the Christian Doctrine; treated of in
a Scriptural and Evangelical way; in an easy, affectionate and correct Style;
suited to the Minds and Apprehensions of the Young and those of inferior
Capacity, as well as edifying to those of riper Years and more improved
Understanding; not running out into learned Niceties or Debates, to disturb
common Readers or Hearers; but avoiding all speculative and controversial
Subjects, or touching upon them only to improve them, as far as possible,
toward the Purposes of practical Godliness and vital Christianity."

Although the Author has not the Vanity to imagine, that the following Sermons
are wholly sufficient to this good Design, yet they may lay the Foundation of a
more perfect Work; and although a Work of this kind, might be compiled from the
various printed Sermons of the great and Orthodox Divines of the Church of
England; yet every Age and Country are best pleased with their own Forms,
Compositions, and Phrases of Speech; and the author flatters himself, that if
it should please God to enable Him to finish those Sermons in the way he
proposes, they will be of use to all well disposed Christians in the United
States, and especially to those of the following Descriptions, viz.

1. To Heads of families, who may think it their Duty to devote the Evening of
the Lord's Day to the Instruction of their own Households.

2. To pious and well-disposed Persons (remote from Places of public worship,
or unprovided with Ministers or Pastors) who may wish to collect their
Neighbors and Friends to spend some Parts of a Sunday in public Worship, and
in reading Sermons and Books of Devotion.

3. To young Clergymen and Preachers, who, being illsupplied with books, or a
variety of Sermons on proper Subjects, may be assisted in their earlier
Compositions by the present Work; which it is Proposed to comprize in about
four Octavo Volumes; two Volumes to be published yearly, at the Rate of One
Dollar per Volume, bound in Boards, on the Delivery of the same to the
Subscribers.

August 5, 1789. WILLIAM SMITH.

In Convention, August 7, 1789.
On Motion of Mr. John Cox.

Resolved unanimously, That the Members of this Convention, being fully
persuaded that the Interests of Religion and practical Godliness may be greatly
promoted by the Publication of a Body of Sermons, upon the Plan above proposed;
and being well satisfied of the Author's Soundness in the Faith, and eminent
Abilities for such a work; they do therefore testify their Approbation of the
same, and their Desire to encourage it by annexing their Names as

SUBSCRIBERS.
WILLIAM WHITE, Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, and President of the Convention. BENJAMIN MOORE, D. D.
Assistant Minister of Trinity Church in the City of New York. ABRAHAM BEACH, D.
D. Assistant Minister of Trinity Church in the City of New York. MOSES ROGERS,
Lay Deputy from the State of New York. WILLIAM FRAZER, A. M. Rector of St.
Michael's Church in Trenton, New Jersey. UZAL OGDEN, Rector of Trinity Church
in Newark. HENRY WADDEL, Rector of the Churches of Shrewsbury and Middletown,
New Jersey. GEORGE H. SPIERIN, A. M. Rector of St. Peter's Church, Perth-Amboy.
JOHN COX, Lay Deputies from N. Jersey. R. STRETTEL JONES, Lay Deputies from N.
Jersey. SAMUEL OGDEN, Lay Deputies from N. Jersey. SAMUEL MAGAW, D. D. Rector
of St. Paul's, and Vice Provost of the University, Clerical Deputies from
Pennsylvania. ROBERT BLACKWELL, D. D. Clerical Deputies from Pennsylvania.
JOSEPH PILMORE, Clerical Deputies from Pennsylvania. JOSEPH G. J. BEND,
Clerical Deputies from Pennsylvania. FRANCIS HOPKINSON, Lay Deputies from
Pennsylvania. TENCH COXE, Lay Deputies from Pennsylvania. GERARDUS CLARKSON,
Lay Deputies from Pennsylvania. JOSEPH COUDON, A. M. Clerical Deputies from the
Delaware State. STEPHEN SYKES, A. M. Clerical Deputies from the Delaware State.
JAMES SYKES, Lay Deputy of Delaware. THO. J. CLAGGET, Clerical Deputies from
Maryland. COLIN FERGUSON, D. D. Clerical Deputies from Maryland. JOHN BISSET,
A. M. Clerical Deputies from Maryland. RICHARD B. CARMICHAEL, Lay Deputies from
Maryland. WILLIAM FRISBY, Lay Deputies from Maryland. ROBERT ANDREWS, Lay
Deputy from Virginia. ROBERT SMITH. A. M. Clerical Dep. From SouthCarolina. W.
W. BURROWS, Lay Deputies. From SouthCarolina. WILLIAM BRISBANE, Lay Deputies.
From SouthCarolina.
N. B. SUBSCRIPTIONS will be received in the several States by all the Clergy
and Laity above named.

Subscriptions will also be received by Thomas Dobson, and other Booksellers in
the City of Philadelphia. And the author requests those who intend to become
Subscribers will speedily send their Names, as the 1st Volume will soon be sent
to the Press, and he wishes to ascertain the number of Copies to be Printed.


