AN EULOGIUM IN HONOR OF THE LATE DR. WILLIAM CULLEN, PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE
OF PHYSIC IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH; DELIVERED BEFORE THE COLLEGE OF
PHYSICIANS OF PHILADELPHIA, On the 9th of July, agreeably to their Vote of the
4th of May, 1790.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. Professor of the Theory and Practice of Medicine, in
the College of Philadelphia.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, BOOKSELLER AT THE STONE HOUSE IN
SECOND STREET. M,DCC,XC.

COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS.
MAY 4, 1790.
THE College taking into consideration the loss which the Republic of Medicine
has sustained by the death of Doctor WILLIAM CULLEN, late Professor of the
Practice of Physic in the University of Edinburgh; and being desirous to
manifest the high sense they entertain of his eminent Talents, and many
important improvements in Medicine, unanimously agreed, that an EULOGIUM in
honor of his distinguished Character should be prepared and delivered by one of
their Members.

Doctor BENJAMIN RUSH was then appointed for that purpose.

JULY 9th.
AT a meeting of the College, it was resolved unanimously, That the thanks of
the College be given to Dr Rush for the Eulogium delivered by him this day, in
honor of Dr Cullen, and that he be requested to furnish a copy of it for
publication.

Extracted from the Minutes. SAMUEL POWEL GRIFFITTS, Sec.

AN EULOGIUM, etc.
MR PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN,
BY your unanimous vote, to honor with an Eulogium, the distinguished
character of the late DR. WILLIAM CULLEN, Professor of Medicine in the
University of Edinburgh, you have done equal homage to Science and Humanity.
This illustrious Physician was the Preceptor of many of us: -- He was moreover
a distinguished citizen of the republic of Medicine, and a benefactor to
Mankind; and although, like the sun, he shone in a distant hemisphere, yet many
of the rays of his knowledge have fallen upon this quarter of the globe. I
rise, therefore, to mingle your grateful praises of him, with the numerous
offerings of public and private respect which have been paid to his memory in
his native country. Happy will be the effects of such acts of distant sympathy,
if they should serve to unite the influence of science with that of commerce,
to lessen the prejudices of nations against each other, and thereby to prepare
the way for the operation of that divine system of morals, whose prerogative
alone it is, to teach mankind that they are brethren, and to make the name of a
fellow creature, in every region of the world, a signal for brotherly affection.

IN executing the task you have imposed upon me, I shall confine myself to such
parts of Dr. Cullen's character as came within the compass of my own knowledge,
during two years residence in Edinburgh. -- To his fellow citizens in Great
Britain, who were more intimately acquainted with him, we must resign the
history of his domestic character, as well as the detail of all those steps
which, in early life, led him to his unparalleled height of usefulness and fame.

DR. CULLEN possessed a great and original genius. By genius, in the present
instance, I mean a power in the human mind of discovering the relation of
distant truths, by the shortest train of intermediate propositions. This
precious gift of Heaven, is composed of a vigorous imagination, quick
sensibility, a talent for extensive and accurate observation, a faithful
memory, and a sound judgment. These faculties were all united in an eminent
degree in the mind of Dr. Cullen. His imagination surveyed all nature at a
glance, and, like a camera obscura, seemed to produce in his mind a picture of
the whole visible creation. His sensibility was so exquisite, that the smallest
portions of truth acted upon it. By means of his talent for observation he
collected knowledge from exery thing he heard, saw, or read, and from every
person with whom he conversed. His memory was the faithful repository of all
his ideas, and appeared to be alike accurate upon all subjects. Over each of
these faculties of his mind a sound judgment presided, by means of which he
discovered the relation of ideas to each other, and thereby produced those new
combinations which constitute principles in science. This process of the mind
has been called invention, and is totally different from a mere capacity of
acquiring learning, or collecting knowledge from the discoveries of others. It
elevates man to a distant resemblance of his Maker; for the discovery of truth,
is the perception of things as they appear to the Divine Mind.

IN contemplating the human faculties, thus exquisitely formed, and exactly
balanced, we feel the same kind of pleasure which arises from a view of a
magnificent palace, or an extensive and variegated prospect; but with this
difference, that the pleasure, in the first instance, is as much superior to
that which arises from contemplating the latter objects, as the mind of man is
superior, in its importance, to the most finished productions of nature or of
art.

DR. CULLEN possessed not only the genius that has been described, but an
uncommon share of learning, reading, and knowledge.

HIS learning was of a peculiar and useful kind -- He appeared to have
overstepped the slow and tedious forms of the schools, and, by the force of his
understanding, to have seized upon the great ends of learning, without the
assistance of many of those means which were contrived for the use of less
active minds. He read the ancient Greek and Roman writers only for the sake of
the knowledge which they contained, without wasting any of the efforts of his
genius in attempting to imitate their style. He was intimately acquainted with
modern languages, and through their means, with the improvements of medicine in
every country in Europe. Such was the facility with which he acquired a
language, and so great was his enterprise in his researches in medicine, that I
once heard him speak of learning the Arabic, for the sake of reading Avicenna
in the original; as if it were a matter of as little difficulty to him, as it
was to compose a lecture, or to visit a patient.

DR. CULLEN'S reading was extensive, but it was not confined wholly to
medicine. He read books upon all subjects; and he had a peculiar art of
extracting something from all of them which he made subservient to his
profession. He was well acquainted with ancient and modern history, and
delighted in the poets, among whom Shakespeare was his favorite. The history
of our globe, as unfolded by books of geography and travels, was so familiar to
him, that a stranger could not converse with him, without supposing that he had
not only traveled, but that he had lived every where. His memory had no
rubbish in it. Like a secretory organ, in the animal body, it rejected every
thing in reading, that could not be applied to some useful purpose. In this he
has given the world a most valuable lesson, for the difference between error
and useless truth is very small; and a man is no wiser for knowledge which he
cannot apply, than he is rich from possessing wealth, which he cannot spend.

DR. CULLEN'S knowledge was minute in every branch of medicine. He was an
accurate anatomist, and an ingenious physiologist. He enlarged the boundaries,
and established the utility of Chemistry, and thereby prepared the way for the
discoveries and same of his illustrious pupil Dr. Black. He stripped Materia
Medica, of most of the errors that had been accumulating in it for two thousand
years, and reduced it to a simple and practical science. He was intimately
acquainted with all the branches of natural history and philosophy. He had
studied every ancient and modern system of physic. He found the system of Dr.
Boerhaave universally adopted when he accepted a chair in the University of
Edinburgh. This system was founded chiefly on the supposed presence of certain
acrid particles in the fluids, and in the departure of these, in point of
consistency, from a natural state. Dr. Cullen's first object was to expose the
errors of this pathology; and to teach his pupils to seek for the causes of
diseases in the solids. Nature is always coy. Ever since she was driven from
the heart, by the discovery of the circulation of the blood, she has concealed
herself in the brain and nerves. Here she has been pursued by Dr Cullen; and if
he has not dragged her to public view, he has left us a clue which must in time
conduct us to her last recess in the human body. Many, however, of the
operations of nature in the nervous system have been explained by him; and no
candid man will ever explain the whole of them, without acknowledging that the
foundation of his successful inquiries was laid by the discoveries of Dr Cullen.

HE was intimately acquainted with the histories and distinctions of the
diseases of all countries, ages, stations, occupations, and states of society.
While his great object was to explode useless remedies, he took pains to
increase the influence of diet, dress, air, exercise, and the actions of the
mind, in medicine. In a word, he was a great practical physician; and he has
left behind him as many monuments of his success in curing diseases, as he has
of accuracy and ingenuity in describing their symptoms and explaining their
causes.

BUT his knowledge was not confined wholly to those sciences which are
intimately connected with medicine. His genius was universal, as to natural and
artificial subjects. He was minutely acquainted with the principles and
practices of all the liberal, mechanical, and chemical arts; and tradesmen were
often directed by him to new objects of observation and improvement in their
respective occupations. He delighted in the study of agriculture, and
contributed much to excite that taste for agricultural science, which has of
late years so much distinguished the men of genius and leisure in
North-Britain. I have been informed, that he yielded at last to that passion
for rural improvements, which is common to all men, and amused himself in the
evening of his life by cultivating a farm in the neighborhood of Edinburgh.
Happy would it be for the interests of agriculture, if physicians in all
countries, would imitate Dr. Cullen by an attachment to this noble science; for
their previous studies are of such, a nature as frequently to enable them to
arrive at improvements in it without experiments, and to apply the experiments
of others, in the most extensive and pofitable manner.

DR CULLEN'S publications were few in number compared with his discoveries.
They consist of his Elements of physiology, his Nosologia Methodica, his First
Lines of the Practice of Physic, an Essay upon the cold produced by
Evaporation, published in the second volume of the Physical and Literary Essays
of Edinburgh, a Letter to Lord Cathcart upon the method of recovering persons
supposed to be dead from drowning, and a system of the Materia Medica. These
are all the works which bear his name; but the fruits of his inquiries are to
be found in most of the medical publications that have appeared in Great
Britain within the last thirty years. Many of the theses, published in
Edinburgh during his life, were the vehicles of his opinions or practice in
medicine; and few of them contained an important or useful discovery, which was
not derived from hints thrown out in his lectures.

As a TEACHER of medicine, Dr. Cullen possessed many peculiar talents. He
mingled the most agreeable eloquence with the most profound disquisitions. He
appeared to lighten upon every subject upon which he spoke. His language was
simple, and his arrangement methodical, by which means he was always
intelligible. From the moment he ascended his chair, he commanded the most
respectful attention from his pupils; insomuch that I never saw one of them
discover a sign of impatience during the time of any of his lectures.

IN the investigation of truth, he sometimes ventured into the regions of
conjecture. His imagination was a hot-bed of hypotheses, which led him to
constant observation and experiment. These often proved the seeds of subsequent
discoveries. It was thus Sir Isaac Newton founded an empire in science; for
most of his discoveries were the consequence of preconceived hypotheses. In
delivering new opinions, Dr. Cullen preserved the strictest integrity. I have
known him more than once, refute the opinions which he had taught the preceding
year, even before the fallacy of them had been suspected by any of his pupils.
Such instances of candor often pass with the vulgar for instability; but they
are the truest characteristics of a great mind. To be unchangeable, supposes
perpetual error, or a perception of truth without the use of reason; but this
sublime act of intuition belongs only to the Deity.

THERE was no tincture of credulity in the mind of Dr. Cullen. He taught his
pupils the necessity of acquiring "the slow consenting academic doubt." I
mention these words of the poet with peculiar pleasure, as I find them in my
notes of one of his lectures, in which he has delivered rules for judging of
the truth of things related as facts; for he frequently remarked, that there
were ten false facts (if the expression can be allowed) to one false opinion in
medicine. His Materia Medica abounds with proofs of the truth of this part of
his character. With how much caution does he admit the efficacy of medicines,
as related in books, or as suggested by his own experience! Who could have
expected to have found so much modesty in the writings of a physician in the
77th year of his age? But let it be remembered, that this physician was Dr.
Cullen; and that he always preferred utility to novelty, and loved truth more
than fame.

HE took great pains to deliver his pupils from the undue influence which
antiquity and great names are apt to have upon the human mind. He destroyed the
superstitious veneration which had been paid for many ages to the names of
Hippocrates, Galen, and other ancient authors, and inspired his pupils with a
just estimate of the writings of modern physicians. His constant aim was to
produce in their minds a change from a passive to an active state; and to force
upon them such habits of thinking, and observation, as should enable them to
instruct themselves.

As he admitted no truth without examination, so he submitted to no custom in
propagating it that was not reasonable. He had a principal share in the merit
of delivering medicine from the fetters of the Latin, and introducing the
English language, as the vehicle of public instruction in the university of
Edinburgh. Much of the success of the revolution he effected in medicine, I
believe, may be ascribed to this circumstance. Perhaps the many improvements
which have lately been made in medicine, in the British dominions, may likewise
be ascribed to the present fashionable custom of communicating medical
knowledge in the English language. By this means, our science has excited the
notice and inquiries of ingenious and observing men in all professions, and
thereby a kind of galaxy has been created in the hemisphere of medicine. By
assuming an English dress, it has moreover been prepared more easily to
associate with other sciences; from each of which it has received assistance
and support.

IN his intercourse with his pupils Dr. Cullen was truly kind and affectionate.
Never have I known a man who possessed in a higher degree those qualities which
seize upon every affection of the heart. He knew the rare and happy arts, as
circumstances required, of being affable, without being sociable; sociable
without being familiar; and familiar, without losing a particle of respect.
Such was the interest he took in the health, studies, and future establishment
of all his pupils, that each of them believed that he possessed a pre-eminence
in his friendship; while the equal diffusion of his kind offices proved that he
was the common friend and father of them all. Sometimes he would lay aside the
dista^^^, without lessening the dignity of the professor, and mix with his
pupils at his table upon terms of the most endearing equality. Upon these
occasions his social affections seemed to have an influence upon his mind.
Science, sentiment, and convivial humor, appeared for hours together to strive
which should predominate in his conversation. I appeal to you, gentlemen, who
have shared in the pleasure which I have described, for the justice of the
picture which I have drawn of him at his hospitable table. You will recollect,
with me, how agreeably he accommodated himself to our different capacities and
tempers; how kindly he dissipated our youthful blushes, by inviting us to ask
him questions; and how much he taught us, by his inquiries, of the nature of
the soil, climate, products, and diseases of even our own country.

FROM the history that has been given of Dr. Cullen, we shall not be surprised
at the reputation which he gave to the university of Edinburgh, for upwards of
thirty years. The city of Edinburgh during his life became the very atmosphere
of medicine. But let me not here be unjust to the merits of his illustrious
colleagues. The names of Whytt, Rutherford, the Monroes, Black, the Gregory's,
Hope, and Home, will always be dear to the lovers of medical science. May every
healing plant bloom upon the graves of those of them who are departed! and may
those who have survived him, together with their new associate, the learned and
excellent Dr. Duncan, long continue to maintain the honor, of that justly
celebrated school of medicine!

IT remains now that I add a short account of Dr. Cullen's conduct as a
physician and a man.

IN his attendance upon his patients, he made their health his first object,
and thereby confirmed a line between the mechanical and liberal professions;
for while wealth is pursued by the former, as the end of labor, it should be
left by the latter to follow the more noble exertions of the mind. So gentle
and sympathizing was Dr. Cullen's manner in a sick room, that pain and distress
seemed to be suspended in his presence. Hope followed his footsteps, and death
appeared frequently to drop his commission in a combat with his skill. He was
compassionate and charitable to the poor; and from his pupils, who consulted
him in sickness, he constantly refused to receive any pecuniary satisfaction
for his services.

IN his intercourse with the world he exhibited the manners of a well-bred
gentleman. He exercised upon all occasions the agreeable art, in which true
politeness is said to consist, of speaking with civility, and listening with
attention to to every body. His conversation was at all times animated,
agreeable, and instructing. Few persons went into his company without learning
something; and even a common thought, by passing through his mind, received an
impression, which made it ever afterward worthy of being preserved.

HE was a strict oeconomist of time. He seldom went out of his house in his
carriage, or a sedan chair, without a book in his hand; and he once told me
that he frequently employed one of his sons to read to him after he went to
bed, that he might not lose that portion of time which passes between lying
down and falling asleep.

HE was remarkably punctual to all his professional engagements. He appeared to
consider time as a species of property, which no man had a right to to take
from another without his consent.

IT was by means of his economy and punctuality in the use of time, that he
accomplished so much in his profession. I have read of some men who have spent
more time in their closets, and of others who have done more business; but I
have never read, nor heard of a man, who mingled more study and business
together. He lived by rule, without subjecting himself to the slavery of forms.
He was always employed, but never in a hurry; and amidst the numerous and
complicated avocations of study and business, he appeared to enjoy the
pleasures of society, as if company-keeping and conversation were the only
business of his life.

I shall mention but one more trait in the character of Dr. Cullen, and that
is, that he was distinguished by no one singularity of behavior from other
men. It is true he stood alone; but this singularity was occasioned, not by his
quitting the society of his fellow-men by walking on their left, or right side,
but by his walking before them. Eccentricities in behavior are the offspring
of a lively fancy only, but order is inseparably connected with real genius.
The actions of the former may be compared to the crooked flash of distant
lightning, while the latter resembles in its movements the steady revolutions
of the heavenly bodies.

IN reviewing the character which has been given of Dr. Cullen, I am forced to
make a short digression, while I do homage to the profession of physic by a
single remark. So great are the blessings which mankind derive from it, that if
every other argument failed to prove the administration of a Providence in
human affairs, the profession of medicine alone would be sufficient for that
purpose. Who can think of the talents, virtues, and services of Dr. Cullen,
without believing that the Creator of the world delights in the happiness of
his creatures, and that his tender mercies are over all his works!

FOR the information of such of the members of our college as have not seen Dr.
Cullen, it may not be improper to add the following description of his person.
He was tall, slender, and had a stoop in his shoulders; his face was long; his
under lip protruded a little beyond the upper; his nose was large, and inclined
to a point downwards; his eye, which was of a blue color, was penetrating but
soft; and over his whole face was diffused an air of mildness and thought,
which was strongly characteristic of the constant temper and operations of his
mind.

IT pleased God to prolong his life to a good old age. He lived near 78 years.
He lived to show the different nature of the soul and body, by the increasing
vigor of the former, under the gradual decay of the latter. He lived to
demonstrate how much the duration of all the faculties of the mind depends upon
their constant exercise. He lived to teach his brethren by his example, that
the obligations to acquire and communicate knowledge, should cease only with
health or life; and lastly, he lived to reap the fruits of his labors in the
most extensive fame; for not only his pupils, and his works, had conveyed his
reputation; but canvass, paper, and clay, had borne even the image of his
person to every quarter of the globe.

THE public papers, as well as private letters, inform us, that he survived his
usefulness only a few months. He resigned his professorship in the autumn of
1789, on account of bodily weakness, and died in the month of January of the
present year; a year fatal to the pride of man; for this year Franklin and
Howard, as well as Cullen, have mingled with the dust. During the interval
between his resignation and his death he received the most affectionate marks
of public and private respect. The city of Edinburgh voted him their thanks,
and presented him with a piece of plate. This instance of public gratitude
deserves our particular attention; as it is more common for cities to treat
their eminent literary characters with neglect during their lives, and
centuries afterward to contend for the honor of having given them birth. The
different medical societies of Edinburgh followed him to his chamber with
addresses full of gratitude and affection. In mentioning these facts, I am led
to contemplate the venerable subject of our praises in a situation truly solemn
and interesting. How pregnant with instruction is the deathbed of a physician,
who has spent a long life in extensive and successful practice! If the sorrows
we have relieved are the surest support in our own, how great must have been
the consolation which Dr. Cullen derived, in his last hours, from a review of
his active and useful life! How many fathers and mothers, husbands and wives,
brothers and sisters, whose tears he had wiped away by averting the stroke of
death from the objects of their affections, must have presented themselves to
his imagination, and soothed his soul with grateful prayers for his eternal
welfare! But the retrospect of the services he had rendered to his
fellow creatures, was not confined to the limits of his extensive business in
the city of Edinburgh. While the illustrious actions of most men may be viewed
with a naked eye, the atchievments of Dr. Cullen, in the distant regions of
humanity and science, can only be perceived by the help of a telescope. Let us
apply this instrument to discover his exploits of beneficence in every quarter
of the world. He had filled the capitals, and most of the towns of
Great Britain and Ireland with eminent physicians. Many of his pupils had
arrived at the first honors in their profession in the principal cities on the
continent of Europe. Many of them had extended the blessings of his
improvements in the principles and practice of medicine, to every British
settlement in the East and West Indies, and to every free state in America. But
the sum of his usefulness did not end here. He had taught the different
professors in the College of Philadelphia, and in the University of
Pennsylvania, the art of teaching others the most successful methods of curing
diseases, and thereby he had conveyed the benefits of his discoveries into
every part of the United States. How great was the mass of such accumulated
beneficence! and how sublime must have been the pleasure which the review of it
created in his mind! Had it been possible for the merit of such extensive and
complicated services to mankind to have rescued one mortal from the grave, Dr.
Cullen had never died. But the decree of death is universal, and even the
healing art, is finally of no effect in saving the lives of those who have
exercised it with the most success in saving the lives of others.

Dr. CULLEN is now no more. What a blank has been produced by his death in the
great volume of Science! Behold! The genius of humanity weeping at his feet,
while the genius of medicine lifts up the key, which fell from his hand with
his last breath, and with inexpressible concern, cries out, "To whom shall I
give this instrument? Who now will unlock for me the treasures of universal
nature?"

VENERABLE Shades, adieu! What though thy American pupils were denied the
melancholy pleasure of following thee from thy Professors-chair to thy
sickbed, with their effusions of gratitude, and praise! What though we did not
share in the grief of thy funeral obsequies, and though we shall never bedew
with our tears the splendid monument which thy affectionate and grateful
British pupils have decreed for thee in the metropolis of thy native country;
yet the remembrance of thy talents and virtues, shall be preserved in each of
our bosoms, and never shall we return in triumph from beholding the efficacy of
medicine in curing a disease, without feeling our obligations for the
instructions we have derived from thee!

I repeat it again, Dr. Cullen is now no more -- No more, I mean, a pillar and
ornament of an ancient seat of science -- no more, the delight and admiration
of his pupils -- no more the luminary of medicine to half the globe -- no more,
the friend and benefactor of mankind. -- But I would as soon believe that our
solar system was created only to amuse and perish like a rocket, as believe
that a mind endowed with such immense powers of action and contemplation had
ceased to exist. Reason bids us hope that he yet LIVES -- And Revelation
enables us to say, with certainty and confidence, that he still LIVES. -- Fain
would I lift the curtain which separates eternity from time, and inquire, what
are now his studies and employments -- But it is not for mortals to pry into
the secrets of the invisible world.

SUCH was the man whose memory we have endeavored to celebrate. He lived for
our benefit. It remains only that we improve the event of his death in such a
manner, that he may die for our benefit likewise. For this purpose I shall
finish our Eulogium with the following observations.

I. LET us learn from the character of Dr. Cullen duly to estimate our
profession. While Astronomy claims a Newton, and Electricity a Franklin,
Medicine has been equally honored by having employed the genius of a Cullen.
Whenever therefore we feel ourselves disposed to relax in our studies, to use
our profession for selfish purposes, or to neglect the poor, let us recollect
how much we lessen the dignity which Dr. Cullen has conferred upon our
profession.

II. BY the death of Dr. Cullen the republic of medicine has lost one of its
most distinguished and useful members. It is incumbent upon us therefore to
double our diligence in order to supply the loss of our indefatigable
fellow-citizen. That physician has lived to little purpose, who does not leave
his profession in a more improved state than he found it. Let us remember, that
our obligations to add something to the capital of medical knowledge,
areequally binding with our obligations to practice the virtues of integrity
and humanity in our intercourse with our patients. Let no useful fact
therefore, however inconsiderable it may appear, be kept back from the public
eye; for there are mites in science as well as in charity, and the remote
consequences of both are often alike important and beneficial. Facts are the
morality of medicine. They are the same in all ages and in all countries. They
have preserved the works of the immortal Sydenham from being destroyed by their
mixture with his absurd theories; and under all the revolutions in systems that
will probably take place hereafter, the facts which are contained in Dr.
Cullen's works, will constitute the best security for their safe and grateful
reception by future ages.

III. HUMAN nature is ever prone to extremes. While we celebrate the praises of
Dr. Cullen, let us take care lest we check a spirit of free inquiry, by too
great a regard for his authority in medicine. I well remember an observation
suited to our present purpose, which he delivered in his introduction to a
course of lectures on the institutes of medicine in the year 1766. After
speaking of the long continued and extensive empire of Galen in the schools of
physic, he said, It is a great disadvantage to any science to have been
improved by a great man. His authority imposes indolence, timidity, or idolatry
upon all who come after him. -- Let us avoid these evils in our veneration for
Dr. Cullen. To believe in great men, is often as great an obstacle to the
progress of knowledge, as to believe in witches and conjurers. It is the image
worship of science; for error is as much an attribute of man, as the desire of
happiness; and I think I have observed, that the errors of great men partake of
the dimensions of their minds, and are often of a greater magnitude than the
errors of men of inferior understanding. Dr. Brown has proved the imperfection
of human genius, by extending some parts of Dr. Cullen's system of physic, and
perhaps by correcting some of its defects. But he has left much to be done by
his successors. He has even bequeathed to them the labor of removing the errors
he has introduced into medicine by his neglect of an important principle in the
animal economy, and by his ignorance of the histories and symptoms of
diseases. Perhaps no system of medicine can be perfect, while there exists a
single disease which we do not know, or cannot cure. If this be true, then a
complete system of medicine cannot be formed, till America has furnished
descriptions and cures of all her peculiar diseases. The United States have
perfected the science of civil government. The freedom of our constitutions, by
imparting vigor and independence to the mind, is favorable to bold and
original thinking upon all subjects. Let us avail ourselves therefore of this
political aid to our researches, and endeavor to obtain histories and cures of
all our diseases, that we may thereby contribute our part toward the formation
of a complete system of medicine. As a religion of some kind is absolutely
necessary to promote morals; so systems of medicine of some kind, are equally
necessary to produce a regular mode of practice. They are not only necessary,
but unavoidable in medicine; for no physician, nay more, no empiric, practices
without them.

THE present is an age of great improvement. While the application of reason to
the sciences of government and religion, is daily meliorating the condition of
mankind, it is agreeable to observe the influence or medicine, in lessening
human misery, by abating the mortality or violence of many diseases. The
decrees of heaven appear to be fulfilling by natural means; and if no ancient
prophecies had declared it, the late numerous discoveries in medicine would
authorize us to say, that the time is approaching, when not only tyranny,
discord and superstition shall cease from our world, but when diseases shall be
unknown, or cease to be incurable; and when old age shall be the only outlet of
human life.

"THUS heavenward all things tend." In that glorious era, every discovery in
medicine shall meet with its full reward; and the more abundant gratitude of
posterity to the name of Dr. Cullen, shall then bury in oblivion the feeble
attempt of this day to comply with your vote to perpetuate his fame.

FINIS.
A NEW EDITION, CORRECTED, IMPROVED, AND GREATLY ENLARGED, NOW PUBLISHING BY
SUBSCRIPTION,
BY THOMAS DOBSON, BOOKSELLER, AT THE STONE HOUSE IN SECOND STREET,
PHILADELP^HIA, ENCYCLOPEDIA, OR, A DICTIONARY Of ARTS, SCIENCES, AND
MISCELLANEOUS LITERATURE.

On a Plan entirely New. By which the different Sciences and Arts are digested
into the form of distinct Treatises or Systems; COMPREHENDING, The History,
Theory and Practice of each, according to the latest Discoveries and
improvements; And full Explanations given of the Various detached Parts of
Knowledge -- Whether relating to Natural and Artificial Objects, or to matters
Ecclesiastical, Civil, Military, Commercial, etc.

Including Elucidations of the most important Topics relative to Religion,
Morals, Manners, and the Economy of Life: -- Together with,

A Description of all the Countries, Cities, principal Mountains, Seas, Rivers,
etc. throughout the World.

A general History, Ancient and Modern, of the different Empires, Kingdoms and
States -- And

An account of the Lives of the most Eminent persons in every Nation, from the
earliest Ages down to the present Times.

Compiled from the Writings of the best Authors, in several Languages: the most
approved Dictionaries, as well of general Science as of particular Branches,
the Transactions, Journals and Memoirs, of learned Societies, both at home and
abroad; the MS. Lectures of eminent Professors on different Sciences; and a
variety of original Materials, furnished by an extensive Correspondence.

The Plan of this Work gives it a decided Superiority over any other of the
kind ever published in the English Language. The work is now going forward
enriched with various Improvements, by Gentlemen eminent in the respective
Sciences in this Country, and under the patronage of such a liberal
Subscription, as makes it necessary to print double the Number originally
intended.

The First Volume is now completed, and the Second considerably advanced: a
Volume will be published every twenty Weeks, at Five Dollars in boards, or a
Half Volume every ten Weeks, at Two Dollars and Two-Thirds. The Price of the
First and Second Volumes to be paid on delivering the First, and the Price of
every succeeding Volume on delivery of the Volume preceding it. No Part will be
furnished to any Person but Subscribers only.

Such Gentlemen as choose to become Subscribers, will please forward their
Subscriptions to THOMAS DOBSON, the (...).

July 30th, 1790.

