THOUGHTS UPON THE Amusements and Punishments WHICH ARE PROPER FOR SCHOOLS.
ADDRESSED TO GEORGE CLYMER, ESQUIRE. BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D.
DEAR SIR,
THE last time I had the pleasure of being in your company, you did me the
honor to request my opinion upon the AMUSEMENTS and PUNISHMENTS which are
proper for schools. The subjects are of a very opposite nature, but I shall
endeavor to comply with your wishes, by sending you a few thoughts upon each
of them. I am sure you will not reject my opinions because they are contrary to
received practices, for I know that you are accustomed to think for yourself,
and that every proposition that has for its objects the interests of humanity
and your country, will he treated by you with attention and candor.

I shall begin with the subject of AMUSEMENTS. Montesquieu informs us that the
exercises of the last day of the life of Epaminondas, were the same as his
amusements in his youth. Herein we have an epitome of the perfection of
education. The amusements of Epaminondas were of a military nature; but as the
profession of arms is the business of only a small part of mankind, and happily
much less necessary in the United States than in ancient Greece, I would
propose that the amusements of our youth, at school, should consist of such
exercises as will be most subservient to their future employments in life.
These are; 1. agriculture; 3. mechanical occupations; and 3. the business of
the learned professions.

1. There is a variety in the employments of agriculture which may readily be
suited to the genius, taste, and strength of young people. An experiment has
been made of the efficacy of these employments, as amusements, in the Methodist
College at Abington, in Maryland; and, I have been informed, with the happiest
effects. A large lot is divided between the scholars, and premiums are adjudged
to those of them who produce the most vegetables from their grounds, or who
keep them in the best order.

2. As the employments of agriculture cannot afford amusement at all seasons of
the year, or in cities, I would propose, that children should be allured to
seek amusements in such of the mechanical arts as are suited to their strength
and capacities. Where is the boy who does not delight in the use of a hammer --
a chissel -- or a saw? and who has not enjoyed a high degree of pleasure in his
youth, in constructing a miniature house? How amusing are the machines which
are employed in the manufactory of clothing of all kinds! and how full of
various entertainment are the mixtures which take place in the chemical arts!
each of these might be contrived upon such a scale, as not only to amuse young
people, but to afford a profit to their parents or masters. The Moravians, at
Bethlehem in our state, have proved that this proposition is not a chimerical
one. All the amusements of their children are derived from their performing the
subordinate parts of several of the mechanical arts; and a considerable portion
of the wealth of that worthy and happy society is derived from the labor of
their little hands. --

If, in these amusements, an appeal should be made to that spirit of
competition which is so common among young people, it would be the means of
producing more pleasure to the children, and more profit to all who are
connected with them. The wealth of those manufacturing towns in England, which
employ the children of poor people, is a proof of what might be expected from
connecting amusement and labor together, in all our schools. The product from
the labor obtained in this way, from all the schools in the United States,
would amount to a sum which would almost exceed calculation.

3. To train the youth who are intended for the learned professions, or for
merchandise, to the duties of their future employments, by means of useful
amusements, which are related to those employments, will be impracticable; but
their amusements may be derived from cultivating a spot of ground; for where is
the lawyer, the physician, the divine, or the merchant, who has not indulged or
felt a passion, in some part of his life, for rural improvements? -- -- Indeed
I conceive the seeds of knowledge in agriculture will be most productive, when
they are planted in the minds of this class of scholars.

I have only to add under this head, that the common amusements of children
have no connection with their future occupations. Many of them injure their
clothes, some of them waste their strength, and impair their health, and all of
them prove, more or less, the means of producing noise, or of exciting angry
passions, both of which are calculated to beget vulgar manners. The Methodists
have wisely banished every species of play from their college. Even the healthy
and pleasurable exercise of swimming, is not permitted to their scholars,
except in the presence of one of their masters.

Do not think me too strict if I here exclude gunning from among the amusements
of young men. My objections to it are as follow.

1. It hardens the heart, by inflicting unnecessary pain and death upon animals.

2. It is unnecessary in civilized society, where animal food may be obtained
from domestic animals, with greater facility.

3. It consumes a great deal of time, and thus creates habits of idleness.

4. It frequently leads young men into low, and bad company.

5. By imposing long abstinence from food, it leads to intemperance in eating,
which naturally leads to intemperance in drinking.

6. It exposes to fevers, and accidents. The newspapers are occasionally
filled with melancholy accounts of the latter, and every physician must have
met with frequent and dangerous instances of the former, in the course of his
practice.

I know the early use of a gun is recommended in our country, to teach our
young men the use of firearms, and thereby to prepare them for war and battle.
But why should we inspire our youth, by such exercises, with hostile ideas
toward their fellow creatures? -- Let us rather instill into their minds
sentiments of universal benevolence to men of all nations and colors. Wars
originate in error and vice. Let us eradicate these, by proper modes of
education, and wars will cease to be necessary in our country. The divine
author and lover of peace "will then suffer no man to do us wrong; yea he will
reprove kings for our sake, saying, touch not my anointed and do my people no
harm." Should the nations with whom war is a trade, approach our coasts, they
will retire from us, as Satan did from our Savior, when he came to assault
him; and for the same reason, because they will 'find nothing in us' congenial
to their malignant dispositions; for the flames of war can be spread from one
nation to another, only by the conducting mediums of vice and error.

I have hinted at the injury which is done to the health of young people by
some of their amusements; but there is a practice common in all our schools,
which does more harm to their bodies than all the amusements that can be named,
and that is, obliging them to sit too long in one place, or crowding too many
of them together in one room. By means of the former, the growth and shape of
the body have been impaired; and by means of the latter, the seeds of fevers
have often been engendered in schools. In the course of my business, I have
been called to many hundred children who have been seized with indispositions
in school, which evidently arose from the action of morbid effluvia, produced
by the confined breath and perspiration of too great a number of children in
one room. To obviate these evils, children should be permitted, after they have
said their lessons, to amuse themselves in the open air, in some of the useful
and agreeable exercises which have been mentioned. Their minds will be
strengthened, as well as their bodies relieved by them. To oblige a sprightly
boy to sit seven hours in a day, with his little arms pinioned to his sides,
and his neck unnaturally bent toward his book; and for no crime! -- what
cruelty and folly are manifested, by such an absurd mode of instructing or
governing young people!

I come next to say a few words upon the subject of PUNISHMENTS which are
proper in schools.

In barbarous ages every thing partook of the complexion of the times. Civil,
ecclesiastical, military, and domestic punishments were all of a cruel nature.
With the progress of reason and christianity, punishments of all kinds have
become less severe. Solitude and labor are now substituted in many countries,
with success, in the room of the whipping-post and the gallows. -- The innocent
infirmities of human nature are no longer proscribed, and punished by the
church. Discipline, consisting in the vigilance of officers, has lessened the
supposed necessity of military executions; and husbands -- fathers -- and
masters now blush at the history of the times, when wives, children, and
servants, were governed only by force. But unfortunately this spirit of
humanity and civilization has not reached our schools. The rod is yet the
principal instrument of governing them, and a schoolmaster remains the only
despot now known in free countries. Perhaps it is because the little subjects
of their arbitrary and capricious power have not been in a condition to
complain. I shall endeavor therefore to plead their cause, and to prove that
corporal punishments (except to children under four or five years of age) are
never necessary, and always hurtful, in schools. -- The following arguments I
hope will be sufficient to establish this proposition.

1. Children are seldom sent to school before they are capable of feeling the
force of rational or moral obligation. They may therefore be deterred from
committing offenses, by motives less disgraceful than the fear of corporal
punishments.

2 By correcting children for ignorance and negligence in school, their ideas
of improper and immoral actions are confounded, and hence the moral faculty
becomes weakened in after life. It would not be more cruel or absurd to inflict
the punishment of the whipping-post upon a man, for not dressing fashionably or
neatly, than it is to ferule a boy for blotting his copy-book, or misspelling a
word.

3. If the natural affection of a parent is sometimes insufficient, to restrain
the violent effects of a sudden gust of anger upon a child, how dangerous must
the power of correcting children be, when lodged in the hands of a
schoolmaster, in whose anger there is no mixture of parental affection!
Perhaps those parents act most wisely, who never trust themselves to inflict
corporal punishments upon their children, after they are four or five years
old, but endeavor to punish, and reclaim them, by confinement, or by abridging
them of some of their usual gratifications, in dress, food or amusements.

4. Injuries are sometimes done to the bodies, and sometimes to the intellects
of children, by corporal punishments. I recollect, when a boy, to have lost a
school-mate, who was said to have died in consequence of a severe whipping he
received in school. At that time I did not believe it possible, but from what I
now know of the disproportion between the violent emotions of the mind, and the
strength of the body in children, I am disposed to believe, that not only
sickness, but that even death may be induced, by the convulsions of a youthful
mind, worked up to a high sense of shame and resentment.

The effects of thumping the head, boxing the ears, and pulling the hair, in
impairing the intellects, by means of injuries done to the brain, are too
obvious to be mentioned.

5. Where there is shame, says Dr. Johnson, there may be virtue. But corporal
punishments, inflicted at school, have a tendency to destroy the sense of
shame, and thereby to destroy all moral sensibility. The boy that has been
often publicly whipped at school, is under great obligations to his maker, and
his parents, if he afterward escape the whipping-post or the gallows.

6. Corporal punishments, inflicted at school, tend to beget a spirit of
violence in boys toward each other, which often follows them through life; but
they more certainly beget a spirit of hatred, or revenge, toward their
masters, which too often becomes a ferment of the same baneful passions toward
other people. The celebrated Dr. afterward Baron Haller declared, that he
never saw, without horror, during the remaining part of his life, a
schoolmaster, who had treated him with unmerited severity, when he was only
ten years old. A similar anecdote is related of the famous M. de Condamine. I
think I have known several instances of this vindictive, or indignant spirit,
to continue toward a cruel and tyrannical schoolmaster, in persons who were
advanced in life, and who were otherwise of gentle and forgiving dispositions.

7. Corporal punishments, inflicted at schools, beget a hatred to instruction
in young people. I have sometimes suspected that the devil, who knows how great
an enemy knowledge is to his kingdom, has had the address to make the world
believe that feruling, pulling and boxing ears, cudgelling, horsing, etc. and,
in boarding-schools, a little starving, are all absolutely necessary for the
government of young people, on purpose that he might make both schools, and
schoolmasters odious, and thereby keep our world in ignorance; for ignorance
is the best means the devil ever contrived, to keep up the number of his
subjects in our world.

8 Corporal punishments are not only hurtful, but altogether unnecessary, in
schools. Some of the most celebrated and successful schoolmasters, that I have
ever known, never made use of them.

9. The fear of corporal punishments, by debilitating the body, produces a
corresponding debility in the mind, which contracts its capacity of acquiring
knowledge. This capacity is enlarged by the tone which the mind acquires from
the action of hope, love, and confidence upon it; and all these passions might
easily be cherished, by a prudent and enlightened schoolmaster.

10. As there should always be a certain ratio between the strength of a
remedy, and the excitability of the body in diseases, so there should be a
similar ratio between the force employed in the government of a school, and the
capacities and tempers of children. A kind rebuke, like fresh air in a fainting
fit, is calculated to act upon a young mind with more effect, than stimulants
of the greatest power; but corporal punishments level all capacities and
tempers, as quack-medicines do all constitutions and diseases. They dishonor
and degrade our species; for they suppose a total absence of all moral and
intellectual feeling from the mind. Have we not often seen dull children
suddenly improve, by changing their schools? The reason is obvious. The
successful teacher only accommodated his manner and discipline to the
capacities of his scholars.

11. I conceive corporal punishments, inflicted in an arbitrary manner, to be
contrary to the spirit of liberty, and that they should not be tolerated in a
free government. Why should not children be protected from violence and
injuries, as well as white and black servants? -- Had I influence enough in our
legislature to obtain only a single law, it should be to make the punishment
for striking a schoolboy, the same as for assaulting and beating an adult
member of society.

To all these arguments I know some well disposed people will reply, that the
rod has received a divine commission from the sacred Scriptures, as the
instrument of correcting children. To this I answer that the rod, in the Old
Testament, by a very common figure in rhetoric, stands for punishments of any
kind, just as the sword, in the New Testament, stands for the faithful and
general administration of justice, in such a way as is most calculated to
reform criminals, and to prevent crimes.

The following method of governing a school, I apprehend, would be attended
with much better effects, than that which I have endeavored to show, to be
contrary to reason, humanity, religion, liberty, and the experience of the
wisest and best teachers in the world.

Let a schoolmaster endeavor, in the first place, to acquire the confidence
of his scholars, by a prudent deportment. Let him learn to command his passions
and temper, at all times, in his school. -- Let him treat the name of the
Supreme Being with reverence, as often as it occurs in books, or in
conversation with his scholars. -- Let him exact a respectful behavior toward
himself, in his school; but in the intervals of school-hours, let him treat his
scholars with gentleness and familiarity. If he should even join in their
amusements, he would not lose, by his condescension, any part of his authority
over them. But to secure their affection and respect more perfectly, let him,
once or twice a year, lay out a small sum of money in pen-knives, and books,
and distribute them among his scholars, as rewards for proficiency in learning,
and for good behavior. If these prudent and popular measures should fail of
preventing offenses at school, then let the following modes of punishment be
adopted.

1. Private admonition. By this mode of rebuking, we imitate the conduct of the
divine Being toward his offending creatures, for His first punishment is
always inflicted privately, by means of the still voice of conscience.

2. Confinement after school-hours are ended; but with the knowledge of the
parents of children.

3. Holding a small sign of disgrace, of any kind, in the middle of the floor,
in the presence of a whole school.

If these punishments fail of reclaiming a bad boy, he should be dismissed from
school, to prevent his corrupting his school-mates. It is the business of
parents, and not of schoolmasters, to use the last means for eradicating
idleness and vice from their children.

The world was created in love. It is sustained by love. Nations and families
that are happy, are made so only by love. Let us extend this divine principle,
to those little communities which we call schools. Children are capable of
loving in a high degree. They may therefore be governed by love.

The occupation of a schoolmaster is truly dignified. He is (next to mothers)
the most important member of civil society. Why then is there so little rank
connected with that occupation? Why do we treat it with so much neglect, or
contempt? It is because the voice of reason, in the human heart, associates
with it the idea of despotism and violence. Let schoolmasters cease to be
tyrants, and they will soon enjoy the respect and rank, which are naturally
connected with their profession.

We are grossly mistaken in looking up wholly to our governments, and even to
ministers of the gospel, to promote public and private order in society.
Mothers and schoolmasters plant the seeds of nearly all the good and evil
which exist in our world. Its reformation must therefore be begun in nurseries
and in schools. If the habits we acquire there, were to have no influence upon
our future happiness, yet the influence they have upon our governments, is a
sufficient reason why we ought to introduce new modes, as well as new objects
of education into our country.

You have lately been employed in an attempt to perpetuate our existence as a
free people, by establishing the means of national credit and defense; Mr.
Clymer is one of the Representatives of Pennsylvania, in the Congress of the
United States.
but these are feeble bulwarks against slavery, compared with habits of labor
and virtue, disseminated among our young people. Let us establish schools for
this purpose, in every township in the United States, and conform them to
reason, humanity, and the present state of society in America. Then, Sir, will
the generations who are to follow us, realize the precious ideas of the dignity
and excellence of republican forms of government, which I well recollect you
cherished with so much ardor, in the beginning of the American revolution, and
which you have manifested ever since, both by your public and private conduct.

We suffer so much from traditional error of various kinds, in education,
morals, and government, that I have been led to wish, that it were possible for
us to have schools established, in the United States, for teaching the art of
forgetting. I think three-fourths of all our schoolmasters, divines, and
legislators would profit very much, by spending two or three years in such
useful institutions.

An apology may seem necessary, not only for the length of this letter, but for
some of the opinions contained in it. I know how apt mankind are to brand every
proposition for innovation, as visionary and Utopian. But good men should not
be discouraged, by such epithets, from their attempts to combat vice and error.
There never was an improvement, in any art or science, nor even a proposal for
meliorating the condition of man, in any age or country, that has not been
considered in the light of what has been called, since Sir Thomas More's time,
an Utopian scheme. The application of the magnet to navigation, and of steam to
mechanical purposes, have both been branded as Utopian projects. The great idea
in the mind of Columbus, of exploring a new world, was long viewed, in most of
the courts of Europe, as the dream of a visionary sailor. But why do we go to
ancient times, for proofs of important innovations in human affairs having been
treated as Utopian schemes. You and I recollect the time, when the abolition of
negro slavery in our state, as also when the independence of the United States,
and the present wise and happy confederacy of our republics, were all
considered by many of our sober prudent men, as subjects of an Utopian nature.

If those benefactors of mankind, who have levelled mountains in the great road
of human life, by the discoveries or labors which have been mentioned, have
been stigmatized with obloquy, as visionary projectors, why should an
individual be afraid of similar treatment, who has only attempted to give to
that road, from its beginning, a straight direction.

If only a dozen men like yourself, approve of my opinions, it will overbalance
the most illiberal opposition they may meet with, from all the learned vulgar
of the United States.

For the benefit of those persons who consider opinions as improved, like
certain liquors, by time; and who are opposed to innovations, only because they
did not occur to their ancestors, I shall conclude my letter with an anecdote
of a minister in London, who, after employing a long sermon, in controverting
what he supposed to be an heretical opinion, concluded it with the following
words, "I tell you, I tell you my brethren, -- I tell you again, -- that an old
error is better than a new truth."

With great regard I am, Dear Sir, Yours sincerely, BENJ. RUSH.
Philadelphia, Aug. 20th, 1790. P. S. Since writing the above letter, an
ingenious German friend of mine has informed me, that a curious work has lately
appeared in Germany, entitled, "A treatise on human misery," written by a Mr.
Salzman, an enlightened schoolmaster, in which a striking view is given of the
misery inflicted upon part of the human race, by the present absurd, and cruel
modes of conducting education in public schools. The author concludes this part
of his work, my friend informs me, with a dream, in which he beholds with
ineffable joy, the avenging angel descending from heaven, and afterward
consuming in an immense bonfire, certain absurd school-books, and all the
ferules in the world.




