A DISCOURSE ON THE LOVE OF OUR COUNTRY, DELIVERED ON NOVEMBER 4, 1789.

[PRICE ONE PISTAREEN.]

A DISCOURSE ON THE LOVE OF OUR COUNTRY, DELIVERED ON NOV. 4, 1789, AT THE
MEETING HOUSE IN THE OLD JEWRY.

TO THE SOCIETY FOR COMMEMORATING THE REVOLUTION IN GREAT BRITAIN.

By RICHARD PRICE, D.D. LL.D. F.R.S. AND FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL
SOCIETIES AT PHILADELPHIA AND BOSTON.

LONDON, PRINTED: BOSTON, REPRINTED: BY EDWARD E. POWARS, COURT STREET.

M.DCC.XC.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
PSALM cxxii, 2d, and following verses. Our feet shall stand within thy gates,
O Jerusalem, whither the tribes go up; the tribes of the Lord unto the
testimony of Israel. To give thanks to the name of the Lord, for there sit the
thrones of judgment; the throne of the House of David. Pray for the peace of
JERUSALEM. They shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions sake I will now
say, peace be within thee. Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will
seek thy good.
IN these words the Psalmist expresses, in strong and beautiful language, his
love of his country, and the reasons on which he founded it; and my present
design is, to take occasion from them to explain the duty we owe to our
country, and the nature, foundation, and proper expressions of that love to it
which we ought to cultivate.

I RECKON this a subject particularly suitable to the services of this day, and
to the Anniversary of our deliverance at the Revolution from the dangers of
popery and arbitrary power; and should I, on such an occasion, be led to touch
more on political subjects than would at any other time be proper in the
pulpit, you will, I doubt not, excuse me.

THE love of our country has, in all times, been a subject of warm
commendations; and it is certainly a noble passion; but, like all other
passions, it requires regulation and direction. There are mistakes and
prejudices by which, in this instance, we are in particular danger of being
misled. -- I will briefly mention some of these to you, and observe,

FIRST, That by our country is meant, in this case, not the soil, or the spot
of earth on which we happen to have been born; not the forests and fields, but
that community of which we are members; or that body of companions and friends
and kindred who are associated with us under the same constitution of
government, protected by the same laws, and bound together by the same civil
polity.

SECONDLY, It is proper to observe, that even in this sense of our country,
that love of it which is our duty, does not imply any conviction of the
superior value of it to other countries, or any particular preference of its
laws and constitution of government. Were this implied, the love of their
country would be the duty of only a very small part of mankind; for there are
few countries that enjoy the advantage of laws and governments which deserve to
be preferred. To found, therefore, this duty on such a preference, would be to
found it on error and delusion. -- It is however a common delusion. -- There is
the same partiality in countries, to themselves, that there is in individuals.
All our attachments should be accompanied, as far as possible, with right
opinions. -- We are too apt to confine wisdom and virtue within the circle of
our own acquaintance and party. Our friends, our country, and, in short, every
thing related to us, we are disposed to overvalue. A wise man will guard
himself against this delusion. He will study to think of all things as they
are, and not suffer any partial affections to blind his understanding. In other
families there may be as much worth as in our own. In other circles of friends
there may be as much wisdom; and in other countries as much of all that
deserves esteem; but, notwithstanding this, our obligation to love our own
families, friends, and country, and to seek, in the first place, their good,
will remain the same.

THIRDLY, It is proper I should desire you particularly to distinguish between
the love of our country and that spirit of rivalship and ambition which has
been common among nations. -- What has the love of their country hitherto been
among mankind? What has it been but a love of domination; a desire of conquest,
and a thirst for grandeur and glory, by extending territory, and enslaving
surrounding countries? What has it been but a blind and narrow principle,
producing in every country a contempt of other countries, and forming men into
combinations and factions against their common rights and liberties? This is
the principle that has been too often cried up as a virtue of the first rank: a
principle of the same kind with that which governs clans of Indians, or tribes
of Arabs, and leads them out to plunder and massacre. As most of the evils
which have taken place in private life, and among individuals, have been
occasioned by the desire of private interest overcoming the public affections;
so most of the evils which have taken place among bodies of men have been
occasioned by the desire of their own interest overcoming the principle of
universal benevolence: and leading them to attack one another's territories, to
encroach on one another's rights, and to endeavor to build their own
advancement on the degradation of all within the reach of their power -- What
was the love of their country among the Jews, but a wretched partiality to
themselves, and a proud contempt of all other nations? What was the love of
their country among the old Romans? We have heard much of it; but I cannot
hesitate in saying that, however great it appeared in some of its exertions, it
was, in general, no better than a principle holding together a band of robbers
in their attempts to crush all liberty but their own. What is now the love of
his country in a Spaniard, a Turk, or a Russian? Can it be considered as any
thing better than a passion for slavery, or a blind attachment to a spot where
he enjoys no rights, and is disposed of as if he was a beast?

LET us learn by such reflections to correct and purify this passion, and to
make it a just and rational principle of action.

IT is very remarkable that the founder of our religion has not once mentioned
this duty, or given us any recommendation of it; and this has, by unbelievers,
been made an objection to Christianity. What I have said will entirely remove
this objection. Certain it is, that, by inculcating on men an attachment to
their country, Christianity would, at the time it was propagated, have done
unspeakably more harm than good. Among the Jews, i^ would have been an
excitement to war and insurrections; for they were then in eager expectation of
becoming soon (as the favorite people of Heaven) the lords and conquerors of
the earth, under the triumphant reign of the Messiah. Among the Romans,
likewise, this principle had, as I have just observed, exceeded its just
bounds, and rendered them enemies to the peace and happiness of mankind. By
inculcating it, therefore, Christianity would have confirmed both Jews and
Gentiles in one of the most pernicious faults. Our Lord and his Apostles have
done better. They have recommended that UNIVERSAL BENEVOLENCE which is an
unspeakably nobler principle than any partial affections. They have laid such
stress on loving all men, even our enemies, and made an ardent and extensive
charity so essential a part of virtue, that the religion they have preached
may, by way of distinction from all other religions, be called the Religion of
Benevolence. Nothing can be more friendly to the general rights of mankind; and
were it duly regarded and practiced, every man would consider every other man
as his brother, and all the animosity that now takes place among contending
nations would be abolished. If you want any proof of this, think of our
Savior's parable of the good Samaritan. The Jews and Samaritans were two rival
nations that entertained a hatred of one another the most inveterate. The
design of this parable was to show to a Jew, that even a Samaritan, and
consequently all men of all nations and religions, were included in the
precept, THOU SHALL LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF.

BUT I am digressing from what I had chiefly in view; which was, after noticing
that love of our country which is false and spurious, to explain the nature and
effects of that which is just and reasonable. With this view. I must desire you
to recollect that we are so constituted that our affections are more drawn to
some among mankind than to others, in proportion to their degrees of nearness
to us, and our power of being useful to them. It is obvious, that this is a
circumstance in the constitution of our natures which proves the wisdom and
goodness of our Maker; for had our affections been determined alike to all our
fellow creatures, human life would have been a scene of embarrassment and
distraction. Our regards, according to the order of nature, begin with
ourselves; and every man is charged primarily with the care of himself. Next
come our families, and benefactors, and friends; and after them, our country.
We can do little for the interest of mankind at large. To this interest,
however, all other interests are subordinate. The noblest principle in our
nature is the regard to general justice, and that good will which embraces all
the world. -- I have already observed this; but it cannot be too often
repeated. Though our immediate attention must be employed in promoting our own
interest and that of our nearest connexions; yet we must remember, that a
narrower interest ought always to give way to a more extensive interest. In
pursuing particularly the interest of our country, we ought to carry our views
beyond it. We should love it ardently, but not exclusively. We ought to seek
its good, by all the means that our different circumstances and abilities will
allow; but, at the same time, we ought to consider ourselves as citizens of the
world, and take care to maintain a just regard to (...) rights of other
countries.

THE enquiry by what means (subject to this limitation) we may best promote the
interest of our country, is very important; and all that remains of this
discourse shall be employed in answering it, and in exhorting you to manifest
your love to your country, by the means I shall mention.

THE chief blessings of human nature are the three following: -- TRUTH --
VIRTUE -- and LIBERTY. -- These are, therefore, the blessings in the possession
of which the interest of our country lies, and to the attainment of which our
love of it ought to direct our endeavors. By the diffusion of KNOWLEDGE it
must be distinguished from a country of Barbarians: by the practice of
religious VIRTUE, it must be distinguished from a country of gamblers,
Atheists, and libertines: and by the possession of LIBERTY, it must be
distinguished from a country of slaves. -- I will dwell for a few moments on
each of these heads:

OUR first concern, as lovers of our country, must be to enlighten it. -- Why
are the nations of the world so patient under despotism? -- Why do they crouch
to tyrants, and submit to be treated as if they were a herd of cattle? Is it
not because they are kept in darkness, and want knowledge? Enlighten them and
you will elevate them. Show them they are men, and they will act like men. Give
them just ideas of civil government, and let them know that it is an expedient
for gaining protection against injury and defending their rights, and it will
be impossible for them to submit to governments which, like most of those now
in the world, are usurpations on the rights of men, and little better than
contrivances for enabling the few to oppress the many. Convince them that the
Deity is a righteous and benevolent as well as omnipotent Being, who regards
with equal eye all his creatures, and connects his favor with nothing but an
honest desire to know and do his will; and that zeal for mystical doctrines
which has led men to hate and harass one another, will be exterminated. Set
religion before them as a rational service, consisting not in any rites and
ceremonies, but in worshipping God with a pure heart, and practicing
righteousness from the fear of his displeasure and the apprehension of a future
righteous judgment, and that gloomy and cruel superstition will be abolished,
which has hitherto gone under the name of religion, and to the support of which
civil government has been perverted. -- Ignorance is the parent of bigotry,
intolerance, persecution and slavery. -- Inform and instruct mankind, and these
evils will be excluded. -- Happy is the person who, himself raised above vulgar
errors, is conscious of having aimed at giving mankind this instruction. Happy
is the Scholar or Philosopher who at the close of life can reflect that he has
made this use of his learning and abilities: but happier far must he be, if at
the same time he has reason to believe he has been successful, and actually
contributed, by his instructions, to disseminate among his fellow creatures
just notions of themselves, of their rights, of religion, and the nature and
end of civil government. Such were Milton, Lock, Sidney, Hoadly, etc. in this
country; such were Montesquieu, Fenelon, Turgot, etc. in France. They sowed a
seed which has since taken root, and is now growing up to a glorious harvest.
To the information they conveyed by their writings we owe those revolutions in
which every friend to mankind is now exulting. -- What an encouragement is this
to us all in our endeavors to enlighten the world? Every degree of
illumination which we can communicate must do the greatest good. It helps to
prepare the minds of men for the recovery of their rights, and hastens the
overthrow of priestcraft and tyranny. -- In short, we may, in this instance,
learn, our duty from the conduct of the oppressors of the world. They know that
light is hostile to them, and therefore they labor to keep men in the dark.
With this intention they have appointed licensers of the press; and, in Popish
countries, prohibited the reading of the Bible. Remove the darkness in which
they envelope the world, and their usurpations will be exposed, their power
will be subverted, and the world emancipated.

THE next great blessing of human nature which I have mentioned, is VIRTUE.
This ought to follow knowledge, and to be directed by it. Virtue without
knowledge makes enthusiasts; and knowledge without virtue makes devils; but
both united elevates to the top of human dignity and perfection. -- We must,
therefore, if we would serve our country, make both these the objects of our
zeal. We must discourage vice in all its forms; and our endeavors to enlighten
must have ultimately in view a reformation of manners and virtuous practice.

I MUST add here, that in the practice of virtue I include the discharge of the
public duties of religion. By neglecting these, we may injure our country
essentially. But it is melancholy to observe that it is a common neglect among
us; and in a great measure owing to a cause which is not likely to be soon
removed: I mean, the defects (may I not say, the absurdities?) in our
established codes of faith and worship. In foreign countries, the higher ranks
of men, not distinguishing between the religion they see established and the
Christian religion, are generally driven to irreligion and infidelity. The like
evil is produced by the like cause in this country; and if no reformation of
our established formularies can be brought about, it must be expected that
religion will go on to lose its credit, and that little of it will be left
except among the lower orders of people, many of whom, while their superiors
give up all religion, are sinking into an enthusiasm in religion lately revived.

I HOPE you will not mistake what I am now saying, or consider it as the effect
of my prejudices as a Dissenter from the established church. The complaint I am
making, is the complaint of many of the wisest and best men in the established
church itself, who have been long urging the necessity of a revisal of its
Liturgy and Articles. These were framed above two centuries ago, when
Christendom was just emerging from the ignorance and barbarity of the dark
ages. They remain now much the same they were then; and, therefore, cannot be
properly adapted to the good sense and liberality of the present times. -- This
imperfection, however, in our public forms of worship, affords no excuse to any
person for neglecting public worship. All communities will have some religion;
and it is of infinite consequence that they should be led to that which, by
enforcing the obligations of virtue and putting men upon loving instead of
damning one another, is most favorable to the interest of society.

IF there is a Governor of the world, who directs all events, he ought to be
invoked and worshipped; and those who dislike that mode of worship which is
prescribed by public authority, ought (if they can find no worship out of the
church which they approve) to set up a separate worship for themselves; and by
doing this, and giving an example of a rational and manly worship, men of
weight, from their rank or literature, may do the greatest service to society
and the world. They may bear a testimony against that application of civil
power to the support of particular modes of faith, which obstructs human
improvement, and perpetuates error; and they may hold out an instruction which
will discountenance superstition, and at the same time recommend religion, by
making it appear to be (what it certainly is when rightly understood) the
strongest incentive to all that is generous and worthy, and consequently the
best friend to public order and happiness.

LIBERTY is the next great blessing which I have mentioned as the object of
patriotic zeal. It is inseparable from knowledge and virtue, and together with
them completes the glory of a community. An enlightened and virtuous country
must be a free country. It cannot suffer invasions of its rights, or bend to
tyrants. -- I need not, on this occasion, take any pains to show you how great
a blessing liberty is. The smallest attention to the history of past ages, and
the present state of mankind, will make you sensible of its importance. Look
round the world, and you will find almost every country, respectable or
contemptible, happy or miserable, a fruitful field or a frightful waste,
according as it possesses or wants this blessing. Think of Greece, formerly the
seat of arts and science, and the most distinguished spot under heaven; but
now, having lost liberty, a vile and wretched spot, a region of darkness,
poverty, and barbarity. -- Such reflections must convince you that, if you love
your country, you cannot be zealous enough in promoting the cause of liberty in
it. But it will come in my way to say more to this purpose presently.

THE observations I have made include our whole duty to our country; for by
endeavoring to liberalize and enlighten it, to discourage vice and to promote
virtue in it, and to assert and support its liberties, we shall endeavor to do
all that is necessary to make it great and happy. -- But it is proper that, on
this occasion, I should be more explicit, and exemplify our duty to our country
by observing farther, that it requires us to obey its laws, and to respect its
magistrates.

CIVIL government (as I have before observed) is an institution of human
prudence for guarding our persons, our property, and our good name, against
invasion; and for securing to the members of a community that liberty to which
all have an equal right, as far as they do not, by any overt act, use it to
injure the liberty of others. Civil laws are regulations agreed upon by the
community for gaining these ends; and civil magistrates are officers appointed
by the community for executing these laws. Obedience, therefore, to the laws
and to magistrates, are necessary expressions of our regard to the community;
and without this obedience the ends of government cannot be obtained, or a
community avoid falling into a state of anarchy that will destroy those rights
and subvert that liberty, which government is instituted to protect.

I WISH it was in my power to give you a just account of the importance of this
observation. It shows the ground on which the duty of obeying civil governors
stands, and that there are two extremes in this case which ought to be avoided.
-- These extremes are adulation and servility on one hand; and a proud and
licentious contempt on the other. The former is the extreme to which mankind in
general have been most prone; for it has oftener happened that men have been
too passive than too unruly; and the rebellion of Kings against their people
has been more common, and done (...) mischief, than the rebellion of people
against (...)

(...) odious, and when offered to (...) them, by giving them improper ideas of
their situation; and it debases those who offer it, by manifesting an
abjectness founded on improper ideas of themselves. I have lately observed in
this kingdom too near approaches to this abjectness. In our late addresses to
the King, on his recovery from the severe illness with which God has been
pleased to afflict him, we have appeared more like a herd crawling at the feet
of a master, than like enlightened and manly citizens rejoicing with a beloved
Sovereign, but at the same time conscious that he derives all his consequence
from themselves. But, perhaps, these servilities in the language of our late
addresses should be pardoned, as only forms of civility and expressions of an
overflow of goodnature. They have, however, a dangerous tendency. The
potentates of this world are sufficiently apt to consider themselves as
possessed of an inherent superiority, which gives them a right to govern, and
makes mankind their own; and this infatuation is almost every where fostered in
them by the creeping sycophants about them, and the language of flattery which
they are continually hearing.

CIVIL governors are properly the servants of the public; and a King is no more
than the first servant of the public, created by it, maintained by it, and
responsible to it: and all the homage paid him, is due to him on no other
account than his relation to the public. His sacredness is the sacredness of
the community. His authority is the authority of the community; and the term
Majesty, which it is usual to apply to him, is by no means his own majesty, but
the MAJESTY OF THE PEOPLE. For this reason, whatever he may be in his private
capacity; and though, in respect of personal qualities, not equal to, or even
far below many among ourselves -- For this reason, I say (that is, as
representing the community and its first magistrate), he is entitled to our
reverence and obedience. The words MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY are rightly applied
to him; and there is a respect which it would be criminal to withhold from him.

You cannot be too attentive to this observation. The improvement of the world
depends on the attention to it: nor will mankind be ever as virtuous and happy
as they are capable of being, till the attention to it becomes universal and
efficacious. If we forget it, we shall be in danger of an idolatry as gross and
stupid as that of the ancient heathens, who, after fabricating blocks of wood
or stone, fell down and worshipped them. -- The disposition in mankind to this
kind of idolatry is indeed a very mortifying subject of reflection. -- In
TURKEY, millions of human beings adore a silly mortal, and are ready to throw
themselves at his feet, and to submit their lives to his discretion. -- In
RUSSIA, the common people are only a STOCK on the lands of grandees, or
appendages to their estates, which, like the fixtures in a house, are bought
and sold with the estates. -- In SPAIN, in GERMANY, and under most of the
governments of the world, mankind are in a similar state of humiliation. Who,
that has a just sense of the dignity of his nature, can avoid execrating such a
debasement of it?

HAD I been to address the King on a late occasion, I should have been inclined
to do it in a style very different from that of most of the addressers, and to
use some such language as the following: -- I rejoice, Sir, in your recovery. I
thank God for his goodness to you. I honor you not only as my King, but as
almost the only lawful King in the world, because the only one who owes his
crown to the choice of his people. -- May you enjoy all possible happiness. --
May God show you the folly of those effusions of adulation which you are now
receiving, and guard you against their effects. -- May you be led to such a
just sense of the nature of your situation, and endowed with such wisdom, as
shall render your restoration to the government of these kingdoms a blessing to
it, and engage you to consider yourself as more properly the Servant than the
Sovereign of your people.

BUT I must not forget the opposite extreme to that now taken notice of; that
is, a disdainful pride, derived from a consciousness of equality, or, perhaps,
superiority, in respect of all that gives true dignity to men in power, and
producing a contempt of them, and a disposition to treat them with rudeness and
insult. It is a trite observation, that extremes generally beget one another.
This is particularly true in the present case. Persons justly informed on the
subject of government, when they see men dazzled by looking up to high
stations, and observe loyalty carried to a length that implies ignorance and
servility: such persons, in such circumstances, are in danger of spurning at
all public authority, and throwing off that respectful demeanor to persons
invested with it, which the order of society requires. There is undoubtedly a
particular deference and homage due to civil magistrates, on account of their
stations and offices; nor can that man be either truly wise or truly virtuous,
who despises governments, and wantonly speaks evil of his rulers; or who does
not, by all the means in his power, endeavor to strengthen their hands, and to
give weight to their exertions in the discharge of their duty. -- Fear God,
says St. Peter. Love the brotherhood. Honor all men. Honor the King. -- You
must needs, says St. Paul, be subject to rulers, not only for wrath (that is,
from the fear of suffering the penalties annexed to the breach of the laws) but
for conscience sake. For rulers are ministers of God, and revengers for
executing wrath on all that do evil.

ANOTHER expression of our love to our country is defending it against enemies.
These enemies are of two sorts, internal and external; or domestic and foreign.
The former are the most dangerous, and they have generally been the most
successful. I have just observed, that there is a submission due to the
executive officers of government, which is our duty; but you must not forget
what I have also observed, that it must not be a blind and slavish submission.
Men in power (unless better disposed than is common) are always endeavoring to
extend their power. They hate the doctrine, that it is a TRUST derived from the
people, and not a right vested in themselves. For this reason, the tendency of
every government is to despotism; and in this the best constituted governments
must end, if the people are not vigilant, ready to take alarms, and determined
to resist abuses as soon as they begin. This vigilance, therefore, it is our
duty to maintain. Whenever it is withdrawn, and a people cease to reason about
their rights and to be awake to encroachments, they are in danger of being
enslaved, and their servants will soon become their masters.

I NEED not say how much it is our duty to defend our country against foreign
enemies. When a country is attacked in any of its rights by another country, or
when any attempts are made by ambitious foreign powers to injure it, a war in
its defense becomes necessary: and, in such circumstances, to die for our
country is meritorious and noble. These defensive wars are, in my opinion, the
only just wars. Offensive wars are always unlawful; and to seek the
aggrandizement of our country by them, that is, by attacking other countries,
in order to extend dominion, or to gratify avarice, is wicked and detestable.
Such, however, have been most of the wars which have taken place in the world;
but the time is, I hope, coming, when a conviction will prevail, of the folly
as well as the iniquity of wars; and when the nations of the earth, happy under
just governments, and no longer in danger from the passions of Kings, will find
out better ways of settling their disputes; and beat (as Isaiah prophesies)
their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.

AMONG the particulars included in that duty to our country, by discharging
which we should show our love to it, I will only further mention praying for
it, and offering up thanksgivings to God for every event favorable to it. At
the present season we are called upon to express, in this way, our love to our
country. It is the business of this day and of the present service; and,
therefore, it is necessary that I should now direct your attention to it
particularly.

WE are met to thank God for that event in this country to which the name of
THE REVOLUTION has been given; and which, for more than a century, it has been
usual for the friends of freedom, and more especially Protestant Dissenters,
under the title of the REVOLUTION SOCIETY, to celebrate with expressions of joy
and exultation. -- My highly valued and excellent friend, who addressed you on
this occasion last year, has given you an interesting account of the principal
circumstances that attended this event, and of the reasons we have for
rejoicing in it. By a bloodless victory, the fetters which despotism had been
long preparing for us were broken; the rights of the people were asserted, a
tyrant expelled, and a Sovereign of our own choice appointed in his room.
Security was given to our property, and our consciences were emancipated. The
bounds of free enquiry were enlarged; the volume in which are the words of
eternal life, was laid more open to our examination; and that era of light and
liberty was introduced among us, by which we have been made an example to other
kingdoms, and became the instructors of the world. Had it not been for this
deliver^ (...), the probability is, that, instead of being thus distinguished,
we should now have been a base people, groaning under the infamy and misery of
popery and slavery. Let us therefore, offer thanksgivings to God, the author of
all our blessings. Had he not been on out side, we should have been swallowed
up quick, and the proud waters would have gone over our souls. But our souls
are escaped, and the snare has been broken. Blessed then be the name of the
Lord, who made heaven and earth. cxxivth Psalm.

IT is well known that King James was not far from gaining his purpose; and
that probably he would have succeeded, had he been less in a hurry. But he was
a fool as well as a bigot. He wanted courage as well as prudence; and,
therefore, fled, and left us to settle quietly for ourselves that constitution
of government which is now our boast. We have particular reason, as Protestant
Dissenters, to rejoice on this occasion. It was at this time we were rescued
from persecution, and obtained the liberty of worshipping God in the manner we
think most acceptable to him. It was then our meeting houses were opened, our
worship was taken under the protection of the law, and the principles of
toleration gained a triumph. We have, therefore, on this occasion, peculiar
reasons for thanksgiving -- But let us remember that we ought not to satisfy
ourselves with thanksgivings. Our gratitude, if genuine, will be accompanied
with endeavors to give stability to the deliverance our country has obtained,
and to extend and improve the happiness with which the Revolution has blessed us
-- Let us, in particular, take care not to forget the principles of the
Revolution. This Society has, very properly, in its Reports, held out these
principles, as an instruction to the public. I will only take notice of the
three following:

FIRST; The right to liberty of conscience in religious matters.

SECONDLY; The right to resist power when abused. And,

THIRDLY; The right to choose our own governors; to cashier them for misconduct;
and to frame a government for ourselves.

ON these three principles, and mere especially the last, was the Revolution
founded. Were it not true that liberty of conscience is a sacred right; that
power abused justifies resistance; and that civil authority is a delegation
from the people -- Were not, I say, all this true, the Revolution would have
been not an ASSERTION, but an INVASION of rights; not a REVOLUTION, but a
REBELLION. Cherish in your breasts this conviction, and act under its
influence; detesting the odious doctrines of passive obedience, non-resistance,
and the divine right of kings -- doctrines which, had they been acted upon in
this country, would have left us at this time wretched slaves -- doctrines
which imply, that God made mankind to be oppressed and plundered; and which are
no less a blasphemy against him, than an insult on common sense.

I WOULD farther direct you to remember, that though the Revolution was a great
work, it was by no means a perfect work; and that all was not then gained which
was necessary to put the kingdom in the secure and complete possession of the
blessings of liberty. -- In particular, you should recollect, that the
toleration then obtained was imperfect. It included only those who could
declare their faith in the doctrinal articles of the church of England. It has,
indeed, been since extended, but not sufficiently; for there still exist penal
laws on account of religious opinions, which (were they carried into execution)
would shut up many of our places of worship, and silence and imprison some of
our ablest and best men. -- The TEST LAWS are also still in force; and deprive
of eligibility to civil and military offices, all who cannot conform to the
established worship. It is with great pleasure I find that the body of
Protestant Dissenters, though defeated in two late attempts to deliver their
country from this disgrace to it, have determined to persevere. Should they at
last succeed, they will have the satisfaction, not only of removing from
themselves a proscription they do not deserve, but of contributing to lessen
the number of public iniquities. For I cannot call by a gentler name, laws
which convert an ordinance appointed by our Savior to commemorate his death,
into an instrument of oppressive policy, and a qualification of rakes and
atheists for civil posts. -- I have said, should they succeed -- but perhaps I
ought not to suggest a doubt about their success It has been unfortunate for
the Dissenters th^^, in their late applications for a repeal of the Test Laws,
they have been opposed by Mr. Pit. He has contended that, on account of their
not believing and worshipping as the Church of England does, they ought to be
excluded from that eligibility to public offices which is the right of other
citizens, and consequently denied a complete toleration; acknowledging,
however, their integrity and respectability, but reckoning it only the more
necessary on that account to defend the national church against them. Such
sentiments in these times can do no honor to any man, much less to a son of
the late Lord Chatham, whose opinion of toleration and Protestant Dissenters
may be learnt from the following account.

In 1769 and 1772, the ministers among the Dissenters applied to Parliament for
relief from the obligation they were then under to subscribe the doctrinal
articles of the Church of England in order to be entitled to a toleration, and
both times succeeded in the House of Commons, in consequence of Lord North' s
neutrality, but were defeated in the House of Lords, in consequence of an
opposition from the Episcopal Bench. They persevered, however; the Bishops
repented; and a third application proved successful in both houses. In the
debate occasioned in the House of Lords by the second application, Dr Drummond,
the Archbishop of York, having called the Dissenting Ministers men of close
ambition, Lord Chatham said, that this was judging uncharitably; and that
whoever brought such a charge against them, without proof, defamed. Here he
paused; and then went on -- The Dissenting Ministers are represented as men of
close ambition. They are so, my Lords; and their ambition is to keep close to
the college of fishermen, not of cardinals, and to the doctrine of inspired
apostles, not to the decrees of interested and aspiring bishops. They contend
for a spiritual creed, and scriptural worship. We have a Calvinistic creed, a
Popish liturgy, and an Arminian clergy. The Reformation has laid open the
scriptures to all. Let not the Bishops shut them again. Laws in support of
ecclesiastical power are pleaded for, which it would shock humanity to execute.
It is said, that religious sects have done great mischief, when they were not
kept under restraint: but history affords no proof that sects have ever been
mischievous, when they were not oppressed and persecuted by the ruling church.
See the Parliamentary Debates, 1772.

In one of his letters to me, not long after this debate, dated Burton-Pynsent,
January 16, 1773, he expresses himself in the following words: In writing to
you, it is impossible the mind should not go of itself to that most interesting
of all objects to fallible men -- Toleration. Be assured, that on this sacred
and unalienable right of mankind, and bulwark of truth, my warm wishes will
always keep pace with your own. Happy, if the times had allowed us to add hopes
to our wishes.


. And, indeed, when I consider that in Scotland the established church is
defended by no such test -- that in Ireland it has been abolished -- that in a
great neighboring country it has been declared to be an indefeasible right of
all citizens to be equally eligible to public offices -- that in the same
kingdom a professed Dissenter from the established church holds the first
office in the state -- that in the Emperor's dominions Jews have been lately
admitted to the enjoyment of equal privileges with other citizens -- and that
in this very country, a Dissenter, though excluded from the power of executing
the laws, yet is allowed to be employed in making them. -- When, I say, I
consider such facts as these, I am disposed to think it impossible that the
enemies of the repeal of the Test Laws should not soon become ashamed, and give
up their opposition.

BUT the most important instance of the imperfect sect state in which the
Revolution left our constitution, is the inequality of our representation. I
think, indeed, this defect in our constitution so gross and so palpable, as to
make it excellent chiefly in form and theory. You should remember that a
representation in the legislature of a kingdom is the basis of constitutional
liberty in it, and of all legitimate government; and that without it a
government is nothing but an usurpation. When the representation is fair and
equal, and at the same time vested with such powers as our House of Commons
possesses, a kingdom may be said to govern itself, and consequently to possess
true liberty. When the representation is partial, a kingdom possesses liberty
only partially; and if extremely partial, it only gives a semblance of liberty;
but if not only extremely partial, but corruptly chosen, and under corrupt
influence after being chosen, it becomes a nuisance, and produces the worst of
all forms of government -- a government by corruption, a government carried on
and supported by spreading venality and profligacy through a kingdom. May
heaven preserve this kingdom from a calamity so dreadful! It is the point of
depravity to which abuses under such a government as ours naturally tend, and
the last stage of national unhappiness. We are, at present, I hope, at a great
distance from it. But it cannot be pretended that there are no advances toward
it, or that there is no reason for apprehension and alarm.

The inadequateness of our representation has been long a subject of complaint.
This is, in truth, our fundamental grievance; and I do not think that anything
is much more our duty, as men who love their country, and are grateful for the
Revolution, than to unite our zeal in endeavoring to get it redressed. At the
time of the American war, associations were formed for this purpose in LONDON,
and other parts of the kingdom; and our present Minister himself has, since
that war, directed to it an effort which made him a favorite with many of us.
But all attention to it seems now lost, and the probability is, that this
inattention will continue, and that nothing will be done toward gaining for us
this essential blessing, till some great calamity again alarms our fears, or
till some great abuse of power again provokes our resentment; or, perhaps, till
the acquisition of a pure and equal representation by other countries (while we
are mocked with the shadow) kindles our shame.

SUCH is the conduct by which we ought to express our gratitude for the
Revolution. -- We should always bear in mind the principles that justify it. We
should contribute all we can toward supplying what it left deficient; and show
ourselves anxious about transmitting the blessings obtained by it to our
posterity, unimpaired and improved. -- But, brethren, while we thus show our
patriotic zeal, let us take care not to disgrace the cause of patriotism, by
any licentious, or immoral conduct. -- Oh! how earnestly do I wish that all who
profess zeal in this cause, were as distinguished by the purity of their
morals, as some of them are by their abilities; and that I could make them
sensible of the advantages they would derive from a virtuous character, and of
the suspicions they incur and the loss of consequence they suffer by wanting
it. -- Oh! that I could see in men who oppose tyranny in the state, a disdain
of the tyranny of low passions in themselves; or, at least, such a sense of
shame, and regard to public order and decency as would induce them to hide
their irregularities, and to avoid insulting the virtuous part of the community
by an open exhibition of vice! -- I cannot reconcile myself to the idea of an
immoral patriot, or to that separation of private from public virtue, which
some think to be possible. Is it to be expected that -- But I must forbear. I
am afraid of applications, which many are too ready to make, and for which I
should be sorry to give any just occasion.

I HAVE been explaining to you the nature and expressions of a just regard to
our Country. Give me leave to exhort you to examine your conduct by what I have
been saying. You love your country, and desire its happiness; and, without
doubt, you have the greatest reason for loving it. It has been long a very
distinguished and favored country. Often has God appeared for it, and
delivered it. Let us study to show ourselves worthy of the favor shown us. --
Do you practice virtue yourselves, and study to promote it in others? Do you
obey the laws of your country, and aim at doing your part toward maintaining
and perpetuating its privileges? Do you always give your vote on the side of
public liberty; and are you ready to pour out your blood in its defense? Do you
look up to God for the continuance of his favor to your country, and pray for
its prosperity; preserving, at the same time, a strict regard to the rights of
other countries, and always considering yourselves more as citizens of the
world than as members of any particular community? If this is your temper and
conduct you are blessings to your country, and were all like you, this world
would soon be a heaven.

I AM addressing myself to Christians. Let me, therefore, mention to you the
example of our blessed Savior. I have observed, at the beginning of this
discourse, that he did not inculcate upon his hearers the love of their
country, or take any notice of it as a part of our duty. Instead of doing this,
I observed that he taught the obligation to love all mankind, and recommended
universal benevolence, as (next to the love of God) our first duty; and, I
think, I also proved to you, that this, in the circumstances of the world at
that time, was an instance of incomparable wisdom and goodness in his
instructions. But we must not infer from hence, that he did not include the
love of our country in the number of our duties. He has shown the contrary by
his example. It appears that he possessed a particular affection for his
country, though a very wicked country. We read in Luke x. 42, that when, upon
approaching Jerusalem, in one of his last journies to it, he beheld it, he wept
over it, and said, Oh! that thou had known (even thou, at least in this thy
day) the things that belong to thy peace. -- What a tender solicitude about his
country does the lamentation over Jerusalem imply, which is recorded in the
same gospel, chap. xiii. and 34. Oh! Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest
the prophets, and stonest them who are sent to thee, how often would I have
gathered thy children together, as a hen gathers her brood under her wings,
but ye would not.

IT may not be improper farther to mention the love St. Paul expressed for his
country, when he declared, that, for the sake of his brethren and kinsmen, he
could even wish himself accursed from Christ. (Romans ix. 3.) The original words
are an ANATHEMA from Christ; and his meaning is, that he could have been
contented to suffer himself the calamities which were coming on the Jewish
people, were it possible for him, by such a sacrifice of himself, to save them.

It is too evident that the state of this country is such as renders it an
object of concern and anxiety. It wants (I have shown you) the grand security
of public liberty. Increasing luxury has multiplied abuses in it. A monstrous
weight of debt is crippling it. Vice and venality are bringing down upon it
God's displeasure. That spirit to which it owes its distinctions, is declining;
and some late events seem to prove that it is becoming every day (...)
reconcilable to encroachments on the secu^^^^ of its liberties. -- It wants,
therefore, your patriotic services; and, for the sake of the distinctions it
has so longed enjoyed; for the sake of our brethren and companions, and all
that should be dear to a free people, we ought to do our utmost to save it from
the dangers that threaten it; remembering, that by acting thus, we shall
promote, in the best manner, our own private interest, as well as the interest
of our country; for when the community prospers, the individuals that compose
it must prosper with it. -- But, should that not happen, or should we even
suffer in our secular interest by our endeavors to promote the interest of our
country, we shall feel a satisfaction in our own breasts which is preferable to
all this world can give; and we shall enjoy the transporting hope of soon
becoming members of a perfect community in the heavens, and having an entrance
ministered to us, abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

You may reasonably expect, that I should now close this address to you. But I
cannot yet dismiss you. I must not conclude without recalling, particularly, to
your recollection, a consideration to which I have more than once alluded, and
which, probably, your thoughts have been all along anticipating: A
consideration with which my mind is impressed more than I can express. I mean,
the consideration of the favourableness of the present times to all exertions
in the cause of public liberty.

WHAT an eventful period is this! I am thankful that I have lived to it; and I
could almost say, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation. I have lived to see a diffusion of knowledge,
which has undermined superstition and error -- I have lived to see the rights
of men better understood than ever; and nations panting for liberty, which
seemed to have lost the idea of it. -- I have lived to see THIRTY MILLIONS of
people, indignant and resolute, burning at slavery, and demanding liberty with
(...) irresistible voice; their king led in triumph, and an arbitrary monarch
surrendering himself to his subjects. -- After sharing in the benefits of one
Revolution, I have been spared to be a witness to two other Revolutions, both
glorious. -- And now, methinks, I see the ardour for liberty catching and
spreading; a general amendment beginning in human affairs; the dominion of
kings changed for the dominion of laws, and the dominion of priests giving way
to the dominion of reason and conscience.

BE encouraged, all ye friends of freedom, and writers in its defense! The
times are auspicious. Your labors have not been in vain. Behold kingdoms,
admonished by you, starting from sleep, breaking their fetters, and claiming
justice from their oppressors! Behold, the light you have struck out, after
setting America free, reflected to France, and there kindled into a blaze that
lays despotism in ashes, and warms and illuminates Europe!

TREMBLE all ye oppressors of the world! Take warning all ye supporters of
slavish governments, and slavish hierarchies! Call no more (absurdly and
wickedly) REFORMATION, innovation. You cannot now hold the world in darkness.
Struggle no longer against increasing light and liberality. Restore to mankind
their rights; and consent to the correction of abuses, before they and you are
destroyed together.

FINIS.

