THE HISTORY of Sir Charles Grandison, ABRIDGED FROM THE WORKS OF Samuel
Richardson, Esquire. Author of Pamela and Clarissa.

THE TENTH EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by Carey, Stewart, and Co. North Front-street, No. 22.

THE HISTORY OF SIR CHARLES GRANDISON, Bart.
CHAP. I.
A concise account of (...) Thomas Grandison and his (...), due of the
education they gave th^^^ son. The death of that lady.

SIR CHARLES, the subject of this history, was the only son of sir Thomas
Grandison, a person fond of magnificence and splendour: who valued himself on
his breed of race horses and hunters, and on his kenne^^ in which he was
prodigiously extra^^gant. He inherited from his fathe^^ (...) in England, which
brough^^ (...) 6000l. a year, and another in Ireland, worth about 2000l. per
annum, besides a very considerable fortune in money. His lady, who was of a
noble family, also brought him a great fortune. She was a most excellent woman,
to whom he was a complaisant, but careless husband. Soon after his marriage,
giving way to his predominant inclination for pleasure, he entirely left the
care of the family to her: and (...) applied herself to the domestic duties:
finding that she could not prevail on sir Thomas to reduce his expenses, she
thought it prudent to use her utmost endeavors to enable him to support them,
without discredit to himself, or any visible injury to his family. Yet this
lady, while she used the best economy, was free from all narrow, mean, and
selfish views. She was beloved for her benevolence and generosity, and idolized
by her poor neighbors. She had a plentiful table, and was extremely
hospitable, both from her natural goodness, and to give credit to her husband.
By this excellent lady, sir Thomas had a son and two daughters, who received
from her the best part of their education, she instilling into their young
minds the first principles of christianity, and strong ideas of moral rectitude.

Sir Thomas, considering his daughters as an encumbrance, grew extremely fond
of his son, and placing all his affections on him, was desirous of his becoming
master of every accomplishment. He early filled his (...) with high notions of
(...), and bef^^ he had reached (...) year, ^^^vided him a master to instruct
him in the science of defense: hence the amiable youth soon acquired such skill
in the weapons, as gave the greatest satisfaction both (...) his father and
master. He had remarkable strength of body, with great agility: and this
exercise added to both, while the praises he received from his father and
master, so inflamed his co^^^ge, that he was almost tempted to wish for a
subject to exercise it upon. His excellent mother, however, tremble for the
effects of their praises, which, (...) dreaded, might render him too ^^ble to
take off^^^^^, and to resent it with the sword, to the danger of his own (...)
or of ^^is future peace of mind; (...) was continually discoursing to him on
the virtues of true magnanimity, the law of kindness, benevolence, and
forgiveness of injuries; frequent^ly reminding him, that wha^ he was then
learning was called the science of defense, and not of offense.

Mr. Grandison had the misfortune to lose this best of mothers while young: but
it was* by a circumstance that deeply imp^^ssed all her lessons on his heart.
His father was brought home, as it was thought, mortally wounded in a duel,
when this good lady's surprise threw her into fits, from which she was never
after free, and the danger in which sir Thomas continued for a considerable
time, with her extraordinary solicitude and care in attending him night and
day, broke her constitution, and brought her into an ill s^ate of heal^h, which
soon proved fatal. A few hours before this excellent lady expired, after
having, on general principles, warmly recommended to her children, duty to
their father, and brotherly and sisterly love, as necessary to their happiness,
^he had a private discourse with her son, on the same subject, in which, with
great affection, she recommended his sisters to him: they entering at this
instant, found him in tears, when the am^able youth, taking each of their
hands, kneeled down, and put them into his mother's extended dying hand: then
bowing his face upon all three, he cried, all, madam -- all my dearest, best of
mothers that you have enjoined -- He was unable to proceed; but their arms were
bedewed with his tears. Enough, enough, my son, I distress you! she returned;
and kissing her own arm, added, these, my dear, are precious tears, -- you
embalm me with your tears, -- O how precious the balm! Then lifting up her
head, she kissed him, and repeated her blessings.

Upon her death, the engaging youth became inconsolable. He loved his father,
but had been more particularly fond of his mother. Sir Thomas, though he had
given but little attention to his education in general, was extremely fond of
him; and had taken the less care on this head, as he was well convinced that
this neglect would be well supplied by his excellent lady, who had mingled her
instructions with those of the masters of the several s^^ences, who, at her
desire, attended upon him.

CHAP. II.
Mr. Grandison sets out on his travels. The dissolute life of Creutzer his
Governor. Mr. Grandison becomes inti^^te with Dr. Bartlett, governor to Mr.
Lorimer, a profligate young gentleman, who contracting an intimacy with
Creutzer, the latter commits crimes which oblige him to seek his safety in
flight. Mr. ^orimer and a courtezan conspire the death of Dr. Bartlett; which
is near being effected. Mr. Lorimer'^ death. Instances of Mr. Grandison's
generosity.

THE young gentleman being seized with a deep melancholy on his suffering so
irreparable a loss, his father, who was also greatly grieved, (and the more so,
as he could not help reproaching himself for having, in some measure, been the
occasion of that loss) yielded to the entreaties of general W. his late lady's
brother, to permit him to travel. The general recommended for a governor to mr.
Grandison, one Creu^zer, an officer under him, who, having been wounded, was
obliged to quit the (...). Sir Thomas allowed his son, who w^^ now about
seven^een, 800l. a year, from the time of his setting ou^ on his travels; and
some time after, raised his allowance to 1000l.

Creutzer, though recommended by his uncle, soon convinced mr. Grandison, that
he was a most abandoned profligate. The young gentleman had, however, the
happiness, by his prudence, to escape several snares, which this artful wretch
laid for h^s virtue, from the hopes, that if he could betray him into them, he
should silence his remonstrances against his own had conduct, and prevent his
complaining of him in his letters to sir Thomas.

When they were at Turin, mr. Grandison commenced an acquaintance with dr.
Bartlett, governor to mr. Lorimer, a young gentleman, with whom mr. Creutzer
became extremely intimate: and the two former became as clos^ly united from
their good qualities, as the two latter from their bad ones. Several riotous
things were done there by mr. Grandison's governor and Lorimer, who,
notwithstanding the doctor's using his utmost endeavors to keep them asunder,
were almost cons^antly together. But one of their explo^ts rendering them in
danger from the civil magistrate, Creutzer, to avoid the (...) sh^^eu^ he
deserved, fled to Rome, from whence he wrote to desire mr. Grandison to join
him in that city.

The worthy youth, who had often in vain threatened to complain of him to his
father, then sent to inform him of the profl^gacy and abandoned principles of
the man who had been placed over him, in order to direct his condu^t, and to
entreat him to appoint him another governor, or permit him to return to
England, till he had chosen one for him. In the mean time, ^e besought dr.
Bar^let^, to allow him to apply to him for his advice and instruction, till he
had received his father's answer. Sir Thomas wrote him word, that having heard
of his prudence from every ^^^^th, he gave him full liberty to choose w^a
companion he pleased, and appointed him no other governor but his own
discretion. Upon this mr. Grandison, more earnestly than before, with a modesty
and di^^^dence of himself, suited to his natural generosity of temper, which
wou^^ never permit him to grow vain and assuming upon indulgence, entreated the
doctor's directions with the greatest earnes^ness: and when they were obliged
to p^rt, they es^ablished a correspondence that la^^ed as long as their lives.

While the empty and profligate mr. Lor^mer passed through a few of the cit^es
of Lombardy, where he spent his time in dissipation, and in attending the idle
diversions of the places in which he lived; mr. Grandison made the tour of
almost the whole of Europe, and yet took sufficient time to make such remarks
upon persons, places, and things, as could scarcely be supposed the
observations of a man so young.

Dr. Bartlett, observing the idle manner in which mr. Lorimer spent his time,
was the ^^ore patient, as he hoped the carnival at Venice would be over before
his pupil got to that city. But Lo^^mer, suspecting that he intended to prevent
his being there, gave his governor the sl^p, and got thither at the very
beginning of it. The doctor was obliged to follow him; and on his arrival at
Venice, (...) the mortification to hear, that he was (...) of the most
dissolute persons there. When he saw him again, he set before him the example
of mr. Grandison, a much younger man; and endeavored to inspire him with
emulation, by reading to him some of mr. Grandison's letters. But all the
effect these had upon him, was to increase his aversion both to his governor
and to that gentleman. However, by one of these letters, he for a time obtained
some rep^^ation. It was written some months before it was shown him, and
described some places of note* through which mr. Grandison had passed. He
therefore contrived to steal it; and his father having frequently desired him
to let him see a specimen of his observations on his travels, he copied it
almost verbati^^^ and sent it a^ his own. The doctor was greatly surprised on
his rece^ving a congratulatory l^tter from his father, on his son's
improve^^^^^, mixed with some little asp^^^^y a^ the doctor's having
represe^^^^ him in a too disadvantageous (...). The (...) father observed, that
(...) never believe that a (...) of (...) genius, and he was (...) he ^^^ded
^^^^ing but to apply. He then gave orders for doubling the va^^^ of his next
remittance. Upon this ^^^or Bar^lett taking the young gen^^^^^ to task, he
owned what he had (...), and seemed greatly elated at his contrivance. His
governor, however, thought proper to undeceive the father. Mr. Lo^^mer, enraged
at doctor Bartlett for exposing him, and for his continually obstructing his
lawless pursuits, was determined to make him repent it; and becoming acquainted
with a courtezan, who by her subtle and dangerous contrivances had ruined many
young travelers, they joined in a resolu^^on, to be revenged on the doctor,
whom they considered a^ their greatest enemy. They formed several projec^^ and
one of them proved so successful, as to put his life in the greatest danger.
Great (...) had been taken with Lorim^^ (...) instruct him in the hi^^^^ies of
an^^^^ ^^ece and (...) is (...) a learned man* (...) very de^^^^ (...) those
places of anc^^^ (...) which he had read so much (...) Bartlett, with great
diffi^^^ (...) veiled on the young (...) leav^ V^nice, where the vile woman,
and the diversions of the place* had ta^^^ scandalous hold of him. He took
(...) with him to Athens, where he at (...) found that the very woman, (...)
given him such uneasiness at Venice, had followed them, and was still Lorimer's
mistress. However, upon their being guilty of some fresh enormities, he
complained of her to the tribunal of Christians, consisting of eight venerable
men out of the eight divisions of the city, who determine causes among the
Christians; when, they taking cognizance of the facts, this abandoned woman
suborned wretches to accuse the doctor to the cadi, who is the Turkish judge of
the place, (...) ^^^^flected person: and he being corr^^ted by present^^ (...)
the va^^ode o^ governor to (...) on which the doctor was ^^^zed, and thrown
into (...). His Chri^^^an fr^ends in the (...) were (...) ^^den to interpose
(...) favor. (...) ^as denied the use of pen and ink, (...) all access to him
was prohibited. After which, the vile woman, having taken proper measures with
the persons she (...) suborned for continuing ^he worthy doctor in his severe
confinement, returned with her para^^^ (...) Venice, where they aband^^^
themselves to the most dissolute manner of life.

In the mean time, mr. Beanchamp, a young man of learning and fine parts, who
had some time before made an acquaintance with mr. Grandison, visiting Athens,
was informed of the doctor's misfortune; and being told that mr. Grandison was
(...) a^ Constantinople, sent a man on purpose to inform him of the whole
affair, with all the particulars that had come to his knowledge. Mr. ^rancison,
at ^^is information, was struck with gri^f and astonishment, and immediately
applied to the English ambassador at the Port, and also the French minister
there, to whom he was known. They made application to the grand vizier; upon
which an order was issued for setting the doctor at liberty. Mr. Grandison,
with a view to hasten the Chiaux who carried it, accompanied him, and reached
Athens just as the vayvode, who had found the doctor's finances exhausted, had
determined to get r^d of the whole affair in a private manner, by the
bow-string. The danger endeared the doctor to the generous mind of mr.
Grandison: and so happy and seasonable a relief endeared mr. Grandison to the
doctor; while both of them were filled with gratitude to mr. Beauchamp, who had
busied himself in the be^^ manner he could, to suspend the fatal blow, and
would not leave Athens, ^ill he had seen the doctor delivered.

Mr. Lorimer's father, not having the least idea that his son had any concern
in the plot formed against doctor Bartlett, wrote to in^reat that gentleman,
when he had obtained his liberty to take h^s son again under his care, and the
doctor, as little thinking then, that his pupil had been capable of so base an
^nstance of villainy, returned to Venice, and got him out of the hands of the
vile woman; after which they went to Rome. But there the unhappy Lorimer
continuing his profligate courses, at length became a sacrifice to his vices.
On his death^ed, he confessed his connivance at the plots which this infamous
woman had formed against the doctor, and particularly that which she had
carried into execution at Athens. He was filled with horrors not to be
described, and as his death approached, begged for l^f^ with the greatest
earnestness, pro^^sing* on that cond^tion, the most perfect reforma^ion. The
manner of his death, an^ the cr^^es of which he confessed h^^self guilty, by
the instigation of the most aba^^oned of women, so shocked and (...) his
governor, tha^ he fell s^^k.

In the mean wh^le, ^r. Grandison vis^^ed several parts of Asia and Afri^^, and
in particular, Egypt, during which time he carried on a correspondence with dr.
Bar^lett. On his return to Italy, and joining his two friends, he engaged the
doctor to accompany mr. Beauchamp* into some of the eastern reg^ons, which he
himself had been particularly pleased with, and as he said, wanted to be more
exactly informed of: and therefore insisted on its being undertaken at his own
expense* for he knew that mr. Beauchamp had a stepmother* who had preva^led on
his father to take off two th^rds of the allowance he made him* when he set out
on his travels.

That gentleman was very unwilling to comply with the conditions imposed on him
by his beloved friend. But mr. Grandison was never at a loss for arguments to
keep those in countenance, whose interest he promoted, and to make their
acceptance of his favors appear to be both a duty and an obligation conferred
on himself. Indeed mr. Grandison delighted in doing good. Thus, while he was at
^^^horn, where he resided some time for the convenience of the English chapel,
he lent an honest ^rades^^n a considerable sum on his bond; but after a while,
things not answering the poor man's expectation, that benevolent young
gentleman took notice, that he seemed dejected, and occasionally came into his
company, with such a sense of obligation in his behavior and countenance, as
filled him with compassion. Why, said he to himself, should I keep it in my
power to distress one, whose modesty and diffidence show that he deserves to be
made easy? My life is uncertain. I may die suddenly. My executors may think it
but justice to exact payment: and that may involve the poor man in as great
difficulties as those from which this money has delivered him. I will therefore
make his heart light, and instead of suffering him to sigh over his uncertain
prospects a^ his board or in his bed, I will make both easy to him. His wife
and children shall rejoice with him; they shall see his countenance again shine
upon them, and occasionally meet mine with grateful comfort. He then cancelled
the bond; and at the same time fearing that the poor man's distress might be
deeper, than he was willing to acknowledge, offered to lend him a farther sum.
But by his behavior upon this generous offer, he found that the sum he owed,
and his doubts of being able to pay it in time, were his only grievances; for
he gratefully declined the additional offer, and from that time walked erect,
with a cheerful countenance.

CHAP. III.
An account of a noble family at Bologna. Mr. Grandison's friendship for
seignior Jeronymo, whom he in vain endeavors to reform. They quarrel; mr.
Grandison refuses to draw his sword; but afterward saves his life. The
gratitude shown by all Jero^^mo's family on this occasion.

WE are now going to enter on many interesting scenes arising from mr.
Grandison's con^^^^^ons with persons, who from henceforward will make a very
considerable figure in this history, and with whom it is necessary to render
the reader acquainted.

At the city of Bologna, and in the neighborhood of Urbino, are two branches
of a noble family, who are marquisses and counts of Porretta, and trace their
pedigree from the R^man Princes. In Bologna is the Marchese della Porretta, a
nobleman of distinguished merit, whose lady is illustrious for her descent, her
prudence, her goodness of heart, an^ sweetness of temper. They have three sons
and a daughter. The eldest of the sons is a general officer in the serv^ce of
the king of the two Sicilies, and is a man of great honor and distinguished
bravery, but being proud of his descent, is haughty and passionate.

The second, who belongs to the church, is already a bishop. The (...), who is
called Seignior Jeronymo, and sometimes the barone della Poretta, has a
regiment in the king of Sardinia's service. The sister is beloved by them all.
She has a fine person, is gentle in her manners; and has lofty, but just
notions of the honor of her sex. She is pious, beneficent and charitable.

The ingenuous and engaging mr. Grandison became intimate with Seignior
Jeronymo, while at Rome. This youth had many fine qualities. He had such a
sweetness of manners, and was so delightfully gay and lively, that every one
sought for his company: but he unhappily had a set of dissolute companions,
with whom he was very desirous of bringing mr. Grandison acquainted. That
gentleman suffered himself several times to be brought unto their company: but
as he found they were totally abandoned in their morals, he earnestly
endeavored to draw his friend from such dangerous companions, by opposing
their libertine principles; but, infatuated by a love of pleasure, he had not
the co^rage to forsake them, or to resist their attacks upon his morals.
However, mr. Grandison's friendship was so sincere, as to induce him to make
use of all his abilities to reclaim him. But finding his repeated admonitions
were (...) no purpose, he had recourse to writing and sent him a friendly and
affectionate letter, in which he represented the weakness of the arguments used
by his libertine companions; and in a forcible manner represented the motives
to virtue and honor, and the meanness which is the inseparable companion of
guilt. Let us consider, said he, the objects of your pursuit, are the women you
have seduced from the path of virtue, who would, perh^^^, have otherwise
married, and made useful members of society. What a capital crime is a
seduction of this kind! Can you glory in the virtue of your own sister, and
allow yourself to destroy the virtue of the daughter or the sister of another?
Men, in the pride of their hearts, are apt to suppose that nature has designed
them to be superior to women. The highest proof, that can be given of such
superiority, is the protection afforded by the stronger to the weaker. But what
can he say for himself and his proud pretensions, who employs all his art to
seduce, betray, and ruin her, whom he ough^ to guide and protect? -- Sedulous
to save her, perhaps, from every foe but the devil and himself! What a blessing
are good children to their parents! but what comfort can a parent have in
children born ^he heirs of disgrace; and who, owing their very being to
profligate principles, have no family honor to support, no fair example to
imitate -- but must be warned by their father, when he is convinced by bitter
experience, to shun the paths he has trodden? On the other hand, how delightful
is the domestic connection! to bring to the paternal and fraternal dwellings, a
sister, a daughter, that shall (...) received with tender love, to strengthen
your own interests by an alliance with some noble and worthy family, who shall
rejoice to trust to the barone della Porretta, the darling of their hopes. This
would, to a generous heart like yours, be the source of infinite delights. But
could you now think of introducing to the friend you revere, the unhappy object
of a vagrant affection? Must not my Jeronymo estrange himself from his home, to
conceal from his father, from his mother, from his sister, persons shut out
from their society, by all the laws of honor? Justly do you boast of the
nobility of your descent, of the excellence of every branch of your family.
Bear with my question, my lord -- are you determined to sit down with the
honor of your ancestors? Your progenitors, and every one of your own family,
have given you reason to applaud their worth; will you not give them cause to
boast of yours? You have showed me letters from your noble father, from your
mother, from the pio^s prelate your brother, and still, if possible, more
admirable ones from your sister, all filled with concern for your present and
fu^ure welfare. How dearly is my Jeronymo beloved by his whole family; and how
tenderly does he love them! What ought to be the result? Jeronymo cannot be
ungrateful. He knows so well what belongs to the character of a dutiful son and
affectionate brother, that I need not attempt to enforce their arguments.

The Barone had a high spirit, and could not bear to be opposed i^ any pursuit,
in which his passions we^^ engaged: hence he was displeased at the generous
freedom of this letter: and mr. Grandison soon became less solicitous to
cultivate a friendship with a person, who, where his morals were concerned,
could not bear the most friendly admonitions. They, therefore, separated, and
during their absence dropped all correspondence with each other. The Barone,
however, being sometime after involved by his libertine companions in great
difficulties, broke his connexions with them, and afterward accidentally
meeting mr. Grandison at Padua, their friendship was again renewed, at the
earnest desire of Jeronymo. That youth thought himself reformed, and mr.
Grandison flattered himself that his reformation was real; but in a little time
he met with a temptation, which he had not the resolution to resist. This was
from a lady more famed for her birth, her beauty and fortune, than for her
prudence and virtue. Before Jeronymo became acquainted with her, she had spread
her snares for mr. Grandison, and being exasperated at his slighting the
advances she had made him, she hoped now to find an opportunity of being
revenged.

Mr. Grandison being deeply concerned at the infatuation of his friend, thought
himself under an obligation, both from honor and conscience, to endeavor by
writing him another let^er, to recall him to the paths of virtue. He in the
gentlest and most friendly terms censured his conduct, and strove to put him on
his guard, by informing him his life was in danger from two men of violent
tempers, who, unknown to each other, considered this lady as their own.
Jeronymo was so ^^^eak as to let her see the contents of this letter: he even
resolved to vindicate her honor, and, prompted by this revengeful woman,
defied, and challenged his friend. Mr. Grandison, with a noble disdain,
refusing to draw his sword, appealed to Jeronymo's cool reflections. High words
arose between them. Jeronymo even called him a coward: but mr. Grandison, after
a violent struggle with himself, mastered his temper, and defying the unjust
censures of the world, told him, that he would never meet as a foe, the man he
had ever desired to consider as his friend. If ever we meet again, I assure
you, ^e added, it must be by accident; and then it will be time enough to
dispute respecting the occasion of this misunderstanding. Indeed, the next
meeting was unsought for, Jeronymo rashly pursuing the adventure, which had
occasioned this misunderstanding, one of the lady's admirers hired several
B^esc^an bravoes to assassinate him. They made their attempt in the Cremonese,
where they fell upon him, in a thicket, at a distance from the road.

Happily Mr. Grandison was passing by, attended by two servants, when a
frighted horse, with his bridle broke and his saddle bloody, ran across the
way. Mr. Grandison, imagining that some mischief had befallen the rider, drove
down the opening from which the horse came, and soon beheld a man struggling on
the ground with two ruffians, one stopping his mouth, and the other stabbing
him. Mr. Grandison then jumped out of the post-chaise, drew his sword, and ran
toward them as fast as he was able, calling to his servants to follow him. On
this the villains fled, when he heard one of them say, let us make off, we have
done his business. Shocked at the villainy of these assassins, he pursued and
came up with one of them, who turning upon him, he beat down the fellow's
blunder^uss a^ the instant ^e presented it at him, then wounded and threw him
on the ground. But observing the other ruffian turning back to help his
companion, and two others suddenly appearing with their horses, he thought it
more prudent to make his retreat, though he was very desirous of securing one
of them. His servants, at the same instant, seeing his danger, hasted shouting
toward him, when the bravoes, perhaps, imagining there were more still behind,
seemed as glad to escape with their rescued companion, as he was to leave them.
Mr. Grandison then hasted to the unhappy man. But how great was his
astonishment, when he found him (...) Jeronymo, who had been pursuing his amor
in disguise!

As he gave signs of life, mr. Grandison immediately sent one of his servants
to Cremona for a surgeon: and in the mean while bound up two of his wounds, one
in his breast, and the other in his shoulder but he had another in his hip,
which his young deliverer found beyond his skill (...) manage. He however
strove to stop the blood with his handkerchief; and having lifted him into his
chaise, stepped in with him, and held him up in it, till he was told by one of
his men, that in another part of the thicket, he had found the barone della
Porretta's servant bound and wounded, and near him his horse lying dead. At
this mr. Grandison stepped out, and finding the poor fellow faint with his
wounds, and unable to stand, put him into the chaise; then walked by its side,
and in this manner moved slowly toward Cremona, in order to shorten the way of
the expected surgeon, who soon met them.

The po^^ chaise was stopped, when the surgeon entering it, found that the
Barone had fainted away. But he dressed his wounds, and proceeded with him to
Cremona, where opening his eyes, he beheld and knew mr. Grandison; and being
informed by the surgeon, that he owed his life to him, O Grandison, said he,
that I had followed your advice! -- that I had kept my promise with you! -- How
did I insult you! -- Can my generous deliverer forgive me? If it please God to
restore me, you shall be the guide of my future life.

Mr. Grandison stayed with him till he was fit to be removed from Cremona,
where he was visited by the whole family. Never was there a family more
affectionate to each other; for the suffering of one was the suffering of all.
The Barone was extremely beloved by his father, mother, and sister, for his
affectionate heart, and the engaging sweetness of his manners. It is therefore
easy to conceive how acceptable to the whole family was the important service
which mr. Grandison was so happy as to render their Jeronymo. Th^^ all joined
in blessing him, which they repeated with double ardour when they knew, that he
was the person whom their Jeronymo, during their intimacy, had warmly extolled
in his letters to both his brothers, and to his sister; and who now told them
the occasion of their quarrel, with circumstances as much to mr. Grandison's
honor, as they were disgraceful to himself. While his generous friend attended
him by his bed's side, he frequently called for a repetition of those
arguments, which he had before joined with his pretended friends in der^ding.
He begged him to forgive his having treated them with levity, and him with the
greatest disrespect; and entreated his family to consider his generous friend,
not only as the preserver of his life, but as the restorer of his morals. Hence
the whole family entertained the highest idea of mr. Grandison's exalted virtue
and friendship; and to strengthen their good opinion, the noble youth showed
them the letters his friend had wrote, with the hopes of enforcing, his
temporary convictions, and ^^rawing him from the shameful pursuits, in which
(...) was unhappily engaged. The whole family were inspired with the utmost
gratitude. The father was uneasy from his not knowing how to acknowledge,
according to the largeness of his heart, to a man in genteel circumstances, the
obligations under which he had laid them. The mother, with an amiable freedom,
which the Italian ladies are accustomed to express, desired her Clementi^^ to
consider, as her fourth brother, the preserver of the third: and the Barone
observed, that he should never rest, till his dear Grandison was rewarded in
the manner he deserved.

CHAP. IV.
The count of Belvedere falls in love with Clementina, whom mr. Grandison
admires, yet is desired to talk to her in that nobleman's favor. That lady is
suspected to be in love with mr. Grandison, who leaves Italy. Her strange
behavior during his absence, and her love for mr. Grandison.

THE Barone was no longer removed (...) Bologna, than the whole family appeared
studious to get mr. Grandison among them. The general made him promise, when
his relations, as he termed them, at Bologna, could part with him, to favor
them with his company at Naples.

In such company mr. Grandison could not fail of passing his time very
agreeably. He was particularly honored with the confidence of the marchioness,
who opened her heart to him on every material occurrence that presented itself.
Her lord, who is distinguished by his politeness, was never better pleased than
when he found them together: and frequently, though they were not engaged in
lectures, the lovely Clementina claimed a right to be present with her mother.

Things were in this situation, when the young count of Belvedere, who had
received his education in Spain, returned to Parma; and paying a visit to this
noble family, saw and loved Clementina. As the count was not only a man of
sense, but had a handsome person, and a great fortune; they all thought that
his alliance was very desirable. The marquis highly approved of it, and the
marchioness had several conversations with mr. Grandison on this subject. She
thought it necessary to know his thoughts on the occasion, as the barone,
unknown to him, had frequently declared, that he thought there was no other way
of rewarding his merit, than by giving him a relation to the family. In the
mean time, mr. Grandison, thus distinguished by all the persons of this noble
house, and a daily witness of the innumerable excellencies of the lovely
Clementina, found it impossible not to suffer his vanity to be sometimes
awakened, and to stifle his wishes of obtaining such a prize. But he
endeavored to check the pleasing idea, the moment he found it play about his
heart; for he would have thought any attempt to recommend himself to the young
lady's favor, though only by his looks and assiduities, a breach of that
generous trust and confidence which they all reposed in him.

Mr. Grandison now formed the resolution of retiring from Italy, and visiting
some of the German courts. This he communicated to the Marchioness, who
expressed her concern at the thoughts of his leaving them, and prevailed on him
to defer his departure for some time; but hinted her and her lord's
apprehensions of his being in love with Clementina. He convinced her, that he
had behaved with the utmost honor in this particular: and ^he so fully
satisfied the marquis, that on their daughter's absolutely refusing the count
of Belvedere, they de^ired him to talk to her in favor of that nobleman. The
young lady and mr. Grandison had a conference on this subject, while the
marquis and marchioness, unknown to either of them, had placed themselves to
listen to their discourse in a closet adjoining to the room, and which
communicated to another room, as well as to that they were in. However, they
had not the least reason to be displeased with their conversation.

The time of mr. Grandison's departure now drawing near, and the young lady
repeatedly refusing the count of Belvedere, the barone, unknown to his friend,
declared in his favor. His relations objected difficulties with respect to his
religion and his country; on which he desired they would permit his talking to
him on those subjects, and discoursing with his sister on her motives for
refusing the count of Belvedere; but this they would not allow. The Marchioness
herself undertook to talk to her daughter, and to demand of her, her reasons
for disliking all the proposals that had been made her; but on her closetting
the lovely Clementina, nothing was to be had from her but tears. A silence,
that had not the least appearance of fullenness, had for some days, shown, that
a deep melancholy had begun to take possession of her mind; and yet she
appeared extremely offended at their attributing it to love. However, her
mother informed mr. Grandison, that she could not help suspecting, that,
unknown to herself, she was under the dominion of that passion, from her never
appearing cheerful, but when taking lessons for learning a language that was
never likely to be of the least service to her. Her melancholy still
increasing, he was desired to talk with her. He did so, and it was observed,
that she generally assumed a cheerful air, while he was present; and though she
said little, appeared pleased with every thing he said to her; but the moment
he left her, she studied to find opportunities of being alone. Her parents, who
were in the deepest affliction, consulted physicians, who all declared, that
she was in love. She was taxed with it, and the utmost indulgence promised her,
with respect to the object of her affection, that she could wish; but still she
could not bear the imputation with patience.

On the evening before the day appointed for mr. Grandison's departure, this
noble family made a splendid entertainment in honor of a guest, who had laid
them under such extraordinary obligations. For they had the more readily
brought themselves to approve of his leaving them, from their desire to know
how it would affect Clementina. That lady appeared at table, and during the
whole evening, supported her part of the conversation with extraordinary
vivacity; and yet there appeared nothing in her looks or behavior, that seemed
the least affected. When they thanked him for the pleasure he gave the whole
family, she joined her acknowledgments; and when they expressed their wishes to
see him again before he returned to England, she did the same. Mr. Grandison's
heart was dilated, and he was overjoyed at seeing such a happy alteration. When
he took leave of them, she stood forward to receive his compliments. He offered
to press her hand with his lips, but presenting her cheek to him, my brother's
deliverer, said she, m^st not affect this distance; adding, God preserve my
tutor wherever he goes. May you never want such an agreeable friend as you
have been to us! And, in English, God convert you, Chevalier!

As the barone was not able to be with them, his friend went to take his leave
of him, when, throwing his arms about him, he cried, O my Grandison! will you
go? -- Blessings attend you! But what will become of a brother and sister, when
they have lost you? She must, she shall be yours. Why will you leave us? Mr.
Grandison was surprised; for he had never before been so particular, and
answered, it could not be, for there were a thousand obstacles. -- All of
which, returned the barone, that depend on us, I don't doubt I shall overcome.
They then settled a method of carrying on their correspondence, and parted.

The next morning mr. Grandison set out for Inspruck, but on his arrival at
that city, was deeply afflicted at receiving a letter, by which he was
informed, that Clementina's cheerful and lively behavior had lasted no longer
than the next day, and that her malady had returned with double force. She shut
herself up in her chamber without seeming to know that her woman was in it, or
making any answers to the questions she asked her; but setting her chair with
its back toward her over against a closet, after a deep silence, leaned
forward, and in a low voice, seemed talking to a person in the closet, crying,
you say he is actually gone? Gone for ever? No, not for ever! Who, madam? said
the woman. To whom, pray, do you direct your discourse? -- We were all
doubtless obliged to him, resumed she; so bravely to rescue my brother, and to
pursue the bravoes, and, as my brother says, to put him in his own chaise, and
walk on foot by its side. -- Why, as you say, the assassins might have murdered
him, or the horses might have trampled him under their feet. Her women then
stepped into the closet, and in order to turn the course of her ideas, opened
the door, and left it open, to try if that would divert her attention from the
place; but she still talked calmly, as if to some body in it, then bursting
into a faint laugh, she cried, in love I that i^ such a silly whim, and yet I
love every body better than myself. At this instant the marchioness entering
the room, Clementina ro^^ in haste, and shutting the closet-door, as if
somebody had been hid there, threw herself at her feet, crying, my dear mamma,
forgive me for all the trouble I have caused you. But I will, I ^ust be God's
child, as well as yours. I will retire into a convent.

Every thing that medicine could do, was now tried. But her confessor, though
an honest and worthy man, had filled her mind with fears and terrors. He
observed the favor mr. Grandison was in with the whole family, and dreading
lest his influence might have such an effect, as to withdraw this lady from the
bosom of the church, had raised such a conflict in her heart, between her
piety, which was ardent and sincere, and her gratitude and sensibility, as her
tender frame was unable to bear.

In the city of Florence is a family of distinguished rank and honor, the
ladies of which have a female friend who lives with them, named Beaumont, who
in the early part of life, was defrauded of her fortune by an uncle. She is an
English protestant, and is greatly esteemed for her genius, and the goodness of
her heart. These ladies with this their companion, were one day visiting at
marchese della Porretta's, when the distressed mother told them the mournful
tale; and they thinking nothing that could be effected by human prudence
impossible to mrs. Beaumont, desired that the young lady might be entrusted to
her care at their house in Florence. To this they immediately agreed, and they
took her with them. Mrs. Beaumont soon engaged the unhappy Clementina's
affections, and by her very artful management, found means to prevail on her to
reveal the cause of her melancholy, and that it arose from her regard for mr.
Grandison. Her hopes that his absence would restore her tranquillity, had made
her behave with such steadiness at his departure; but she was not able to
maintain so great a part; yet she professed, that she would never marry one who
by his religion was an enemy to the faith, in which she had never wavered; and
which, she observed, she would never change, were an earthly (...) to be placed
on the head of th^^ ^an she loved, to be the reward.

Upon this, mrs. Beaumont wrote an affecting letter to the marchioness, in
which she gave her a particular account of this conversation: and that lady, in
return, sent her an answer, filled with the warmest expressions of gratitude,
enclosing in it a letter to her daughter, wherein she endeavored to give her
all the consolation possible, inviting her and her amiable friend to Bologna,
and promising, in the name of her father and brothers, a most indulgent
welcome, with the gratification of all her wishes. The lady Clementina became
much easier and more composed, on receiving these assurances; and returned to
Bologna, with a more serene and settled min^ than she enjoyed at her leaving
that city.

CHAP. V.
The whole family being informed of Clementina's passion, send for mr.
Grandison. His reception at his return.

THE whole family were desired to assemble upon this occasion, when, by common
consent, it was agreed, that mr. Grandison should be sent for. That gentleman
was then at (...): and Jeronymo, in his letter, congratulated him on his having
it now in his power to reward him; hinting in general that the conditions would
be such as he could not fail of thinking highly to his advantage. This news
greatly affected mr. Grandison; for, from his knowledge of the lady and the
whole family, he was afraid the articles of residence and religion would not be
easily compromised; on which account he summoned up all his prudence to keep
alive his fears and suspend every flattering hope.

He instantly returned to Bologna, where, on his arrival, he was received with
all the marks of friendship and esteem by the marquis and the bishop. The
barone, who still kept his chamber, embracing him, said, now is the affair I
have so long had in view, determined. O chevalier, you will be a happy man.
Clementina will be yours, and you will be Clementina's. Now do I indeed embrace
my brother -- But I will not detain you; haste to the happy girl, who is with her
mother; and both are ready to welcome you. Mr. Grandison was then conducted
into the marchioness's drawing room, where he found that lady richly dressed,
with the lovely Clementina also elegantly dressed, and standing by her chair;
while her natural modesty, heightened by a glowing consciousness that seemed to
arise from the occasion, gave her advantages superior to her richest jewels.
The marchioness behaved to him with great tenderness and respect, apologized
for her daughter's silence and confusion; and on her returning, congratulated
him on the happiness intended him, observing that she would leave particular
subjects to be discoursed of between the bishop and him, adding that as much
should be done for Clementina, as if she had married the man they wished her to
have, when they imagined her affections entirely disengaged. Mr. Grandison
applauded her goodness, and she added, that she did not doubt of his ^oving
Clementina more than any other lady. He returned, that ^he had never seen one
he could have loved with such tenderness, had he not put a restraint upon
himself, from the high notions they entertained of their rank and quality, from
the difference of religion; and from the confidence the family reposed in him.
He therefore assured the marchioness, that not having presumed to encourage
hopes of the happiness that now seemed to await him, he could hardly yet
flatter himself that he should enjoy such felicity. She answered, that he
deserved it all. He knew the value they had for him. Clementina's regard was
founded on virtue: and she did not doubt, but all that depended on him would,
as well from generosity as gratitude, be complied with. The marquis, who
entered soon after, behaved with the same indulgence, letting him know, that
his son the bishop, would discourse with him upon terms. A great fortune,
besides a noble estate bequeathed her by her two grandfathers, was proposed,
and his father was to be invited over to grace their nuptials.

The bishop at last made the dreaded proposals, with which, neither (...)
conscience, nor his love for his country would suffer him to comply. He was to
make a formal renunciation of his religion, and to settle in Italy, and only be
allowed once in two or three years to go to England, if he pleased, for two or
three months; and, if their daughter should desire it, she might, once in her
life, be carried thither on a visit of curiosity, and stay there the time they
should limit. The bishop, who was amazed at his scruples, in va^^ endeavored
to convince him of what he called his errors; for he could not change his
religion without conviction. He even reproached him with obstinacy,
ingratitude, and cruelty. The general, who was now at Bologna, raved,
threatened, and treated him with contempt, while the marquis began to consider
him as unworthy of the honor designed him. In what distress was mr. Grandison
involved, in being thus obliged to deny himself the dearest wish of his heart,
and to disappoint the warm expectations of those who had a sincere value for
him! But when his dear Jeronymo entreated his compliance -- when the tender
mother entreated him to have pity on her heart, and her poor child's head --
and when the gentle, the lovely Clementina urged him for his soul's sake, to
embrace the doctrines of her holy mother the church, how was his mind torn by
the contending passions, which tortured his breast? But he was fully satisfied
with his own faith, and had insuperable objections to that which they desired
him to embrace; and, if he complied, his conscience and his country were to be
the sacrifice. Yet he studied for a compromise. Clementina was very dear to
him, and he then beheld graces in her, which he had hitherto struggled to
behold with indifference. He proposed to live one year in Italy, and one in
England by turns, if their dear Clementina would consent to live with him
there; if not, he proposed to pass only three months in every year in his
native country. He offered to leave her entirely at her liberty in the article
of religion; and, in case of children by the marriage, the daughters to be
educated by her, and the sons by him; a condition, to which the pope himself,
it was presumed, would not refuse his sanction. To this, the unhappy Clementina
would have consented, and earnestly endeavored to procure the consent of her
friends. But no arguments could prevail on them to allow their daughter to
marry a protestant. This determination was followed by the most distressful
scenes; the mother, indeed, seemed in a manner neutral; and the barone remained
still firm in mr. Grandison's interest; but the marquis, the general, the
bishop, and the whole Urbino branch of the family, were immovable. The general
treated him even with an insolent arrogance; and imagining that mr. Grandison
had used some art to engage his sister's affections, pretended to have a right
to call him to account for it. But notwithstanding mr. Grandison's being deeply
distressed, he answered the general's passionate speeches with spirit; but let
him know, that nothing should make him attempt the life of the brother of his
friend. The rigor of their behavior was now extended even to the unhappy
Clementina: and mr. Grandison in vain recommended their treating her with
indulgence. He was desired to depart from Bologna; and Clementina was not
permitted to see him, though she begged on her knees to have a parting
interview. At hearing of his being gone, her grief moved every one to pity, and
this subsided into fits, the deepest melancholy and silence.

CHAP. VI.
Mr. Grandison saves mr. Danby's life. The manner in which sir Thomas Grandison
lived while his son was on his travels.

MR. Grandison no sooner left Italy than he proceeded to Paris, to wait there
for orders from his father, to return to his native country. While he was in
France, he paid a visit to mr. Danby, an eminent merchant of great integrity,
to whom his father remitted money for his use. With this gentleman, he had been
before acquainted: and having now spent two days with him in the city, he
accompanied him to a little lone house in the Cambresis, which that gentleman
used to term his dormitory. Mr. Grandison had only one servant with him, who
lay in a little room over the stable, with a man servant of mr. Danby's, there
being conveniences in the house only for mr. Danby, a friend and two women
servants. About midnight, mr. Grandison was alarmed by hearing a noise at the
window of mr. Danby's room, when, instantly slipping on his clothes, and
drawing his sword, he ran thither, just as a villain with a large knife in his
hand, had seized mr. Danby's throat, who till then was sound asleep. The skin
of his neck, and one of his hands, which he had lifted up to defend himself,
were slightly wounded, when Mr. Grandison run the ruffian into the shoulder
with his sword; and at the same moment threw him with violence from the bed
against the door; on which he roared out, that he was a dead man. By that time,
a second fellow, who had got up to the window, was half in, when, calling to a
third below, to haste up after him, mr. Grandison ran to the second fellow, who
then fired a pistol, but happily missed him; and feeling the point of the sword
in his arm, threw himself, with a little of mr. Grandison's help, upon the
third ruffian, who was mounting the ladder, and knocked him off; after which
both made their escape. Mean while the assassin within had fainted away, and
the two maids let in mr. Grandison's and mr. Danby's servants, who had been
alarmed by the screams of the women from their window, and the report of the
pistol. The two footmen, having, by Mr. Grandison's order, bound up the
ruffian's shoulder, and carried him into the hall, he came to himself and
offered to make a full confession; and being carried before a magistrate, laid
open the whole villainy.

Mr. Danby had a brother of very abandoned principles, to whom he had
frequently given large sums, which he had squandered away in his debaucheries.
He had also settled a thousand guineas on each of the children of his brother,
who had the folly and impudence to make a demand of the same sum, pleading that
he had as much right to it as they; and enraged at his meeting with a refusal,
formed a design to get possession of his whole fortune. For, mr. Danby being a
bachelor, and being known to have an aversion to the thoughts of making his
will, this wretch had hired these ruffians to murder him; and that the fact
might have the appearance of being done by robbers, the house was to have been
plundered, as soon as the horrid fact was perpetrated. The villains were each
to receive a thousand crowns on this unnatural monster's getting possession of
his brother's fortune; and they had fifty crowns a-piece (...) them in hand.
Their base employ or w^^^ed the event at Calais; and being (...) informed of
what had happiness* passed over to Dover.

During the time that mr. Grandison was sacrificing the dearest wishes of his
heart to his religion, and his love of his country, and was exposed to dangers
that called forth all his courage, his father was indulging his love of
pleasure. He placed over his daughters as governess, the widow of one of his
companions, named Oldham, whose fortune had not held out as sir Thomas's had
done. This lady had fine qualities, was well descended, handsome, and an
economist: But she soon became so unhappily sensible of sir Thomas's favors
and presents, that in a little more than a twelvemonth, she was obliged to
come up to town, where she lay in. The eldest of the young ladies being at that
time about nineteen, and the^ youngest sixteen years old, they had such spirit
as to oppose this lady's return to her office; and undertook to manage every
thing themselves at their capital feat in Hampshire. But sir Thomas having
another seat in Essex, carried mrs. Oldham thither; and for some time every
body apprehended that they were married. Sir Thomas was highly displeased at
his daughters for opposing the return of their governess. And he had another
mistress in town, who had a taste for all its gaieties.

The young ladies were now treated with great severity by sir Thomas: and his
son had not been long abroad, when they were forbid to correspond with him,
lest his ^^llies should be the subject of their correspondence: and he also
ordered their brother not to write to them. This prohibition gave these ladies
the most sensible concern, as they dreaded its laying a foundation for their
being treated with indifference by their brother, on whom, as their mother had
foretold, they were likely, if he survived their father, to have too great a
dependence. But though sir Thomas showed not the least tenderness for his
daughters, he, in all companies gloried in his son, who he observed, was all
that was dutiful, brave, worthy and pious; alleging to his intimate friends,
that the reason of his permitting his being so long absent, was, that his son's
morals and his own were so different, that he should be ashamed of his
superiority; but, that he intended to alter his course of life, and then he
would send for him. In the mean while, mrs. Farnboro^gh, the woman he lived
with, when in town, being seized with the smallpox, died; on which sir Thomas
was so much affected, that he left the town; and in pursuance of his temporary
good resolutions, lived with his daughters, and talked of ^ending for his son;
and for some months behaved like a man of sense and understanding.

About the time of mrs. Farnbo^^ough's being taken ill, Lord L -- returning
from his travels, brought sir Thomas some presents from his son, who took all
opportunities to send him curiosities, some of which were of confiderable
value, and served to show both his duty and economy. Sir Thomas appeared fond
of lord L. and on his retiring to Grandison Hall, after mrs. Farnborough's
death, gave him an invitation to visit him there. Hence that nobleman attended
him at the hall, where he fell in love with the eldest of the young ladies, to
whom he revealed his passion. She referred herself wholly to her father: but
though this match would have been highly to her advantage, sir Thomas
absolutely refused his consent.

At length, sir Thomas resolved to regulate his affairs, preparatory to the
leave he intended to give his son to return home. But he knew not what to do
with mrs. Oldham, and two children he had by her. He made no doubt of his son's
having heard of his guilty commerce with her: but he did not choose that he
should find her living with him as a mistress, in one of the family seats. He
was also unwilling ^o use her unhandsomely, and thought himself obliged to
provide for the children he had by her.

While he was thus contriving how to make the best appearance before his son,
whose character for virtue and prudence, made him half afraid of him, he
received a proposal of marriage for the young gentleman from one of the first
men in the kingdom, whose daughter accompanying her brother and his lady in a
tour to France and Italy, fell in love with mr. Grandison at Florence. Sir
Thomas had several meetings on this subject, both with the brother and the
earl, his father, and was so fond of bringing it to bear, that he had thoughts
of reserving to himself an annuity, and, in favor of this match, making over
the whole estate to his son; and actually sent him this proposal. But mr.
Grandison in his answer, observed, that if this arose from his generosity,
affection, and indulgence, he had so often experienced, he could not ^ear it;
but if it proceeded from proposals made to him, God forbid; said he, that I
should give your name to a woman, however illustrious in her descent, and
however wealthy, whose friends could offer such conditions to my father. On
this answer, sir Thomas resolved to suspend the treaty of marriage till his
son's arrival.

While sir Thomas was planning future schemes of life, and had actually begun
to treat with mrs. Oldham, who, desiring to reform her conduct, agreed to
ret^re at the first word; he was seized with a violent fever, which, in three
days, deprived him of the use of his reason. He was at this time with mrs.
Oldham at his seat in Essex: and the physician^ soon giving her no hopes of his
recovery, she wrote to acquaint the two ladies with his danger, who, a few days
after, dispatched a letter to their brother, who was waiting at Paris,
expecting to receive permission from his father to return home. On the eleventh
day of his illness, sir Thomas coming a little to himself, knew his daughters,
and wept over them. He then wished he had been kinder to them. He was sensible
of his danger, and several times lifted up his feeble hands and dying eyes,
repeating, God is just. I have been very wicked! -- Repentance! repentance! how
hard a task! and mrs. Oldham entering the room, Oh mrs. Oldham, what is the
world now? What would I give -- But repent! repent! repent! Put your good
resolutions in practice, le^t I have more souls to answer for than my own. Soon
after, his delirium returned, and he expired.

CHAP. VII.
Sir Charles returns to England. His engaging behavior to his sisters, and to
mrs. Oldham.

THE affairs of the family were in this situation when Sir Charles arrived. He
returned no answer to his sister's letters, but instantly set out for Calais,
embarked, and the same day in which he landed, arrived at his late father's
house in St. James's square. How awful to the sisters, after an absence of
eight or nine years, must be the first appearance of a brother, on whom their
fortunes entirely depended, and to whom they had been accused by their father,
now so lately departed, of want of duty! He alighted from his post-chaise at
the door, and his two sisters met him in the hall. They remembered the graceful
youth of seventeen, who ^ad left them, with his fine curling auburn locks
waving on his shoulders, intelligence sparkling in his fine eyes, and his
lively features sweetened by good humor; and, forgetting the womanly beauties
into which their own features were ripened, seemed not to expect that manly
stature and air, and that equal vivacity and intrepidity, with a noble
countenance, that then appeared more than usually solemn, from his having in
his thoughts an unburied and beloved father. O my brother! said Caroline,
meeting him with open arms, but shrinking from his embrace, may I say my
brother? and was just fainting. He clasped her, and supported her in his arms,
Charlotte, the youngest, affected at his prefence, and surprised at her
sister's emotion, ran back into the room they had left, and threw herself upon
a settee. Her brother followed her, soothing miss Caroline, with his arm round
her waist, and with eyes of expectation, cried, my Charlotte! holding out his
inviting hand, and hasting toward the settee. She then found her feet, and
throwing her arms about his neck, he folded both of his sisters to his bosom,
crying, receive, my dearest sisters, receive your brother, your friend. Assure
yourselves of my unabated love. That assurance, they cried, was balm to their
hearts; and when each was seated, he sitting over against them, looked first at
one, then on the other; and taking each by the hand, charming women! said he,
how I admire my sisters! I don't doubt, that you have minds answerable to your
persons. What pleasure, what pride shall I take in my sisters! My dear
Charlotte! said miss Caroline, taking her sister's other hand, has not our
brother all the brother in his face? His goodness only looks stronger and more
perfect. What was I afraid of? My heart also sunk; I knew not why, said
Charlotte. But we feared -- indeed, sir, we both feared -- O my brother! tears
trickling down the cheeks of each -- We did not mean to be undutiful -- Love
your brother, my dear sisters, he returned, as he will endeavor to deserve
your love: my mother's daughters could not be undutiful -- mistake only! --
unhappy misapprehension! He then pressed the hands of each with his lips,
arose, went to the window, and wiped his eyes -- Then turning toward them,
added, permit me, my dear sisters, to retire for a moment, my father demands
this tribute. They waited on him to his apartment with silent respect. No
ceremony, I hope, my Caroline, my Charlotte, he resumed, we were true sisters
and brother a few years ago: see your Charles as you saw him then; and don't
let absence, which has increased my love, lessen yours. Each sister then took a
hand, and would have kissed it. But he clasped his arms about them both, and
saluted them. He cast his eyes on his father's and mother's pictures, with some
emotion; then on them, and again saluting each of them, they withdrew with
tears of joy trickling down their cheeks.

Sir Charles in half an hour rejoined them in another dress, and again saluted
them with an air of tenderness that banished fear, and left room for nothing
but love. Soon after their cousin Grandison came in: and after the first
compliments, the ladies retiring, that gentleman touched upon the circumstances
of sir Thomas's illness, and death; inveighing against mrs. Oldham, telling sir
Charles what they had done, and exclaiming against her for the state she had
lived in, and her unwillingness to resign the care of sir Thomas, in his
illness, to his daughters. He then asked sir Charles, if he was not pleased
with what they had done as to that vile woman? But he only observed, that he
believed every thing was designed for the best. Mr. Grandison then ridiculed
her grief and mortification at being obliged to leave the house, where she had
so long reigned lady paramount. Sir Charles asked, if they had found a will?
And was answered, that they looked in every probable place* but found none. I
intend, said sir Charles, to inter the venerable remains with those of my
mother, which I know was his desire. An elegant, but not sumptuous monument
shall be erected to the memory of both, with a modest inscription, that shall
be rather a matter of instruction to the living than a panegyric on the
deceased. The funeral shall be decent, but not ostentatious: and the difference
of the expense shall be privately applied to assist distressed housekeepers, or
some of my father's poor tenants, who have large families, and have
endeavored, by their industry, to maintain them. And this was ^^^n after
carried into execution.

The solemnity was no sooner over, than sir Charles, leaving every thing as he
found it, at Grandison-hall, came to town, and in the presence of his sisters,
broke the seals they had affixed to the cabinets and escrutores in the house
there; and having made memorandums of the contents of many papers, went with
his sisters to the house in Essex, and when there, told them it was necessary
for Mrs. Oldham, who had lodgings at a farmhouse in the neighborhood, to be
present at breaking the seals, as she had affixed here is; and accordingly sent
for her. She came with fear and trembling, when sir Charles, not expecting her
so soon, was in his stable, with the groom and coachman, looking at his horses,
which were some of the finest hunters and racers in England. She was shown, by
mistake, into the room where the two ladies were; and at seeing them was in
great confusion, wept, curte^ied; and, on miss Caroline's blaming her maid for
bringing her to them, begged pardon, and was withdrawing, but stopped on that
lady's saying, my brother, not we, sent for you, I assure you, madam. He says,
it is necessary, as you thought fit to put your seal with ours, that you should
be present at the breaking them. Prepare yourself to see him: You seem mighty
unfit -- no wonder! Indeed I am unfit, very unfit, said the poor woman: Let me,
ladies, bespeak your generosity; a little of your pity; a little of your
countenance; I am indeed an unhappy woman! And so you deserve to be, said Miss
Caroline. I am sure we are the sufferers. And so you have put yourself into
mourning, madam! Pretty deep too! Indeed ladies, said mrs. Oldham, I am a real
mourner. Here, ladies, are the keys of the stores, of the confectionary, and of
the wine-vault. I thought it best ^o keep them, till I could deliver them to
your or sir Charles's order. I have not, ladies, been a bad manager, considered
as a housekeeper; all I have in the world is under the seals. I am yours and
your (...) You Will soon know, madam, said miss Charlotte, what you have to trust
to from him.

Sir Charles entered, and saw her standing pale and trembling near the door. He
bowed to her. Mrs. Oldham, I presume, said he -- pray, madam, be seated: I sent
to you, that you might see the seals broken -- pray, madam, sit down, added he,
taking her hand, and leading her to a chair not far distant from his sisters,
and then sitting in one between them and her. Pray, madam, compose yourself,
added he, with pity in his eyes; and and then turned to his sisters, to allow
her time to recover herself. She was relieved by a flood of tears, and tried to
suppress her audible sobs, which he would not seem to hear. Her emotions then
attracting the e^es of his sisters, he took them off by asking them something
about a picture that hung on the other side of the room. Then drawing his chair
nearer to the unhappy woman, and again taking her trembling hand, said, I am
not a stranger, mrs. Oldham, to your melancholy story. Don't be discomposed.
See in me a friend ready to thank you for art your past good offices, and to
forget all mistaken ones. This was more than she could bear; she threw herself
at his feet, when raising her to her chair, he added, poor mr. Oldham was
unhappily careless, yet I have been told he loved you, and that you merited his
love. Your misfortunes threw you into the knowledge of our family. You have
been a faithful manager of the affairs of this house. By written evidences I
can justify you: evidences that I am sure none here will dispute. Mr.
Grandison, who is a good natured man, but a li^le hasty, has told me, that he
treated you with unkindness. He thought you wrong for insisting to put your
seal; but he was mistaken, you did right. O brother! O brother! said both the
ladies at once, half in admiration, though half vexed. Bear with me, my
sisters, said he, we have all something to be forgiven for. They knew not but
they might be concerned in the admonition from what their father had written of
them. He then mentioned chocolate being brought in, and being desirous of
relieving mrs. Oldham by some little employment, desired her to be so obliging
to see it made.

She had no sooner left the room, than, addressing himself to the ladies, my
dear sisters, said he, let me, on this occasion, desire you to think favorably
of me. I don't consider this poor woman on the foot of her own merits with
respect to us: The memory of our father is concerned. She is entitled to
justice, for its own sake; to generosity, for ours; to kindness, for my
father's. In several of his letters to me, he praises mrs. Oldham's economy;
and he had a right to do what he would with his own fortune. It was not ours
till now. Whatever he has left us, he might have lessened. The economy is all
that concerns us in the point of interest, and that is in her favor. He might
have given mrs. Oldham a title to a name that would have commanded our respect,
if not our reverence. You have enlarged minds; and are the daughters of the
most charitable, the most forgiving of women; and I was willing to judge of her
behavior, before I recommended her to your humanity. Is she not humbled
enough? From my soul, I pity her. She loved my father, and I don't doubt mourns
for him in secret; yet does not dare to plead her love. I would now consider
her only as one who has executed a principal office in this house; and it will
become us to behave to her in such a manner, as to make the world think we
consider her only in that light.

When they had drank chocolate, he told mrs. Oldham, he was ready to attend
her, and desired his sisters to give them their company. On their coming to the
chamber in which sir Thomas died, mrs. Oldham turned ^ale, and begged to wait
in the adjoining drawing room. Poor woman, cried he, how unhappily is she
circumstanced! She dares not, before us, show the tenderness which is the glory
of her sex, and of human nature! On opening one of the cabinets in that
chamber, they found a beautiful little casket with a paper wa^ered upon it, on
which was written, My ^ife's jewels. Sir Charles asking his sisters, if they
had not received their mother's jewels, and they answering, that their father
had (...) they should be theirs on their marriage; he immediately presented them
this casket, which they retired to open, while their brother was taking minutes
of papers. Besides the jewels, they found in it three purses, in two of which
were a considerable number of old broad pieces, with some bank notes and India
bonds. The third parcel was thus labelled, For my beloved son: In
acknowledgment of his duty to his father and me, from infancy to this hour; of
his love to his sisters; of the generosity of his temper: of his love of truth,
and his modesty, courage, benevolence, steadiness of mind, docility and other
great and amiable qualities, by which he gives a moral assurance of his ^^^ing
a good man. God grant it. Amen.

This purse the ladies immediately carried to their brother, when, hav^ng read
the label, excellent woman, said he, being dead, she yet speaks; may her pious
prayer be answered!

Sir Charles and his sisters having examined every other place in this
apartment, he followed mrs. Oldham to here is; where ^^ewing him the closet in
which was contained all she was worth, she complained of mr. Grandison's
refusing to let her take out of it 50l. He told her, she might assure herself
of justice, and breaking the seal, desired her to produce what she thought
proper for him to take account of. He was obliged to check the curiosity of his
sisters, who would fain have examined her drawers. She showed him the cabinet,
in which was contained all the money, notes, and securities she had honestly
saved. Miss Caroline asked to what amount? No matter, sister, said sir Charles.
You hear mrs. Oldham says, they are honestly saved. I dare say my father's
bounty enabled his meanest servants, to save money. I would (...) keep one that
I thought did not. I make no comparison. Mrs. Oldham, you are a gentlewoman. I
believe, said mrs. Oldham, looking afraid of the censures of the ladies, there
is near 1200l. They appeared surprised at the largeness of the sum, and
observed that they should of^^^^ have been glad of having as many ^^^^ings
between them. Sir Charles ^^ked what occasion had they for more than current
money? but added, that now they had a claim to independency, he hoped, either
of their stores would exceed that sum. Mrs. Oldham the^ trembling, said, in
this private drawer are some presents -- I disclaim them: If you will believe me,
ladies, I never wished for them, offering to pull out the drawer. Forbear, mrs.
Oldham, said sir Charles, both the presents and money are yours: Never will I
either disparage or diminish my father's bounty. He had a right to do as he
pleased. Had he made a will, would they not have been yours? -- If you, my
sisters, if you, mrs. Oldham. can tell me any thing he but intended to do for
any of his people, I will execute his intention with the same exactness as if
he had inserted it in a will. Shall we do nothing (...) legal justice? -- The
law was not made for a man of conscience.

When sir Charles had examined and taken minutes of every thing in this hous^^
(...) delivered to mrs. Oldham the (...) of her apartment, ordering the
housekeeper to assist her in the removal of her effects when she pleased; and
to allow her to come and go at all times with the same freedom and civility, as
if she had never left the house. Then, addressing himself to his sisters, he
said, you may consider the justice I am willing to do to persons who can claim
only justice from me, as an earnest that I will do no more than justice for
you. You should have been the first to have found the fruits of my love, had I
not feared that prudence would have narrowed my intentions. I am sorry, my dear
sisters, for the sake of your spirits, that you are left in my power. The best
of ^omen always feared that it would be so; but as soon as I can, you shall be
absolutely independent on your brother. Both Calonine and Charlotte expressed
their gratitude by their tears, telling him, that their being in the power of
such a brother was their highest felicity.

As sir Charles found that his father had left his affairs embarrassed, he
disposed of his hunters, (...) and dogs, took a survey of the timber upon his
estate, and felled what would have been worse for standing; but for the sake of
posterity, planted an oakling for every oak he (...) down.

Two or three months after sir Charles's arrival in England, lord L. came to
town from Scotland, and paid him his first visit; when, his lordship mentioning
his love for miss Caroline, and she acknowledging her regard for him, he
introduced him to her, and joining their hands, held them between both his;
saying, with pleasure do I join hands, where such worthy hearts are united.
From this time, my lord, do me the honor to look upon me as your brother. My
father was a little embarrassed in his affa^rs, and was perhaps loath they
should early claim another protection; but if he had lived to make himself
easy, he would doubtless have made them happy. He has left that duty upon me,
and I will perform it. Miss Caroline's joy rendered her unable to speak, and my
lord was extremely affected. Miss Charlotte was moved with this see^e, and
^^^ing up her hands and eyes, prayed, that God would make his power as large as
his heart. And has not my Charlotte, said he, turning toward her, some happy
man whom she can distinguish by her love? You, my sisters, are equally dear to
me. Come, Charlotte, make me your considant; and your inclinations shall direct
my choice.

Before the marriage, sir Charles gave his sister a paper sealed up. Receive
this, my Caroline, said, he, as from your father's bounty, in compliance with
what your mother, had she lived, would have wished. When you oblige lord L --
with one hand, make him this present with the other; and thus entitle yourself
to all the gratitude with which his worthy heart will overflow. I have only
done my duty, in promising an article of the will I have made in my own mind
for my father. He then saluted her, and withdrew before she broke the seal; and
when she did, she found it contained bank notes for 10,000l. She threw herself
into a chair, and was unable to rise; but recovering herself, she hurried out
to find her brother, and was told he was in his sister's apartment. She ran
thither, and found Charlotte was in tears, sir Charles having just left her.
What ails my Charlotte? said she. O Caroline, cried the other, this brother!
there is no bearing his generous goodness. See that deed! She took it up, and
finding it was for the same sum he had given her, and to carry interest, they
congratulated and wept over each other, as if distressed. Caroline found out
her brother; but when she approached him, could only express her gratitude by
lifting up her hands and eyes. He had no sooner raised and seated her, than the
equally grateful Charlotte entered, when placing her next her sister, and
drawing a chair for himself, he took the hand of each, and then said, my dear
sisters, you are too sensible of these instances of my brotherly love. It has
pleased God to deprive us of our father and mother, and we must supply the
^^loss to each other. Consider me as an executor of a will, that ought to have
been made, and perhaps would, had there been time. My circumstances are more
assluent than I expected; and I could not do less than I have done. You don't
know how much you will oblige me if you never say another word upon this subject.
Soon after this, Caroline was married to lord L --, who carried her down with
him to Scotland, where she was greatly admired and esteemed by all his
relations.

CHAP. VIII.
The History of miss Byron, who is rescued by sir Charles from the attempts of
sir Hargrave Pollexsen.

WE shall now leave sir Charles, to bring the reader acquainted with an
accomplished young lady, who will engage his attention in the following part of
this work. Miss Harriot Byron had united in her face the most enchanting
beauty, grace, and expression; she had a heart equally pure and open, and a
noble mind, legible (...) her lovely and expressive countena^^^. This lady
lived at Selby-house, in Northamptonshire, and was the delight, the pride of
her relations, and the admiration of all who ever saw or conversed with her.
She was brought to London by her aunt Reeves; and here, as well as in the
country, (...) several admirers, among whom^^^ as sir Hargrave Pollexsen, a
gay, proud, and conceited fop, with a handsome person, and an estate of 8000l^
a year. The baronet had been accidentally in her company when she enlivened the
conversation with the most agreeable sallies of wit; and afterward, waited
upon her at mrs. Reeves's, and made an open declaration of his passion in the
presence of her uncle and aunt; on which miss Harriet frankly told him, she
thanked him for his good opinion, but could not encourage his addresses. He
appeared amazed at this declaration, and repeating, cannot encourage my
addresses! said, he had been assured her affections were not engaged; but that
surely it must ^e a mistake. She desired to know if it was a necessary
consequence* that the wo^^^ must be engaged, who could not (...) the addresses
of sir Hargrave Pollex^^n? Why, madam, as to that, said he, I don't know what
to say; but to, a man of my fortune, and I hope not absolutely disagreeable,
either in person or temper, of some (...) in life. -- What, madam, if you (...)
^uch in earnest as you pretend, can be your objection? We cannot said she, all
like the same person. Women are said to be very capricious, and, perhaps, I am
so. But there is a something, we cannot always say what, that attracts or
disgnsts us. Disgusts! madam, -- Disgusts! Miss Byron, ^^ied he. I speak in
general, sir, she returned; I dare say nineteen women out of twenty, would
think themselves ^avoured by the addresses of sir Hargrave Pollexfen. You, sir,
may have more merit, perhaps than the man I may happen to like better; but
pardon me, sir, you don't hit my fancy. If pardon depends upon my breath, cried
he, let me die if I do! -- Not ^it your fancy, madam, looking upon himself all
round, not ^it your fancy, madam! In short, the ba^one^, provoked at the
thought of her reject^^^ so accomplished a person as him^^^, behaved with great
insolence, charged her with pride, and ingratitude, and cruelty; when miss
Byron, being unwilling to stay to be insulted, begged his excuse, and hastily
withdrew.

Sir Hargrave soon after paid her another visit, and having apologized for his
former behavior, made vehement professions of love, offered to make her large
settlements, and told her, that she should prescribe to him in every thing. To
which she answered as before; but on his insisting upon knowing her reasons for
refusing him, she frankly told him, it (...) with some reluctance that she
owned her not having that opinion of his morals, that she must have of those of
the man, on whom she must build her hopes of present happiness, and, on whose
guidance, entrust her future. Sir Hargrave stormed, repeating, my morals,
madam! You have no opinion of my morals, madam! and then showing several
men^cing airs, abruptly departed.

As this young lady had never before been in Lo^^^^* lady Betty Williams, a
near ^^lation to mr. Reeves, insisted on miss Byron's accompanying her to a
ball at the opera-house in the Hay-market.

They stayed till about two in the morning, when mr. Reeves conducted her to
her chair, and saw her in it, before he attended his wife unto hers; but
observed, that neither the chair nor the chairmen were those that brought her;
on which he asked the reason of it, and was told by her servant, who had been
hired only a few days before, that the chairmen had been ^^veigled away to
drink, and that after having waited two hours for them, he had hired a chair to
supply their place.

The chair moved off with her servant carrving his lighted flambeau before it.
The chairmen had not gone a great way, when calling out, they stopped, and her
servant asked her commands. Where am I, William? said she. Just at home, madam,
he answered, and on her observing, that they must have come a round-about way,
told her, they had done so on purpose to avoid the crowd of coaches and chairs.
They then proceeded forwards; but soon after, in drawing the curtains, she
found herself in the open fields, and presently after the lights put out; on
which she pierced the air with her cries, till her strength was exhausted. She
was at last taken out in fits, and on a bed with three women about her; one at
her head holding a bottle to her nose, which was sore with hartshorn, and the
room was filled with the strong smell of burnt feathers. Where am I? Who are
you, madam, she cried. No harm is intended you, said the eldest of them; for
you are to be made one of the happiest women upon earth. We would not be
concerned in a bad action. I hope not, I hope not, she returned. You seem to be
a mother, these young gentlewomen, I presume, are your daughters. Save me from
ruin, I beseech you, madam -- Save me from ruin as you would these your
daughters. This must be the vile contrivance of sir Hargrave Pollexfen. Is it
not? Is it not? Tell me, I beg you to tell me.

Miss Byron then rising, sat on the side of the bed; when sir Hargrave
instantly entered. She screamed out, and he threw himself at her feet; but
finding that the women could hardly keep her out of a fit, retired. On her
reviving, she begged and offered rewards to induce them to facilitate her
escape: but she had scarce began to speak before sir Hargrave returned, and
haughtily bade her not needlessly terrify herself, ordering the women to
withdraw. As they went out, she rushed forward, and followed the foremost of
the daughters into the parlour, and then sinking on her knees, clasped her arms
about her, crying, O save me! Save me! Sir Hargrave following them, miss Byron
kn^^led to him, crying, if you have any compassion, let me now, I beseech you,
sir, experience your mercy. The women again walked out, and he answered, I have
entreated you, madam, and on my knees too, to show me mercy, but you would show
me none. Kneel if you will, the tables are now turned. Barbarous man! said she,
rising from her knees; but her spirits immediately subsiding, she added, don't
be cruel, sir Hargrave, I beseech you; I never was cruel to any body. You know
I was civil to you. Yes, yes, and very determined, he replied. You called me no
names; and I call you none. Sweet creature, added he, your very terror is
beautiful! I can enjoy your terror, madam! Then offering to kiss her, she
turned aside her head, on which ^e added, I don't hit your fancy, madam! You
don't like my morals, madam! Are these, sir Hargrave, said she, the means you
take to convince me, that I ought to like them? Well, madam, he returned, you
shall meet with the mercy in me, you would not show. Be mine, madam, I offer
you my honest hand; consent to be lady Pollexfen. -- No punishment, I hope! or
take the consequence. Take my life, sir, said she; but my hand and my heart are
my own. They never shall be separa^ed. You cannot fly me, madam, returned he;
you are securely mine; and mine shall be still more securely. Don't provoke me,
don't make me desperate. Then throwing his arms about her, she was terrified,
and cried out, when instantly entered one of the daughters, crying, good sir!
Did not you say you would be honorable? The mother followed her in, saying,
sir! sir! in my house -- What a plague, cried he, do you come in for; I thought
you knew your own sex better, than to mind a woman's squalling* Dear, blessed,
blessed woman, cried the lady, frantic with mingled terror and joy, to find
herself in better hands than she expected; protect me! save me! Indeed I have
not deserved this treacherous treatment. Nay, dear lady, said the woman, if sir
Hargrave will make you his true and lawful wife, there can be no harm done,
surely. Then turning to him, she told him the gentleman was waiting.

At this instant entered a horrid looking clergyman; he was a tall, big-boned,
splay-footed man, in a shabby gown, a wig equally shabby, with a huge red
pimpled face, and a great red nose. He held a dog's eared common prayer book in
his hand, opened at the page of matrimony. But paying little attention to his
horrid visage, she pushed by sir Hargrave, turning him half round, and making
the woman of the house totter; then throwing herself at the clergyman's feet,
good, dear, reverend sir, cried she, save a poor creature, basely tricked away
from her friends. Save me from violence! Don't give your aid to sanctify a base
action! The man snuffled his answer, and opening his pouched mouth, the tobacco
hung about his great yellow teeth; when taking her clasped hands, rise, madam,
said he. Don't kneel to me. No harm is intended you. Who is that gentleman in
the silver laced clothes? He is sir Hargrave Pollexfen, sir, said she; a
wicked, a very wicked man. O madam, returned he, a very honorable man! bowing
to sir Hargrave. Then asking her name, and she telling it to him, sir Hargrave
seized her hand, and the souffling priest beg^n, Dearly beloved -- The lady was
perfectly frantic, and crying, read no more! read no more! dashed the book out
of his hand, adding, I beg your pardon, sir, but you must read no further. I am
basely betrayed. I cannot, I will not be his. Proceed, proceed, sir, said Hargrave,
taking her hand by force, virago as (...) is, I will own her my wife. Again
snuffled the minister, Dearly beloved. She flamped, crying, no dearly
beloved's! while sir Hargrave held her struggling hand, and the minister
proceeded, We are gathered together in the fight of God. I adjure you, sir
Hargrave, in the same tremendous name, to stop all farther proceedings. Take my
life; but my hand shall never be joined with yours. Proceed, doctor, pray,
doctor, proceed, said the vile sir Hargrave. When the day dawns she will be glad
to own her marriage. Proceed at your peril, sir, said she. If you be really a
minister of God, don't proceed. Don't make me desperate. Then turning to a
window, she added, madam, you are a mother, and have given me room to hope you
are a good woman; look upon me as if I was one of those your daughters. --
Could you see one of them treated thus? Dear young women, turning to each, can
you unconcernedly look on, and see a poor creature tricked, be^rayed, and thus
violently, basely treated, and not make my case your own? Speak for me! plead
for me! If you be women, plead for me! -- You have a soul to answer for. I can
die; but never, never will be his! The young women wept; and the mother being
moved, desired they might talk to the lady by themselves. This was granted;
when, retiring into another room, they pleaded sir Hargrave's great estate, his
handsome person, his honorable love, and their being unable to save her from
worse treatment. On the other hand, miss Byron pleaded her invincible aversion,
and contempt of riches, crying, how, not able! Is not this, ladies, your own
house? Cannot you raise your neighbors? Before the week is out, I will order a
thousand pounds to be paid into your hands. I pledge my honor for the payment
-- A thousand pounds, dear ladies, only to save me, and see me safe to my
friends!

At this moment sir Hargrave entered, and, with a malicious look, desired the
young wom^^ to go to bed, and leave the perverse beauty to him. He called her
cruel, and ungrateful, swearing, that if she would not permit him to exalt her
into lady Pollexfen, he would humble her. She would be greatly hurt, indeed,
cried he, to be the wife of a man of my fortune and consequence! But I Will bring
down her pride. What the devil, am I to creep, beg, and entreat only for a
wife! -- But, madam, added he, with a sneer, perhaps you will be mine upon
certain terms.

The mother and youngest daughter were then led by sir Hargrave to the ^^oor,
the eldest following them, while miss Byron entreated them not to go; and when
they did, made an attempt to follow them: but sir Hargrave, in shutting them
out, gave her a dreadful crush with the door, she being half in and half out;
her nose gushed out with blood; her stomach was much pressed, and one of her
arms bruised. She s^reamed, and he appeared frighted; but she instantly
recovering herself, cried out, she hoped he had killed her; and throwing
herself into a chair, repeated, so, so, you have killed me -- Well, I hope you
are now satisfied. I forgive you; only leave me to my own sex. She was in
violent pain, her head swam, her eyes failed her, and she fainted away. Sir
Hargrave, filled with consternation, ran about the room calling upon God to
have mercy upon him, and having let in the women, they lamented over her, and
said she had death in her face. The baronet, in the midst of his horror, seized
her bloody handkerchief, and saying it should not appear against him, stepped
into the next room, and thrust it into the fire, by which was sitting the
minister and his helper, over some burnt brandy. O Gentlemen, said he, nothing
can be done tonight. Take this, giving them money; the lady is in a fit, I
wish you well home. They, however proposed to sit in the chimneycorner till
peep of day; when the women fearing she would not recover, one of them ran in,
and declared she was dead, on which, calling for a dram, they snatched up their
hats and sticks, and hurried away.

On miss Byron's coming to herself, she found no body with her but the three
women. She was in a cold sweat, and as there was no fire in the room, they
conducted her into the pa^lour, which the two men had left; and being hardly
able to stand, they placed her in an elbow chair, and chafed her temples with
Hungary water. Soon after the mother and eldest daughter left her, and went to
sir Hargrave: and the youngest being at length called out, the baronet entered,
took a chair, and sat down by miss Byron, who still felt a violent pain in her
stomach and arm. At last the lady breaking silence, said have you done well,
sir Hargrave, to commit such violence on one who never did nor thought to
injure you? In what distraction have you involved my cousin Reeves! She
stopped, and he continuing silent, she resumed, these seem to be honest people,
and I hope you only design to terrify me. Your bringing me into no worse
company, assures me that you meant better -- Devils all! interrupted he. She
again stopped, but soon added, I forgive you, sir, the pain you have given me.
-- But as soon as day breaks, I Will get the woman to let my cousin Reeves -- up
he started, crying, miss Byron, you are a woman, a true woman, holding up his
clenched hand. Then, after a short pause, you are the most consummate hypocrite
that I ever knew in my life. She was silent and trembled. Damn'd^ fool! Ass!
Blockhead! Woman's fool, I could curse myself for sending away the parson! but
your hypocrisy, madam, shall be of no service to you. What I failed in here,
shall be done elsewhere. ^he wept, but could not speak. Cannot you go into fits
again? cried he, with a sneering air. God deliver me, prayed she to herself,
from this madman's hands. She then stood up, and the candle standing near the
glass, saw herself in the habit, to which she had hitherto paid little
attention. Pray, sir Hargrave, said she, let me beg you to te^^^y me no
farther. I will forgive what is past, and consider it as a proper punishment,
for my consenting to be thus marked for a vain and foolish creature. Your
abuse, sir, allow me to say, is low and unmanly; but in the light of a
punishment, I will confess I deserve (...). Let my punishment end here; and
I Will thank and forgive you with all my heart. Your fate is determined said he;
and the servant maid giving him a capuch^^; he repeated, your fate is
determined, madam. -- Here put this on. -- Now fall into fits again! -- Put
this on. She ^egged, prayed, and would have kneeled to him, but in vain; the
capuchin was put on; and being afterward muffled up in a man's cloak, in spite
of all her p^d^ers, struggles and resistance, he lifted her into a chariot and
six, which came up to the door.

The chariot was attended by several men on horseback, among whom was her own
servant, and sir Hargrave stepping in, said to him, if you meet with
impertinents, you know what to say; and on her screaming out, he upbraidingly
cried, scream on, my dear, and barbarously mocked her, imitating the bleating
of a sheep. Then rearing himself up, cried, with an air of triumph, now am I
lord of miss Byron! At their first setting out, she once or twice cried out for
help, when pretending she would catch cold, he tied a handkerchief over her
face and mouth; and muffling her up in a cloak, leaned against her with his
whole weight, holding both her hands with one of his, while his other arm being
thrown round her, kept her on her seat. On her calling out for help, at the
approach of passengers, she heard one of the men represent sir Hargrave as the
best of husbands, and herself as the worst of wives. Thus every glimmering ray
of hope vanished from the poor lady's mind.

Sir Charles expecting lord and lady L --, who were returning from Scotland,
had been at that nobleman's seat at Colnebrook, where he had left his sister
Charlotte, to see every thing put in order against their arrival, and was
coming to town in his chariot and six, when meeting sir Hargrave's chariot, the
coachmen seemed to dispute the way. Sir Hargrave looking out, to see what was
the matter, miss Byron pushed the handkerchief from her mouth and eyes, and
(...) out, help! help! for God's sake. (...) Charles ordered his coachman to
stop, and sir Hargrave damning his coachman, called out, d^^ve on, when I bid
you. The lady again cried out for help, when sir Charles ordered his servants
on horseback to stop she postilion of the other chariot, and bid sir Hargrave's
coachman proceed at his peril. Sir Hargrave, with dreadful execrations,
continued calling out on the contrary side of the chariot to that sir Charles
was on. Upon which, sir Charles alighting, walked round to the other side, and
the lady endeavoring to cry out, he observed sir Hargrave struggle to put the
handkerchief over her mouth, when she seeing the stranger, spread out both her
hands, repeating, for God's sake! -- Sir Charles taking sir Hargrave by the
arms, said I am afraid you are engaged in a very bad affair. I am sir Hargrave
Polexfen, and carrying away a fugitive wife. Your own wife, sir Hargrave? Yes,
said he, swearing; and she was going to elope from me, at a damned masquerade.
See, drawing aside the cloak, I detected her in the very dress! O no! no! no!
(...) the lady. Proceed, coachman, cried sir Hargrave, and cursed and swore.
Let me ask the lady a question, sir Hargrave. You are imperti^ent, sir, said
the villain: who the devil are you? Are you, madam, lady Pollexfen? returned
sir Charles. O no! no! no! repeated she.

Instantly, two of sir Charles's servants rode up to him, and a third held the
head of the horse, on which the postilion sat. Three of sir Hargrave's
approached on their horses, but appeared afraid of coming too near. Have an eye
on these fellows, said sir Charles, some base work is on foot. Then addressing
sir Hargrave's coachman, who lashed his horses, he cried, sirrah, proceed at
your peril. While sir Hargrave cursing and threatening him, ordered him to
drive over all that opposed him. Sir Charles then turning to the lady, said,
madam, will you -- O sir, sir, sir. cried she, relieve me! help me for God's
sake! I am in a villain's hands! Help! help! for God's sake! Sir Hargrave then
drew his sword, and called upon his servants to fire at all that offered to
oppose his passage, My servants, said sir Charles, have fire arms as well as
yours; and will not dispute my orders. Don't provoke me to give the word. Will
you, madam, put yourself into my protection? Oye yes, sir, said she, with all
my he^r*

At this instant sir Charles open the chariot door, when sir Hargrave making a
pass at him, take that, scoundrel; but sir Charles being aware of the thrust,
put it by, though the sword raked his shoulder. His own sword was in his hand,
butundrawn; and ^he charior door remaining open, he seized sir Hargrave by the
collar, before he could recover from the pass he had made; and with a jerk laid
him under the hind wheel of the chariot. Then wrenching the sword from him, he
snapped it, and threw away the two pieces. Sir Hargrave's mouth and face were
instantly covered with blood, they being hurt by the pummel of sir Charles's
sword, and one of his legs, in his sprawling, getting between one of the spokes
of the chariot wheel, sir Charles charged his coachman not to stir for his
master's sake.

Notwithstanding the disorder of miss Byron's mind, she had disengaged herself
from the man's cloak. sir ^harles was struck with her beauty, but still more
with her terror. He then offered his hand; but instead of accepting it, she
threw herself into his arms ready to saint; on which he carried her round sir
Hargrave's horses, and seating her in his own chariot, assured her, that she
was now in honorable hands, and that he would carry her to his sister, a young
lady of virtue and honor; when shutting the door, he entreated her to banish
her fears; for he would attend her in a moment. Sir Hargrave's men had sled:
and sir Charles's servants having purs^^ed them a little way, were returning to
support their master, when bidding one of them tell sir Hargrave his name, he
stepped back to the char^ot, where, through terror, she was sunk down to the
bottom, and at his approach, could only say, save me! save me! Sir Charles
lifted her on the seat, and giving her all the consolation possible, carried to
his sister's.

M^ss Charlotte was so much surpr^sed at her brother's unexpected return, and
so affected at the disorder still visible ^n the (...) countenance, that she at
first gave little attention to her dress; and hea^^ing sir Charles in a very
tender manner, assure her of his and his sister's kindest pr^tection, she
stepped up to her, and saluting her, bid her thr^^^ welcome to that house. Miss
^^ron, too much humbled by her distress, threw herself on her knees to miss
Charlotte, when sir Charles and that lady, raising her to her seat, you see
before you, madam, said she, a strange creature, and looked at her dress; but I
hope you will believe I am an innocent one. Think not hardly, sir, added she,
holding up her clasped hands, of her whom you have so generously delivered.
Think not hardly of me, madam, the v^le, vile man -- Sir Charles desired his
sister to make it her first care to raise the spirits of the injured beauty,
and her next care to take her directions, and inform her friends of her safety;
observing, that such an admirable young lady could not be missed an hour,
without exciting the fears of all her friends. Then sending for an eminent
physician, and repeating that she was in honorable hands, and that his sister
would take pleasure in obliging her, he took his leave.

The consternation of mr. and mrs. Reeves was exceeding great, on their coming
home from the masquerade, and finding that miss Byron was not there. They
immed^ately sent to the lady Betty's; but she being unable to give them any
information, every method they could think of was taken, to discover the place
to which she was carried, but without effect, till they received a letter from
miss Charlotte, which informed them, that she had been cruelly treated, but was
now in safe and honorable hands; and though she was very ill, she was better
than she had been. Mr. Reeves instantly set out for lord L'^, taking with him a
portmanteau filled with miss Byron's clothes, and there found his lovely cousin
ill, but filled with gratitude for the favors she received from sir Charles
and miss Charlotte.

As to sir Hargrave, he was not only much bru^sed, but had still a greater
mortification, by his having three of his teeth struck out in the fall from the
chariot, and his upper lip cut through, which he was obliged to have sewed up.
He vowed revenge; and was no sooner recovered, than he sent sir Charles a
challenge. But though sir Charles was perfectly skilled in the use of all the
offensive weapons, he had resolved never to make use of them, except in his own
defense. Sensible that duelling was contrary both to the laws of God and
society, he vindicated his right to guard his own life, and to spare himself
the guilt of murder: yet he justified what he had done, boldly asserting to sir
Hargrave's face, that were he to find him again guilty of a notorious violation
of the laws of humanity and justice, he would again exert himself in attempting
to save injured innocence from the effects of brutality.

Sir Charles and his sister were charmed with the conversation and engaging
qualities of their amiable guest, and became so extremely fond of her, as to
give her the title of sister; and on lord and lady L's arrival, after miss
Byron's return to Mr. Reeve's, they were conducted thither by sir Charles and
miss Charlotte, that they might then see and acknowledge their new relation.
Miss Byron's heart was filled with gratitude to her generous deliverer; whose
virtues were the subject of her admiration, and this gratitude soon ripened
into love.

CHAP. IX.
Miss. Byron acknowledges to sir Charles's sisters her love for their Brother.

MISS Byron was charmed with the disinterested goodness in her deliverer; and
sir Charles's sisters, by whom she was tenderly beloved, observing the pleasure
with which she I stened to every thing they said of him, and the delight she
took in his conversa^^ion, prevailed on her to confess the impression he had
made on her heart; letting her know, that they wished to acknowledge her as
their real sister, and generously offered their assistance, in order to
discover the situation of their brother's mind. They knew that he had a high
esteem for miss Byron, but could not be certain that he was not under
engagements to some foreign beauty. They therefore applied for information to
the worthy doctor Bartlett, who was now sir Charles's chaplain, and was well
acquainted with every circumstance of his life. But this gentleman referred
them to their brother; on which they took the first opportunity to ask him
whether he had any thought of marriage, and if his heart was in possession of
any foreign lady. To this he only answered, that he was in a very difficult
situation, and far from being happy. But a few days after, taking miss Byron
into lord L -- 's study, he gave her the history of the noble Clementina and
his friend Jeronymo, referring her, for farther particulars to his letters to
dr. Bartlett. She was extremely moved by the affecting story, admired and
pitied the lovely Italian; and every hope of happiness by an union with him,
being now vanished, resolved to use her utmost endeavors, to conquer her
passion.

Sir Charles, some days after, paid a visit to miss Byron at her uncle Reeve's,
where being left alone with her, he, with a solemn air, thus addressed her: The
last time I had the honor of being alone with my good miss Byron, I told her a
very tender tale, which must raise in such a heart as here is a generous
compassion for the noblest lady on the continent. The story did indeed, affect
you; and I am sure you must have suffered still more from the same
compassionate goodness on the communications made you by dr. Bartlett. May I be
allowed, madam, to add a few particulars on the same subject, for I am desirous
to acquaint you, rather than any woman in the world, with all I know myself of
this melancholy affair. Miss Byron, with trembling hesitation, answered, that
the story was, indeed, a most affecting one, and that he would do her an honor
in acquainting her with further particulars. Sir Charles then told her, that
Clementina's brother the bishop, had written to entreat that he would once more
visit Bologna, though the general was against his coming. He offered to meet
him where he pleased, and to conduct him to Bologna, where his presence would
rejoice every heart. He likewise showed her a letter from mrs. Beaumont, which
informed him of many affecting particulars. The noble yet unhappy Clementina
had been hurried from place to place, with the expectation of seeing him, and
had afterward been put into the hands of the lady Sforza, and her daughter
Laurana, who, from interested motives, and envy of her superior qualities, had
treated her with the utmost cruelty. Miss Byron wept at read^ng the affecting
particulars of those inhumanities, which had broken the spirit of the excellent
lady, while sir Charles cried ou^, how insupportable have been my reflex^ons,
did my conscience tell me that I had been the wilful cause of the noble
Clementina's calamities! He also showed her a letter from seignior Jeronymo,
which informed me that his life was a burden to him, and that he did not think
himself in skilful hands, wishing that sir Charles and himself had been of one
country, since the greatest felicity he could now enjoy, would be to resign up
his life to the great author of it, in the arms of his dearest friend.

At this instant mr. Reeves entering the room, miss Byron walked to the window,
and strove to recollect herself. The gentleman soon after withdrew, when sir
Charles coming up to her, my heart bleeds, sir, said she, for ^he distresses of
your Clementina; I admire, beyond expression, the greatness of her behav^our,
and most sincerely do I lament her distresses. But what is there in the power
of man, that sir Charles Grandison cannot do? You, sir, have honored me with
the title of sister, and in the tenderness of that relation, permit me to say,
that I dread the effects of the general's petulance; I feel for you the pain it
must give your humane heart to be once more personally present to the woes of
the inimitable lady; but, I am sure, you did not hesitate a moment about
leaving all your friends here, and resolving to haste over, to try at least
what can be done for the noble sufferer. Sir Charles leading her to her seat,
and taking his by her, answered, ever since I had the honor of knowing miss
Byron, I have considered her as one of the most excellent of women. My heart
demands an alliance with here is, though I am in so perplexed a situation, that I
scarcely da^e trust myself to speak on the subject. From the first, I called
miss Byron my sister; but she is even more to me than the dearest sister, and
whatever may be the accidents of either side to bar a farther wish, I aspire to
hold a more tender friendship with her; and this I hope she will not deny me,
so long as it shall be consistent with her other attachment. He paused, and she
made an effort to speak, but could not utter a word. He then told her, that he
had wrote to the bishop, that he would most cheerfully comply with his wishes,
and that as Jeronymo expressed himself dissatisfied with his surgeons, he only
wa^^ed for a skilful one, who was settling his affairs, in order to go with
him. Then, inviting miss Byron to dine with him the next day, he took his leave.

Sir Charles, having settled some important affairs, particularly the marriage
of his sister Charlotte to lord G --, and obtained the opinion of several
eminent physicians in writing, on lady Clementina's case, he set out for Italy,
by the way of France, accompanied by mr. Lowther, a skilful surgeon.

CHAP. X.
Sir Charles rescues sir Hargrave Pollexfen from the farther resentment of the
persons whom he had injured. The reception he meets with from the noble family
at Bologna, who consent to his own terms; bu^ when he thin^s his happiness
secure, she, from a scruple of conscience, rejects him, and entreats him to
marry another lady. The distressful scenes which followed.

IN his journey to Paris, he was stopped by one of sir Hargrave Pollexfen's
servants, who gave him a dismal account that his master and another gentleman
had been attacked by several men, who were at that time murdering them behind a
hill at a small distance. Sir Charles leaping out of the postchaise, desired
mr. Lowther's servant to dismount, and getting on his horse, galloped away with
his three servants toward the place. His ears were soon pierced with the poor
wretches cries, and he beheld two men on horseback holding the horses of four
others, who had two gentlemen under them struggling, groaning, and crying for
mercy. Sir Charles who was a good way ahead of his servants, called to them to
spare the gentlemen, and galloping toward the prostrate sufferers, two of the
four quitted them, and mounting, joined the two other horsemen, advancing to
meet him, wi^h a show of supporting the two men on foot, who continued lying on
the wr^^^^ unmercifully with the bu^t end of their whip^. The four men on
horseback demanded a conference, with their pistols in their hands, as sir
Charles also had his, advising him not to p^^voke his fate by his rashness, and
declaring that he was a dead man if he fired. S^r Charles bid them forbear all
further violence to the gentlemen, and then he would hear what they had to say.
He then put his pistol into his hol^^er, and one of his servants coming up, and
the two others being at hand, he called out to them not to fire till they had
his orders; and giving him hi^ horse's reins, leaped down, drew his sword, and
advancing toward the two men who were so cruelly exercising their whips: but
on his approach, they drew their hangers, and retired to a little distance. The
four men on horseback joining the two on foot, just as they were quitting the
object of their fury, one of them said, forbear brother, for the present, any
farther violence; the gentleman shall be told the cause. Murder, sir, said he,
is not intended, nor are we robbers. Those you are solicitous to save are
villains. At this instant, sir Charles first raised one groaning man, and then
the other. Their heads were covered with blood, and they were so bruised, that
they could not extend their arms to reach their wigs and hats which lay near
them. By this time the men on foot had mounted their horses, and all six stood
on their defense; but one of them was so furious, that two of the others could
scarce restrain him, he cried that his vengeance should be still more complete.
At this instant came up mr. Lowther, and his servant in the chaise, each with a
pistol in his hand, and he having, at sir Charles's desire, examined their
wounds, declared that there was no apparent danger of death. On which sir
Charles observed, that as they had neither attempted to fly, nor been guilty of
violence to himself, his friend, or servants, he was afraid they had reason to
think themselves ill used by the gentlemen. You, sir, cried one of them, seem
to be a man of honor and temper; we are men of honor as well as you. Our
design was not to kill the miscreants, as we told you, but to give them reason
to remember their villainy as long as they lived, and to put it out of their
power ever to be guilty of the like. They have made a vile attempt on a lady's
honor at Abbeville, and finding themselves detected, have endeavored, by
roundabout ways, to escape the vengeance of her friends. That gentleman has
reason for being enraged, since he is the lady's husband; that and that are her
brothers. The villains have not yet been punished as they deserve, but let them
ask on their knees this gentleman's pardon, pointing to the husband, and
promise never more to come within two leagues of Abbeville, and we will leave
them in your protection. Sir Charles then turning toward sir Hargrave and his
companion, said, gentlemen, if you have done wrong, you ought not scruple
asking pardon; but if you know yourselves to be innocent, though I would be
loath to risque the lives of my friend and servants; my countrymen shall not
make so undue a submi^^ion. The wretches instantly kneeled, and the others
civilly saluting sir Charles and mr. Lowther, rode off to the great joy of the
two delinquents, who again kneeled to their deliverers, pouring forth blessings
on the man whose life one of them had so lately sought, and in whose
preservation he had such reason to rejoice. Sir Hargrave's postchaise now
coming up, he and his companion were, with difficulty, lifted into it, while
sir Charles and Mr. Lowther went into theirs, and being only at a small
distance from Paris, they proceeded to that city in company.

Sir Charles was met at Parma by the bishop and father Marescotti, where he
found them at the palace (...) the count of Belvedere. They all expressed great
joy at seeing him; but told him, on his enquiring after the barone Jeronymo,
that he was alive, and that was all; however, the sight of his friend would be
a cordial to his heart. As to Clementina, her bodily health was greatly
impaired, and they had little hopes of the recovery of her mind. They both
regretted that she had been denied the requested interview at his departure,
and were convinced, that if it had been granted, and she had been left to mrs.
Beaumont's friendly care, they might have expected a happy issue. The next day
they set out for Bologna, and the count of Belvedere accompanying them about
half way, found an opportunity to mention to sir Charles his unabated passion
for Clementina, and that he had lately made offers to marry her,
notwithstanding the disorder of her mind, since he flattered himself that her
cure was not impossible.

Sir Charles, on his arrival at Bologna, hasted to the barone, who, the moment
he saw him, cried, do I once more behold my friend, my Grandison? let me
embrace my dearest friend, now, now, I have lived long enough; and bowing his
head on his pillow, his countenance shone with pleasure in spite of his pain.
The bishop then led him to the marquess and marchioness, when his reception
from the former was kind, but from that of his lady, it was that of a mother to
a long absent child. She told him, she had had ever esteemed him her fourth
son, and now he had brought over with him a surgeon of experience, and advice
in writing, of eminent physicians of his country, the obligations he had laid
on their whole family, were too great ever to be returned. They received Mr.
Lowther with great politeness, and recommended their Jeronymo to his best
skill. His two surgeons were sent (...), and sir Charles having given them mr.
Lowther's character presented him to them, and they informed him of their
method of proceeding. The (...) e^^ning, mr. Lowther a^^^^^ed a^ the d^^^^ings,
and in so easy and (...) a (...) sug^^^^^d an^ (...) gentleman came readily
into it. The family were now delighted with mr. Lowther, and flattered
themselves with the hopes of the barone's recovery.

When sir Charles had been a few days at Bologna, the lady Clemen^ina was
brought thither by the general and his lady, to whom he had ^ately been
married. The general could never bear the thought that sir Charles, an English
protestant, should be thought of such consequence ^o his fi^^ers happiness:
hence he had always been his enemy; he therefore ^ow expressed himself with
coldness on his coming over, and treated him with contempt. This behavior sir
Charles resented, and with a noble superiority of behavior obliged him to
ban^sh his unjust suspicions, and at length to grant him his esteem. The lady
Cle^enti^a seemed the picture of ^ilent woe: she neither knew nor paid the
(...) attention to her mother, of whom she had never before been unmindf^l:
(...) it was resolved to (...) her (...) reducing her in a (...) which (...)
Charles was present. Being before told that he was arrived, she entered,
leaving only Camilla, her woman, with her servant Laura attending. Her motion
was slow and solemn; her robes were black, and flowing; her dejected face was
half covered by a veil of black gause, and her eyes cast on the ground. Sir
Charles arose from his seat, sat down, and rose again irresolute, not knowing
what he did, or what to do. She approached the table, round which the company
sat, but with her eyes cast down, and more than half closed: she then turned
toward the window. Here, here, madam, said Camilla, leading her to a chair
that had been placed for her between the marchioness and the general's lady.
She sat down. Her mother wept, as did also the general's lady; and her father
sobbing, turned his head aside. Her mother then took her hand, saying, my love,
look round about you; but she took no notice. The general grieved and
impatient, arose; stepped to her; and hanging over her shoulder, cried, my
dearest sister, look upon us all. See your father, mother, sister, and every
body in tears. If you love us, smile upon us; when lifting up her eyes to him,
she tried to smile: but such a solemnity had taken possession of her features,
that her smile appeared the smile of woe. The marquis rising from his seat,
with his handkerchief at his eyes, cried, sweet creature! never, never ^et me
see again such smile as that. It is here, add^d he, lying hi^ hand on his
bosom. Obliging sister, said the general; see father Marescotty is in tears,
(he sat by sir Charles) pity his gray hairs! She cast her eyes that way, and
saw sir Charles greatly affected. She started, she looked again: again started,
reddening and turning pale by turns. She rose, then threw her arms about
Camilla, who stood by her, crying, O Camilla! then gave way to a violent burst
of tears. Sir Charles was springing to her, and before them all, would have
clasped her in his arms, but the general stopping him, dear Grandison, keep
your seat. If Clementina remembers her English tutor, she will once more
welcome you to Bologna. O Camilla, said she, faithful good Camilla! now at last
you have told me truth! It is, it is he, hiding her face in Camilla's bosom.
She then, supported by the Marchioness and the general's lady, turned toward
the door; but sir Charles coming up to her, she stopped, and saying, Ah,
chevalier, reclined her head on her mother's bosom, seemed ready to faint. He
took her hand, and kneeling, pressed it to his lips, crying, forgive me,
ladies, forgive me; lady Clementina! His soul overflowing with tenderness, he
could say no more; he therefore rose. She moved on to the door, and then turned
her head, straining to look at him till she was out of the room, sir Charles
standing like a statue.

After this, many tender interviews passed between sir Charles and Clementina.
The whole family repeatedly used the most earnest persuasions to induce sir
Charles to change his religion; but these proving ineffectual, they consented
to give him Clementina on the conditions he himself had proposed; the daughters
were, therefore, to be considered as Italians, they were to be educated in
Italy, and to enjoy the great estate given to Clementina by her two
grandfathers, on condition of her marrying; while the sons, as being
protessants, were to be educated in England, and provided for by their father.
Mean while, sir Charles's joy was damped by the grief of the count of
Belvedere, who, arriving at Bologna, pa^d him several visits; and being weary
of life, strove, but in vain to prevail on sir Charles to meet him without the
city gates, protesting, that while he had life, Clementina should not be his.

The whole family having consented to sir Charles's union with Clementina, and
the marriage articles being settled, it was imagined she would have received
his hand with transport: but now a sudden thoughtfulness took possession of her
mind, and she spent a considerable time in writing. On sir Charles'^ being
introduced to her, she received him with tears, sighs, and trembling
hesitation; and having put a paper into his hand, cried, leave me, leave me;
then retiring to her closet, shut the door, and fell on her knees; when sir
Charles, to avoid hearing sighs which pierced his heart, walked into the next
room, where he found her mother and Camilla, who instantly went to her. When
opening the paper, he was astonished at finding that it contained the most
earnest persuasions to banish all thoughts of being united to her by marriage,
urged by all the tenderness of mind influenced by piety, and overflowing with
love and gratitude: the substance of which is as follows:

O thou, whom my heart loves; my tutor, my brother, my friend! seek me not to
marriage. Thy soul was ever most dear to Clementina; whenever I meditated the
gratefulness of thy person, I restrained my eye, I checked my fancy by
meditating on the superior graces of thy mind. And is no^ that soul, thought I,
to be saved? Dear obstinate and perverse! And shall I bind my soul to a soul
allied to perdition? -- O thou, most amiable of men! how can I be sure that
were I thine, thou would not draw me after thee, by thy love, by thy
sweetness of manners, by thy condescending goodness. I, who once thought a
heretic the worst of beings, have been already led by the amiableness of thy
piety, by the universality of thy charity, to thin^ more favorably of heretics
for thy sake? Of what force could be the advice of the most pious confessor,
were thy condesecending goodness and sweet persuasion to be exerted, to melt a
heart wholly thine? O thou whom my soul loves, seek not to entangle me by thy
love! Were I to be thine, my duty to thee would mislead me from that I owe to
my God, and make me more than temporarily unhappy; for, can thou, can I be
indifferent in these high matters? Have thou not shown me that thou can not?
And shall I not be instructed by thine example? Shall a wrong religion have a
force and eff^^acy upon thee, which a right one cannot have upon me? O thou
most amiable of men! seek not to entangle me by thy love; but do thou indeed
love me, or is it owing to thy generosity, thy nobleness, thy compassion for a
creature, who, aiming to be great, like thee, could not sustain the effort? I
know thou love Clementina: It is her pride to think thou do. But she is not
worthy of thee. Yet let thy heart own that thou love her soul, her immortal
soul, and her future peace. In that will thou show thy love, as she has
endeavored to show here is. Thou art all magnanimity; thou can sustain the
effort to which she was unequal. Make some other woman happy, but let it not be
an Italian.

O thou whom my soul loves, let me try the greatness of thy love, and the
greatness of thy soul, by thy endeavors to strengthen, and not to impair a
resolution, which after all, it will be in thy power to make me break or keep!
But my brain wounded, my health impaired, can I expect a long life? and shall I
not endeavor to make the close of it happy.

But, O my friends, what can we do for this great and good man, in return for
his goodness to two of your children? These obligations lie heavy upon my
heart. Yet who knows not his magnanimity? Divine, almost divine philanthropist,
can thou forgive me? I know thou can. Thou have the same notions that I
have of the brevity and vanity of this world's glory, and of the duration of
that to come! If I have the courage, the resolution to show thee this paper, do
thou enable me, by thy great example, to complete the conquest of myself; and
do not put me upon taking advantage of the generosity of my honored friends.
Yet after all, it must be, let me own, in thy choice; for I cannot bear to be
thought ungrateful to such exalted merit, to add what name thou pleases to
that of Clementina.

At reading this paper, sir Charles was amazed, confounded, and filled with
admiration at the angelic soul of this lady. He threw himself on a couch,
without thinking of Camilla, who sat in the window. Clementina rang, Camilla
hasted to her. He started as she passed him, and rose; but on her return, she
roused him from the stupefaction with which he was seized. O sir, cried she, my
poor lady fears your anger; she fears, yet hopes to see you. Haste, haste, and
save her from fainting. He ran in. -- The admirable lady met him half way, and
throwing herself at his feet, said, forgive, forgive the creature that must be
miserable, if she has offended you. He attempted to raise her, but she cried,
she would not rise till he had forgiven her. He then kneeled to her as she
kneeled, and clasping her in his arms, cried, forgive you, madam! O inimitable
woman! Can you forgive me for having presumed, and for still presuming to hope
to call such an angel mine! Being ready to faint, she threw her arms about sir
Charles, to support herself. Camilla held her salts to her nose, and she again
repeated, am I, am I forgiven? Say that I am. Forgive you, madam! he returned,
you have done nothing that wants forgiveness! I admire your greatness of mind.
What you wish, bid me be, and that I will be. Rise, most excellent of human
creatures! Sir Charles, then raising her, led her to a chair, and involuntarily
kneeled on one knee with both her hands in his, and looked up to her with eyes
filled with love and reverence. Camilla had hasted to the marchioness, crying,
O madam! such a scene! hasten up, hasten up. They will faint in one another's
arms. The marchioness ran after Camilla, and found them thus kneeling. Dear
chevalier, cried she, for the sake of my child's head restrain your grateful
rapture! O madam, said sir Charles, rising and taking one of her hands, glory
in your daughter: You always loved and admired her; you will now glory in her,
she is an angel. Permit me, madam, added he, looking at Clementina, to present
this pa^er to the marchioness. He the^ gave it her, saying, read it, madam, let
your lord, let the bishop, let father Marescotti read it. But read it with
compassion for me, and then direct me what to say, what to do! I resign myself
entirely to your direction and theirs; and to yours, my dear lady Clementina.
You say you forgive me, chevalier, said she; now shall I forgive myself. God's
goodness and yours will, I hope, perfectly restore me. O chevalier, love my
mind, as yours was ever the object of my love.

Every person in the family were astonished at this unexpected turn; the barone
pitied his friend, telling him that he could not bear to see a mind like his,
subject to the petulance of a brain sick g^rl: but none of them imagined she
would be able to keep her resolution; and to encourage sir Charles, they
reminded him, that she had entirely put herself in his power, by writing, that
he might add what name he pleased to that of Clementina. Sir Charles, however,
perceived that her conscience was concerned, and notwithstanding his passion,
he told them, he could not resolve to persuade her to violate it. Dear
Grandison, said the bishop, taking his hand, how I admire you! But can you be
so great? Shall I not, my lord, he returned, emulate such an example set by a
woman? I came over without any interested views. I indeed considered myself as
bound by the conditions to which I had formerly agreed; but the lady Clementina
and your family, as free. If she persists in her resolution, I will endeavor
to acquiesce.

A few days after, the marchioness, in Clementina's name, begged of sir Charles
that he would accept of her, on the conditions they themselves had proposed,
and that he would change his religion. Father Marcscotti, seconding the motion,
would have entreated him on his knees. O chevalier said the bishop, how happy
is it in your power to make us all! You will not, I hope, dear Grandison, said
the marquis, refuse my daughter. Ask any conditions of us. She shall be with
you in England in a month's time. We will accompany her thither; and stay till
you shall choose to return with us. Jeronymo, sobbing, caught his hand, crying
for God's sake, for my sake, for all our sakes, for your soul's sake, my
Grandison, be ours. Let your Jeronymo call you brother. If my tears, if my
prayers have weight, said the marchioness, let me call down my child, and she
shall give you her hand in our presence. She thinks, besides her regard for
your soul, that she ought to insist upon the terms on which we would have
consented to make her yours, in gratitude for our compliance with her wishes.
Dearest* Grandison! rejoined the bishop, refuse not my sister, refuse not the
assenting Clementina.

They were all silent, with their eyes fixed upon sir Charles, on which he
replied, refuse lady Clementina, said you! How you wound my soul by the
supposition! Lady Clementina's generous and condescending proposal, when I am
willing to allow terms to her, that she will not to me, shows how important she
thinks the difference between the two religions, and I have only to confess
myself, that the power of refusal lies where it ought. Yet let me add, this
company cannot think me too solemn -- Were I to live always here, and were
convinced there is no life after this, your commands and Clementina's would be
laws to me. But has she not the goodness to say in her paper, that I have the
same notion as she of the brevity and vanity of this world's glory, and of the
duration of that to come. It is hard, very hard, said the bishop, for a man
convinced of the truth of his religion, to allow to another* of a different
persuasion, what he expects should be allowed for himself. You, chevalier,
however, can allow it; and have such greatness of mind as to judge favorably
of those who cannot. I do love you, but fain would I love you more. The
marchioness wept. My dear love, said the marquis, taking her hand, how many
tears has this affair cost you: -- My heart bleeds to see you weep. The
chevalier is unworthy of our child, unworthy of the terms we offered him;
unworthy of our joint entreaties -- He is an invincible man.

Sir Charles being greatly affected, withdrew; but having taken two or three
turns in the saloon, returned; on which the marquis coming to him, cried, I am
sorry -- Not one word of apology, my lord, said sir Charles, interrupting him:
I did not withdraw from resentment, but purely from concern, that in your
opinion, I did not deserve the honor, done me by one so dear to you. Think me
unhappy, my lord, and pity me. Principle, not perverseness, influences me. It
does every one present; it does the lady above; and shall we not ^llow for one
another, when we are all actuated by the same motive? At this the bishop threw
his arms about sir Charles, crying, generous expansion of heart!

Sir Charles, now finding that Clementina steadfastly persisted in her
resolution, desired they would allow him to make one effort to convince her,
that she might be happy with him; by endeavoring to remove her scruples with
respect to his inviolable honor, and his allowing her the free exercise of her
religion. To this they at length consented: and she desiring to see him, he
earnestly pleaded his having agreed to allow her her chapel, her confessor, and
her own servants. He alleged, that he might prevail on her father and mother to
give them the pleasure of their company in their first journey to England; and
that the barone would likewise go with them, and might obtain great benefit
from the use of the restorative baths of his country. He expatiated on the
ple^^sure she would receive from the aff^^^tion of his sisters and their lords,
who would accompany her in her j^ur^^ey to Italy; and on the delight with which
she would every other year visit and revisit England and her native country.
How dear, cried he, will you be in turn, to your old friends and to your new!
My dearest Clementina! let me hear you say, that you think you can be happy,
and yet bless me with your love. O how, said she, shall I guard myself against
a voice that is the voice of love! -- If I attempt to argue, I am lost! -- Does
not this show me, that were I to be yours, I must be all you wish? And then my
everlasting peace; my everlasting happiness! O chevalier! I doubt not your
justice, your generosity: but I fear myself; -- seek not, let me rep^at, seek
not, kindest of men, to entangle me with your love. Sir Charles fearing she
would have fainted, clasped her in his arms; and she returned, let me, let me
cut short what I intended to say, by referring you to my paper, which cannot be
answered to my satisfaction. Be my advocate to your own heart, and seek not,
dearest of men, to entangle me with your love. Sir Charles then assured her,
that whatever it cost him, he would yield to her pleasure, and never urge her
again on that subject, except he was informed by the bishop that she had
changed her mind.

The agitations he had suffered were scarcely to be supported; and as he found
his health affected, he thought it necessary, both on the noble lady's account
and his own, to wean himself by absence. He therefore visited several cities of
Italy, and then returned to take his final leave of Bologna. The joy and
gratitude of the marquis, his lady, and her son, on the recovered intellects of
their incomparable daughter; the pleasing prospect of the recovery of Jeronymo,
and their admiration and affection for a person to whom they were under such
great obligations, made them at a loss how to return the favor he had
conferred upon them; and they entreated him to let them know what return he
would accept. On which he observed, that the highest favor he could possibly
receive, would be the honor of a visit the next spring, from that noble
family; by which means, he made no doubt, but that his dear Jeronymo would be
perfectly recovered by the use of the English ^aths. They accepted this
proposal with hearts filled with admiration, and sir Charles, after taking an
affecting leave of Clementina and Jeronymo, set out for England.

CHAP. XII.
Miss Byron struggles to conquer her passion; but sir Charles no sooner returns
to England, than he pays his addresses to her. Their courtship and marriage.

ON sir Charles's arrival in his native country, he was received by his family
and friends with the warmest testimonies of joy: but he was extremely alarmed
to hear that miss Byron was ill; he therefore took a journey into Northamp
onshire, where that lady lived with her relations, and paid a visit to Mrs.
Shirley, her grandmother, an elderly lady of a very amiable character; when,
informing her of his situation with respect to Clementina, he asked if it was
consistent with her notions of delicacy, to give her interest in his favor;
adding, that if it was, and if miss Byron would accept of a heart that had been
thus unaccountably divided, they would lay him under an obligation that he
could only endeavor to return by the utmost gratitude and affection; then
desiring an answer in writing, he left upon the table several letters he had
received from Jeronymo and Clementina, with his answers, that she might see
that the affair was entirely finished between him and that lady, and then took
his leave.

Immediately mrs. Shirley sent for miss Byron, mr. and mrs. Selby, with some
other relations, and having informed them of the welcome news, they read the
letters, which gave them entire satisfaction; on which the old lady wrote to
sir Charles, that they received as the highest honor, the offer he had made of
an alliance, that would do credit to families of the first rank; and that it
had been their most ardent wish, that the man, who had rescued the dear
creature, might be a^ liberty to entitle himself to her grateful love.

Sir Charles, on receiving this welcome letter, paid his addresses to miss
Byron. She at first received him with visible confusion, but was soon
encouraged by his polite and tender behavior. He showed her another letter
from Jeronymo, in which his dear friend urged him to set an example to
Clementina, by entering into the marriage state, and informing him, that the
noble lady wished for nothing more than to hear of his being happily married.
You see, madam, added he, I am fully free, with regard to Clementina; free by
her own choice. It was always Clementina's wish that I would marry, and only be
careful that my choice should not disgrace her regard for me; but when she has
the pleasure of knowing the dear lady before me, if I am allowed that honor,
she will confess that my choice has done the highest credit to the favor she
honored me with. He was silent, and seeming to expect an answer; the honor,
said she, with much hesitation, of sir Charles Grandison, no one ever did, or
ever can doubt. -- I must own -- I must confess -- Here she paused. What does
my dear miss Byron own? What confess? said he. Assure yourself, madam, of my
honor, of my gratitude. Should you have doubts, speak them. This, sir, said
she, is my confession, the confession of a heart no less sincere than yours,
that I am dazzled and confounded at the superior merits of the noble lady you
still so justly esteem. I fear not, sir, any more than she, your honor, your
justice, your indulgent tenderness. Your character, your principles are full
security to the woman who shall endeavor to deserve that indulgence. But so
justly high do I think of the lady Clementina's conduct, that I fear it is
impossible. What impossible? What does my dear miss Byron fear is impossible?
Thus kindly urged, returned she, why shall I not speak all that is in my mind?
The poor Harriot Byron, when she contemplates the magnani^^^^ of that excellent
lady, fears, (...) with all her endeavors, she sh^^ never be able to make the
figure to herself that is necessary for her tranquillity. This, sir, is all my
fear. Generous, kind, noble miss Byron, returned he, in a rapture; and is this
all your fear? Then must the man before you be happy. Clementina has acted
gloriously, preferring her religion and her country, to all other
considerations; and shall I not be doubly bound in gratitude to her sister
excellence, who not having these trials, yet the most delicate of human minds,
shows in my favor, a frankness of heart which sets her above little forms, and
at the same time a generosity with regard to the merits of another lady, that
has few examples? May my future life be attended with blessings, in proportion
as this grateful heart shall acknowledge your goodness!

At last the happy day was fixed. The relations of miss Byron chose to have the
ceremony performed in as public a manner as possible; and sir Charles coming
into their measures, that lady acquiesced, though she could not, without great
^^^^siness, think of being exposed, on (...) solemn occasion, to the view of a
number of spectators. Sir Charles invited his nearest relations; and those of
miss Byron were desirous of attending her.

The ladies were all elegantly dressed; but miss Byron was in virgin white. The
procession to church consisted of eight coaches and four, and the way was lined
with spectators. On their stopping at the church yard, four tenants daughters,
the eldest not above thirteen, unexpectedly appeared with neat baskets in their
hands filled with flowers; and as soon as the bride, mr. Selby, sir Charles,
and mrs. Shirley alighted, these pretty little Floras, all dressed in white,
with chaplets of flowers for head-dresses, large nosegays in their bosoms,
white ribbons adorning their stays and their baskets, some streaming down, and
others tied round the handles in true lovers' knots, attended the company; two
going before, and the others here and there, all strewing flowers.

At the conclusion of the ceremony, sir Charles with a joy, that lighted up a
finer flush (...) usual in his face, took the bride by the hand, and saluting
her, said, in an audible voice, may God, my dearest life, be gracious to your
Grandison, as he will be good to his Harriet, now no longer Byron! She
curtesied low, every one blessing her, and pronouncing her the loveliest of
women, and him the politest and most graceful of men. Sir Charles now led her
intothe vestry, followed by the rest of their friends; and the moment she
beheld her grandmother, she kneeling, cried, bless, madam, your happy, happy
child. ^od for ever bless, said she, the darling of my heart! Sir Charles then
bending his knee to the venerable lady, said, receive and bless also your son.
The good lady was affected; she slid off of her seat on her knees, and lifting
up her hands and eyes, while the tears trickled down her cheeks, cried, thou
Almighty, bless the dear son of my wishes! He raised her with a pious
tenderness, and saluted her. Excellent lady! said he; but was too much affected
to say more; and having seated her, turned to mrs. Selby. Words are poor, said
he. My actions, my behavior, shall speak the grateful sense I have of your
goodness, saluting her; of yours, madam, to mrs. Shirley; and of yours, my
dearest life, addressing himself again to his lovely bride, who seemed scarcely
able to support her joy. Let me once more, added he, bless the hand that has
blessed me! She cheerfully offered it. I give you, sir, said she, my hand,
curtsying, and with it a poor but grateful heart. -- It is all your own. He
bowed upon it, unable to speak. Joy, joy, joy, was wished the happy pair from
every mouth. See, my dear young ladies, said the happy and instructive mrs.
Shirley, addressing herself, to several who had entered the vestry, the reward
of duty, virtue, and obedience! How unhappy must those parents and relations
be, whose daughters, unlike our Harriet, have disgraced themselves and their
families by a shameful choice! -- As my Harriet's is, such, looking round her,
be your lot, my amiable daughters! They each besought her hand, kissed it, and
promised to cherish the memory of what they had seen and heard.

Sir Charles wrote the very next day to inform his dear friend the barone della
Porretta of the actual celebration of his nuptials, and concluded with a
caution, given in the warmest terms, against urging Clementina, with too much
earnestness, to marry. The same day, by sir Charles's desire, the
churchwardens brought a list of the poor, amounting to upwards of a hundred
and forty persons, divided into two classes; one, of the poor -- the other of
housekeepers and laboring people, who were ashamed to apply, but to whom the
church wardens knew his bounty would be acceptable. He gave very liberally to
all, and in particular, to about thirty of the last: and the church wardens,
who were men of great humanity, went away blessing him.

On the following Sunday, the relations of the bride and bridegroom, were all
richly dressed. The bride, lovely in any dress, wore richer silks than usual,
costly laces and jewels that added grace to that admirable proportion, and
those fine features to which no painter has been able to do justice. The
bridegroom was principally admired for his native ^ase and dignity, and that
inattention to his own appearance which shows the truly fine gentleman,
accustomed to be always elegant. On his lady's coming to him and her friends,
they involuntarily rose, as if to pay her homage; but sir Charles approaching
her, with an air of unusual freedom, cried, how lovely! But what is even all
this amazing loveliness to the graces of her mind? They every hour rise upon
me. She hardly opens her lips, but I find reason to bless God and you, my dear
ladies, bowing to mrs. Shirley and mrs. Selby; for God and you have given her
goodness. -- My dear life, allow me to say, that this person, which will be
your first perfection in every stranger's eye, is but a second in mine. Teach
me, sir, said she, to deserve your love, by improving the mind you have the
goodness to prefer, and then I shall be the happiest of women on earth. The
church was extremely crowded, and the charming couple greatly admired. Sir
Charles and his bride, however, did not forget that humble deportment due to
the place, which seemed to render them absent for the time from that splendour,
which attracted every ^ye out of the pews in which the family were placed. The
church, in the afternoon, was still more crowded. How was sir Charles blessed
by the poor, and people of low circumstances, for his well disposed bounty!

Sir Charles and his bride, having received and returned the visits of the
neighboring gentry, and giving the tenants their company at another
entertainment provided for them, they set out for Grandison-hall, sir Charles's
principal seat; where, having again run the round of receiving and paying
visits, they settled into that pleasing serenity, that constitutes the most
perfect state of human happiness.

A considerable part of his time was now employed in improving his estate, in
order to enable him to exercise his generous spirit. He became acquainted with
every tenant, and even cottager, enquiring into their circumstances, the number
of their children, and their prospects. When they were distressed, he would
forgive arrears of rent; or send them on urgent occasions, a supply of money;
and when they had no prospect of success, he gave them money to quit. At the
tenants' desire, he transplanted one to a larger farm, and another to a less,
according to their stock, or the probability of success. By these acts of
humanity and friendship, a means, his tenants overcame every difficulty, and
^rew rich, while he himself reaped the benefit of his own* generosity, by the
case and punctuality with which they paid their rents. On the other hand he
began to employ himself in reconciling the differences between his friends and
tenants, and frequently united those, who, from any misunderstanding, had been
at variance; it being his settled opimon, that a day spent in restoring peace
and harmony, let the objects be ever so mean, is more pleasing, on re^^exion,
than a day spent in the most elegant indulgence.

CHAP. XIII.
Clementina, who had escaped from her friend, comes to England to avoid
marrying the count of Belvedere, and is protected by sir Charles and his lady.
She is followed by her relations and friends, who were received by sir Charles;
and by his management, every uneasiness is removed. The conclusion.

WHILE sir Charles was thus employed in the most generous acts of humanity and
friendship, a letter he received from the barone della Porretta, filled him
with deep concern. By this letter he learned that the lady Clementina, being
strongly bent on taking the veil, had been pressed with such earnestness and
incessant importunity to give her hand to the count of Belvedere, as had
greatly disordered her brain; and that, to avoid that union, and put a stop to
these importunate solicitations, she had fled from her friends; and with no
other attendants than her page, an English youth, and her servant Laura, had
embarked in a vessel bound to London; and that both her father, mother, and
himself, together with several other of her friends, being inconsolable for her
loss, were following her; beseeching him to search for the fugitive Clementina,
and to provide them lodgings against their arrival. It is no wonder that this
news gave both sir Charles and his lady great concern. They were then at
Grandison-hall: and that lady being firmly convinced of the steadiness of his
v^rtue, immediately persuaded him to give the unhappy Clementina his
protection. Dear sir, said she, consider me as a strengthener* not as a
weakener of your hands in her service. My only concern is for her safety and
honor, and for your concern on the affecting occasion, and let me, by
sympathising with you, lessen it. Soul of my soul, cried he, clasping her in
his bosom, I have not the least doubt of your generous goodness. It would be
doing injustice to the unhappy lady, and to the knowledge I have of my own
heart, as well as to you, the absolute mistress of it, to think it necessary to
make professions of my inviolable love to you. I will acquaint you with every
step I take on this occasion, and must have your advice as I go along: for such
delicate m^nds as yours and Clementina's must be nearly allied.

Sir Charles immediately rode post ^o town, where he found a long letter from
the fugitive lady, who in unconnected ramblings, lamented the s^ep she had
taken; observing, that she was far from being happy; but wished for his advice
and protection, though she did not dare to let him know where he might see her;
yet at the same time informed him how he might direct a letter, so as to come
to her hands. He strove, in his answer, to sooth her mind; offering to put her
under his lady's or his sister's protection; and beseeching her to remove his
anxiety, by giving him an immediate opportunity of seeing her. In another
letter she earnestly endeavored to engage him to use his interest with her
friends to allow her the freedom of her choice, and prevent her being forced ^o
marry the count of Belvedere. All this he readily promised in his reply. And
she allowed him to wait on her.

Sir Charles went, and was introduced by her servant Laura. On his entering the
room, he immediately welcomed her to England. Do you, can you, cried she, bid
me welcome, me a fugitive, an ingrate, undutiful! -- O chevalier, don't debase
your un^^llied character, by approving the unnatural step I have taken. I do
bid you welcome, madam, said, he; your brother, your friend from his soul,
welcomes you to England. Let me know, chevalier, before another word passes,
returned she, whether I have a father? whether I have a mother? Thank God,
madam, you have both, said ^e. God, I thank thee! cried she, ^^^^ing up her
hands. Had I not, distraction would have been my portion! If they had been no
more, I should have thought myself the most detestable of parricides. They are
in the utmost distress, rejoined he, for your safety; and will think themselves
happy when they know that you are well, and in the possession of your brother
Grandison. Will they, sir, cried she. O how strange! They so cruel, yet so
indulgent! -- I so dutiful, yet a fugitive! But determined as I was against
entering into a state I had too much honor to enter with a reluctant heart,
could I have taken any other step to free myself from the cruelty of
persuasion? Your conscience, madam, said he, is a law to you: if that accuses
you, you will repent: if i^ acquits you, who shall presume to condemn? Sir
Charles then strove to raise her spirits by expatiating on the kind reception
she would meet with among his friends. She then remarked, that he forbore to
mention the principal person among them, and asked, what his lady would think
of the poor fugitive Clementina? desiring him to assure her, that she would not
have landed in England, if he had not been married; addine, that should she
render him and his lady unhappy, no person on earth could have her so much as
she should hate herself. Sir Charles assured her, that her happiness (...)
really essential to that of them bo^^: that his Harriot was another C^^ment^^a,
whom she must know and love, for she was prepared to receive her as the dearest
of her sisters. Generous lady Grandison! said she, I have heard her character,
and con^^a^^la^e you, sir, on your happiness: I should have been grieved, had
you not met with a lady worthy of you* But my being sensible of your happiness,
and that you do not blame me for declining your addresses, will contribute more
to my peace of mind than I can express. When I have more courage, and this poor
heart is eased of that part of its trouble, you shall present me to her. In the
mean time tell her, that I will love her; and that I shall ever think myself
under the highest obligations for making him happy, whom once, but for a
superior motive, I had the vanity to think I could have made so. She here
turned away her glowing face, bedewed with tears, while sir Charles's
admiration of her greatness of mind, so like that of his own Harr^ot, kept him
silent; but he at last persuading her to accept of an apartment at lady L --
's, she consented to go thither the next day. Sir Charles and his sister came
the next morning, and after an affecting interview, took her away in lord L's
coach. All the ladies of sir Charles's family strove who should most oblige the
unhappy Clementina; and particularly his lady, who had all along admired her
for her virtues, and noble magnanimity; and now treated her with the ^ender
affection of a beloved sister. Clementina had no^ been long acquainted with the
principal persons of this happy family, when sir Charles received a letter by
an express from his dear friend the ba^one, to let him know, ^he marquis and
the marchioness, with several of their friends, were landed at Dover. Upon
which he immediately set out with four coaches and six of his own and his
friends, to accommod^^e them and their attendants, he having before fitted up
his house in Grosvener square for their reception. He had not long been gone,
when the count of Belvedere, who impatiently longed to hear news of Clementina,
arrived with one of his friends, and were received by lady Grandison with all
possible marks of respect: she let them know that she was safe and in good
hands; but no arguments could prevail on her to inform them where that lady was.

Sir Charles no sooner arrived at Dover* than he was received with
inexpressible joy by the whole noble family: however, though he found them
breathing nothing but reconciliation and love to their dear Clementina, ^e was
determined to keep her concealed, ^ill he was fully satisfied that her
understanding could not be endangered, by her being ^eazed to marry the c^unt
of Belvedere.

Sir Charles conducted the family, by easy journ^es, to London, where he
brought them to the house he had provided for their reception; and was
agreeably surprised, on their arrival, at finding that his lady had, unknown to
him, prepared an elegant repast. The marchioness was so impatient to see
Clementina, that every one was afraid of the consequences, with respect to her
health; and, on the other hand, the young lady was grieved at finding herself
so situated, as to be obliged to cause her parents to enter into articles with
her before she kneeled to them, which she longed to do, notwithstanding her
dreading to see them. Sir Charles, by the desire of all parties, drew up a
paper, copies of which were given both ^o the principal persons of her family,
and to Clementina; in which he proposed, that she should lay aside all thoughts
of retiring to a convent, be allowed to choose her way of life, and her
attendants: that her parents and brothers should promise never to persuade her,
much less to compel her to marry any man; and that the count of Belvedere
should discontinue his addresses. After some debate, the whole family consented
to these articles: but the lady Clementina found the greatest difficulty in
giving up her favorite project of taking the veil; nor could the count of
Belvedere, without the greatest agony of mind, submit to discontinue his
pretensions. These precautions being taken, Clementina was to be introduced to
her longing parents; but her dread of appearing before them made her entreat
the lady Grandison and the lady L -- to introduce and countenance her, by their
presence; to which they willingly consented. At the time fixed for this
affecting interview, sir Charles went to prepare her expecting parents, while
the lady Grandison waited upon her* Clementina looking wild and disordered, and
giving lady L -- and lady Grandison her hand, was led to the coach: but at
stepping in she trembled, and appeared much disturbed. They gave her all the
comfort they were able, while the coach drove to Grosvenor-square. On its
stopping, sir Charles appeared, and seeing her emotion, it is kind, my dear
sister, said he, to accompany the lady Clementina -- Your goodness will be
rewarded by the pleasure of seeing the most gracious reception that ever
indulgent parents gave to a long absent daughter. O Chevalier! was all
Clementina could say. He then told her that he would lead her into a drawing
room, where she should see none but those who were with her. Visibly
encouraged, she gave him her trembling hand, and he led her in, followed by the
two ladies, who seated themselves on each side of her, but with difficulty kept
her from fainting, by their salts and so^^^hing: on her recovery a little,
holding up her finger with wildness in her looks, she cast her eyes to the
doors and windows, crying, hush! they will hear us: but soon coming more to
herself, O cheval^er, said she, what shall I say? How shall I look? What shall
I do? Am I, indeed, in the same house with my father, my mother, Jeronym^? who
else? who else? My dearest Clementina, said sir Charles, it is, from love and
tenderness to you, agreed that you first only see your mother, then your
father, and at your own pleasure, your brothers, mrs. Beaumont, and father
Maresco^t^. Your mamma, madam, who is all indulgence, is impatient to hold you
to her heart. What joy will you give her! He offered his hand and she gave him
hers, making a motion for the two ladies to come with her, and who followed her
into the room, where was her expecting mother. They ran to each other with open
arms. O my Clementina! O my mamma! was all they could utter: they sunk on the
floor, the mother's arms about the daughter's ^eck, the daughter's about the
mother's waist. Sir Charles, lifting them up, seated them by each other.
Pardon! pardon! pardon! cried Clementina, lifting up her hands and eyes, and
sliding out of her mother's arms on her knees. The marquis, unable longer to
contain himself, rushed in, crying, my daughter! my child! my Clementina! do I
once more see my child? Sir Charles then lifted her up, when her father
entered, but she again sunk down prostrate on the floor, with her arms
extended, crying, O father, forgive! forgive me. O my father! By sir Charles's
assistance he raised her up, and seating her between himself and his lady, they
both threw their arms about her; she in broken accents repeating prayers for
forgiveness, while they, in accents as broken, uttered their blessings.

When Clementina's first emotions were over, and she began to look up, she
cried, behold, madam, behold, my lord, looking at lady L --, the hospitable
lady with whom I have lived. Behold, looking at lady Grandison, a more than
woman, an angel! She here seemed at a loss for words. We have before, said the
marquis, seen and admired, in lady Grandison, the noblest of all women. He
arose to approach the ladies, when sir Charles leading them both to him,
Clementina first snatched lady Grandison's hand, and eagerly pressed it to her
lip^; and then lady L -- 's. Her heart was full, and she seemed unable to
speak; when the two ladies, with their eyes overflowing with tears,
congratulated the father, mother, and daughter.

The articles, signed and witnessed, were put into her hands a day or two
after; when having written her name, she tore off the other names, and kissing
the torn b^^, put it in her bosom; then falling on her knees to her father and
mother, who stood together, she presented the paper, crying, never let it be
mentioned that your Clementina has presumed to bind, by these articles, the
dearest of parents. My name stands, and w^ll be a witness against me, if I
break those I have signed: but in your forgiveness, my lord, in yours, madam,
and in a thousand acts of indulgence, I have too much experienced your past
goodness, to doubt the future. May God enable your Clementina to be all you
wish. Only indulge me in my choice of a single li^e, and your word is all the
assurance I desire. They embraced her; then tenderly raising her, embraced her
again.

This noble lady was not informed till the day before, that the count of
Belvedere had accompanied her friends to England. Sir Charles made use of great
precaution in telling her; and at the same time let her know, that the count
was very desirous of taking his leave of her. She consented to see him, as one
of the friends of her father and brothers, and in that light deferred his
departure; she had afterward several conversations with him, and, before all
her relations, behaved toward him with the respect due to his merit. She was
sensible of the ardour with which her parents and brothers wished to see her
married to that accomplished nobleman. She could not help observing the
pleasure that sparkled in his eyes, whenever she was pleased to enter into
discourse with him; and seriously considering their motives, with the
extraordinary merit of the count, together with the reasons that had induced
her to resolve never to enter into the marriage state, she at length began to
hesitate, and voluntarily promised her relations that if, within a year's time,
she should find no reason to change her mind, she would cheerfully comply with
their wishes.

In short, this noble family staid several months with sir Charles. Every
opportunity was taken to render their residence in England as agreeable as
possible, and on their taking their leave, sir Charles and his lady attended
them to Dover.

The next year, sir Charles and his lady went to Italy, where they were
received by this noble family with transports of joy. They found Clementina
perfectly free from her unhappy disorder of mind. After having spent several
months in Italy, sir Charles and his lady, in company with his brothers and
sisters, returned to England, where they had the pleasure to resume their
former plan of life. Their piety and virtue are the sources of the noblest
pleasures that can fill the human mind.

FINIS.

