THE SCHOOL OF VIRTUE, A NOVEL, ON A NEW PLAN. TO WHICH IS ADDED, THE FAIR
SOLITARY: OR, FEMALE HERMIT, A NOVEL.

FROM THE FRENCH OF THE MARCHIONESS DE LAMBERT.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD. M.DCC, XC.

PREFACE.
THE necessity of reformation in the modern system of novels, is obvious to
every reader of taste and judgment. -- The general plan upon which events are
founded to carry on a train of incidents in modern composition, is not the
representation of nature, in showing things as they occur in human life; -- but
an artificial coloring, to please the imagination at the expense of common
sense and reason; -- by portraying, in an extravagant manner, the hero or
heroine of the narrative, to be all perfection; -- passing through the scenes of
action with such eclat, that simple nature has nothing to do in the romantic
exploits that are performed; -- sacrificing at all hazards the complexion of
truth, probability, and propriety, to preserve the favorite of the narrative
from all terrestrial misfortunes; precluding the crush of accidents, the
invasion of distempers, and the horrors of death! -- Thus finishing the piece
egregiously daubed, -- and varnished romantically extravagant and outre.

The plan laid down in the following narrative is quite counter to the
foregoing method, being a faithful transcript from the volume of human nature;
-- wherein hyberbole is utterly excluded, and regular delineations are
attempted, to discountenance vice and reward virtue. -- Yet to perform the
latter, the fenced field of probability is not overstept; -- but a continued
view of it preserved throughout the performance. -- The coloring is without
elaborate art or slovenly carelessness, -- for either of them are disgusting:
-- so that no character is introduced that performs a part either above or
below the regulated standard of nature.

In this work the reader may find some digressions, which are intended to serve
such ends as secure a pardon for the liberty; -- for rational instruction is
the sole aim of such deviations from the usual method of narration.

The style will perhaps be found on a different plan to that used by novelists,
-- but an elevation is attempted: -- yet the common place adoption of egotism
is exploded: -- this composition being chiefly designed for the use of the fair
sex, to give them a taste for the study of science, so far as the cause of
virtue, morality, and religion will permit.

Many objections may be made to the innovation by this plan, but every person
of rational endowments will coincide in the opinion of that excellent genius,
Shakespeare, who observes, "That in many privileged practices, they would be
better in the breach than the performance or observance."

THE SCHOOL OF VIRTUE.
IN the delightful County of Devon lived Sir William Howard, a Baronet of
distinguished abilities; whose sentiments in the grand council of the nation
were on several occasions applauded by every member, who, like him, wished for
the prosperity of his country, before that of degrading self-interest; --
possessing at once the real and uncommon titles of patriotism and honesty: --
for then, as well as at this time, these two epithets bore a different
signification. -- But lest my fair readers should suppose I mean to descant on
the theory or practice of Politics, I shall at once drop the digression, and
proceed.

Sir William's house was an ancient Gothic structure, not raised by lofty
towers or turrets, not the gaudy uplifted tinselled fronts of modern piles, as
the mansions of many of our new created families of fashion are, -- but in a
more noble style, though not overlooking the residence of humbler life, only in
the front, an unobstructed view of the sea shore for many miles, in serene
weather, might be enjoyed; adding an unlimited prospect of the sea, which in a
calm clear day was only to be lost in the sensible horizon of sight, which of
an evening at the setting of the glorious luminary of light and heat, seemed
not only beautiful in the extreme, but an awful emblem of solemn thought; for
who could look on the unparalleled coloring of the glassy deep, without
contemplating on the Supreme Being, who out of nothing, such great and
beautiful elements created? -- Here it was that the worthy Baronet, at the
close of day, spent many edifying and satisfactory hours, whereby he digested a
happy theory into real practice; -- considering wisely, for what end he was
sent into a probationary state as a free agent, whereby the choice of life or
death were given. -- Nor did the early dawn rise from her gray mottled pillow,
without the Knight's visit to the seat of his well earned wisdom, for ere the
golden mantle, embroidered with precious gems of the blushing morn was
perceived, the pious man had invoked the protection and direction of the
Beneficent Being, to whom he owed the whole of his happiness and affluence; so
that with the rising Planet of Glory, he was ready for an audience, -- which
was never refused to the meanest who stood in need of his advice, assistance,
or relief: for his doors were open to his friends, acquaintance, the traveller,
the indigent, or oppressed. Thus was humanity made a regular and unerring
system, -- philosophy only refined the impressions, so that the beautiful
sublimity of Religion was the true finisher of Sir William's works, -- never
daring to attempt any thing that would not admit the touchstone of that exalted
standard, -- she always being ranked the criterion of order. -- So far let me
sketch the outlines of this truly good and worthy character; -- for envy shrunk
at his presence, nor dared calumny to spread her baleful exhalations where his
name was mentioned, -- for Fame (for once) had sounded with solid grounds the
worth of Howard's name -- in proclaiming the daily exercise at Howard's Castle,
such being the name his mansion bore.

Sir William's domestics were not numerous, having only those who were fit to
execute with faithfulness his daily commissions; to distribute not only at
Howard's Castle, but also at the respective residence of the afflicted or
distressed, who had, by proper application, made known their cases, --
therefore the profligate, the idler, and profane were excluded. Three male
servants, with two females, composed the whole of his family. His Lady, who had
for many years shared with him the blessings of the poor, was some time since
departed from a transitory state, to enjoy the everlasting crown laid up for
her, and all those who piously follow her in the paths of virtue and christian
piety. But ere they parted, had given repeated pledges of their love, which the
Deity, for his wise ends, had as often called hence to celestial happiness; yet
did not wholly decline the grant ardently wished in their mutual prayers -- for
an heir was left to perpetuate the worthy name assumed in that illustrious
family. -- Henry was his name, who was now in habits of general custom, making
a grand tour of Europe, in order to finish an education which had been liberal
indeed; -- for early had his parents instilled the seeds of virtue, morality,
and religion into his mind, which was well capacitated to receive the
impressions, being naturally strong and very susceptible of implanting on a
large scale the greatest depths of understanding; whereby expanded ideas could
reach the greatest heights, whilst extension was unlimited. Since this period,
proper preceptors, with the assistance of an university, had finished what the
British Island could afford in the grand researches of knowledge, to be of real
service in the rugged road through life.

Henry was now arrived at an age of manhood, having attained his twenty-second
year; for though his studies were partly finished before that period, yet his
father, wisely considering the danger of evil impressions, and the consequences
of bad examples -- digressionally made applications of all the various courses
continental travelers or residents usually practiced, and the result of
corrupted minds, faithfully pourtraying the use that might be deduced from a
knowledge of men and manners in other countries; at the same time, by an easy
ascent, mounting his ideas above the meridian of modern taste, so far as the
slavish habits of imitation in dress, gambling, or excess in pleasures of a
sensual complexion; -- wisely remarking to his son, the many amateurs in
science, and the few who possessed real talents which would argue the name of
merit. Thus comparatively opposing the advantages and disadvantages of the
usual method of finishing a polite education in traveling -- to see the
manners and customs of the most enlightened and truly polished courts of
Europe, -- a practice really worthy of continuance, and of real utility to form
the mind, so far as liberality of sentiment, a regard to religion, a pure taste
for improvement in arts and sciences, with observations in the real practice of
reading men, to be able to point out the general propensity, whether good or
evil, of the various nations when contrasted, so as to carry thither no
prejudice, nor to bring from thence the least coloring of a depraved taste;
but to go out a man of caution, and return a man of experience; refined by a
true notion of virtue, honor and liberality. Those were the short contents of
Sir William's repeated lessons to his son, previous to his setting out on his
travels; which were listened to with dutiful attention, and carefully retained
for practical uses. -- Being thus provided with necessary instruction, a
competent knowledge of the acquisitions that he was to obtain, the dangers he
was to avoid, and assisted by the counsel and tuition of a respectable
gentleman in holy orders, as his preceptor, we shall not hesitate to proclaim,
that great were the expectations of Sir William, from the consequent polish his
son should acquire by two or three years residence on the continent.

Henry had now been absent nearly three years, without any extraordinary
occurrence, except his intelligence and description of the several towns,
cities, and countries he visited, all of which were, with a precision peculiar
to himself, narrated with a strict adherence to truth; yet in so animated and
chaste a method, with an elegance of style, that gave repetitions of pleasure
to Sir William, to find his labor well bestowed in the cultivation of his
son's morals, -- that assured him alone, that he would be an ornament to the
sphere he was likely to revolve in; as integrity of heart, usually termed (by
the higher ranks of life) honor, was a principle, possessed without a spot or
blemish by his son, which Sir William carefully reminded him to regard as a
jewel of inestimable value.

The exigency of state was now on the eve of calling Sir William to attend his
duty in Parliament, when Henry wrote to his father; he wished to know his
pleasure relative to his return to England, expressing a desire to see him, and
to receive further useful lessons in practical knowledge, having seen a
sufficiency of human life, few of the maxims whereof he chose to adopt,
preferring the manly customs and liberal sentiments of Britain, to all those of
the Continent. To this request Sir William immediately attended, and in reply
to his son's letter gave him to understand, he should be glad of his return; as
his intentions were to vacate his seat in the House, wishing to decline in
favor of him.

Whilst the period of this interval was passing over, Sir William amused
himself with the happiness of seeing his accomplished son return in a few days.

One evening, in the month of September, nearly about the autumnal equinox,
when the sun is supposed to enter the first scruple of Libra, or the Balance,
which makes equal day and night in every quarter of the globe, and consequently
rise sudden squalls of wind, therefore a dangerous season for ships in narrow
seas; -- about the setting of the sun, Sir William, from the leaden terrace of
his mansion, espied something of the appearance of a sail, (a word used as a
sea-phrase on a sight of a ship at sea) however the sudden change of the
approaching night brought on an unusual darkness, accompanied with an awful
sky, overcast with clouds of foreboding danger; the winds sounded hollow, and
seemingly mourned the fate of victims decreed to an untimely visitation; whilst
the waves in sadness seemed disturbed by the gathering of vivid flashes of
lightning, that seemed also determined to be active in the approaching scene.
-- Quickly the distant view of the vessel was interrupted; the face of nature
seemed all at once hid beneath the towering clouds, which like fleeces
overwrapt each other. -- Now was Sir William's conjectures roused; his mind was
agitated exceedingly; in vain were his endeavors to calm the tumult of
assembled passions; reason, fortitude, and all the auxiliary solacing of
resignation barely afforded relief, so great was his anxiety; -- for
probability seemed so nearly allied to truth, that his powers were almost duped
into a belief, that the ship just now in sight, was freighted with the safe
conveyance of his son and his attendants; here he immediately checked his
groundless suspicions, by a succession of ideas that cleared up the gloominess
of his imagination. -- "What," said he, "shall I doubt of the providence of
God, whose hand has hitherto been stretched forth to guard me from misfortunes?
forbid it heaven! -- but I am a son of frailty, yet I hope my fall shall be to
rise again, therefore let the will of Heaven be fulfilled." A short ejaculatory
prayer to the Divine Being closed Sir William's soliloquy. He then hasted from
the terrace, the elements beginning their emulative strife. Rain poured down in
torrents, -- lightning flashed in liquid sheets, -- the winds howled in hoarse
bellowings, accompanied with dreadful claps of thunder: -- thus a hurricane set
in.

Calmness nevertheless sat now triumphant on Sir William's brow, though an
innate principle of something more than ordinary, filled at intervals the scope
of his imagination.

At an advanced hour of night, Sir William ordered his domestics to retire to
rest, yet from him sleep had fled; and so much the ocean gained upon his
thoughts, that he sat direct in view of the boisterous element; carefully
watching each succeeding wave that surfed on the adjacent beach. -- 'Twas now
about the last hour of night, the clock having recently struck twelve, the sky
seemed more clear, -- the sable face had partly disappeared, though the winds
were still more strong, and had set to the south west point, -- a pale yellow
had butted the rising of the blast, -- the storm was completely set; at this
juncture the Knight perceived the ebbing surf of more than common size had left
behind something of the appearance of trunks or chests of baggage! -- forthwith
he rung his alarm bell, his servants instantly attended, but scarce were they
collected, before a second appearance of a wreck was seen, from whence
proceeded a lamentable cry of distress in the extreme. -- This was more than
Sir William's breast could sustain, -- he rushed forth in frantic strides,
beckoning the instant attendance of his domestics, which was obeyed implicitly,
-- a few minutes opened the scene, and revealed a sight more than can be
described in the sadness of representation: -- Several mangled bodies thrown
from the wreck, -- others in pitiable efforts endeavoring to escape, whilst
the yawning deep enveloped her prey! -- In vain did the good Knight exert all
his ability; -- to contest with winds and waves was more than he dared, despair
had invaded the thoughts of those who were minded to give relief, -- the sight
was too piercing a spectacle, where no alleviation could take place, -- the
whole crew were seen to sink beneath the briny surface! -- Here Sir William
broke silence, "Alas! what avails our boasted strength, our greatest power, our
most useful faculties? -- nothing! when Heaven's high will opposes our
intentions -- Though human creatures are in the greatest need of timely aid at
some few yards distance, yet we cannot afford the smallest relief." -- Just now
sunk the last victim to the merciless waves! -- "see the havoc! -- see the
wretched appearance of lifeless mortals! behold the mangled limbs of both
sexes! -- but see what this last ebb has left? -- a woman's body! -- yes! -- no
confusion, -- perhaps not quite dead; -- she was the last the mighty flood was
satiated with, -- hither bear the corpse, -- if returning life should animate
the body, then are all our cares happily bestowed."

Thus ended the good man's reverie. -- He hasted to his house to administer all
that humanity could dictate, to recover the person whom his servants had
conveyed thither; leaving an old man to watch what the sea should cast up, and
bring tidings if the case required assistance.

In less than an hour's application Sir William's efforts were crowned with
success, -- reanimation succeeded the seeming dissolution, -- the delicate
frame of a charming young lady began to exercise its wonted functions. -- The
worthy Baronet knelt down to pay the tribute of thanks and praise to God for
blessing his endeavors, and invoked a continuance thereof. The young lady with
a fervent piety, accompanied him, rendering thanks to Heaven, and pouring out a
blessing on her deliverer from the jaws of death; closing her lips only through
faintness. A cordial was administered with effect, -- she became herself again,
-- health seemed approaching; but rest being deemed a necessary supply, she was
left in the care of Sir William's housekeeper, when sleep seemed a welcome
guest to her wearied senses, -- so in a profound slumber she reposed on a warm
bed, whilst the Baronet withdrew with his assistants.

Meanwhile day approached. Sir William, anxious to know the person he had
rescued from death, as also the names and quality of those who had perished in
the storm, the sea being now silenced by a dead calm, stillness seemed to be
the reigning queen of the morn, whilst he with his servants carefully took up
the bodies that remained on the piked rocks of the shore; shells were provided,
and ten persons were coffined for interment, which with a solemn ceremony was
performed, -- the worthy rector attending his duty with becoming respect,
setting forth to a crowded assemblage of neighboring tenants to the manor, the
uncertainty of life, -- the positive assurance of death, -- the consequences of
sudden or unprovided death, -- the necessity of being always ready, -- with a
pathetic discourse on the heedlessness of youth of both sexes, in regard to
seeking their Creator in the days of their youth, and the indispensible
necessity for it, to ensure a blessing here, and a happy immortality hereafter;
with an allusion to the life preserved, -- that an early piety was no doubt the
cause of prolonging it; also in inveighing much against the detestable word of
chance, -- clearly proving, that without the guidance of the Celestial Power,
nothing was certain; for though wickedness might for a time bear the appearance
of prosperity and happiness, yet a certain fearful period of destruction
awaited the delinquent. The clergyman closed his sermon on the funeral of the
drowned persons, with many serious and practical admonitions, requisitions, and
reflections, -- so that out of the churchyard none departed without a tear of
compunction, and a firm resolve to adhere to the words of their Pastor.

When the rites of the dead were ended, Sir William had the papers of the wreck
examined, when it was found the ship had cleared from New York, in America,
nine weeks before that period; that she was called the Sisters, John Parsons,
Commander; was bound for London, laden with dry goods, and had on board several
ladies and gentlemen as passengers to England. The bad condition of the ship's
papers precluded a further information, and put Sir William under the
disagreeable necessity to enquire of the young lady the other particulars
relative to the voyage, and the number and quality of the persons that were
cast away; which, owing to the fatigue and delicacy of her constitution, he was
obliged to forego for a few days, until she should retrieve strength of body
and recollected ideas, to give a full account of herself, being fearful to
bring to her recollection any thing that would retard her recovery.

A few days elapsed, during which time an unremitting attention was paid to the
young lady's health, in order to establish it, which with the care practiced,
soon accomplished; yet Sir William was cautious to enquire, lest a relapse
should be the consequence. -- Whilst he was ruminating on the late catastrophe
of the shipwreck, the post brought him a letter, announcing the safe arrival of
his son, in England, dated from Dover; that he should take in London in his
route; and hoped to pay his duty in three days to his honored parent. This
filled the good man with a taste of happiness he never knew before; it was now,
and only at this instant, he owned his doubts and fears for the safety of his
son. Although he betrayed no symptons of fear outwardly, yet a continual
disagreeable phantom of imagination haunted his mind, stating a possibility, --
adding a probability of his son being cast away in the late violent hurricane.
Such must be the fears of all parents, whose feelings are edged with a parental
care of tenderness and love for their offspring; where gifts of piety are
bestowed on children, their ardour in affection and duty will be the consequent
return; this Sir William knew, therefore enhanced the regard for his amiable
son.

The expected period of Henry's arrival being nearly advanced, the day being
half spent, the sun was declining from his meridional height, when Henrietta,
for so was she called, asked the assistance of her attendant to dress herself,
fancying she should be better by a jaunt in Sir William's coach, which the
physician that attended her greatly enforced, though strenuously objected to by
Sir William, fearing the sharpness of the air might be too much; however, by
the Doctor's advice he was overruled. She therefore attired herself in an
elegant suit of silk, suitable for the season, richly trimmed with sable, never
having understood the fate of her relations; Sir William having constantly
evaded any conversation on the subject, intending to open it by degrees,
fearing the fatal effect such a narration as he must relate, not knowing what
affinity the deceased might have been to her; for her attendant constantly
remarked, the whole ship's freight, together with the seamen and passengers,
were all saved. The chests of Henrietta, wherein her clothes, money, and jewels
were deposited, being produced, seemed to corroborate the truth of the
housekeeper's tale; -- but there was too much in the sequel to reveal, -- and
the burden was too weighty to conceal. -- Thus were Sir William and Henrietta
anxious to speak to each other, to satisfy their doubts, yet prudential caution
retarded him, whilst the young lady recovered sufficiently to sustain the
shock. Notwithstanding the late miraculous escape and the dangers she
encountered, Henrietta had recovered most surprisingly; she was just returned
from an hour's excursion in the neighborhood, and looked charmingly; her
person was delicate, her comple^^^^ ^^^^edingly fair, her hair of a fine (...)
her shape so delicately formed, (...) ^mpose an elegance of personage ra^^
(...) be met with; her eyes were of a dark hazel, liquid and piercing; her
countenance had more of the languishing expression in it, than the presuming
pertness of modern refinement; she was in every respect a finished beauty, --
wanting neither teint or shade in the composition of her agreements. -- Added
to this delineation of superficial charms, her mind was enlightened, improved,
stored, and enriched with every accomplishment necessary for her sex; -- her
taste was elegant and happy, which would have made her a pleasurable object to
look on or converse with, could her mind be calmed from the doubts and fears
which involuntarily seized her at times, -- yet she feared the solution so
much, as to let it prey upon her patience for a convenient opportunity to
enquire of Sir William.

Dinner was preparing and nearly ready, when at the further end of the avenue a
carriage appeared in view. Sir William had not power to restrain himself, but
cried out in an ecstacy of joy, -- "my son! -- my son!" -- and then almost lost
utterance, -- but on recollection, curbed his passion, by a timely remark, that
he expected his son to dinner; -- concealing from the young lady the emotion he
felt on the approaching interview with him.

Scarcely were their greetings exchanged before Henry arrived, which gave his
worthy father an opportunity of an happy embrace. -- The son returned it with
becoming duty and respect, and after enquiry of health, Sir William took his
son aside, and in a few words gave him a detail of all he knew of the young
lady under his care; -- the story brought tears of pity into the young man's
eyes; -- he felt and sighed for the loss human nature had sustained; -- he said
he would, when opportunity presented itself, in a respectful manner, propose to
the lady such questions as should lead to a discovery of her name and person,
also the relations she had lost, with other particulars relative to her voyage.
-- This Sir William approved. -- They both instantly came into the parlour,
where the young lady, the vicar, and the physician sat; -- the gentlemen both
with equal warmth gave joy to Henry on his safe return; he likewise, with
becoming zeal, gave his friends a kind reply of friendship and thanks, and
after the usual ceremony of welcoming, took his seat; but before this period
had place, the beautiful person of Henrietta caught his eye, and with humility
and respect he gracefully saluted the lady, who was not wanting to return the
compliment. All parties during dinner enlarged on general topics of
conversation, carefully avoiding any subject, that might hurt the lady's
feelings; -- but as soon as the cloth was removed, Henrietta opened the
business by a sincere request to Sir William, (whom she very justly styled her
deliverer,) if any of the persons in the wreck had been able to escape the fury
of the waves? -- Sir William, after a little hesitation, said, he feared not,
-- this answer, Henrietta replied, she feared, ever since the return of her
senses, notwithstanding the great care of the female that attended her, who had
related a contrary story. -- Here she could scarce refrain from tears, but by
the soothing of the gentlemen present, she forbore to weep; especially on the
entreaty of the attracting young traveller, who so happily insinuated himself
by a respectful attention, that she voluntarily wished to relate the
particulars of the voyage, in order to form an opinion of the safety of her
friends. She gave them to understand that she was the youngest daughter of Lord
Colville, whom she hoped was then alive and well, as also the lady her mother;
that in consequence of her sister's being married to a field officer, who had a
particular command of some of the King's troops in America, she had been
prevailed on to go with her to the continent, to which quarter she was
accompanied by her brother, who held a commission under her sister's husband.
That on the ship springing a leak in the Channel, her brother, sister, and her
sister's husband, the captain, and several others, had taken to the long boat;
but owing to a sudden gust of wind, they could not, or rather would not, bring
too the vessel; those who remained on board being partly ungovernable, the mate
refusing to permit her to go into the boat with her friends, so that she was
forced away from her relations by a man, who, had he survived, she had the
greatest reason to dread his unlawful attachments, -- Here the Knight
interrupted her by a thanksgiving, in which the pious vicar added, "that the
evil man seeks his own destruction;" but each asking pardon of the lady,
desired her to proceed, to which she replied, her story was but a few words
more; -- that there were three females and seven males in the ship, when they
parted company from the longboat, and that two of those females were her
attendants; the other being an old lady who had resided many years abroad, and
was returning to her native country to die, as she expressed. -- As for the men
who had perished in the ship, they were all of a desperate fortune, who neither
regarded themselves or those under their care; for in her opinion, a port might
have been attained, had they been unanimous in their opinion; but she had some
reason to think, rapine was the prevalent gloss under which they acted, and
lost their lives through a design of enriching themselves by the money on
board, -- as the mate acknowledged in the hour of danger; -- "so, to the
providence of God," said she, "do I owe my miraculous escape from the wreck. --
But my dear brothers and sister!" -- A flood of tears prevented her from
proceeding. -- when Henry addressed himself to the lady, -- "madam," said he,
"let me give you joy; the General, who is your brother, (I presume,) your
sister and the honorable Mr. Colville, who is a Captain in General Mounsey's
regiment, were, on the eve of the hurricane, picked up by a French Coaster, and
brought into Havre de Grace, from whence they arrived in England three days
ago. I had the honor to be in their company, -- but ocular demonstration will
corroborate what I now affirm to be truth," showing the lady the London news
paper, wherein the ship, and those concerned in piratically carrying her away,
were advertised; also, a reward of five hundred pounds offered by Lord
Colville, for the recovery of his daughter. Here the lady's transport was more
than her tender frame could bear; -- she swooned away in the arms of Henry,
who, with the Doctor's assistance soon brought her to her senses, which for a
few minutes she could not persuade herself to be possessed of; but on the
Baronet's remonstrance, she with transport thanked the gallant Henry, who was
the messenger of Heaven, in disburdening her from an insupportable load of
anxious cares and troubles. -- The gentlemen each congratulated her on the
happy tidings of her friends; -- her escape from the snares of a wicked man, --
and happy revival from the jaws of death; -- and she, with an audible voice,
and a christian solemnity, rendered thanks for the mercies and blessings she
had recently received; -- in which the gentlemen with one accord joined,
commending her to that Beneficent Being for future protection. After this music
was proposed, and Henrietta displayed her finished talents on the organ. This
being over, Sir William informed Henrietta, that he he was well acquainted with
Lord and Lady Colville, her parents; and that he should write by the return of
the post, to acquaint them of her safety, -- to which she thankfully assented.

Night having gained upon them, it was judged time to withdraw by the Vicar and
the Doctor; and Sir William and his son paying their compliments to Henrietta,
each of them repaired to a place of repose.

It was some time before Henry could conquer his revolving ideas, to permit
sleep to sooth him, for the lovely image of Henrietta was constantly in his
view; he found an impression already engraved, -- he flouted the fanciful
notion of love, yet could not say to what other passion he could attribute his
situation. -- After repeated queries and answers, solus, he was unable to
determine the point; so let sleep gain dominion without a satisfactory
investigation. Henrietta was no less disturbed; -- but to yield to love's
impressions at first sight, she deemed romantic to a degree; -- however,
yielded to sleep before she made a decision.

The morning approached, when Sir William, after paying his usual tribute of
thanks to the Deity, went up softly to his son's apartment; but how great was
his surprise, and how pleasing his reflection, when he heard him paying his
tribute to God! -- Hear this, ye sons of dissipation, -- ye nocturnal
revellers! -- to what end is your rendezvous? -- only for one minute consider
the difference of a virtuous and an immoral character! learn from hence true
wisdom and real understanding; -- for in the hour of death neither right
honorable, most honorable, most noble, or even majesty itself, can calm the
pangs of a wounded conscience! -- therefore, consider in time! -- To fly from
evil company, of either sex, is the grand work of reformation, -- so to neglect
so great and so necessary a business, is more than the catalogue of madness or
folly can set forth; -- it is losing all, both here and hereafter, -- for a
bubble! -- For what solid or real satisfaction has the slave of passions? --
ask the miser, -- the gambler, -- the spendthrift, -- the adulterer, -- the
defrauder, -- or any of the rest of the wretched tribe; -- I answer, none! --
any of them must and will own the same. -- Therefore a clear conscience,
upright principles, to do as we would wish to be done by, -- or, the grand
system of honor and honesty, being so easily learned, and with such pleasure
practiced, the weakest or meanest capacity can be an adept in the science in
one lesson, -- from hence all the moral and christian duties will follow; --
and as the happy mystery is so readily obtained, the attainment needs no
comment.

The Baronet's pleasurable curiosity made him return from his son's chamber
door without interrupting his duty to his Maker, and to go, for the first time
in his life, on his tip-toes to a young lady's room door; -- where, to his like
satisfactory surprise, he heard her repeat her morning hymn! -- Hear this, ye
daughters of Eve, ye slaves to dress and fashion! ye light headed frail
votaries of pleasure! -- I ask you, how often, in the whole course of your lives,
you have, either night or morning, invoked the God of power to protect and
direct you? -- I am without faith in the answer, -- therefore I shall leave it
a blank. -- But consider, your years at most can be but few, -- that in the
grave there is no method of repentance, -- that to forget the Deity, is an
invitation to the grand seducer of the first of your sex to make a prey of you,
-- therefore fly from folly! -- your fall is for the most part wrought by
deceit! -- for since the days of Eve, who fell by the device of the serpent,
all her offspring, of the female sex, are victims to that credulity which first
brought sin and death into the world. -- If you wish to be happy both here and
hereafter, abhor that enemy to truth, -- that cross-eyed fawner Flattery, -- as
the rock on which so many of your charming sex are cast away! -- avoid
flattery! -- that is the monstrous champion of vice! -- it is that deceitful
imp that introduces pride, and all her followers; -- the consequences are
fatal! -- For Heaven's sake avoid this one enemy, and you will conquer all the
rest; -- only consult with truth, the faithful companion of virtue, and you
will readily perceive the happiness that results from thence; -- accompany this
one of virtue's champions, and never fear the rest; he will lead you to the
pleasant walks of piety and virtue; -- it is these alone can insure you
happiness through life! -- an easy lesson! -- If your mind is once fixed on it,
your retention will for ever ensure it to you. -- Pray, Ladies, don't be
dormant in a work of such importance; it don't preclude any part of your dress,
if suited to your station in life; no not any of your cosmetics; -- as
effeminate foibles they are not to be accounted a pollution, so that decency in
their usage, or a loss of time is not spent in their application. -- I should
say more on the subject, but I avoid any digression that might give offense to
your sex; my wishes are sincere for the happiness of your temporal and eternal
state, -- therefore don't be angry on reading these few lines by way of
application; -- only reflect, it is yourselves that are concerned. -- A prayer
morning and evening, cannot impede any part of your domestic duties, -- ten
minutes each time will suffice; -- practice this rule for one year, then I am
sure you will own that Novels contain morality, as well as pleasing narrations;
-- as truths are the foundation of this work, I request your attention.

Sir William practiced the same art here at his son's chamber door, for he went
his way without interrupting the lady; -- and walked from his mansion to the
summit of a rock that overhung the flowing tide, which at ebb exposed a
frightful precipice. -- Here it was, at half fall of neap tide the ship was
cast on those breakers, from which the ten persons lately wrecked received
their death wounds; -- it raised up the contemplative ideas of this son of
wisdom, to the mansions of the Deity in the highest Heaven, in glory to him who
is the refuge of the just and faithful, -- which the person of the honorable
lady, whose life he had saved, through God's assistance, he ranked amongst the
most valuable of her sex; ardently wishing that Lord Colville would as readily
consent to the union of his son with her as he should: -- with this remark,
that their persons and minds were very much alike. -- He then leisurely walked
back, when he found his son and Miss Colville in conversation, which was very
agreeable to him; -- the most respectful and affectionate greetings were
exchanged.

When breakfast was prepared, the Baronet expressed a tenderness for Miss
Colville, intimating a desire of Henry's keeping a correspondence with her, as
he was apprehensive Lord Colville would soon deprive both him and his son of
the happiness they at present enjoyed in her company; supposing her father
would remove her to town on receipt of his letter. -- To this Miss Colville
replied, she should ever with gratitude to him, and respect to his son, be much
honored in the correspondence of either. -- Many were the assurances of
friendship that were reciprocally exchanged; and Henry, fixing his thoughts on
the beautiful object present, began, at his father's instance to describe the
various countries he had visited; making remarks on the manners and customs of
their inhabitants; taking a comparative view of their laws and constitutions,
opposed to those of the English Nation; which accounts, remarks, and
applications highly entertained Miss Colville and his father, and were so
agreeable, as to let the forenoon steal away insensibly, till dinner was on the
table. -- Thus did three days elapse in the society of three good persons,
whose minds were of the same contexture. -- The fourth day, pretty early in the
morning, a post chaise and four horses stopped in the court yard, out of which
Captain Colville and Lord Dacie stepped, who were immediately introduced to Sir
William, Henry, and Miss Colville. The Captain thanked the Baronet for the care
he had taken of his sister, and related to them the manner of their escape from
the dangers of the sea. After a tender embrace of her brother, Miss Colville
launched out into praises of the hospitality of Sir William and his son, to
which the Captain, in a handsome manner expressed his obligations, as also
those of his family; -- and gave Sir William to understand, that Lord Colville,
his Lady, and a young female relation, would the next day arrive to pay their
respects to him for the care he had taken of their daughter: -- which
intelligence gave great satisfaction to Miss Colville, Sir William Howard, and
his son. During the conversation between the Captain and Sir William, his son,
and Miss Colville, Lord Dacie stood in an awkward posture, without uttering a
word, except a salute to the strangers on his first entrance. -- The Captain
seemed somewhat embarrassed at the cavalier behavior of his friend, who had
rivetted his eyes on Miss Colville, jogging his heel and toe so as to make a
disagreeable sound. -- He apologized for him, by observing to Sir William, that
his friend, Lord Dacie, had borne him company from town; on which Sir William
complimented him in asking how the noble Duke his father, and the Duchess his
mother were; to which he answered in an affected tone, he supposed they were
very well. -- However, the Baronet with his usual politeness and hospitality,
entertained his guests in a suitable manner. After dinner, Henry recognized the
person of my Lord, whom he had seen on the Continent, which gave the evenings
conversation a general turn; in which the depraved taste, the shallow
understanding, and the superficial knowledge of his Lordship, was glaringly
conspicuous. -- But Henry mildly passed over many controverted matters, in
which Lord Dacie egregiously stated them his own way, regarding neither
composition or disposition in his garulity.

At an early hour Miss Colville wished the gentlemen good night, being tired
with the insipped parade of his Lordship; as a pellucid vein of libertinism was
perceptible in all he could enlarge on; -- adding to every other sentence, an
oath of confirmation.

The character which he bore on the Continent, as well as in the Metropolis,
which was well known to Henry, was that of a petulant coxcomb; therefore no
intimacy ever subsisted between his Lordship and Henry, -- for in truth they
were opponents by principle. Captain Colville was not so; he was nearly in a
medium between the two former characters, consequently coherent to a companion
of either disposition, -- being compatible to a virtuous or vicious guidance.

The increased hour of the clock summoned them to rest. -- The morning ushered
in a fine day, -- the vicar paid his respects, and was stayed by Sir William to
breakfast. Lord Dacie immediately opposed the difference of the cloth of the
Captain and the Parson, upon which each party politely gave precedence to the
other; -- however, the indiscreet jest of the shallow-headed hero did not
escape a sharp reproof from the lady. -- She observed, the reverend name
commanded respect; as also the honorable service of a potentate, or national
representative; -- but then the former certainly had the precedence; -- yet in
her opinion the latter had a pre-eminence over law or physic, which bore a
component sound, as liberal professions, with divinity; but wherefore they were
tagged together she was at a loss to suggest. -- However, as a literary
character, she appealed to his Lordship for a solution. -- The weakness of his
understanding was immediately discovered by the embarrassment he seemed under;
-- he got up, took his coffee in his hand, walked to the window, sipped it, and
returned; -- silence reigned universal! -- upon which, the Captain indiscreetly
burst forth into an immoderate fit of laughter, saying: "my Lord, you are
foiled." -- Lord Dacie replied, "I wonder at your observation; do you think I
reason with women?" -- and walked to the window again in a pet. -- Miss
Colville was not at all displeased, but with her usual good humoured aspect,
said: -- "my Lord, our sex thank you, -- or in other words, I thank you in
their name, for your refusal to speak reasonably to any of us; -- I hope your
own sex may not experience the same inconvenience."

Sir William Howard changed the subject, fearing an obloquy thrown out by any
of the young persons might tend to a bad consequence, well knowing, juvenile
heat would seldom avow, though indiscreetly depart from consistency; -- and in
general terms, said, "I am certain we have all seen the Metropolitan cities of
England and France, therefore I should be glad of your separate opinions,
whether we, or our neighbors, have gained the palm with respect to taste and
refinement, in arts and sciences; and which city can boast of the most superb
buildings, squares, recreations, and outlets?"

To which Lord Dacie, in a hasty tone replied, "there is no comparison; --
except London bore an analogy, as a shilling to a guinea, if compared with
Paris; -- for what signifies," continued he, "the amplitude of that trading
city, when the taste and elegance of Paris is mentioned? -- Can we compare the
choked Thames with the grand river Seine, -- whose banks are not crowded with
buildings to the water's edge, but a parade of near an hundred feet in breadth
between the houses and the river? -- the parapet wall being low, adds a
grandeur to the river, that the muddy Thames cannot presume to command. -- If
you look eastward toward the Pont Neuf, you have the whole range of the old
and new Louvre on one side, and the Mazarin College on the other; -- look down
the river westward, the Thuilleries Gardens on one side, and the Palais de
Bourbon, with the grand Hospital on the other, are such views, that London has
nothing to compare with them."

"I grant you," said Henry, "that those views are very pleasing; but your
prejudice magnifies more than Newton's telescope, as London is at this time one
of the first cities in Europe, or I may say the world: -- for though the
buildings come close to the water's edge, yet there is a convenience that
results therefrom, which would not be equalled by raising a four foot wall to
please the eye of an idle spectator. -- Though we are not without views superior
to those you have mentioned; -- for, look up from Black-Friar's Bridge, and you
take five times the scope you seem to make the most of. -- In the first place,
the Thames is four times the width of the Seine, -- our bridges bear the same
comparison in length, for take the Pont Royal and Black-Friar's Bridge, what is
the one to the other? -- The Place de Victoires is by no means equal to
Grosvenor-Square; -- nor the boasted street of the Boulevards, equal to
Oxford-street; -- nay, the Palais Royal, if divested of its tinselled front,
what are the chambers compared with those of St. James's?" -- Here the Captain
observed, "Gentlemen, I know but little of either London or Paris, though our
family were the best part of a year in the latter. -- I shall appoint an
arbitrator, if you are both willing to abide the decision." -- Henry replied,
"with all my heart," -- his Lordship only said, "every one to his own way of
thinking, but certainly the French were the most polished people." -- Sir
William rallied his Lordship on calling the sons of ancient freedom into the
contest: -- for it was not persons but things that were proposed for
illustration. -- The vicar wished to be neuter, -- though he must observe, that
in his time old England had no rival, if her qualities were known.

Miss Colville observed, that both nations possessed greatness; -- in her way
of thinking, France could say "Paris was great" but England could at the same
time proclaim, "London was greater." -- Sir William complimented her on her
sagacity, -- which closed the conversation.

The vicar being summoned to attend a sick person, and Sir William to decide a
controversy in his official capacity as a justice of the peace, the young
people were left to converse by themselves.

The captain gave Henry a friendly invitation to town, which he very politely
declined; alleging, he should not be able to do himself the honor. -- The
arrival of Lord and Lady Colville, with Miss Dampier, their niece was
announced, which drew the attention of all parties. -- Lady Colville, it is
natural to suppose, was agreeably surprised, on seeing her supposed lost child
in Henrietta, not having seen her for nearly two years; -- his Lordship, her
father, also tenderly embraced his daughter; -- joy was diffused on all sides
in the sight of each other. -- By this time Sir William Howard was released
from his suppliants, and was highly gratified with the interview; giving them
joy in their child, and a hearty welcome to Howard's Castle, -- which was
answered with grateful acknowledgments by Lord and Lady Colville.

The young lady who was come to see her cousin Henrietta, with her uncle and
aunt, was also a cousin to Lord Dacie, being sister's children; so that a
proximity of kindness pervaded the strangers at Howard's Castle.

After dinner the the ladies and gentlemen separated, upon which Lady Colville
gave her daughter to understand, that she must look upon Lord Dacie in a
favorable light in future; as the Duke his father, and Lord Colville, her
father, had agreed upon the match; and that an acquaintance between her and the
young Lord, so as to settle their affections, was the only impediment to
protract solemnization. -- However, her Ladyship assured her daughter, that
notwithstanding the refractory temper of Lord Colville, if the proposition did
not meet Henrietta's plenary approbation, she hoped to find means to secede
from the intended union. -- Miss Colville listened to her mother's proposal, or
rather information of her fathers intentions; -- her father she knew to be
absolute, -- her mother humane and tender in her disposition, -- yet easily
overruled; -- therefore, Henry's personage recurred most forcibly to her
imagination. -- To contrast him with Dacie, was the extremity of degrees in
comparison.

Miss Dampier observed to Miss Colville, the rank and fortune of her cousin,
Lord Dacie, and the certainty of her arriving to a ducal coronet, if she gave
her hand to the amiable young nobleman, as she styled Dacie; -- for Miss
Dampier partook of some of his qualities, so far as pride, a preposterous
taste, a loquacity never to cease, together with prejudicial opinions that were
insurmountable. -- She was therefore a person whom Henrietta had reason to
treat with civility as a relation, yet with so much prudence, as to guard
against her admitting her into confidence; so that her reply was suitable. --
She observed to Charlotte Dampier, that such things required time to seriously
consider, -- remarking, that although life was uncertain, and short in the
enjoyment of its pleasures, -- yet marriage was a sound that conveyed a
solemnity, and required mature deliberation: -- for it was not conditionally
for life, but absolutely so, until death calls for a separation. -- Charlotte
laughed heartily at her cousin's morality, as she called it, and wished some of
her acquaintance had heard her. -- Lady Colville, in her usual tender manner
waved the discourse, observing the levity of her niece, well knowing the
flighty turn of Charlotte was opposite to the temper of Henrietta; -- she
therefore jocosely, desired Charlotte to desist, by remarking her temper to be
like her father's -- alluding to Sir James Dampier, who was Lady Colville's own
brother.

The ladies being seated at tea, we shall take a peep at what the gentlemen
were about, -- which was simply in the ancient style of English hospitality, --
wine and friendship. -- Sir William more than once had it at his tongue's end
to propose an union between his son and Lord Colville's daughter, Henrietta, --
but just as he was determined to open the matter, his Lordship let the secret
out, by informing the company then present, (Lord Dacie having stepped to the
garden) that the young lord was fixed upon by him and his father, to intermarry
with his daughter; -- which he judged an excellent match, as he termed it. --
Upon which Sir William cast his eyes toward Henry, whom he perceived was
somewhat chagrined at Lord Colville's avowal. -- Sir William was not
sufficiently collected in his ideas to make any reply; his surprise was so
great, to find that a lady of such excellent parts as he knew Miss Colville to
possess, should be made a slave to such a sapscull as Dacie; -- therefore, Lord
Colville, and his son the Captain, were at a loss to account for the delay of
Sir William's answer. -- Henry at that juncture withdrawing himself, -- it was
a few minutes before Sir William spoke to the question; -- but then with a
great deal of reserve, and a visible coolness which he could not get over,
observed, "that Miss Colville was a lady deserving of the first character in
the realm, and was every thing her sex ought to be," -- Lord Colville abruptly
replied, "his care was to provide for her maintenance, by choosing a man, as a
husband for his daughter, who had a sufficient income to make him independent;
and that the young nobleman he was so fortunate to make choice of, was heir to
an estate of fifteen thousand a year, -- there being but a sister to provide
for who was two years younger then Lord Dacie; so that Henrietta had but little
to fear when united with a person of the rank and fortune of his lordship." Sir
William seemed to acquiesce, which closed the subject, Lord Dacie entering the
room.

Meanwhile Henry had the pleasure of conversing with the ladies, who were
mutually one and all charmed with his conversation, his vivacity and good
humor being properties not to be equalled; -- adding, to an elegance of person
scarcely to be met with, an air and deportment manly and noble.

Both Henry and Henrietta knowing the intentions of Lord Colville, though
supposing each other strangers to them, it drew their eyes so forcibly, that
they often met, -- and darts of unutterable anguish pierced their hearts; so
that repeated sighs were heaved involuntarily, which gave the quick-sighted
Charlotte some idea of the symptoms. -- But she dared not utter a groundless
suspicion, until more corroborating circumstances occurred to ensure her of the
orthodox of her belief.

The gentlemen now mixed company, and Henry received a rallying on his
effeminancy, to prefer tea before wine. -- Here he had the advantage, by making
a confession, "that ladies were of that attaching quality, that a permission to
be in their company without refreshments, was superior to any repast in the
company of his own sex." -- For this compliment Lady Colville thanked him, and
jollity seemed to pervade the whole evening.

Early the next morning Sir William, at ebb-tide, showed Lord and Lady Colville
the situation the ship was wrecked in, with the manner of their daughter's
miraculous escape.

A week passed as a short space to all parties, except to Lord Dacie, who
wished to return to town, having planted a sufficient quantity of the seeds of
jealousy, to make his abode at Howard's Castle intolerable, -- but through the
persausion of Lord Colville he consented to stay three days longer.

Sir William Howard acquitted himself so well in the estimation of his
visitants, that all were happy, except the exceptionable person just now
mentioned, who suffered in the extreme to find every person attached to Henry;
who, (by Sir William's inadvertency it came out,) would, on his demise, be in
possession of twenty thousand pounds per annum. -- Also had in expectancy an
income of an equal sum, with a Ducal Coronet annexed. Yet nevertheless, Henry's
manner was meekness, added to a becoming cheerfulness, that made him the object
of universal admiration.

The rumor of the extraordinary circumstance of the shipwreck, by this time
had found its way into all the newspapers throughout the kingdom, -- therefore
drew some persons of distinguished rank to enquire into the truth of the
matter. -- The Duke of Kingsborough, accompanied by the Marquis of Languedoc,
his Lady, and their beautiful daughter, were curious enough to take a trip to
Howard's Castle, -- at which seat they arrived the morning that Lord Colville
and his company intended setting out for London. -- The arrival of those noble
personages retarded their journey, as the Duke of Kingsborough and Lord
Colville were intimately acquainted. -- Sir William Howard satisfactorily gave
a detail of the catastrophe, upon which it was determined Lord Colville should
stay a few days longer.

His Grace of Kingsborough was happy in conversing with Henry Howard, who was
his nephew and heir apparent, which, when Lord Colville understood, he was
sorry he had engaged with the Duke of Ashbridge, Lord Dacie's father, -- but as
a man of honor he took no steps to retract.

The reader may naturally suppose, that in so polite an assemblage of notables,
every species of recreation the country afforded was enjoyed; -- a grand fete
was given, but the season was rather too far advanced. -- The ball room was
finished in the highest taste, by the exertions of the ladies and gentlemen. --
Lady Olivia, the Marquis of Languedoc's daughter, was Henry's partner; she was
a person of great skill in the lively scenes of festivity, so that these two
bore the laurel of the evening, as well as the sway of the morning. Olivia was
a finished beauty, and had received what is styled a good education in the Beau
monde -- and therefore might justly say, what report of merit has said, Je le
tiens. -- Miss Colville had but indifferent pastime; -- clogged with Lord
Dacie, who was but a poor substitute to show the graces of the ball room; --
such a partner no doubt disconcerted Henrietta, -- who was brilliant in her
manner, but had no means to exhibit to advantage. -- The near approaches of a
succeeding day brought them to a resolution of changing the scene, -- so that
for once in the course of the regular practice of thirty years, Sir William was
found in bed until nearly nine o'clock in the morning. Noon summoned the
fatigued partakers of pleasure to the breakfast room, every eye sparkled with
pleasure, -- nothing impeded the general satisfaction that was diffused
throughout the persons that composed this polite circle, -- for Dacie had
nipped in the bud the sprouts of jealousy, that suspicion had in a fit of
malignant sport dropped in his bosom. The charming Olivia, by the consent of all
parties, and particularly at the instance of the Duke, was recommended to
Henry's care; -- therefore serenity sat on Dacie's brow, -- ease, though
awkward, gave him her place. Harmony thus beguiled all the strangers in the
west, until the hoary-headed month of November had taken possession of the
fourth day in his sovereignty; -- nor would the chilling breezes of the aged
season have disturbed the happiness of Howard's Castle, but that several of the
gentlemen had an interest in the wrangling of the law; and as those who possess
the qualifications of acting as scribes or advocates, are not always in a hurry
to prefer the interest of their clients to that of their own, it was a prudent
step, in looking to the practice of the gentlemen of the long robe, so far as
consistency would admit of. -- Without aspersing the characters of honor and
integrity that are the pillars of the law, it will not be improper to observe,
how many quacks and illiterate pretenders there are in the profession, -- who,
like moths in a garment, spoil considerable property, to purloin a pittance to
support their ignoble characters; to the utter ruin of families, who become
burdens to the community, through the atrocity of such wretches, who would be
more serviceable in the new settlements of Botany Bay, then in the old
established constitution of Great Britain and its dependencies. -- But those
pests of society render abortive the excellent uses of the law of this country,
by their gross abuses of it; -- for their lengths are the extent of impunity,
and sometimes a step beyond it; -- but then there is a loop to creep out at to
avert the penalty of such violation. -- Yet the evil can never be eradicated,
until the mode of admission is rectified; as the candidates for the greatest
trust, integrity can assume, are admitted, without any qualification, except
having served, or attended a limited term of years, and then on paying a
certain number of fees, are legally admitted to plunder according to law! -- a
shameful neglect in the wisdom of the supreme council of the nation! -- for it
is the gentlemen who bear the title of attorneys, that are the set of men who
want the pruning knife, -- to act in the Prussian fashion, by lopping off three
fourths of the superfluous shoots and rotten branches. -- The gentlemen who are
called to the bar are not the active agents in the iniquitous practice of
protracting suits at law, -- it is the tribe of the foregoing description.

All the nobility and gentry having taken an affectionate leave of Sir William
and his son, they were at leisure to concert what was necessary to be done. Sir
William having vacated his seat, and a writ being issued, Henry was elected
without opposition; therefore must needs attend parliament after the Christmas
recess. Sir William gave his son several political lessons, -- to which he
faithfully promised to concede in every matter he should be concerned in. The
holidays being over, nothing material occurred. Henry took his leave of Sir
William to give his maiden speech in the senate, which was on a question of
national importance; on which he was loudly applauded in the house, and his
speech published at full length in the newspapers. Sir William was not a
little gratified in the difference of the modest account given by Henry in his
letter, and of those in the newspapers announced of his talents. A few days
attendance on the duties of the senate, gave Henry a popular name; -- yet he
was not intoxicated with the plaudits of the multitude; -- wisely reflecting,
the luculent spring was by a single drop made lutulent, -- therefore he
modestly refused all panegyric on his abilities which periodical writers held
out.

About this time Captain Colville gave him an invitation to Colville-House,
which was within a few streets of Henry's dwelling; his residence being at his
uncle's house, the Duke of Kingsborough, Sir William having had no town house
for some years. Henry accepted of his friend's invitation, for he still had a
wish to see Henrietta, although he concluded she was to be the wife of Dacie.
-- Yet it gave him a kind of pleasure that results from the purity of mental
faculties; as he wished for the happiness of the person who made the first
impression of a tactile nature, which should now only bear the appellation of
friendship, yet required a pandect of the softest passion to eradicate it.

But as before remarked, Henry had a perfect mastery over his passions,
therefore latitudinarianism was a course he abhorred; -- so that he went with
pleasure to see his friends. -- He received compliments from Lord and Lady
Colville, General Mounsey and his Lady, Miss Dampier, and several others, but
was surprised he did not see Henrietta. -- He enquired how she did, was told
very well, but was not in town; she was on a visit to Lady Ann Catesby, the
sister of Lord Dacie, at Ashbridge, the seat of the Duke his father.

Until this instant Henry was never at a a loss for recollection, -- but the
frailty of human nature, often, in a conflict with reason, is more than a
conqueror, for every person present observed the disorder of the minute, and
was questioned as to the cause of his sudden indisposition, which he happily
overcame in a short time; giving out, that a dizziness, to which he was often
subject, was the cause, though he was then under prescription for it, which he
hoped would prove a panacea. -- This passed very well of all present, except
Charlotte Dampier, who had other motives to germinate her suspicions.

The day passed extremely well, -- the General wished to cultivate an
acquaintance with Henry, and a future day was appointed at his house for the
pleasure of seeing each other. -- Miss Dampier, in spite of her coquetting,
found her heart was not free, -- that Henry had trespassed innocently; -- this
was done without his knowledge, therefore we shall exculpate him. -- No method
presented, as practicable to the wounded fair, to lay the state of her
grievances before her paramour, at length a letter was considered the best
intelligencer; -- for often times literal conveyance will set forth distinctly,
what verbal conference would shrink from. -- Wherefore, courtship by letter is
recommended as the most delicate method of introduction; -- and where deceit
cannot appear in more colors than one, -- so of course easily detected.

Henry was astonished at the billet-doux of Charlotte, -- being unable to form
a conjecture that would carry a feazability in what she meant, whether jest or
earnest; but in compliance with the rules of decorum, he sent an answer, in
which an explanation was required. The giddy fair-one judged the requisition
was best, if an opportunity served, to deliver it orally -- which was done by
her calling on Henry at his apartments in his uncle's house. It was very
disagreeble to Henry, to receive a lady into the house, without the knowledge
of his uncle, and to deny her an audience, after admission, would be likewise a
still more irksome task to a person of his feelings; -- for he found himself
considerably agitated by the imprudence of his visitant: -- as, in females,
nothing can argue a greater share of indiscretion, than to degrade themselves
by acting masculine characters, to pay those visits that should be paid to
them; therefore, let ladies of prudence and virtue have that coercive
principle, to avoid such unbecoming steps toward levity.

A long conversation ensued, but the wisdom Henry possessed was unshaken. No
advantages were presumed, and much less taken, although a breach of the laws of
prudence might have been otherwise handled by many of our depraved pragmatic
heroes of modern taste. Here the scale was balanced. Miss Dampier took her
leave, though unsatisfied as to Henry's frankness, -- for though he alleged he
was not preengaged, nor yet averse to the happiness of a connubial state, he
pleaded for time to consider, -- never offering to kiss her lips; -- a pleasure
she hoped to enjoy. But such inflammatory incitements, often tend to the worst
consequences; -- a practice though fashionable, yet more honored in the breach
than the observation of it for ladies who wish to reap the advantages of this
life, and that to come, should conduct themselves with the utmost caution; and
doubt every thing that carries an appearance of danger with it. But the lady in
question did not possess the necessary ingredients to avoid an imputation of
censure, which is a stain to the character of a virtuous woman, not easily
effaced, and often terminates in a flaw through life. Thus the enamorata
retired from an unsatisfactory interview. -- However an emissary was sent the
next morning with an elucidation, setting forth, her suspicions of his
attachment to her cousin, Miss Colville, with a recital of what he already
knew, -- the intentions of the parents of Lord Dacie and Henrietta; hinting
that she had for some time suspected what she feared was too true: -- but her
endeavors should be exerted to hasten the solemnization of the nuptials of her
cousins, -- as they both were of the same affinity to her; -- with several
indirect insidious words, which had so great an effect upon Henry, as to hurt
his feelings very much. -- He saw plainly what kind of a woman he had to deal
with, -- how dangerous it was either to encourage or reject her passion; -- and
that she would not be baulked easily. -- This dilemma put him to the ne plus
ultra of acting. -- An answer, as was required, was returned.

This singular circumstance nearly deprived Henry of his vivacity; -- however,
a respite was granted until the appointment at General Mounsey's took place; a
day of much business, as intended by Miss Dampier. The day arrived which
brought with it all the gaiety and splendor of the town; it was that appointed
for celebrating her Majesty's birth day; therefore, the notables throughout the
Metropolis, assisted in paying their compliments to so amiable a pair as the
nation is blessed with; -- for the example given by the Royal Personages, is
not to be equalled; and justly merits the approbation and admiration of every
liberal minded person throughout Europe.

The ladies and gentlemen assembled at General Mounsey's were very numerous;
and in the assemblage, were the Dukes of Kingsborough and Ashbridge, with the
family of the latter, as also Lord and Lady Colville and family, consequently
Henrietta was included. -- For the first time Henry saw the beautiful Lady Ann
Catesby, -- Lady Olivia Beaumont, the lovely daughter of the Marquis of
Languedoc was in her company; they were with Henrietta, three of the first
toasts in this kingdom, each being an accomplished woman. -- Miss Dampier had a
watchful eye on Henry, therefore he was precluded the scope he would otherwise
have taken in innocent recreations. -- The court ball called the whole group to
St. James's, so that Miss Dampier lost her intended hour of interview, which
she fancied portended such happiness; -- vain of the large fortune she knew she
should possess, (which was superior by far to any of the ladies already
mentioned) a pride (of all others the most contemptible,) took possession of
her soul; betokening a low taste, an avaricious disposition, and an inclination
the reverse of every thing a lady should be.

Henry was elegant in the ball room. -- The ladies Ann Catesby and Henrietta
Colville were minuet partners; -- Lady Olivia Beaumont a country dance partner;
-- Henrietta then was a second time his partner, -- Having led down the dance
they had an opportunity to exchange a few words, -- Henry gave the argument or
heads of the Chapter of Accidents relative to Charlotte Dampier; -- Henrietta
also related the arbitrary measures that were put in practice to gain her
compliance to intermarry with Lord Dacie, -- also gave Henry to understand,
that he was not indifferent in Lady Olivia's eyes, and might expect a literal
explanation.

Nothing further passed, Lord Dacie joining the company; being extremely fond
of his intended bride, and tenacious to secure her person. The assembly having
broke up about three o'clock in the morning, the whole company who had left the
General's house returned thither; not one, even amongst the seniors,
complaining of the want of rest, as all wished to suivez raison, so far as they
might say, Loyal je serai durant ma vie bon vouloir servir le majeste, so kept
the night in honor of the day, and the succeeding day in honor of the night, to
make for once an excuse loyalte me oblige. -- Here it might be excusable for
once, but never should be repeated; as human nature will not admit of a
repetition of such recreations as would prevent a necessary recruit of those
animal spirits which are dispersed by the exertion of our faculties; for were
ladies to endeavor to acquire a knowledge of philosophy, instead of spending
their time in learning useless foreign languages, they would thereby enlarge
their faculties, and gain, if not a precedence to, at least an equality with
the male sex. -- It is not the boasted knowledge gained by conversing in
seminaries of learning, that can give us a knowledge of mankind; -- with what
can the fusty style of the Greeks or the Romans enrich our minds, when their
languages are dead to us? -- like many other antiquated customs, more honored
in the breach than the observance. -- Indeed, in any of the learned
professions, Latin and Greek are only necessary to preserve the dignity of the
profession. -- Therefore, Ladies who would wish to be acquainted with the
writings of the Greek or Latin poets, should read some good translations, and
they would be more than a match for those critics of moldy scraps, who pride
themselves in their unintelligible profundity and dogmatical principles.

It is now time to inform our readers, that all the company went from General
Mounsey's, except Miss Colville and Henry Howard, who, through the persuasion
of the General took a morning's nap. The afternoon furnished the tea-table. The
General and Mrs. Mounsey were highly taken with Henry, often wishing, that an
union between him and Henrietta had taken place; -- but as nothing in an
honorable manner could for the present occur, all thoughts of it were laid
aside; yet with a secret resolve on the part of the General, to bring it about
if possible, notwithstanding the obstinate temper of his father-in-law. --
Henry and Miss Colville spent the day together with the greatest satisfaction;
their dispositions being so similar, that it might be said they possessed but
one mind. -- The General pressed Henry to make one at a card party that
evening, with which he reluctantly complied, fearing his presence might create
groundless suspicions to the prejudice of Miss Colville's character; well
knowing, Miss Dampier would make a handle of the least appearance whereby she
could raise the anger of Lord Dacie; and by disturbing the tranquillity of the
two families, consequently disable Henry from having an opportunity of
conversing with Miss Colville. Henrietta let Mrs. Mounsey into the secret of
Miss Dampier's attack on Henry, which created a good deal of mirth between the
Ladies. The General and Henry were both pressing to know the secret, which Miss
Colville strenuously opposed; -- however, by the General's solicitation, Mrs.
Mounsey consented to relate it, if Henry gave permission. This request he did
not hesitate to comply with, yet accused himself of remissness, on hearing Miss
Dampier's affair was the cause of the Ladies sport, -- as it was really
imprudent in Henry to divulge it, without the strictest injunction to keep it
inviolably a secret; -- but he left no restraint on Miss Colville in that
respect, therefore he could only blame himself. -- The General was very merry
on the intelligence given, and in a friendly manner cautioned Henry against the
arts that might be practiced by Miss Dampier, in which he was joined by Mrs.
Mounsey. Miss Colville said but little, only remarked it was too forward for a
lady. -- Company increased, -- Captain Colville being of the party, the evening
passed very agreeably; -- it was near ten o'clock at night, when Miss Dampier
entered the room; her relations were at a loss to conjecture what could have
brought her thither at that hour. -- But the facetious General enquired into
the state of her mind, which the lovesick lady relished but indifferently;
apologized for her interrupting such good company; and said, she came thither
at that hour on business of some importance to her cousin* Lord Dacie, whom she
thought to have found there.

Henry felt himself uneasy at the sight of that lady, as did Miss Colville,
neither of whom had the presence of mind to speak to Miss Dampier, who, with a
malicious smile said, "so, lady and gentleman, you are both too well employed
to speak," and then, like a bow-shot disappeared. We may naturally suppose they
were both hurt very much by that lady's odd manner of salutation, yet were at a
loss to account for such conduct. -- The General, by a pleasant joke, gave
Henry, in a low voice, the substance of his thoughts respecting the strange
visit just now paid by Miss Dampier, in which he coincided. The company soon
after broke up, when no persuasion could avail, for Henry was resolved on going
to his uncle's. -- On his leaving the General's house, Capt. Colville
accompanied him, and informed him, that on his coming to his brother's, he had
seen Lord Dacie and Miss Dampier standing at the entrance of an avenue, in
conversation with Betty, his sister Henrietta's waiting-maid; but on his
approach they disappeared. -- Henry found there was something in preparation
which he judged was not grounded on honorable principles, -- however, he
trusted to the method he had hitherto invariably practiced, to acquit himself
with honor against the united forces of calumny and perfidy; the only
productions the machinations of evil-minded persons can beget. -- The Captain
took his leave with a design to give him a meeting in the morning at breakfast.
-- Henry retired to rest, strangely affected by the unaccountable appearances
of the evening; casting up the most that could be made of them, he found he had
nothing to fear from the lady or gentleman in question; -- rightly judging,
Miss Colville's maidservant acted as an emissary; therefore to inform
Henrietta must be attended to in the morning. -- At an early hour Henry's
servant carried a letter to Miss Colville, warning her against a breach of her
servant's trust. -- An answer was received by Henry, acknowledging the
obligation for his care, at the same time informing him, that her brother, on
his parting with him the preceding night, had told her what he had seen, --
upon which Betty made a confession, that by a gift of a few guineas, Lord Dacie
and Miss Dampier had prevailed on her to watch the conduct of Mr. Howard and
Miss Colville, -- for what reason she did not know, -- but believed Lord Dacie
would do Mr. Howard all the injury in his power.

Upon reading the contents, Mr. Howard could not readily account for all the
scenes of the piece in rehearsal. Presently Capt. Colville called agreeable to
his promise. After breakfast they went together to pay a morning's visit to
General Mounsey and the ladies. Lord Dacie was beforehand with them, and seemed
pleased to see Mr. Howard, and gave him an invitation to Ashbridge, which Mr.
Howard declined in the most polite manner, but his Lordship would take no
denial, so Mr. Howard, after several importunities consented, being surprised
at the seeming friendship of Dacie; but with prudence resolved to guard against
every advantage. Captain Colville, and the ladies, were beyond description
perplexed to account for Lord Dacie's great goodnature to Mr. Howard, -- as
Miss Colville observed, from the beginning of their acquaintance, what a
dislike Dacie seemed to have to Mr. Howard; but the General entering the room
almost at that instant, Lord Dacie also asked him to favor him with his
company at Ashbridge, to which he readily consented, and enquired who were the
others that were to compose the party? to this Dacie, in a vague manner said, a
few select friends. -- The General, in his usual vein of humor, replied,
perhaps enemies; Dacie seemed hurt at his joke. Here the subject concluded, and
Lord Dacie, wishing a good morning, departed.

Mr. Howard had none present but his friends, for the Captain had wholly
forsaken his intended relation Lord Dacie, and was closely attached to the
interest of Mr. Howard. -- Of the rest, Henry had every assurance of
friendship. -- The national concerns required Mr. Howard's attendance in the
House of Commons, and he, of course, took an early leave; Miss Colville was
under the necessity of attending her mother, who was indisposed; -- the Captain
bearing her company, the General and his lady were left alone. In the evening
Miss Dampier paid them a visit in seeming good spirits, and made kind enquiries
for Mr. Howard, who, she said, was a gentleman of distinguished abilities; to
this Mrs. Mounsey made no reply, the General withdrawing previous to her
entree. -- "But," continued Miss Dampier, "is it not provoking, that "my cousin
Henrietta will at all times conduct herself so imprudently, as to shun Lord
Dacie's company, if Mr. Howard's can be resorted to? -- this is not becoming,
notwithstanding all her boasted religion." -- "Pray, Madam," replied Mrs.
Mounsey, "do not give yourself the liberty to asperse an absent character,
especially one who is undeserving of the venom you would willingly discharge; I
beg you will not censure my sister." -- These words roused the fiery
disposition of Charlotte; she, in an elevated tone rejoined, by asking Mrs.
Mounsey if she could deny what she had asserted? if not, then Mrs. Mounsey was
equally culpable, to connive at such duplicity.

Mrs. Mounsey took little notice of her invective, but entreated her to choose
some other time, when the person whom she inveighed against might be present;
to these words Charlotte made no reply, but hastily withdrew, sounding the door
as she went out, signifying thereby the humor she was in.

No change in the condition of affairs took place for some days. -- Mr. Howard,
in company with General Mounsey and Capt. Colville, paid Lord Dacie the
promised visit; Lord Colville, Lady Colville, Henrietta, and Mrs. Mounsey
having gone some hours previous. -- In this visit nothing material happened
until the close of the evening, when Mr. Howard wished to return to town, which
was opposed in a friendly manner by Lord Dacie, and the Duke and the Duchess
of Ashbridge, upon serious grounds, as they expressed. -- Mr. Howard, upon
their entreaties* consented to give over his intentions until the next morning.
-- Wine went round in rather a mercurial revolution, therefore too quick in its
motion for the temperate habit of Henry. -- After the male characters were
warm, and the ladies retired, the Duke proposed to Mr. Howard a treaty of
alliance, not offensively and defensively, as states and powers propose, but
that of father and son; in short, an invitation to pay his addresses to Lady
Ann. -- This was a delicate point with Mr. Howard: he was conscious the lady in
question was equal to his expectations; and of personage, family, and fortune,
to rank with the first lady in the kingdom; her youth and beauty could not be
disputed, therefore a suitable reply was absolutely necessary. -- For a minute
he paused, and then, with the utmost courtesy thanked the noble Duke for the
intended honor, but remarked, that there were several considerable matters to
be settled previous to his being able to state a time wherein he could say he
was prepared to pay his addresses to the lady; as his father, Sir William
Howard, was a man of that strictness and regularity, that nothing could
palliate the crime he would think him guilty of, were he to enter into any
preliminary without his leave and approbation: -- and that he should with
pleasure lay before him the whole of the business, if his Grace thought proper.
-- This Mr. Howard considered as a sure method of parrying for the present any
scheme that might be proposed; as he had in mind the advice in Miss Colville's
letter, which conjured him to act with caution during his stay at Ashbridge;
she being careful of his person, and doubtful of his safety, where Lord Dacie
could act without control. -- It may be urged, what could a gentleman of Mr.
Howard's rank and fortune fear, when surrounded by his friends, at the seat of
a man of fashion, a small distance from the metropolis? -- To this every
prudent person, who has read of the oddities of Lord Dacie's character (his
mind stocked with the malignant plants of envy and jealousy, the latter of
which had shed its baleful seeds in such a prolific soil, that it was beyond
all skill to eradicate the evil) will readily admit, that if they recur to the
former occurrences, his safety was really doubtful; which will hereafter
explain the propriety of the constant use of the aid of prudence, -- for Lord
Dacie here put it to the test, with an irregular subterfuge, by observing, that
Mr. Howard looked for more weight in the scale of Plutus; adding, he was
certain Sir William Howard had not the power to abjugate him in every
transaction, as a living witness could testify. -- On his uttering these last
words, the company were somewhat alarmed, by the gross manner of Lord Dacie's
breach of order, to a select party of his friends; -- but Mr. Howard, in a cool
determinate voice, requested to know the meaning of his pun, adding, in a
peremptory tone, it was an improper time to use such a species of language; but
he must insist on an explanation. -- No reply was given by Lord Dacie, but a
laugh, with which he slunk out of the room. -- It was now too late to think of
town, -- besides, as the utmost harmony had hitherto reigned, Henry was careful
to be on the most delicate forms of politeness, to continue it.

Soon after Lord Dacie returned, and in a light manner wished to retract his
words, saying, it was but freedom of speech. -- The General, casting his eye on
his lordship, with a sarcastic smile, replied, it was freedom, indeed! -- Here
the affair dropped. -- Tea and cards came in succession; -- the cast of partners
were Mr. Howard and Miss Colville, Lord Dacie and Miss Dampier, Captain
Colville and Lady Anne Catesby. -- This work of chance, as it may be called, in
coupling them in this manner, gave Lord Dacie all the sourness he could
decently support without an open revolt from honor. -- Success dealt to Mr.
Howard and his partner in a great measure; though nothing very considerable was
hazarded by any of the parties, it was a sufficient cause to raise a dispute;
-- Miss Dampier alleged an unfair method was practiced in which she was
seconded by Lord Dacie; -- discontent stalked with gigantic strides, therefore
pretexts of the most trivial kind were sufficient incitements; -- the amusement
was marred -- upon which the play ended, but not without very loud complaints
of irregularity, wherein Mr. Howard and Miss Colville were tacit, plainly
perceiving, every trifle gave offense. -- Mr. Howard got up and walked into the
courtyard, but had scarce got across before he received the contents of a
pistol in the tip of his shoulder, which wounded him in two places, though very
slightly.

The report of the pistol drew out the male part of the company, who were not
afraid of danger, in the foremost of whom were Captain Colville and General
Mounsey; when, on seeing the condition of Mr. Howard, they were astonished to
the greatest degree, and unable to conjecture what could have produced so
strange an incident, -- as Lord Dacie, and all his domestics, were within doors
at the time. -- However, his Lordship did not go without censure, --
notwithstanding he was (seemingly) the most surprised of any person present; --
repeatedly asking Mr. Howard, what appearance the ruffian or ruffians had, who
had so Tartar-like assaulted him? -- Mr. Howard gave the description of a
soldier, or a man habited as one. -- By this time the ladies were made
acquainted, by some of the affrighted female male servants, that Mr. Howard was
shot dead! -- This tale had nearly proved fatal to Miss Colville, throwing her
into a state of insensibility, which was succeeded by a violent paroxysm, in
which she called on Mr. Howard's name repeatedly; but through the greatest
attention she was restored to her senses, though not before several hours had
elapsed, and she had a sight of Mr. Howard, who told her his wounds were
slight. -- During this unhappy stir in the family at Ashbridge, Miss Dampier
and Lord Dacie were both active in the misery of the night. -- Miss Dampier had
a violent convulsion fit on hearing of the accident that befell Mr. Howard, for
she sincerely loved him, and would of course (according to the law of love)
rather have seen him in the grave, than in the arms of another. -- Lord Dacie
felt sufficiently, on hearing Miss Colville at intervals call, in her agony, on
the name of Henry, in a rapturous manner; -- it was a rack to his very soul! --
a sensation unutterable! for his pain was in the most exquisite degree acute,
and grievous to be borne; -- but the authors of evil are the greatest partakers
of its malignant influence; -- for he who culls poison for the dispatch of
others, rarely escapes himself. In Dacie this maxim was verified; for though
God gives his sunshine and rain to the just and unjust, yet he has also said,
"that the worker of iniquity shall perish by his own stratagems." -- To
proceed, -- Mr. Howard's wounds, which were very trifling, were dressed by a
surgeon procured for that purpose, yet a fever was feared as attendant;
therefore it was judged necessary that he should keep to his room for a few
days. To this Henry strongly objected, but was overruled, and constrained by
every person present; and to preserve a life of such eminent virtues, it was
unanimously agreed on, that none of the company should depart until he was able
to go to town. -- This was General Mounsey's care, for though he left his
domestics without orders for a single day's absence, yet his friend bore that
estimation, that nothing could preclude his utmost attention. In this plan he
was most heartily seconded by Captain Colville, who foresaw his sister's
happiness existed in the safety of the worthy Howard, whom he now regarded as a
near relation.

Lord Colville and his Lady were very assiduous during Mr. Howard's
confinement; but the ladies, one and all, constantly, notwithstanding the
Doctor's advice to the contrary, kept him company the greatest part of the time.

The affair respecting Miss Dampier and Miss Colville during this period
widened the breach; they were now relations it is true, but no longer friends,
for Miss Dampier openly claimed something more than modesty could produce, or
decency can relate, of an interest in Mr. Howard; but lest our readers should
be inclined to think him deserving of censure in that respect, I shall observe,
Mr. Howard's morals were pure and incorrupt, never having assayed to overstep
the bounds of virtue and religion* -- The ladies were hereupon inclined to
think less favorable of Miss Dampier; so that her pretext only disappointed
her in those steps she took in a most unwarrantable assertion, to secure to her
the test of truth by a palpable falsehood, -- a method that always proves
futile. -- During those strange singularities, a disagreeable piece of news was
set forth in all the public papers, -- that Mr. Howard had recently been
married to Miss Dampier, and had gone to Ashbridge to solemnize their nuptials,
and on the day after was murdered by Lord Dacie's ruffians. -- This report in a
news-paper presented itself to Sir William Howard, as he sat down to breakfast
at Howard-Castle. -- But who can express the surprise, vexation, and grief of
that truly great and good man! -- David on the fall of Absalom, did not feel
more, though their feelings were nearly allied; for Sir William conceived his
son guilty of rebellion, in entering into such a state without his approbation,
and that Divine Vengeance pursued him for such a violation of his duty! It
behooves both sexes seriously to reflect, that to reject the advice, or to
contract marriage without the consent and approbation of parents, is a direct
violation of God's commandment; and will certainly draw down a punishment
adequate to so enormous a crime. On this occasion Sir William lost no time; --
day and night forwarded him; so that little more than thirty hours, brought him
more than two hundred miles. -- He never rested until he alighted at Ashbridge,
enquired for, heard, and soon had a sight of his son. -- Surprise never wore a
face of greater appearance of wonder, than on the worthy father and his worthy
son seeing each other; a kind of suspicion of the reality of the scene haunted
the minds of them both; when the good natured General shook the Baronet's hand,
and on his request the good man showed the print that had given him so much
uneasiness, begging to know how much of it was true; -- all of which was
refuted, to the great satisfaction of the father of this amiable young man, who
was now able to set up, and judged to be out of danger of any feverish attack.

As soon as Sir William Howard had heard the whole story, he rendered thanks to
the Deity for preserving the life of his son in the hour of danger; -- however,
the friends of Henry were unanimous in censuring Lord Dacie. -- The Duke of
Kingssorough was rigid in his opinion of the dishonorable turn of his Lordship;
not concealing his prejudice from the Duke of Ashbridge. -- It was now the
usual hour in which he daily visited his nephew; for since the accident, he was
punctual in his attendance to secure the safety of Henry, until he should be
able to remove him to town. -- Therefore, the Duke opportunely visited him in
the very hour of his father's arrival. -- The Duke was astonished at the
presence of Sir William Howard, "Brother," said he, in the name of wonder, what
enchantment has conjured you hither? but on Sir William's reply, and a sight of
the news-paper, his surprise ceased in that respect; though it increased on
reading the paragraph. Various were their conjectures; however, it was resolved
upon to trace it, as far as they could, and in the mean time to insert a
contradiction, which was immediately attended to. By this time the arrival of
Sir William Howard was made known to the Duke and Duchess of Ashbridge, Lord
and Lady Colville, with the other ladies; -- a congratulation took place, and a
hearty welcome to the neighborhood. -- In all the happy faces on the occasion,
none was so visibly affected as Miss Colville's, she poured out her prayers to
Heaven, to bless her deliverer, -- for so she always termed Sir William, since
her shipwreck.

Happiness and pleasure were seen in every face at Ashbridge, on the arrival of
Sir William, and the restoration of his son's health. -- The evening did not
pass without the Duke of Ashbridge's conference with Sir William Howard on the
former particulars, which he had opened to Henry, respecting Lady Ann his
daughter; -- it was a subject of mature deliberation with Sir William, who
therefore proposed a period to return a categorical answer on the subject. The
next day dismissed all the strangers from Ashbridge. -- Mr. Howard and his
father returned to town, with the Duke of Kingsborough; -- and although every
effort was made to silence the public prints, yet a doubt pervaded the town,
whether the matter was real or fictitious; -- but time, that regulator of
report, gave the truth to the public in less than a month; and Mr. Howard
received the compliments of the Speaker, in the House of Commons, on his
providential escape. -- This transaction threw an odium on Lord Dacie, that he
could by no means efface, to the satisfaction of those who had entertained
disadvantageous opinions of him.

Lord Colville would have willingly broke off the contract, but Lord Dacie and
his father persisted in having the engagement fulfilled; for the marriage
articles between Lord Dacie and Miss Colville were prepared; -- a bond, with a
condition thereunto written, having been already executed between Lord Colville
and the Duke of Ashbridge, subjecting either party to a penalty, to a large
amount, which should recede from the condition of such bond: -- however, Six
Months were limited for fulfilling it, so that there were three months yet to
come, to determine the point.

About this time Mr. Howard became an invalid, having got a new complaint,
which showed apparent symptoms of a consumptive attack. Chalybeate waters were
prescribed by the gentlemen of the faculty, and the German Spa deemed the best
for that purpose. -- From hence arose a most pathetic scene; -- Miss Colville
was inconsolable on receiving the news, -- although uttered from the lips of
Henry; -- every thing in idea magnified to enormity; -- the time, though but
one year, fixed upon for his residence abroad, was with her an age; -- she
dreaded the impediments which his absence would inevitably throw in the way of
her happiness; fearing the approach of the time, wherein her father was to
fulfill his engagement, or incur the penalty, as stipulated with the Duke of
Ashbridge. -- For ten days, which was the term Mr. Howard took to prepare
himself for his journey to the Continent, Miss Colville was incessantly
afflicting herself, on their being separated; and foreboded in her mind, that
the approaching period was to terminate all the felicity life could afford, --
placing an implicit faith in the delusion of her imagination; -- so strong are
the powers of the mind, when a chimerical series of the fictions which the
nervous system may often times impose, are suffered to revolve with the course of
progressive order; from whence may be deduced, the danger of encouraging any of
the opponents of reason, and much more, those of religion; -- for hope is the
sheet anchor of all those, who have faith in the regulating works of an
Omnipotent Being. -- But we must make a small allowance for the errors of love,
-- for it is a strange passion, which alternately changes from its intense
degrees in the zenith, to the nadir of human understanding; and overturns all
the equipoise of reason, should she oppose the hasty strides of the tyrant.

The day too soon arrived, which was to separate two persons, who were really
all they seemed to be; -- doing to none those offices, which they could not
with pleasure receive in return. -- Mr. Howard took a dutiful and affectionate
leave of his father, who, with General Mounsey, his Lady, Captain Colville, and
Miss Colville, accompanied him to Dover, that being the route he chose to Spa.
-- Those friends having, all except Henrietta, taken their adieu, -- the
affecting, -- tender, -- and delicate farewell, was between Henry and Henrietta,
love's dominion indeed! -- sighs and tears completely overcame the fortitude
and resignation of those finished characters; -- but human nature is not
without its frailty, -- which is much better to be trivial and innocent, than
the opposite extreme of so hurtful a contexture. -- The wind was fair, -- the
packet ready, -- and only waited for Mr. Howard; -- dire necessity parted two
persons who seemed molded for each other. So long as the vessel remained in
sight, Henry continued on deck, looking toward the spot where his friends
stood; during which time, Miss Colville devoured with her eyes the object of
her love; -- resolving, never to admit another to supplant him in her heart; --
and earnestly praying to Heaven to preserve him, and grant his safe return; --
hoping to effect her escape from the snares of Lord Dacie, as Sir William
Howard and General Mounsey had undertaken, previous to Henry's departure, to
use their interest and influence with Lord Colville, to forego his covenant
with the Duke of Ashbridge.

An hour deprived them of all observance of the vessel. -- With a sorrowful
countenance Miss Colville prepared to return with her friends to the
Metropolis, -- where they arrived early the next day. -- Sir William and the
General were not unmindful of their word with Miss Colville, but proceeded the
day following in the business with her father, in order to emancipate her from
the power of Lord Dacie; in which they succeeded beyond their most sanguine
expectations. -- The following extraordinary occurrences facilitated the
business. --

Miss Dampier had, through her agitation of mind, brought on a fever, in which
she was apprehensive of the approach of death. -- The dread of dissolution to
an awakened sinner, must present horror, beyond the power of description to be
delineated. -- In this hour of trial, Miss Dampier wished to see Mr. Howard,
and her offended cousin, Henrietta; -- and upon being told of the sudden
departure of the former for the Continent, and of the latter accompanying him,
under the care and conduct of her friends, she was much affected, more
especially as a compunction had attacked her conscience; and she wished to see
her aunt Lady Colville, to whom she confessed her malefaction in being privy to
the attack made on Mr. Howard, at Ashbridge, though the use of fire arms was
concealed from her; -- but that Lord Dacie was culpable, was without doubt. --
She giving reference to the assassin, he was secured, and confessed his crime;
alleging by way of extenuation, the narrowness of his circumstances, and the
largeness of the reward of his services, paid by Lord Dacie. -- Though to a
grovelling wretch, of such narrow faculties, this might seem a palliation for
atrocity, yet it did not lessen the offense.

Upon Sir William Howard's being informed by Lord and Lady Colville, of the
whole of this villainous conspiracy to maim his son, as the hireling set forth
his instructions were to that effect, -- the wretch was permitted to escape, on
condition of his transporting himself forthwith; -- which the worthless being
the first opportunity complied with. -- As for Lord Dacie, he willingly
retracted in his pretension to Miss Colville; for his breach of honor and the
laws of hospitality were more than sufficient to abrogate any treaty that could
have been concluded. -- However, by his, and the Duke his father's rescinding,
the bond became void, and was consequently given up. -- No words can express
the heartfelt satisfaction Miss Colville experienced on the occasion; -- being
thus delivered from bondage.

Miss Dampier's recovery remained for a long time doubtful, having several
relapses of the disorder; -- but Providence was pleased to lengthen her days,
and she retrieved her health, but was brought so low as to require assistance
to use her limbs; -- being debilitated exceedingly. -- This lesson brought her
to a due sense of her state; -- she therefore resolved to redeem the time, and
seek for peace and pardon, from the wise and good author of her being, to atone
for such a black catalogue as her conscience held to view; -- for the
diabolical scheme of disfiguring the person of Mr. Howard, could answer no end
whatever; but was the blackest work of horrid imagination, and an instigation
of a depravity of heart.

By this time a letter from the beloved valetudinarian was expected, -- which
accordingly came to hand, and brought the agreeable news of his safe arrival at
Spa. -- Sir William Howard was mindful to record the whole of the nouvelle
accounts, which he transmitted to his son; -- remarking, that prudence and
caution, were, under the care of Heaven, still necessary attendants to secure
him from danger; -- for that wicked men, can, in the most distant nations, find
miscreants, who for gain, would stick at nothing that wore the face of
practicability.

Captian Colville was very uneasy on perceiving a coolness in the Duke of
Ashbridge toward him; -- and the manner of the Duchess giving him no
opportunity to converse with Lady Ann, was almost a denial to his paying his
devoirs to her, as had been permitted heretofore; -- and on his taking his
leave of Lady Ann, she with tears repeated the message of her father, which
prohibited her the pleasure of seeing him again as a suitor; -- therefore it
must not be, except by stealth. -- This was a thunder-stroke to the Captain,
who, as heir apparent to his father, Lord Colville, had considerable
pretensions, and was in every respect on equal terms; -- but knowing
remonstrance would not avail, and that the pique arose from the denial of his
sister to Lord Dacie, he could not hesitate to acknowledge it was the return of
usage, or what is usually styled retaliation; -- therefore, a literal plan was
established, and the post was deputed to retail the measure of the tender
passion; which they had with an ardent sincerity nourished, and which was truly
sterling in its quality.

Lord Dacie being now a marked character amongst all his acquaintance, he found
it a salutary step to take a trip to the continent, until the wonder of the day
should sleep in the minds of the public; -- to which plan he conformed, -- so
that a few posts brought, in the packet received from Mr. Howard, an account of
Lord Dacie's salutation at Spa. -- This was not pleasing intelligence to any of
the friends of Mr. Howard, though they had in recollection the wise conduct and
prudential steps practiced by him on all occasions; -- yet, a mind of such an
incorrigible state as Lord Dacie's, must naturally lead every reflecting person
to form a critique, not to the advantage (as to safety) of the former, or to
the honor of the latter. Lord Dacie was not clear in his intellects, and
supposing Mr. Howard knew nothing of his former perfidy, sent him a card of
invitation, which Mr. Howard returned, with a verbal answer, that he should
avoid such meetings, Ashbridge intended tragedy was so recent in his memory,
that he could not readily forget the performance. -- and added, that he should
always know the disguise of a base mind, though arrayed in the mask of
friendship.

This answer had the desired effect; Dacie was roused from his lethargic
slumber; -- he was now convinced Mr. Howard was made acquainted with the whole
of the plot. -- Conviction in his heart pronounced the sentence of guilt, which
in the most depraved of mankind, has its moments of reflection; these never
fail to bring shame to remembrance, attended with bitter accusations of
conscience. -- Pusillanimous principles were naturally imbibed by him, which
prevented his calling on Mr. Howard, to excuse his percussion, in such a
villainous style, as he had done; yet to complete his portrait, he wanted
courage and sagacity to direct him, for his counselor, Miss Dampier, was
absent, therefore he felt a severe loss in his plots, not being able to bring
any of them to maturity; -- he of course avoided Mr. Howard as much as
possible; -- constantly retiring if he saw him enter the state, pump, or
assembly rooms; so it was a round of mortifying watchfulness, instead of
recreation, during the time he staid at Spa. -- The evening previous to his
setting out for Paris, he sent Mr. Howard the following letter; SIR,
It will avail but little, for me to draw a case, though in it my utmost
efforts were exerted, to exculpate myself from crimes that make me shudder at
the recollection of them; -- of course palliation is not meant. I concede in
every thing report has spread of the base part I acted. -- I can only say, I am
now the most miserable of mankind, to find myself deserted by every character
of worth that the circle of my acquaintance afforded, -- for the dark sons of
dissipation, who are too much of my own stamp, are not of a nature to admit so
soft a sensation as pity; -- and if my pangs were made known to the most
serious of them, a laugh of deriding contempt would be the relief they would
afford! -- If you can, pray pity and pardon the truly wretched

DACIE.
P. S. I shall take post for Paris within ten minutes; -- however, distance
shall not deprive me of easing my mind in another letter; -- to which an answer
will be a balm of health, though chastisement should compose every stem of it.






Mr. Howard received a sort of satisfaction on reading Dacie's letter; his
concession showing a compunction that resulted from a sense of his crimes, and
the miserable state his wickedness had plunged him into. -- Though his method
to conciliate bore a likeness to artifice, yet as there was nothing to accrue
from duplicity in his confession, Mr. Howard readily gave him what credit, his
returning to an orderly habit could claim as its right; -- for minds,
habituated to the sincere test of regulated truth, are apt to adopt the steps
prodigality assumes, as though there was merit in acting on principles of
integrity. -- However, liberality of sentiment is so praiseworthy, that it
only errs in doing good to all, without examining their pretensions.

During the season Mr. Howard was at Spa, nothing was going forward that
merited recording, saving what follows: Captain Colville was reduced to the
penny-post for all his happiness, -- (Lord Colville having desired him, on pain
of displeasure, to discontinue his visits to Ashbridge, or its environs) but
love often leads children into disobedience, which in Lady Ann Catesby and
Captain Colville was instanced; and if possible for degrees of comparison, to
augment their affection -- fervor and ardency, were the words of their motto.
-- A new character must now be introduced. -- A Mr. Ward, the younger son of a
nobleman, who had just taken upon him sacred orders of the church, made his
appearance, with some friends, on a visit to the Marquis of Languedock. -- Lady
Olivia Beaumont found such an irresistible attraction in the cassock'd hero,
that love's toil was begun. -- The outlines of this honorable and reverend
character were suitable to his function; -- he was young, and in the style of
manhood, very handsome; a sanguine complexion, piercing black eyes, delectable
in aspect, tall and genteel, his delivery the very essence of eloquence; whence
the reader may conceive, he was very soon a popular preacher, and did honor to
his cloth, by his words and works -- which, by the bye, is a good lesson for
his brethren of the gown, for many preach one doctrine and practice another; --
this is a glaring error, the notoriety of the fact, many experienced readers
will, no doubt admit.

This gentleman was a cousin-german to General Mounsey, who was ever an
advocate in the cause of honor; so that Mr. Ward had in him a friend, and a
relation of a fixed standard; yet of so great a delicacy was this business,
that a disparity in fortune made his pretensions to partake, of a precarious
state, for the gown and his family allotment were but barely six hundred pound;
a year, which with Lady Olivia's ten-thousand pounds per annum on the demise of
the Marquis, her father, had but a light sound: but love levels all
distinctions, for Mr. Ward and Lady Olivia commenced and continued the process
of the Paphian God, with truth and sincerity.

Whilst affairs were thus complexioned, Miss Colville was constantly employed
in the care of her absent best beloved, having held a correspondence by each
succceding post; but now the period was advancing to its second moiety, when
England should receive her favorite, with the bloom of health, which blessing
Heaven had wonderfully restored. -- The salubrity of the mineral waters, and
temperature of the climate, daily wrought wonders in Mr. Howard. -- The
following letter gave her hopes a lively faith, and she charitably gave
credence to its contents; -- for, without faith and charity, even in temporal
matters, hope is but a helpless cripple, and often expires in a conflict with
the gigantic champion of despair!

My charming Fair,
How can I in symbols express what I have so often, yet imperfectly attempted,
that is, to explain the real state of my heart? -- I can only observe I love!
and live only to love my Henrietta! -- Your tender solicitations are now before
me, wherein you express your fears of my safety from the wily crafts of poor
Dacie, for so I call him. But, my dear, you may, I am confident, make yourself
easy in that respect, for by his last letter dated from Paris (that voluptuous
receptacle of luxury which once gave him such exquisite pleasure, even in the
mention of it, has now lost all its charms) he says, in his complaint of the
burden of life (to adopt the language of converts) that his iniquitous
companions, which were wont to touch the springs of his heart, in devising new
schemes of unlawful pleasures, are now become as so many imps of odium; -- he
shudders at the sight of any of them, much more so if accosted to partake of
his former divertisements; -- and would immerge himself in reclusion, did his
tenets of religion agree with the opinions of any of the monastical orders on
the continent. But here my Henrietta will smile perhaps, at the idea of
Monsieur Angleterre possessing any seeds of the blessed plant of religion;
though divinity has unerringly recorded, the viler the sinner the brighter the
saint. Heaven grant my prayers for his reformation! pray you angelic mortal,
fervently add, Amen! In my next you shall have abstracts of some former curious
pieces, and an extract from all subsequent pacquets. Pray say handsome things
of me to our little junto. I am ready to speak, or more properly speaking, to
write harshly, for your negligence in keeping the ward of faith and fashion
from me, as by my father's letter by the same post with your last, I find he is
the ward of the key of Olivia's heart; -- that sweet myrtle sprig you flattered
me, had a penchant for the invalid of Spa. But I must not reprove too sharply,
lest my points should rebound, and hurt me in the fall; -- Je n'oublierai
jamais -- But, fair sans dire. I am become a Sampson in strength since my
arrival hither. -- The other few months that are to pass of my term, will soon
slip aside, and release me from servitude; -- for so I call every hour, that
precludes me from the happiness of seeing all I prize in the world! for with
Boileau, I say, je ne cherche qu'une, bonne et belle assez! -- I can only add,
this little imperial commonwealth, to the governors of it, produces miracles in
abundance; yet vice, and all the train of attendants that wait on that lady of
unlawful liberty, are here, performing all her cast of parts. I shall conclude,
ma chere amie, to be what I now am, as long as vital heat and animal sensation
of rational parts compose the faculties of your own

HENRY HOWARD.


This letter had a proper effect on the drooping spirits of Miss Colville; --
she returned her answer, giving potent reasons for neglecting to mention the
reverend character alluded to; however, as Mounsey-Park, in Berkshire, was the
now almost constant residence of General Mounsey and his Lady, Henrietta was
only accommodated with occasional visits from Lady Olivia Beaumont; for the
hurry of bustling strife had passed to the goal of rest; every thing slumbered
into easy and natural interregnum of silence. The months slipped insensibly to
the ultimate, upon which Henry was to return to his native isle; and of course
was expected with joy by all those who had the the pleasure of Mr. Howard's
acquaintance. As for Miss Dampier, she spent her solitary hours at Ashbridge,
Lady Colville having forbid her to visit at Colville-House, ever since the
fever had left her, -- accounting her of too dangerous a disposition to
associate with her daughters. Sir James Dampier and his lady were expected to
arrive in England in a few months, having resided in the exalted sphere of the
representation of Majesty at one of the Barbarian courts of Africa; -- and to
the best of my recollection, at the imperial court of Morocco. Sir James was a
plain honest man, -- his lady haughty and impatient; and what was the worst in
her composition, Pride was a load under which she could hardly support herself;
-- a burden that has ruined the happiness of many of her sex.

In the latter end of September, Mr. Howard's time to return was expired, which
gave Miss Colville the very appearance of content herself. -- She indulged
herself with a walk, in company with Lady Olivia Beaumont, to the Park, and in
a promiscuous manner they met with Captain Colville, her brother, accompanied
by two other officers of his regiment, a Captain Stewart, and a Lieutenant
Pearson, (both of whom had lately purchased their commissions) who were very
uncouth to ladies of such elevated rank, which Captain Colville took amiss,
repeatedly informing them, that one lady was his sister, and the other a lady
of distinction, who paid her a visit. -- However, his words were as idle dreams
to those sons of Mars, imagining they were two courtezans, well known to
Captain Colville, although in the conduct or appearance of the ladies nothing
bespoke such characters; but some of the fops of fashion, when a cockade is
presented in their hats, suppose they are at liberty to insult every fine woman
they meet with.

The disturbance created on the Mall, (as the valiant Colville had given
repeated proofs of his courage in three several battles, whilst Stewart and
Pearson had never unsheathed their swords, except at a challenge of a puppy, or
an incensed gander, or such like animals) brought together a crowd, in which
number of curious persons, the Rev. Mr. Ward was included. -- He readily
recognized the ladies, and immediately espoused their cause; -- and in a
commanding, sharp, and manly tone, desired the heroes of the sword to withdraw;
which, to proceed from a messenger of peace, did not come in a palatable manner
to be relished by such proud stomachs: -- the consequence was, Captain Stewart,
as a qualified blood, drew his sword on the unarmed clergyman, who, by the help
of a cane, parried off the lunge, and instantly disarmed him, to the surprise
and applause of all the spectators present; and then with the cane gave him his
deversed discipline -- Meanwhile Captain Colville rattanned Pearson very
severely, who durst not draw upon a man of such courage and skill as he knew
the Captain to be possessed of. -- Words can scarcely convey the fright and
agony such a rencontre naturally threw such timid innocent ladies into; --
their shrieks and cries prevented Mr. Ward from exacting penance from Captain
Stewart, which he otherwise would have done. -- A conveyance was immediately
procured, and the ladies were attended home with safety by Captain Colville and
Mr. Ward.

This singular circumstance had great influence with the Marquis and
Marchioness of Languedock, who, on the occasion requested the pleasure of
seeing those gentlemen at Pelham-House; this was a favorable opportunity, and
the worthies of the day, Mounsey and Colville were not unmindful of their
friend; for Mr. Ward was complimented by all present as a man of honor and a
man of resolution, when necessity called for the assistance of true courage, in
a case of emergency. -- The noble parents of Olivia were charmed with his
conversation, for he was possessed of all the requisites that compose the man
in a spiritual and temporal sense; -- Calumny never could point a dart* nor
Envy exhale a breath, that had, or could sully his fame. -- Mild benevolence
sat smiling in his road, for this son of the church was what her children
should be in manners and morals. -- Yet, notwithstanding his merit, the fickle
goddess had denied him her boon, therefore little could desert claim, more than
repeated thanks, praises, and promises of friendship. -- Here the reader may
remark, that this introduction was an inlet to a future familiar intercourse;
for though Mr. Ward had visited at Pelham-House once before this period, yet he
was partly a stranger to the noble proprietors.

Mr. Ward having done such wonders in the Park, his fame extended to all
quarters of the towns; -- the rude sons of war were derided by every discerning
person, and heartily laughed at in their own corpse; -- to show the world the
test of their courage, was a thing so horrid in the ideas of those squeamish
heroes, that they gave up every pretension to it. -- But some arch wags, who
had an ascendancy over Captain Stewart, advised him to vindicate his honor, by
sending a challenge to the gownsman who had so shamefully treated him;
alleging that he would certainly decline opposing his person to the danger of
powder and ball; and that by this means he would wipe away the imputed scandal
of pusillanimity. This scheme took the desired impression. -- Quixotism was now
established, -- a messenger was posted away with the following card; MR. WARD,
SIR,
AS a man of honor you are desired, on receipt hereof, to attend with your
friend at Hyde-Park, to satisfy the injured reputation of

ALEXANDER STEWART.
Four o'clock, P. M. Tuesday. * Pistols are to be provided.



To which Mr. Ward returned for answer as follows: Captain Stewart may be more
deliberate in his folly, -- for the darkness of the evening, by the time I
should be able to attend, would prevent the satisfaction that is to be
sacrificed at the shrine of honor. -- It may be remarked, that I lose my gown
by an acceptance of your invitation; -- but I hold it necessary to chastise
the arrogance of noughtiness, -- therefore be assured, any hour tomorrow that
you may appoint I shall attend, not only with pistols, but an horse-whip, to
bring you to a state of repentance of your folly.

CHARLES WARD.




This unexpected reply of Mr. Ward's was a thunder-stroke to the fighting
Captain, -- his heart was agitated exceedingly, -- and his pulse beat high, --
the fright brought on a fever; -- so that Mr. Ward was troubled no further with
the gasconades of the cockade; the newspapers bore testimony of the seat of
true courage (by publishing it) to be often resident with men of contrasted
employments. -- The nine days of wonder were over, -- and the story subsided.

Now the time was fully accomplished that Mr. Howard should return to England.
-- Miss Coville, Sir William Howard, and several of his nearest friends, were
waiting his arrival with anxiety; -- but all sublunary transactions are liable
to transmutation, for when our thoughts are pregnant with the created pleasures
of hope, which exist only in imagination, the limping swollen-eyed hag of
disappointment mars our proposed happiness; -- cutting off even what we
possessed, from the flattering, yet all-acceptable cozener: -- thus human
happiness, at most, is in a continual habit of uncertainty. -- A former letter
had given the happy hour in which Mr. Howard was to arrive at
Kingsborough-House, in Surry, thither were assembled the entire circle of
Howardian friends; but who can paint the reverse of the festive scene, upon
receipt of an express, which gave the assembly to understand, that an accident
of a broken limb, retarded Henry from being able to fulfill his engagement;
which accident proceeded from a hasty step into the packet at Ostend, (that
being the way he chose in his return, being shorter by many leagues than by way
of France) a shattered leg was the consequence, the fractured bones threatened
an amputation to be necessary. -- This intelligence threw a gloom on the aspect
of every face present, -- in Sir William Howard it excited every feeling of a
parent of tenderness; -- he sighed, and in his grief offered up fervent prayers
to the Deity for the safe recovery of his son. As for Miss Colville, her
afflictions were beyond measure; -- every phantom of her mind corroborated the
doubtings that oppressed her; -- a kind of despair possessed her heart, that
she should never see the object of her love; -- therefore only to minds
susceptible of the tender passion, can be conveyed the distress of this young
lady.

Nothing could be devised by any of the ladies or gentlemen that composed the
society of friends assembled, but a resignation to the will of Heaven, that
disposes of all things for the best, to answer some unknown yet wise ends; so
that only in the lap of patience, their cares were laid: for all the anxiety
that might arise in the breast of any solicitous friend, tended only to corrode
with perplexity its possessor, and rendered no service to the afflicted object
of Heaven's visitation. -- To repine is a sin, -- for resignation and prayer
certainly continues the work of miracles, notwithstanding what disaffected
casuists have advanced to the contrary.

We shall leave this collection of notables to the contemplation of their
friend's situation, as in fact it really proved to be a dangerous one: --
whilst we observe to the reader, the turn of affairs at the metropolis of
France.

Lord Dacie, we have already noticed, kept up a continued correspondence with
Mr. Howard, therefore knew the time he had proposed to return to the land of
liberty, and had resolved, if possible, to give him a friendly meeting in
London, for which purpose he prepared his baggage for removal; but had, on the
evening preceding his intended route, a curiosity to see the entertainment
exhibited by royal appointment in the gardens of Versailles. But an unhappy
accident happened, whereby several persons were taken into custody, by the
Marechaussee of the Lieutenant Criminel at the Chatelet, for a riot in those
gardens; which subjects all persons, of whatever rank or country they may be,
who draw swords in places of royalty, to an imprisonment of twenty-one years
continuance. Amongst the number accused, was the unfortunate Lord Dacie,
although his sword had not left its scabbard, and he had only been a spectator
to the disorder of the malcontents. -- To assert his innocence was left to
future proofs, therefore he was hurried away to prison, with the other noblesse
and gentry, who were the unhappy objects of the arbitrary measures of despotic
power. The Prevost of the Bastille received those persons from the officers of
the Chatelet, to whose unhappy fate we shall leave them, and relate what passed
elsewhere.

The packet in which Mr. Howard had taken his passage for England, was, by
contrary winds forced, when half channel over, in their track for Margate, on
the breakers off the town of Helveot Sluys, and every soul perished; amongst
whom were several passengers of distinction. -- Hereby we may observe, the
favors of all bountiful Heaven, whose greatest blessings we too often construe
into a curse; so much do we prize the short-sighted infatuation of our shallow
discernments. The friends of Mr. Howard, on hearing the authentic account of
the loss of the packet, with the tragic catastrophe of the persons on board,
were one and all thankful to the dispensation of Heaven, in ordering the lesser
evil to prevent a greater.

News arrived of Mr. Howard's safety, so far as the faculty could conjecture,
wherein the fears of amputation, or a fever were removed; -- the splintered
parts were knitted, though as a compound fracture the utmost care was necessary
to guard against any dangerous symptom. -- The misfortune of poor Dacie by this
time was publicly known, for the newspapers announced the accusation and
punishment. -- The Duke of Ashbridge hereupon exerted all his court influence,
to find means to extricate his son; -- but liberation is not a light word in
France; -- liberty being a coy lady in that nation, as well as in most of the
courts on the continent. -- By this, discontented people may learn, that the
possession of this English beauty, is the greatest blessing under Heaven.

This affair rendered the court of London active in demanding a British
subject, who in the most plausible point of view, was but a spectator to the
scene of riot the natives had solely enacted: to which remonstrance the court
of Versailles attended, and liberated the person of Lord Dacie; yet not without
manifest regret, and wholly granting it as a national favor, rather than
acknowledge the innocence of his lordship: -- so much for the happiness and
safety of the subjects of the grand monarque.

During this period, the scene of action was chiefly confined to Great Britain.
-- The limb of Mr. Howard, which received the accident, now (by some alteration
in the application) mended but slowly; and the necessary bandages, and the
continued situation of an exact posture, brought on a sort of an intermitting
fever. -- This alarming symptom gave Miss Colville fresh cause of uneasiness,
-- which showed itself in a manifest change in the state of her health, and by
the advice of physicians, Bath waters were deemed absolutely necessary; to
which place, Lord and Lady Colville removed, with their daughter, for that
purpose.

The springs afforded but little relief, it was the mind that was disordered,
and not any material decay in the body; -- but so predominant is the power of
the faculties of thought over the organs of action, that though the springs and
order of mechanism is in the latter, yet the former comprises the force, power,
and spirit, by which they are worked. -- Hence we shall conclude a continual
state of watchfulness, in too an elaborate cast of thought, had so completely
vanquished the refreshment of sleep, that for several days and nights the fair
penitent knew nothing of the pleasing delusion of dreams, being without a
desire to slumber. Therefore opiates were necessarily administered, which took
a little effect, and of course the soporiferous draught was increased, which
operated so powerfully, that an everlasting sleep was dreaded as the
consequence; for during an interval of two days and nights, no remedy availed
to revive her from a stupefaction. All this time, Lord and Lady Colville were
almost frantic, and the discarded relation, Miss Dampier, was permitted to see
her cousin; yet her presence or that of any other visitant had no effect. --
Lady Ann Catesby and Lady Olivia Beaumont were exceedingly affected, as were
all friends who visited this amiable young lady.

Lord Dacie now arrived from the continent, and was, with the rest of the
Ashbridge family at Bath. He saw the beautiful object of his once violently
heated love; -- he was extremely agitated, and felt in his very soul the most
poignant grief for her apparent dissolution. But the only catholicon that can
be applied in such cases had its course of application, that is to say, the
hand of the Omnipotent Power in the working of Nature; -- she by slow degrees
arrived to a state of sensibility, and progressively attained the other
faculties of Nature.

The cynic proverb says, that love is a jest, and vows are but wind, which, in
fallacious minds may obtain verification; but in those of exalted nature, where
honor keeps the door of faith, it is altogether an erroneous principle.
Henrietta loved, and yet held faith sacred! Lord Dacie loved; and broke his
faith! -- he saw, felt, and indulged a passion, that had led him into such
fatal error, and which he had pledged his honor to his friend never to indulge
again; -- but alas! what are human resolves? -- a blast of the impregnated
element, and as light as the air itself, unless it is biassed by admonitions of
honor and truth, two qualities rarely found in one person: -- for though truth is
essential to honor, yet honor is no guide to truth; and there is a false honor,
that is more dangerous than the slippery footed jilt, falsehood. For in what
point of view shall we take the satiated prodigal, if he returns to those
vicious courses, that deprived him of all he possessed, when in the state of
his inebriation.

If the wretch, reprieved from an ignominious termination of his existence,
should again by evil practices violate those laws which the hand of clemency
had released him from the atonement of, do we generally admit that his second
offense against light, knowledge, and experience, deserves the same mercy,
which lengthened his days at a former period. -- I answer, -- we do not: -- for
it would be a false aphorism, founded in error, and must tend to the manifest
injury of society.

Who can indulge an unlawful passion, and not dread its effects? -- for love,
if once it can conquer reason, is like firing a tenement of faggots, -- it
cannot be extinguished until all the fuel is exhausted; -- therefore, why
should we make light of such a dangerous combustion, whose explosion may give
us cause, too late, to repent of such rashness?

Miss Colville and Mr. Howard were alike in the steps they slowly mounted to
obtain, pristine vigor. -- Great were the adulatory compliments paid by many
male visitants, particularly Lord Dacie, who was now admitted as a converted
man; for his munificence to many was so conspicuous, that a censure of
ostentation was issued forth by the general firm of every body; -- and, as his
compliments with Miss Colville, came mala-propos, and was a perishable
evanescent, -- totally an exotic remedy, to gain that lady's favorable opinion
of his reformed principles, -- in that alone was her faith accounted weak: for
this doubtful part of the creed of a lady, when a libertine is the saint to be
canonized, is really good doctrine. -- Pray keep in your opinion, and still
doubt; for to the daughters of Eve, not in this terrestrial sphere dwells a
more dangerous monster than an hypocrite -- a wretch that despises God, to
deceive man! -- therefore let the convert by his faith show forth his works,
that by his works faith may be given to his conversion.

Lady Olivia Beaumont found many inconveniences since his Lordship's return
from the continent; he wore such a face of sanctity, that the Marquis and
Marchioness of Languedoc were upon all occasions happy to see his Lordship. The
worthy person of Mr. Ward was his first essay against the doctrine of truth, --
but with no great success; -- this son of the priesthood being more than his
match in every respect: so that his Lordship took occasion to shun every place,
where he knew the worthy gentleman would be of the party. -- Thus by an outward
form, to which his inward thoughts were in no wise suited, this mistaken man
practiced a new species of deceit; but to many of those who were acquainted
with his former mal-practices, it was obvious to be no more than a veil; though
to the rest of the world it was a cloak which covered all the vile nakedness of
craft and subtlety. -- In this masked character his Lordship did not fail to
write in course to Mr. Howard, who was fully satisfied of his Lordship's
sincerity; and was so far wrapped up in his faith, as to entrust his packet
for Miss Colville to the care of this son of sanctity. -- But in this step he
was certainly wrong, for where deceit has been once practiced, that person
should never be tempted to violate the laws of fidelity again.

The curiosity such a trust excited in him, did so powerfully work upon his
weakness, that it was to him an impossibility to withstand the temptation; he
therefore formed a resolve at all events to see the contents of the packet.
Thus he fell to a contemptible breach of honor and integrity, betraying the
trust reposed in him; which could answer no end whatever, but only to show the
frailty of human nature when it became depraved: -- so that little heed should
be given to the returning honesty of the sons of prodigality. -- To heal their
tainted principles is as much impossible, as to restore to life the dead corpse
that is in a state of putrefaction; and it should be a settled maxim with the
inexperienced of either sex, to shun the company of all those who have led a
dissolute life; for as it is impossible for the leopard to change his spots, in
like manner is the same task of impossibility to those who pretend reformation,
to be freed of their habitual evil practices, whenever they revolve in the
circles of gay scenes of life: -- for they will certainly fulfill the scripture
phrase, "like a dog return to his vomit, or a sow to wallowing in the mire." --
This state will be continued so long as ease and elegance are worn on the brow
of religious appearance. -- This is certainly a fatal mistake, and a great
injury to the cause of pure religion, whose words and works are simple,
sincere, and without ostentatious parade.

The worst state a man can fall into is to make a mockery of that sublime
system which begins at the heart, and reaches up to Heaven, to enter the ears
of the omniscient being, who perceives our most inward or remote thoughts;
therefore, it is more than madness to attempt to act the hypocrite, when our
opponent is no less a being than God himself.

Now Lord Dacie having broke the faith, he found the secret of Mr. Howard's
heart, which was an expression of pure love for Miss Colville, by which all the
former bitterness of the spirit of rivalship revived in his Lordship's breast;
he was therefore resolved to make the most of every opportunity: however, he
had no confidant, his evil genius directing him solely; but he soon found out a
scheme which he put in practice in the following extraordinary manner.

Miss Colville did not receive her usual weekly packet, therefore was very
unhappy at the neglect of Mr. Howard. Her conjectures were various upon the
occasion, as she could not surmise what to impute it to. -- Lord Dacie readily
conceived the cause of that lady's uneasiness; he added a forgery to the
packet committed to his care, by fixing a day, in which he mentioned Mr.
Howard would arrive in England; and as he meant to surprise his friends,
requested she would meet him at the Devizes, a town on the London road, some
few miles from Bath; that by his enter unawares, his father, and all their
friends at Bath, would meet with an agreeable surprise.

This device was framed, as he knew Miss Colville went out daily in a carriage
beyond the verge of the city of Bath. -- He sealed up the packet, and had it
delivered by a person, as though he arrived express with it. -- The news of
this post revived the lady, to whom it was directed; -- she felt every power
assume its wonted regulation; she perused, digested, and then seemed amazed at
the oddity of Mr. Howard's whim, as the letter represented; and as she
perceived somewhat in the difference of the handwriting, and the style of the
lines which were the counterfeit part, she was stagnant in opinion respecting
it; -- however, the conveyance by the post, express as she conceived, and his
seal to it, put it beyond a doubt as genuine. -- This craft succeeded so well,
that Lord Dacie was preparing all his necessary apparatus to put his scheme
into practice, when he received another packet, enclosed in one to himself,
and directed as before for Miss Colville. -- This he also broke open, and found
by its contents, that in reality Mr. Howard had determined to return to
England, on the very day following that which he had appointed in the packet
already delivered, therefore, it made him more vigorous in his plan; -- for he
found it now wrought up to a pitch of desperation: -- for what was now done, he
knew would raise a potent enemy in Mr. Howard, and expose him to the shame and
censure of the whole nation; -- therefore he thought the plan that he had laid
down, could he carry it through, and gain his point, the excuse of an ardent
lover would be sufficient to palliate for the duplicity he might be charged
with. -- Thus were at one and the same time, three grand deceptions carried on
by this converted man of honor! -- He deceived the liberal-minded Mr. Howard,
-- the charming, innocent fair, Miss Colville, -- and the whole circle of his
friends and acquaintance! -- He was constrained to place confidence in his
valet de chamber, whom he bribed to be honest, as he called it, -- and posted
him to look out for a ship, bound to the city of Lisbon, or any of the Italian
States. As for France, he had received partly his deserts there, which raised
in him an implacable hatred for every thing that bore the name of French. This
trusty servant was a Portugueze by birth, therefore fitted to the work he was
employed in. -- He found a Captain who would sail the day Lord Dacie proposed
to seize his prize, -- but would wait a day longer in order to accommodate his
Lordship; -- as his passengers were to be well paid for, he would strain a
point to serve himself and his friends.

The post brought a letter to Sir William Howard, announcing the day that Henry
hoped to pay his duty to him at Bath. -- This diffused such a spirit of joy in
the worthy Baronet, that he could not forbear acquainting Miss Colville with
the agreeable intelligence, at which she seemed greatly surprised; yet imagined
she was beforehand in her knowledge, and pleased herself with the agreeable
ideas of Mr. Howard's frolic, to surprise his friends a day sooner than he was
expected; she therefore was amusing the cognitions of her mind with the
pleasures of idea, letting hope and an exuberant fancy sport in her bosom, at
the prospect that lay before her.

Whilst she was thus agreeably entertaining her thoughts, the base-minded Lord
Dacie was getting ready all necessaries for his intended elopement. The day at
length arrived, and Miss Colville, though she imagined she was in a few hours
to see the person for whom she wished to live, had a kind of predestination of
fatality, which affected her so much that she fell into tears several times;
this was observed by her domestics, who were anxious to know her disorder, --
but she waved all direct answers. By these evasions her women supposed her mind
to be somewhat disordered, and strenuously opposed her going out that morning;
-- this liberty of her servants made her in a peremptory manner, command
silence, in which they implicitly obeyed.

She no sooner got into her carriage, than another flood of involuntary tears
gushed from her eyes, -- a presage of a particular change. -- The coach went on
at a quick pace, but ere she reached Devizes by three miles of the road, it
being a lonesome place, no houses or persons near, a post-chaise and four
horses appeared, out of which two men rushed with masks on, and without
ceremony commanded the coachman to stop, forcing Miss Colville out of her
carriage and thrusting her into the post-chaise, into which one of them stepped,
whilst the other rode on horseback with a loaded blunderbuss in his hand. --
The chaise drove off at a great rate, taking the cross roads, and avoiding the
town that was then partly in view, distant nearly three miles. -- Previous to
their departure, they gave the coachman and footman, who conducted Miss
Colville, a caution to depart homeward to Bath, on pain of the forfeiture of
their lives; -- with which they readily complied.

Words cannot describe the agony of Miss Colville! -- she shrieked out, tore
her hair, and in vain called for help, and then fell into a convulsion fit; but
the ravisher, who had her now in his custody, had no pity on her cries and
lamentations, telling her, on her revival, that as she regarded her life,
welfare and safety, to forbear making such noise; -- and endeavored to sooth
her, by informing her that she should be conducted to a place of safety, and
find a friend there ready to receive her, who loved and adored her. -- She,
however received no consolation from this flattering tale, continuing to vent
her grief in torrents of showers, that fell from her lovely eyes; -- tears of
heated brine of sorrow, that scalded and wounded her beauteous cheeks as they
fell.

The tyrant was relentless, and closed up the blinds, not permitting her to
leave her seat for nearly twenty hours, having provided necessaries for the
journey, which were in the carriage. -- Of these refreshments the afflicted
lady would not partake. -- The stratagem practiced on her, -- the dangers she
had to encounter, -- the loss of Mr. Howard, -- added to those of her friends,
were burdens on her mind, not to be easily removed, -- she therefore saw in
the terrors of her mind, every species of villainy practiced on her, -- but how
to escape she could not devise. With these disagreeable reflections she arrived
at Black-Wall, near London, and was hurried immediately on board a ship, which
was then making ready to fall down the river, and was bound on a voyage to
Lisbon.

No sooner was she seated in the cabin, than the two masqued men took off their
disguises, and in their persons she perceived, to her utmost astonishment and
mortification, -- Lord Dacie and his valet de chamber! -- She was then, if
possible, more miserable than before; -- she felt every pang redoubled; she
then readily recollected the forgery of the packet, and that it really must
have been intercepted; -- she accused his Lordship with it, -- he did not
hesitate to own it, -- and only said, he thought every scheme laudable whereby
he could secure her in his possession; -- for he had determined not to exist
without her, and therefore hoped she would make him happy in a few days. -- He
would give her a week to make up her mind, which, if not favorable to his
expectations, he must use force to make her comply with his desires, as his
intentions were honorable; -- and should as soon as they reached the destined
port, make her his wife, according to the ceremonial of the law, and therefore
she might rest assured, she was safe under his care, and that his person and
fortune were at her service. -- There we shall leave them and return to Bath.

It would baffle description to set forth the ravings of her parents, -- her
brothers, sister, and Sir William Howard; with the rest of her friends. --
Henry arrived! -- His Henrietta and his false friend Dacie, were both missing!
He stormed, raved, and was in such a frantic plight, as he never experienced
before! -- He soon discovered the cheat and trick played by the designing
villainy of Dacie! He made the coachman and footman who attended Miss Colville,
relate all the particulars of the usage of the ravisher. A hue and cry was
raised! It was all in vain, for no person had seen a lady of her description,
no inn keeper saw such travelers, -- all enquiry was without effect.

A week was spent in exploring all parts of the kingdom; -- advertisements made
their appearance; -- all the pacquets to the continent were constantly
searched; every means used to find out the retreat of the stigmatized Dacie, --
all efforts were vain: -- so that the pursuers teturned to Bath inconsolable,
and sorrow pervaded every countenance.

As for Mr. Howard, he wished for death a thousand times, -- but had too great
a dread to offend the Omnipotent Being, to use any means to shorten an
existence, which was given by God, and should therefore be demanded at his good
pleasure: -- for of all the catalogue of crimes belonging to sinful man, none
can equal that of suicide! It is of so daring and presuming a nature to oppose
God's will and pleasure, as to leave no hope of pardon; -- for as there is no
time on earth for repentance, we are certain in the grave there is none.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
THE SCHOOL OF VIRTUE. VOL. II.
THE Portugueze ship proceeded on her voyage without any material occurrence,
until the sixth day after her departure from England, when the sea became very
rough; and although the vessel was deeply laden, and kept steady of course, yet
Miss Colville was so much affected by sea sickness, that her recovery was
doubtful.

Dord Dacie had hitherto behaved with all the respect imaginable, and gave
every possible attendance to render her situation as agreeable as could be
expected, but her grief was not to be soothed; -- she pined with inward
sufferings; and had been so late an invalid, that her constitution bore evident
marks of declension. -- About sunset the breeze abated, and in a few hours it
totally subsided. -- Lord Dacie seated himself by her bedside in the
state-room, and addressed Miss Colville in the following manner.

"I perceive you give way to an indulgence of your grief, -- a passion, in your
present situation, very unbecoming; but if you persevere in it, the effects
will be of a serious consequence, -- for," continued he, "if you mourn the loss
of that spiritless fellow, Henry Howard, your penchant shall be gratified; --
he shall have your charms, if you are willing to resign yourself to his care in
preference to mine; -- but this you are to remark, as the test of truth, that I
shall reap those sweets that were so long intended for Mr. Howard; -- and only
two days further consideration shall be granted, in which you are to determine
on the matter. -- The choice is in substance this, -- you must at all events
yield to my embraces at that period; -- if it is willingly performed on your
part, I shall espouse you in legal form on our arrival at Lisbon, and then
return with you to England as my lady: -- and consider, Madam, that my family
and fortune are equal to your own, and that you once had consented to give me
your hand; which contract would have been long since consummated, were it not
for the schemes of your composing, as well as those of my cousin, Miss Dampier:
-- for to her I owe the hardships I have felt, ever since Mr. Howard returned
from his travels. -- But on the other hand, if it is a forced compliance on
your part, the consequence will be this, I shall detain you during my pleasure,
and then send you home by the first vessel I shall find suitable for your safe
conveyance, to that idol of your affections; and no doubt, as he is possessed
of so much religion, he will thankfully accept you, and be resigned to his fate
of being comuted, as many men of rank and fashion often are. -- So, Madam,"
continued Dacie, "you are at liberty to be a wife or a mistress, both of which
are freely submitted to your own choice; whereby a state of future repentance
on your own part may be avoided.

"I shall now withdraw, by tomorrow you will be more recollected in your
thoughts, -- and as it is now calm weather, I shall not disturb your rest any
longer." -- On saying these words he wished her a good night, and retired to
his room on the other side of the cabin.

This choice, as Lord Dacie had termed it, was more than a dagger to the soul
of Miss Colville. She, in despair, prayed to the author of her being, to
release her from the tyranny of this wicked man, by calling her hence, -- as
there were no other means, in human probability, to protect her from the
loathsome embraces of a man in whom was every species of villainy; -- therefore
the names of a wife or mistress, to such a person, were equally odious; and
whose promise of a performance to make legal the former appellation, was not to
be relied on; at best it was sacrificing herself to a son of Belial, from whom
every evil consequence was to be feared.

She spent the night in lamenting her misfortunes, often earnestly invoking the
deity to avert the ruin that so nearly threatened her.

In the combat of a resignation to the will of Heaven, the delusive enemy of
our nature held out the quick means to avoid shame and misfortune, by making
her quietus in suicide. -- This alluring bait was gilded over with the beauties
of Roman virtue, and an exaltation of mind, and the use of such means when
necessity required it, with a thousand suggestions equally palatable to a mind
not fraught with the principles of incorrupt religion; -- but in all these
methods of seduction the enemy found nothing in her; and not being able to
prevail, he retired, leaving her to converse with the spiritual comforts she
received from a sole dependence in a resigned state on the goodness and mercies
of God: abhorring in her soul the idea of self-murder, -- that gloomy monster
that recently has shown his power amongst Christian nations. -- The very
opposite power to the beneficence of the author of Nature. -- For how can a
creature, which is composed of the dust of the earth, presume to disembody
himself, to appear naked in the presence of glorious spirits, before the throne
of grace, with the entire burden of numberless imperfections laid open to
view? It is a horrid thought indeed! and is the most depraved and attrocious
crime man can commit.

About ten o'clock in the morning Lord Dacie again waited on Miss Colville, and
by great persuasion she sipped a little tea; not having taken any sustenance,
that would visibly support human nature, since her decoy from Bath, except tea.

The day was nearly at a period when Lord Dacie again renewed his solicitations
to her concerning the proposed choice. -- She mildly observed; -- that he
should grant her time, till the ship arrived in the port of her destination, to
consider of the matter; -- but in this he peremptorily refused to comply. --
His tenacious disposition made her apply herself to reason with him, which she
did in the following words:

"I know, my Lord, I am now in your power, so far as a command over my person
will admit, -- but surely you will not be so cruel to exert that prerogative
over a person of my sex, by snatching from me the felicity of my future
existence, in depriving me of a title I prize equally with my life, and which
in the fruition can afford you no solid satisfaction. Reflect, but for a
moment, the offense such a crime would give to the supreme being, and what
destruction it will bring down on your head for violating the laws of God and
man! -- You know the manner in which your wiles allured me from my friends; and
although it was an imprudent step in me even to consent to meet the man whom I
thought was to be my husband, yet a tenderness for him, through a perfect
knowledge of his honorable principles, made me comply. -- The stratagem you
used can never redound to your credit; so that on a due consideration of the
aggravated character of duplicity, that you acted both with me and all the
world, I think you cannot do less than indulge me with time to make my election
on the position advanced by you. -- Honor calls aloud to you not to violate her
system in an action so repugnant to the laws of human nature, both moral and
divine; for even after the rites of the church were performed, it would be time
enough to ask any favor that is in my power to grant. "Pray, therefore,"
continued she, "for Heaven's sake don't triumph in my misery; -- but have pity
on the feelings of human nature, and do not insult the resistless state I am
placed in; -- your kindness herein shall not pass without grateful
acknowledgments." -- Here tears started in her eyes, and grief prevented her
further utterance.

But the attentive Lord, with a sullen brow replied, "Madam, it will not avail
to try by the art of words to dissuade me from my purpose; for if you and I are
in this vessel on Sunday night, I shall accomplish my desires: -- the rest of
the rites of honor leave to me. -- Your demeanor shall, agreeably to my
proposition, ensure you future regard; -- for I suppose you mean to claim
protection at Lisbon, if you possess what I am determined you shall not have in
your power to plead; for if you are admitted but once to my bed, that court
will not look upon you otherwise than as a wife or a mistress. -- Here you
shall not be too crafty for me. Was I to admit this, it would be folly indeed;
for I have been at a great deal of pains to bring matters to the present
crisis, therefore all schemes to divert me from my purpose will be vague, and
answer no intention whatever. -- So, Madam, desist, and make yourself happy; --
for nothing on my part shall impede it. If you can, make yourself easy, until
an opportunity serves to quiet your stings of conscience, -- although with me,
I must confess, it is an idle useless ceremony." He ended here, she rejoined in
the most pathetic manner to grant her request, alleging, she would not take
the advantage of claiming national protection; (although it was her secret
intention) but in all her reasoning and fair promises the hardhearted ravisher
seemed unaffected. -- She cried and claimed on her knees his protection and
favor; but he remained inexorable, and went aloft, leaving her to her own
determination, as he said, for no words could persuade him to change his brutal
purpose.

The next day passed, in which poor Miss Colville felt all the pangs that a
malefactor can feel the day before execution. -- Saturday morning* was now
approached, -- the sky looked red and lowering, -- the face of heaven seemed
changed, -- the winds seemed howling and hollow -- the ship rolled exceedingly
-- the wind set in to the southward, -- upon which the Captain called all hands
aloft; -- every one did his part with alacrity, they saw the winds were
determined to contest the point with the watery element. -- Presently vivid
flashes of lightning rolled along the deck, -- the echoing thunders, with
dreadful murmurings passed through the watery clouds, -- the wind in frantic
sport tosed the sea in mountain heaps, forming valleys at pleasure; -- the
loaded ship with difficulty went up the limped hill, but with redoubled
velocity ran down the steep declivity, -- thus the ship and her cargo were
become in a few hours the mock and sport of contesting elements.

Danger with all her terrific attendants made her appearance, -- the Captain,
in despair, cried out hard weather! -- to prayers! -- and in the same instant
almost, called to lighten the vessel! -- Overboard were hove valuable bales of
merchandise. -- Death in various forms stared every one in the face, -- all
seemed struck with horror at the approach of that grim-visaged monarch; -- to
all he seemed terrible, except the amiable Henrietta; -- she smiled at their
danger, and thanked heaven that had changed her sufferings, -- being happy to
be in the power of God, in preference to that of vile seducing man; -- with
pleasure offering up her breath into the hands of the being who had given it.

It was the reverse with Lord Dacie; -- in wild disorder his hair stood erect,
-- he saw death as the fell monster of terror, -- he prayed with despairing
agony, -- and in broken accents, with a most fearful countenance, invoked the
God of mercy to forgive his sinful soul. Thus in his humility he craved
forgiveness from Henrietta for the wrongs he had done her, and also for those
he intended to perpetrate; and in his seemingly dying words, solemnly vowed,
that if the ship should outride the storm, he would not attempt to violate the
laws of moral rectitude; -- but that she should be safe in his care, and no
insult ever should be offered.

The storm after some hours abated, and by the appearance of the Sabbath Day
rested from its vigorous fury, and about noon became perfectly serene.

Miss Colville was dubious of the faith she could place in Lord Dacie's
promises to her, though to witness them, he appealed to heaven; -- and whilst
she was ruminating on his words, he came to her bedside, and with a pleasant
aspect, gave her notice, that that night was to afford him all that human
happiness could bestow.

These words struck her with horror, -- she reminded him of his vows to heaven,
and to forbear such wickedness; -- her words were wasted in the air; -- he said
he had sworn to fulfill his desires, and that it was equally as great a sin to
perjure himself by the omission, as the commission; and desired she would not
resist: him. -- She prayed him earnestly to think of his words when death was
near, and to forego his wicked purposes; for that she was come to a determined
resolution, to lose her honor only with her life; and therefore, if he
attempted to force her to a gratification of his unlawful desires, she would
not only resist him, but oppose her strength to his, and offensively maintain
her privilege. -- She hereupon called the Captain of the vessel, and craved his
protection; -- but Lord Dacie's purse had commanded him already, therefore, in
vain were her entreaties; he was deaf to all her complaints, -- and as for her
threats, he knew they must prove abortive, for Dacie's ends obtained, set aside
the force of complaint.

Now seeing every refuge vanish, except that of her own breast, she was
determined to yield only by the force of power; -- bravely resolving, and
firmly determining, to perish in the conflict, rather than pollute her virtue.
-- A principle which every lady of honor should imbibe; -- for in defense of
God's law, if a life is lost, the virtuous competitor lives or dies without an
imputation of sin.

The clock time-piece showed the fourth hour since noon. -- Lord Dacie had
confirmed, with an evil imprecation, by an oath, that at six o'clock he would
gain all he wished for; -- to which Miss Colville protested, in the presence of
heaven, he should not. -- Her words were scarcely repeated, when the Captain
slipped down stairs, and on entering the cabin, gave by his countenance symptoms
of fear equal to those which appeared on his brow during the preceding storm.
-- He said, a corsair was in chase of the ship; -- for a vessel had just now
hove in sight, which had fired a gun to leeward to bring him to; -- however, he
had crowded all the canvas he could to escape. As for themselves, as British
subjects, they would be safe no doubt, as all the states of the piratical
infidels were in amity with Great Britain; -- but as for him, and his crew,
together with the ship and the remainder of the cargo that was saved from the
storm, would certainly be the absolute property of the infidels, who would make
him and his crew slaves.

The reader may conjecture what were the difference of the feelings of Miss
Colville, contrasted with every other person on board. -- It sounded to her as
a reprieve from heaven, as she had an uncle who had resided at Fez, in Morocco,
but was now at Algiers, as Plenipotentiary from the Court of Great Britain; --
and added to this, she was certain, on being reported, any of the states would
free her.

Lord Dacie was petrified, and stood aghast, quite motionless, plainly
perceiving her opposition to the title of being his wife would separate them;
and in all probability he should not meet with her again until they returned to
England. -- His countenance fell, -- he lowered his tone, -- and in faultering
accents begged she would pass for his wife; which assumption (he observed) to
the Mahometans, would preserve her from insult. -- To this she hastily replied,
-- "No, my Lord, I will trust my person with Turks or Heathens, rather than
with a perjured wretch, who can claim no sanctity in any religion; -- your
heart is corrupt, therefore your words and actions partake too much of its
quality; -- so of all mortals existing, you are the most detestable to me; for
even your dying words are not to be regarded." -- "But," rejoined his Lordship,
"admitting all you say to be true, -- I don't mean to contradict you, only
remain neuter, whilst I inform the captors of our names, quality and nations --
She replied, "Enough of your dissimulation, I shall not hold any converse with
you, but claim their protection."

By this time the galley was plainly in sight, and within a league, bearing
down on them with all possible expedition. -- The Portugueze Captain seeing it
was impossible to escape, was laying to for the Algerine to come up with them,
as by their flag and pendant it was easy to distinguish what nation she was of,
although it was now near the dusk of the evening. The Portugueze sailors were
all pannic struck, finding that such inveterate enemies were to be their
masters.

In vain did Fernandez, Lord Dacie's servant, who had procured the means to
enslave himself, by acting in iniquity, the performance of trepanning Miss
Colville, implore his master, to use his endeavors to obtain his liberty, as
the servant of a British Lord; -- His Lord was too busily employed to attend to
any thing he said; -- whereupon the affrighted wretch fell on his knees before
Miss Colville, imploring her favor and protection, which she promised,
notwithstanding his villainy, in conjunction with that of his master, was the
means to bring her thither. -- Even the base-minded Captain Cordoza, also
claimed a share of her favor and protection; although he had an hour before,
denied her the like boon, at the greatest extremity a virtuous mind could
possibly experience.

The galley was now along-side the ship; the pirates boarded with their usual
ferocity, clapping the Captain and all his crew into irons. -- Lord Dacie was
taken into custody and Fernandez would have partook of the same fate of his
countrymen, but Miss Colville humanely interceded for him, by alleging he was a
British subject, -- therefore he went with his master.

The Captain of the galley was an English Renegado, who had fought under
General Mounsey in America, and recollected Miss Colville to be the General's
sister, which was a happy circumstance; and she therefore received all the
politeness that could be expected from an apostate infidel Captain, who had
chosen this life, merely to get a sufficient booty to enable him to live
independent whenever he should think proper to steal off to his own country. --
But this is a bad scheme indeed, -- to hazard both soul and body for filthy
lucre!

The Captain of the galley immediately removed Miss Colville into the cabin of
his war ship; -- he laid before her a variety of preserved fruits and
sweetmeats, with a plenty of chocolate and coffee, made in the European manner.
-- This was a seasonable supply, and the only hearty meal which that lady had
eaten since she left Bath; for though she drank tea on board Cordoza's ship,
yet she eat nothing except a biscuit about noon each day; she was therefore
through her late illness; and the harrassed state she had experienced, quite
reduced to the appearance of a skeleton; and might be said to be no more than
skin and bone, notwithstanding the cruelty exercised by Lord Dacie for the
completion of his brutal desires, taking no pity on her reduced state of health.

The galley bore away for Algiers with her prize, where we shall leave Miss
Colville and Lord Dacie, and return to see what went on during this period in
England.

Mr. Howard, Captain Colville, and General Mounsey, having spent a week, as was
before remarked, in a fruitless search for Miss Colville, returned to Bath with
all the dejection of spirits imaginable. However their gloom, except that of
the disconsolate Henry, was soon removed; -- but he mourned his mate in
silence. -- Sir William Howard did all he could to console his son for the
irreparable loss of the accomplished Miss Colville, and by degrees opened his
mind to him with respect to another choice, naming Lady Ann Catesby, or Lady
Olivia Beaumont. But Mr. Howard knew where their hearts were engaged; -- but if
they were free, this proposal at present would have no influence on Henry. The
impression already made by virtue and innocence were not easily erased; the
dear image of Henrietta was never out of his mind; and to reflect she was in
the arms of such a monster of deceit, as he was convinced Lord Dacie was, put
him into flights of torment that bordered on insanity.

He at times fostered a hope in his bosom of the interposition of Providence in
the favor of innocence, -- but he as often scouted the idea; well knowing that
the good man is as much, if not more liable to misfortunes than the evil man:
for Providence permits, for its own secret purposes, things to pass, that in
all appearance, to the superficial eye of human nature, is loss and misfortune.
-- Yet a benefit arises to the sufferer, that more than sufficiently
compensates for his vexation in the visitation of the calamity. -- As Mr.
Howard was now become more thoughtful, yet resigned to the decree of Heaven, he
mentioned to his father a wish to return to Howard's castle, in Devonshire,
with which Sir William cheerfully complied.

About this time it was known in most polite circles that Miss Dampier was
pregnant. Such a report in the bon ton goes at the ratio of wild fire; few
diminishing the shame or misfortune of their acquaintance, -- on the contrary
swelling the account from one to another, until at last it becomes a hyperbole
of incredence, and sinks into oblivion, through the means ill nature had
undertaken to sully the covering of truth. However, here the story could
neither add or diminish, unless some ladies might report she was to produce
twins or a monster. -- But the real fact was, she was in a few months the
mother of a young son; and as Sir James, her father had never that happiness,
it was a great acquisition in the family! -- Report stood tiptoe to know the
author of her misfortune, or as others styled it, her fortune; but in this the
new-made mother was also very explicit, for a stranger had not been admitted, a
friend, and a relation, was the person admitted to partake of her amusements;
-- the already execrated Lord Dacie was the cause of his relation's increase.
-- This put him up again to receive the discipline of tongues: -- for one
worthless man to destroy the happiness of two ladies, and the peace of several
families, was deemed a very capital offense all over England, which no doubt it
was: -- and by the sequel we shall find how his thrift turned out.

Mr. Ward was now the constant and accepted visitant at Feversham-House, the
seat of the Marquis of Languedoc. -- He saw and admired the talents and
abilities of the young clergyman, and found out his daughter's inclinations to
be fixed on that gentleman; therefore he was resolved to prove the affection of
Mr. Ward, before he made his purpose known.

About this time he admitted the honorable Mr. Ward into his family, as his
chaplain, which was a desirable situation for the accommodation of the lovers,
-- for every day afforded hours of converse; -- and although Lady Olivia was not
without a considerable train of admirers, yet no person had influence enough to
assume the name of rival.

A 'Squire Lee, and his sister, who were the sister's children of the Marquis,
paid a visit at Feversham-House. -- The Lady, whose name was Arabella, and who
was really a fine woman, was possessed of a fortune of ten thousand pounds,
then in her own hands; -- the Marquis therefore judged this a proper
opportunity to try the sincerity of the honorable Chaplain's pretensions, and
in a friendly manner opened the business to him, by declaring his approbation,
if his niece's affection could be obtained, which he had no doubt but Mr. Ward
could with assiduity gain; and he should acquaint Miss Lee to look upon Mr.
Charles Ward in quality of a suitor in future. -- This proposition staggered
Mr. Ward; he was cautious in giving offense, therefore, in reply to the
Marquis, he returned him his sincere thanks, but declined his answer until he
should acquaint his friends of the honor his Lordship proposed doing him, to
admit him as a relation in his family.

The Marquis dismissed the subject for the present, but in a few days renewed
it; when the generous-minded Ward, with a sincerity that would do honor to a
prince, frankly owned he could not accept of the terms his Lordship had
proposed; -- and that had he seen the Lady in question two years sooner, he
should have been happy to have embraced the opportunity, as she was a Lady of
rank, fortune and beauty; -- but he must confess he loved a nearer relation to
his Lordship, and that Lady was no other than his daughter: -- "And," continued
Mr. Ward, "I shall openly confess, I cannot be happy with any other Lady, were
her pretensions ever so great to the high rated trifles of fortune; -- for with
Lady Olivia, I should be the happiest man living, did she but possess only a
covering. -- I would have sooner made known my pretensions, but the difference
in the scale of fortune, I judged, would mar them; now, my Lord, I assume an
equality of fortune, as by the loss of my two elder brothers, one of whom died
of a decline in the south of France a few days ago, and the other nearly about
the same time of the like disorder, in this kingdom, I am left to claim the
honors of my father's title and fortune, whom I presume you knew." -- "Very
well" replied the Marquis, "and now," continued he, "you are the Earl of
Bellview, I presume." -- "Yes, my Lord," rejoined Mr. Ward, "I am." -- "Well
then," says the Marquis, "I shall let you know the whole of my intentions.

"As you were a character which took my attention, I paid particular regard to
your conduct; -- I found, both by report and observation, that my daughter
really loved you; -- I judged your income was not very large, I therefore
schemed the plan of proving your affections for my child, and this was the day
I purposed to open my mind to you, by offering you my daughter's hand: -- for
the wretched passion of avarice, I thank Heaven, has never had any dominion
over me. -- As I have but one child, was your income not to produce five
pounds, annually, there is enough to support the dignity of my family. -- But
now, my Lord Bellview, for in future so I shall call you, you are at liberty to
name the day you are to be my son."

Mr. Ward, in a polite manner, thanked his Lordship, and hasted to relate to
Lady Olivia the substance of their conversation, -- as he had not seen her
since the express came with the news of both his brothers death. -- The
interview no doubt gave both parties sincere happiness, to be permitted to
assure formally, what they so long had been secretly, that is, true lovers; --
but the death of such near relations obliged Mr. Ward to remain for three
months longer in his present state, until the period of mourning was at an end.

Captain Colville, during the time that Lord Colville, his father, forbad him
to visit Lady Ann Catesby, was constrained to carry on a correspondence with
that Lady in the utmost privacy, well convinced of the violence of his father's
passion, should he know of his disobedience. He had an assurance of the Lady's
affections for him, and had on those grounds imprudently mentioned to her the
practicability of an elopement, -- which had such an effect on her principles,
that she doubted the Captain's sincerity for a considerable time afterward.
This is a very proper remark to be made by every Lady who has moral rectitude,
and a care and regard for her character, to shun the man who would propose such
a hazardous scheme; which carries infamy in the very name of it, and shows that
the woman who consents to elope under the sanction of immediate marriage, is no
better in her virtuous principles, than the mistress who consents to go into
lodgings, until her seducer fulfils his promise; which by the bye he never
meant to perform. -- Sans changer comme je fus!

The Captain was very much alarmed at the diffidence Lady Ann had assumed, in
her credence of his sincerity; he on all occasions endeavored to persuade her
of his integrity of heart, and that his intentions were to get the marriage
rites performed in private, as the family difference had retarded it, the
preliminaries whereof had been long since settled; -- but all he could advance
had but little influence on Lady Ann, -- she was of a contrary composition to
that of her brother, Lord Dacie; -- she was virtuous and dutiful, but very
timorous, which was a guard over her morals, a principle which should be
imbibed by the younger part of the sex; for they cannot be too cautious of the
deceits and crafts of the world, especially if a Lady is in possession of
beauty or fortune, to engage the attention of the libertine or the
fortune-hunter, -- two dangerous and detestable characters.

Meanwhile a true account was transmitted by Lady Dampier, to her husband, from
whom she was but just come over (for Sir James was a second time appointed
resident at Algiers) of the stigma cast on their family, by the imprudence of
their daughter, and the deceit of her nephew, Lord Dacie, whom she had drawn in
his true colors, without reserve; -- and in her narrative gave him to
understand, that the shame and odium brought on their daughter Charlotte was
irreparable, -- as his Lordship had eloped with Miss Colville, whom he decoyed
by stratagem: -- and entreated Sir James to return to England as soon as he
could, for on her return home she had found, that by Charlotte's imprudent
conduct, his affairs required a speedy rectitude in many particulars.

This news came to hand a fews days previous to the return of the Renegado with
his prize to Algiers, which had the desired effect on Sir James, for he
immediately dispatched a messenger to England, claiming letters of recall from
his embassy; -- and in consequence waited only the return of the messenger to
fulfill the forms of office previous to his departure for England.

His uniform conduct and proper demeanor gained him the countenance and favor
of the Dey, who respected him very much; and as marks of his approbation and
esteem, made him many valuable presents. The officers of state, belonging to
the Barbarian Court were also greatly taken with the manner of Sir James's
rectitude, and particularly Benhaded Mustapha Beg, who was the Abalaroux, or
Captain General of the Dey's forces, whose galley the Renegado commanded, which
had taken the Portugueze ship.

The galley arrived with her prize in safety. Benhaded Mustapha Beg, the
Captain General, and Sir James Dampier, were then at Oxora, a village three
miles from the city of Algiers, on a party of pleasure, created merely to
entertain Sir James, in terms of friendship, prior to his departure for
England; and of consequence the Captain of the galley was under the necessity
of bringing thither all the captives or ransomers taken in the prize.

The Renegado made his appearance with Cordoza and his crew as captives; Miss
Colville, Lord Dacie, and his servant Fernandez (at the instance of Miss
Colville) as British subjects; who, on the interposition of Sir James Dampier,
as representative of his Britannic Majesty, were to be liberated and sent to
England, at the expense of the state.

The weather being at this season very pleasant in Barbary, the rural retreat
of the Mohammedan Chieftain was very well laid out to enjoy the luxury of
Mussulmen; for the Haaram or petty Seraglio for the female captives of
Christian nations, was in the form of a semicircle, close to the rotundity
whereof were the apartments of those unhappy persons which Providence had
permitted for his own wise purposes to fall into the hands of this Infidel
Chief. In the interior part, from the radical line which formed the segment,
was a beautiful garden, which, contrary to the general practice of the
Mahometans, was laid out in all the art and taste of European nations. In the
middle of this delightful spot was a small neat building, in the Ottoman style,
with projected balconies, so that the front which formed the piazza, overlooked
the platform, which was enclosed by palisades of curious workmanship, which
entrance into this prison palace was more difficult than a European could
conceive; and was merely that captives should, under the parade of the
attendant eunuchs, enter in a pageant to set forth the grandeur of this
Mohammedan Lord.

Sir James Dampier and Mustapha Beg were at the Balcony when the Captain of the
galley entered with his pageant. The Captain first, and the ransomers
following. Sir James no sooner cast his eyes on the prisoners, than he
immediately recognized his niece, Miss Colville, and the nephew of his Lady,
Lord Dacie, who had brought shame to his family; he therefore with a suitable
dignity informed the Lordly General, that the Lady who had passed into the
portico of inspection was his niece, and that the Lord who followed the
captives was a nephew to Lady Dampier; and gave him a detail of such part of
the intelligence which he had received from Europe as he judged material to
answer his purpose.

Mustapha Beg was happy to have it in his power to oblige Sir James, and
instantly dispatched a messenger attendant to bring thither the Lady. On the
summons of the eunuch, Miss Colville was petrified with fear, lest any immodest
liberty should be taken before she could apply to the court of Algiers for
protection, not knowing where to find her uncle. But the Renegado Captain
dispelled her fears, with an assurance that nothing was to be feared from his
Lord, for that the English Ambassador was with him, therefore it was a
fortunate circumstance. On hearing this, she with haste accompanied the
attendant to the presence chamber, where she was at the door saluted by
Benhaded, who retired, that Sir James might have an opportunity of embracing
his niece and hear the story of her adventures. -- This was a signal favor of
the utmost respect from a proud Mussulman.

Sir James received in his arms his niece, and wept over her with different
emotions; -- first, with grief, supposing her debauched by the vile seducer who
accompanied her, -- and then with joy, on being so fortunate as to have it in
his power to protect her, and give her every comfort and assistance, until he
should bring her safe to her disconsolate parents, -- being convinced, from the
amorous disposition of Mustapha, that had he set out for his native country,
her transcendent beauty would have endangered her liberty.

The overjoyed and surprised Lady dropped quite insensible in his arms, and not
without the services of an attendant eunuch was brought to a state of
sensibility. -- Returning animation gave her astonished senses reasonable
application; -- she poured out blessings on her dear uncle, who was the agent
of Heaven, to assist her in the most critical juncture. -- She then related the
whole story of her extraordinary history, since her return from America, until
that instant period; the recital of which drew a second time tears from the
manly brow of Sir James; for his feelings were acute, when suffering innocence
experienced such severe trials. He joined with his worthy relation in returning
thanks to the Omnipresent Power that protected her from pollution under the
dominion of the agent of Satan, who (Miss Colville found out by the servant
Fernandez whose liberty she sought to restore) had by a large bribe gained over
the Renegado Captain to report them to be man and wife; -- which would afford
him an opportunity to accomplish his wicked design on her virtue. As Dacie did
not know Sir James had been removed from Fez, by his own choice, to Algiers,
therefore at the expense of every thing sacred, the wicked man purposed to
perpetrate the villainous work he had undertaken; -- but the Omniscient Power
frustrated his desired purpose, and exposed all his artful projects, to his
utter shame and disgrace.

After a long conference, the waiting eunuch acquainted his Lord of Sir James's
wish for his return, which was complied with by his immediate presence; upon
which Sir James gave the substance of his niece's adventures, and on hearing of
it, he in a friendly manner congratulated him and the Lady on her miraculous
escapes from surrounding dangers, and on her arrival at a place of safety; --
generously offering her all the services in his power to bestow.

She, with every acknowledgment thanked him for his kind professions of
friendship, and in an opportune and seasonable minute, craved the liberty of
Cordoza (notwithstanding his behavior to her in the hour of trial and imminent
danger) as she had promised him so to do, in kind compassion for his family, he
having a wife and several children dependant on his industry, -- who must pine
in want should his assistance be withheld; -- for her system was to do good
for evil, which in the end answered every good purpose, as it was heaping coals
of fire on the heads of enemies, and commanded their future friendship, with
the due sense of gratitude. -- She also begged the liberty of Fernandez, Lord
Dacie's servant, to whom she had promised her protection, and who was grateful
for it, as the intelligence lately given had instanced, -- for in so doing he
had incurred the displeasure of his master; -- yet he was careless in that,
choosing to flee from a man whose employments would have inevitably made him a
slave for life, had not the injured innocent Lady, who withstood the shock of
combined villainy, and which she sustained with surprising fortitude, become an
advocate for him; and to whose benevolent disposition he should be indebted for
the term of his natural life, -- Miss Colville having reported the truth that
he was a Portugueze.

The courteous Mohammedan without a minute's hesitation, freely granted her
request; and ordered them instant liberation.

They were conducted to the Mustapha's presence, and fell on their knees to
return him thanks, which he refused, saying, "Thank that generous Lady, who
fufils the belief your religion requires, in doing good to her enemies, in
which character you have both acted your parts, though happily for her without
much success; -- go and retain a due sense of gratitude, learn from a woman, a
lesson of true wisdom, be thankful to the Supreme Being, repent and be happy."
-- He then dismissed them, but not before they had with tears of gratitude,
sincerely thanked a thousand times, the goodness of Miss Colville. They both of
them were conveyed to Portugal, in a vessel of redeemed captives, which was
then putting to sea.

Lord Dacie was, during this time, in a painful state of suspense; -- he was
quite crest fallen, on finding his trusty servant in iniquity had recanted from
his principles, and had not returned. -- He was, as all base minds are, on the
appearance of danger of the most trivial consequence, -- mean and grovelling,
-- ready to worship the most abject wretch that could show the least favor.

The time came that released him from his meditation. -- He attended Mustapha,
but what was his surprise, confusion, shame, terror, and remorse, on seeing Sir
James Dampier, his uncle, whose daughter he had debauched! He would have sunk
into a state of annihilation, could his will bring forth wishes into works!

Sir James, in the style of a true Briton, asked him what he thought of human
nature? -- the works necessary to secure a peaceable conscience here, and a
happy state hereafter! -- to gain either, he had pursued a wrong method; -- but
he should help him to pursue another course, which in the end would bring him
to a due sense of the obligation he was under to him.

Lord Dacie found by the stern aspect of Sir James, that here his career must
end! -- This guilt brought in accusation, and for the first time, perhaps, in
his whole life, he felt the pangs of compunction. His silence was an
interpretation of the perturbed state of his mind; but Sir James undeceived him
in his conjectures, and addressed him in these words. "Pray, my Lord, which of
those Ladies is the real object of your choice, -- my daughter or my niece? --
I find you are resolved to be a near relation of mine." -- Dacie, with a
downcast look, and a sigh, replied, "Sir, I have abused your family, it is
true, and perhaps would have gone farther, were it not for the accident that
prevented me." -- "Silence your wicked tongue," replied Miss Colville, "it was
not accident that prevented you, nor chance either, but the interposition of an
invisible power, whose influence only can bring you to an acknowledgment of
what you are. -- You have abused my uncle, who has the misfortune to
acknowledge your kindred, by seducing my cousin Charlotte; -- therefore, to
atone for your crime, make her your wife, who has now a pledge of your unlawful
amor, and then you will palliate only the illegal step you have both taken: --
however, assimilate the honor due to your progeny."

Lord Dacie found that Sir James had received the full particulars of his
conduct in England, he therefore was fearful of his anger, -- as cowardice is
inseparable from base principles, and in a tone of humble supplication craved
his pardon; -- and that he would repair as much as in him lay, the injury he
had done. -- Sir James, who perceived that Lord Dacie would not only promise to
perform, but absolutely swear to any thing that should avert for the present
moment his displeasure, seemingly, therefore, acquiesced in the solemnity of
his Lordship's assertions, -- finding it of no real service in the cause of his
daughter, to enlarge farther upon a subject which gave him pain in the recital.
-- Besides, Lord Dacie would not have been his choice for a son-in-law, had his
daughter behaved with prudence and discretion.

Benhaded Mustapha Beg, who had left the presence chamber on the entrance of
Lord Dacie, to view and order the disposal of the captives which were brought
in by Captain Maanoka, the Renegado (which was the name given by the barbarians
on his conversion, and which implies, " a reformed sinner!" -- A singular
epithet to be given to a vile, or the vilest of sinners, who had renounced his
interest in the Messiah, and had entered into the cabal of Mahomet, the
wretched impostor, and was an open enemy to most Christian nations, in the
character of a public robber. -- This fellow, who we have before noticed, was
an officer in the British service in America, but through disgust had sold out
and entered himself in the list of apostates in the road to destruction, (gain
being his only god!) gave the necessary directions to the Captain, and had just
now returned; -- who, on finding his friend Sir James Dampier in better
spirits, wished him joy.

The heads of the conversation being related, he gave it as his opinion, that
Lord Dacie should, without fail, repair the disgrace he had brought on so
worthy a gentleman as his excellency, the British Ambassador was allowed to be,
by all ranks in that state; the Ottoman Court having always ratified his
requisitions with signal marks of approbation: -- the Dey of Algiers, as the
tributary of that power, paid him all the respect due to his exalted station;
-- particularly his own merit had enhanced his regard for him beyond the
respect paid to his predecessors in that high office, which he then filled with
honor to his King and Country.

Sir James thanked the generous Algerine for his liberal compliment, that he
had with such candor reported, what his merit could in no wise claim, but his
friendship had with such kindness bestowed. Mutual compliments passed between
them. Lord Dacie, though callous in the state of corrupt principles, gave his
honor as a pledge, that on the first opportunity he would do that justice to
Sir James and his family, which his conscience called aloud to be performed; --
in short, the hypocrite was never better acted than by his Lordship at this
juncture. -- In his soul he was resolved to forfeit every tittle he advanced,
though he had pawned honor and honesty for the comfortable covering of a good
opinion, which was freely granted by Sir James and the noble Algerine.

Miss Colville only remained of the doubtful sect, as she saw the caricature of
deceit was of congenial parts and principles with the artful schemer: -- truly
supposing was he to be out of his present situation, and a charte blanch
presented to him to be afterward on his filling it up, attested, -- that a
single sentence of what he now advanced would not be inserted. -- For though
liberality of sentiment was her just claim, yet she well knew, by woeful
experience, that Dacie wanted a cardiac medicine to perform the regular action
of a man, who feared his Maker, -- loved his fellow creatures, or regarded the
useful laws of civil society. -- For all was a chaos, -- a very mist of
darkness and confusion in his breast, to perform all the cast of parts which he
ought not!

Dinner being prepared, the noble Mustapha regaled his friends with all the
pomposity and style of the east; (for the manners of Mahometans, in all nations
are nearly alike,) where we shall leave them and see how affairs went on in
Great Britain.

Sir William Howard and his son having retired to the family seat at Howard's
Castle, spent their time in happy converse on the mutability of mundane
enjoyments; and by opposing philosophy with religion, Sir William easily
demonstrated the theory and practice of both, -- when to his satisfaction he
plainly perceived the near affinity the one had to the other; -- for
philosophy, which is a word derived from the Greek, signifying a love of
wisdom, is that useful science, which comprehends the whole system of morality,
or the duties of human life, commonly called ethics.

The next thing it comprehends, is the knowledge of the causes and effects of
things, whether external or internal, in the air, earth, or waters, which may
be said to proceed from natural causes, agreeably to the order of creation by
the Supreme Being. -- The other part of the science, is in the curious
speculation of the existence of things; by which calculations in the revolution
of the Heavenly bodies are made, with other experiments which are commonly
called the Phoenomena of Nature.

Religion (which is derived from the Hebrew, signifies the duties of human
creatures to the Deity, and to their own species) may be subdivided into three
parts, comprehending natural, moral, and revealed. -- The first was the worship
of the Gentile world; -- the second, by the Jews under the law; -- the third to
the Christians, through the atonement for sin by the Messiah, whereby the law
is done away, and the world is now under grace, that all who repent of their
iniquities and believe, may receive remission thereof and be saved.

Thus the good Baronet satisfied his son of the affinity of philosophy and
religion, which are so nearly allied, as to render it impossible to separate
them, -- therefore, it would enlarge the faculties, and illumine the ideas of
the fair sex, were they to study these grand sciences, on which all our
happiness here and hereafter solely depends; -- and as their abilities in
comprehension, for the most part, are superior to that of the opposite sex,
there can be no reason assigned why they should not partake of the inestimable
blessings of those studies, which in the junior, or adult, can be, by
assiduity, attained, for the most part in a few months; -- or, at least, so
much of both, as by application at leisure hours, a proficiency may be gained,
-- and then we shall have publications of the compositions of the fair, in all
the abstruse principles of science; which are now for the most part dogmatized
to a mechanic standard; -- as, though reason and religion were to be dealt out
to mankind by a market corporation, with weight, measure, size, shape, colors,
and a thousand et coeteras. -- Pray, fair readers, exert your talents, and
rival those sons of nominal learning.

At intervals the loss of Miss Colville was a recollection in Henry's breast,
that brought with it all the pangs of a lover's despair, -- as it may well be
supposed, he conjectured her to be, by this time, the absolute wife or mistress
of his false friend; -- for the name of a friend had been bestowed by the
liberal-minded Henry, from the period the deceitful Lord assumed compunction,
until the time Mr. Howard arrived in England, and was undeceived. -- Yet he did
not withdraw that familiar title; only added a preceding well-adapted word of
falsehood to it, by constantly stiling the absent Lord his false friend.

In these paroxisms, Henry's delicate feelings were in the extreme of agony
wrought to the highest pitch of human suffering; -- yet he did, when thus
attacked, avoid his father's presence, with a view to keep him from being a
partaker of his sorrows. -- Upon those occasions he often times went to the
projecting summit of the precipice, beneath whose awful craggy limbs the object
of his thoughts was cast into the bosom of the briny deep; -- contemplating on
her miraculous escape from an enraged element, that in the calm of the morn
usually dashed with impetuous force against the shelving teeth of this
ponderous competitor; -- which, in his reverie, gave him a glimpse of Hope's
celestial ray, that the power, whose care had preserved her from the dangers of
such potent forces, in the time of a mountainous tossing sea, when winds and
rocks had combined in the utter destruction of presuming mortals, who by their
art endeavored to outride in their wooden walls, the contending elements, --
that she alone should be restored to the happiness of society; although
experienced persons, who knew the art of steering their naked frames through
the surfing flood, had tasted the bitterness of death, whilst the inexperienced
timorous female, knew no method to gain a measure of the shortest name through
the deluge of surrounding sheets.

These cogitations often gained their point, -- and soothed the lover with
providential faith, -- that still a door was open to receive the object of his
meditation from all the pursuits of designing man, assisted by the grand enemy
of peace.

Thus the mount became a place of soothing resort, -- which to a timorous head
would have caused a speedy dizziness on the horror of the gaping jaws of a
thousand opening clefts, that only spring tides gave a moistening to their
wind-dried fronts.

Serious conversation only, had admission between the sage and his gloomy son,
-- for melancholy had so constantly attended him, that it was in vain to drive
her from the duties of her employ; -- though Sir William often endeavored to
beguile the tedious hours with cheerful converse and recreating amusements, the
vicar and physician, with other worthy characters assisting; but in this he
failed, -- for Henry was only a spectator, a smile not daring to approach his
lips, -- so well had the pallid votary of his attendance kept her regulated
duty in its course.

Music was always agreeable, if the plaintive strain was performed. -- In this
refining employment Henry engaged many hours of the heavy measure of Time's
glass; -- for in this art he was an amateur, and had attained a competent
knowledge to dub the connoisseur.

Thus the days were spent in Devon's pleasant shire; -- the revolving year
going on its circuitous motion with clogged wheels.

During this time the Bath meeting dispersed: -- each family going to their
mansion. -- Lady Dampier about this time received her husband's packet, which
in substance contained his request to the British court, for leave to return
from his embassage; -- but things having received a different turn since her
letter to him to return, she therefore withheld it, and at court his request
was not known.

The scandal of the day being more than her Ladyship's pride could brook, she
therefore, with her fallen daughter, resolved again to visit the African shore,
to find amongst infidels, what a Christian country had denied to her daughter;
who could claim no excuse for levity and barefaced error, in straying from
Virtue's track.

They embarked for the Barbary shore, leaving the young offspring of the
prolific pair, (Lord Dacie and Charlotte Dampier) to the care of an experienced
nurse, at Craydon, in Surry, near the seat of Sir James Dampier, in that
county. -- Charlotte on parting with the infant showed a mother's care by her
sorrowful countenance.

The weather being fine, and the winds fair, they left sight of Albion's shore
with a pleasant gale; though not without a sinking state of spirits, on
reflecting, the land they had just lost sight of, was their native soil; --
where a certain succession of the comforts of human life might have been had in
abundance, had not dire necessity obliged them to go in quest of the like
solace in a foreign climate, where the attainment of them was all an
uncertainty. -- And as neither her Ladyship or Charlottle drew any of their
happiness from the source of religion, it may be naturally supposed, they were
without much comfort in the prosecution of their voyage: -- as, the notion of
leaving cares behind, is but a mere idle tale, founded in the theoretical
chimera of an inexperienced imagination: -- for let it be understood, in
future, by adventurers who have done wrong in one country, and who fly to
another to forget their errors or evil haunting of thought, -- that wherever
they go for such purposes, their minds will accompany them, -- and the faithful
monitor of the heart, -- their consciences, -- constantly accuse them.

Captain Colville was on a precarious footing at Ashbridge. -- A young nobleman
of family, who bore the title of Lord Fairford, was much approved of by the
Duke and Duchess in the qualifications of his person and family; but what met
their greatest approbation was the largeness of the income he was in possession
of; -- and although they liked his person very much, yet Lady Ann, their
daughter, was not of their way of thinking, -- for she neither approved of him
in that respect, or in any of the many qualifications he was said to possess,
-- as he was too much of her brother's wily craft, to merit her approbation. --
He could act the very faint in public, -- but was, in the receptacles of his
secret retreats, a very lewd and abandoned character.

Lady Ann, although she had treated the Captain rather severe, yet was
satisfied of her having sufficient provocation, by the insult he had offered to
her virtue, in proposing an elopement; -- for though she really loved the son
of Mars with all the ardency of a prudent lady, yet she had resolved never to
break the commandment of God, by disobeying her parents; -- or provoke the
wrath of Heaven, by violating its holy laws, in making a private match, though
it had been with a Monarch, without their entire consent and approbation; --
and had rather, in obedience to their commands, have given her hand, to a
person of their choice, to be her husband, though the compliance should make
her days miserable, than run counter, in making her own bargains, without their
consent. But she was satisfied of the tenderness of her father and mother, in
not forcing any person on her that was not agreeable to her.

Lord Fairford paid her a visit in due form; -- but the lady, with an honest
sincerity assured him, it was in vain for him ever to expect a compliance in
her, to be suitable to his expectations; -- therefore it would be advisable in
him to desist, as his solicitations would answer no end.

His Lordship took great offense at the plain avowal of her Ladyship, and in a
haughty tone declared his intentions were to persist in the liberty her father
had given him, in paying his devoirs to her; -- and added, that women were
sublunary beings, consequently liable to a fickle fancy, -- and that
perseverance, even by the help of patience, had repeatedly wrought wonders.

To this coarse compliment, her Ladyship thankfully acknowledged his elegant
simile would do honor to the sex; and further added, ironically, -- that she
supposed his taste and judgment corresponded with the elegance of his
sentiments. If so, it was a pity a nobleman of his accomplishments did not seek
for some object that was not subject to mutability, or under the influence of
the planetary system; -- as in her opinion, the study of humanity was omitted
by modern polish, or else the diminished worth of female happiness would not be
overlooked by every pretender to a character of rank.

His Lordship could hold out no longer, -- his heat was visible -- as he
perceived the lady had in sentiment an advantage over him. -- He replied in a
hasty tone, that notwithstanding he might not be the object of her choice, yet
to suit his own inclinations, he should repeat his visits so often, as to
preclude her an opportunity of receiving the favors of the discarded Captain,
-- alluding to Captain Colville: -- "But," continued he, -- "if I find that
hero is continued in your list, I shall chastise the haughty spirit that makes
him assume to be on equal terms with me."

These words were uttered with such an affected air of consequence, as made the
prudence of Lady Ann give way to a smile of contempt; -- informing him, at the
same time, that Captain Colville was not only on equal terms with him, but with
the first nobleman in the kingdom, for he had both rank and fortune, added to
merit, to warrant his pretensions; -- therefore it was not altogether so
commendable, in her opinion, for a gentleman to menace an absent character, who
had equal pretensions in every respect to those he could assume.

Lord Fairford was hasty in his temper, therefore he could not tamely submit to
the rebuke of a lady, for the unmanly part he had acted, -- but with a seeming
show of indifference, forced a loud laugh, -- which gave occasion to the lady
to leave him to his own private thoughts. -- This he did not notice, but paid
her repeated visits; -- and finding the vanity of his pretensions, was resolved
to show to his mistress the greatness of his spirit, that she might not think
so slightly of him, as he perceived plainly, she had on all occasions given him
to understand. -- So in the hour of heated imagination, by the aiding
assistance of old hock, he sent a challenge to Captain Colville, or rather a
threatened chastisement, as though he had dominion over him. -- The letter was
as follows: -- Lord Fairford desires Captain Colville will not use his
influence with Lady Ann Catesby, to retard the honor intended by the noble
Duke, her father, to be done to him. -- If Captain Colville should persist, he
may expect disagreeable consequences to be the effect of his imprudence.

Thursday Noon.



Captain Colville received the billet by Lord Fairford's servant, who instantly
returned without waiting for the Captain to open it, as his Lordship had
commanded him, for fear a disagreeable answer should be returned. -- Captain
Colville could not forbear smiling at the assumed air of dictating authority
with which the menace was fraught; -- and immediately returned the following
replication: Captain Colville did not know he had a dictatorial pedagogue until
now; -- but lest the office should make Lord Fairford forget himself, --
Captain Colville discharges him from henceforth; and shall in future contend on
all occasions any pretensions his Lordship may presume to have to a certain
noble lady, -- and defies the threats of a bravado.

Thursday Afternoon.



This letter was sent by Captain Colville's servant to his Lordship, -- who was
under particular instructions to wait for an answer. -- In this he was
disappointed, -- for his Lordship, through the effects of his elevating dose,
was constrained to lay himself down to rest on his bed, to retrieve, by the
assistance of sleep, his reason and recollection, therefore the letter was left.

The morning gave his Lordship an opportunity of reading the spirited answer of
his rival; he was very much perplexed how to manage matters; -- and as his name
was enrolled in knight-errantry, on taking a repeated bumper of brandy, he sent
the Captain a downright challenge, to meet him the next morning at eight
o'clock, with his friend, at an appointed ground. -- This was delivered by Lord
Fairford's servant, by whom the Captain returned a written answer, in which he
acknowledged the receipt, and accepted the treat.

Accordingly Captain Colville called on his brother, General Mounsey, who
readily attended him to the spot -- They waited until past nine o'clock, and
were for returning to town, when Lord Fairford and Captain Thwaites made their
appearance in his Lordship's coach, and would have passed them, had it not been
for Captain Colville, who called loudly to the coachman to stop.

Lord Fairford and his second came out; -- his Lordship, in a faltering and
stammering voice endeavored to apologize for his having kept the Captain and
his second so long waiting, alleging, his watch was the occasion; but here
Captain Thwaites interrupted him, by saying, he understood ten o'clock was the
appointed hour; -- to this his Lordship stammered as a reply, "he must have
mistaken him;" -- "however," said General Mounsey, "you are both time enough to
kill one, or perhaps both!"

By this time the honorable Mr Ward, now the Earl of Bellview, made his
appearance, having heard of the appointment of these victims to false honor,
and joined the antagonists and their seconds; -- when, after a friendly
salutation, as he was known to all the parties present, (and was a relation to
the General, as was noticed before) he enquired whether or not they had
seriously considered the business they were going about? -- To this Captain
Colville replied, "My Lord Bellview, the noble Lord who has brought me hither,
has given me sufficient cause to vindicate my honor, in seeking reprisal, for
by his hostile invitation, I am to protect, at the hazard of my life, the
dignity of my rank; -- therefore, as a man of tried courage in the field of
glory, I scorn to be deemed unworthy of all I assume.

"This proud Lord, whose arrogance is not to be borne with, has, by an
unprovoked insult defied me. -- But I am come here with a determined resolution
to have the satisfacton of his opposing his life to mine; -- and as a lady is
the disputed prize, only with my life shall I resign my pretensions to her: --
and to evade my sword, will at this time, to all intents and purposes be
nugatory and cowardly!"

Lord Fairford replied, "you are hasty, Captain Colville; -- it was in an hour
of inebriety, at the instance of this gentleman, (pointing to Captain Thwaites)
I undertook to compose a mandatory card, to require your attendance here this
day, and do now acknowledge I was in error."

Lord Bellview rejoined, "I do not take into consideration your false reasoning
on either side, -- for the diabolical usage of duelling should, of all the
lists on record of barbarous chivalry, be the first that should be expunged,
being repugnant both to the laws of God and man; -- for what man of the least
serious reflection, but must shudder at the thoughts of being hurried, in the
very act of offense, in the real breach of the divine command, -- before the
throne of a just offended God!

"Is not this an act of more heinous atrocity, then any of the wrongs for which
a justiciary court has awarded judgment of death? -- For in the latter, a time
of repentance, through grace, may be obtained, and a foundation of hope
ascertained; -- but in the former case, no such blessing can be promised; it is
a voluntary race to perform the works of the cruel enemy of souls, -- cutting
off the wretch from a means of obtaining peace and pardon, to sink into the
abyss of destruction! -- And in our view of the crime it amounts to, against
the peaceful law of society, the calamity is truly great, for in this deluded
notion of supporting the empty title of false honor, or nominal heroism, the
most worthless of the sons of Adam, may, if he is what is styled a gentleman,
that is to say, a man of property, call forth a man of integrity, worth, and
respectability, who may perhaps have an amiable wife and several children,
whose sole hapiness depends upon the valuable life of this gentleman, and
through the mistaken notion of honor, upon the summons of this worthless
character, be brought to an appointed spot, as you both are at this period, and
by an exchange of fire, or a thrust of a sword, this infatuated, yet amiable
gentleman, is carried home on a bier, lifeless, to his family!

"The villain escapes! -- boasts of his courage, or rather savage nature, -- as
he possesses neither the fear of God or man, -- and evades the hand of justice,
for so heinous a crime with impunity; -- though in fact he is literally the
murderer of the fallen victim to this barbarous custom: -- leaving a
disconsolate widow, and orphan children, to bemoan and lament his untimely
fate! -- Pray therefore, you giddy headed and over heated young men, relinquish
a pursuit of such serious consequences -- for everlasting happiness or misery
depends on the fall!

This serious remonstrance had a good effect upon the duellists and their
seconds; -- all of them acknowledging the truth of what Lord Bellview had
advanced. -- The consequence was, Lord Fairford asked Captain Colville's
pardon, as being the aggressor; -- and in order to show a due sense of the
impropriety of his conduct, relinquished the pretensions he had assumed for
Lady Ann Catesby; -- promising, in the presence of these credible witnesses, to
add his good offices in forwarding the Captain's happiness with that lady.

Thus was stopped the effusion of blood, which would have been the consequence,
were it not for the timely interposition of this reverend and right honorable
character. A lesson not beneath the notice of those sons of wantonness, who
shed blood to satiate a brutal inclination of a fiend-like wish of revenge! --
A spark, kindled by the very arch fiend himself, which cannot be extinguished
without human gore, unless a calm friend of peace, with his attention to the
heedless opponents, forwards a reconciliation.

It was a remark of the celebrated Dean Swift, that when two gamblers fell out,
the only way to decide their quarrel, was, like men of spirit, by a duel; then
if one or both were killed, it was only ridding the world of one or two
rascals. -- Ne oublie!

The duellists, their seconds, and the noble peacemaker, retired from the spot
to their respective homes, quite satisfied with the reconciliation that had
taken place; -- and which, it is to be hoped, gave them a useful memento.

Lady Dampier and her daughter arrived at the city of Algiers, the once
celebrated city of Carthage, the Queen of Nations, but now of a despotic petty
Prince, styled the Dey, or Grand Lord, -- who is as absolute over his subjects,
as though they were a herd of swine; -- their lives and fortunes being always
at his disposal, unless he is cautious of the Captains, or Commanders of his
bands or troops, who often rise as conspirators, cutting off suddenly the
tyrant for some bloody act; -- as his word is a law, and his soldiers
executioners. -- Yet every crowned head in Europe, as also every state, are
more or less tributary to this infidel depredator; or else their subjects feel
the fatal effects of such a neglect.

This may seem strange, that a petty Prince, whose dominions is little more
than the size of a county in England, should keep all the Christian powers in
awe! -- But to eradicate the evil, would require no less an extirpation, than
to destroy the race of this infidel sect, that swarms all over Africa, Asia,
and some part of Europe; -- for as soon as one set of these marauders are put
to the sword, a like number flock to supply their stead -- for desperation in
fight is their acknowledged disposition. -- Added to this, -- a chain of these
Barbarian Lords, called Beys or Begs, are settled all along the coast of the
Mediterranean Sea; -- therefore can, in a few hours be out at sea, and in the
like time return with their prizes into any of the ports of these piratical
states, who are always so far united, as to aid and assist against Christian
powers.

Upon Lady Dampier and Charlotte's arrival, they were waited on by the proper
officers of the state, who conducted them, with the usual formality or
ceremonial, on the introduction of persons of the first rank at Court; and were
escorted safe to the hotel of the British Ambassador, who received them with no
less joy then surprise: -- Sir James, having at that instant, Lord Dacie and
Miss Colville, with other notable characters, at dinner.

The surprise was of the most agreeable kind to Miss Colville, -- that she
might be assured of Lord Dacie's performance of what he had so profusely
promised, when opportunity would serve. -- The effect of surprise was on the
contrary with his Lordship, -- he was greatly disconcerted, -- but was
constrained to yield to the stroke of his own cunning, -- he had no back doors
nor ways of escape, -- he had promised, in the presence of a principal Lord at
the Algerine Court, Benhaded, -- therefore to rescind, would endanger his
liberty.

Lady Dampier was all fury on the sight of her nephew, and in spite of all
remonstrance to the contrary, she loaded him with every vile epithet her
passion could suggest, -- imagining, he had got beyond any method of
retribution to her daughter Charlotte; -- supposing, he had been married to
Miss Colville: -- but on her being undeceived, she became more calm. -- But
Charlotte was so affected at seeing the perjured Lord, that she swooned away,
and was some time before she recovered. -- On her being informed of the
singular adventures of Miss Colville, she was astonished, and contrary to her
general practice, thanked heaven for her fortunate escape; -- but the liberty
such an accident left in Lord Dacie's power to do her justice, was partly an
incitement for her praise to heaven for so fortunate an accident.

She gave Miss Colville a satisfactory account of the beloved Henry, (whom she,
as well as Henrietta once had loved to distraction; but finding her endeavors
fruitless, had combined with Lord Dacie, to assassinate him, as has been in the
former part of this narration fully set forth) Miss Colville was happy to hear
of her dear Henry's welfare, and wept for joy on the occasion.

The hurry of the day being over, Lady Dampier and her daughter much fatigued
with their voyage, retired to rest. -- Lord Dacie found no place wherein he
could enjoy a peaceful hour. -- The whole night passed without his being able
to get any sleep, to forget his burdens, which were now become seriously a
weighty load; -- for he saw the hand of a supreme power dealt to him the
bitters, which he himself, had so long mixed for others.

Early the next morning Sir James Dampier was waited on by Benhaded Mustapha
Beg, who, on hearing that the injured young lady was arrived, came on purpose
to pay his compliments to her and Lady Dampier. -- But the most material cause
of his visit, was to see the promises of Lord Dacie fulfilled.

After a ceremonial had taken place between Lord Mustapha and the Ladies, Lord
Dacie was summoned to attend; and on his introduction, the Algerine informed
him, he should be glad to see the ceremony of marriage performed by the
Ambassador's chaplain, which would make his Lordship happy in the lady for whom
he had heard him express such a strong regard, and which would, according to
the Christian laws, make them one flesh.

His Lordship found all evasion would answer no end, but to expose his
principles to a clear view, and his person to real danger, -- so he tamely
submitted to the matrimonial bondage! -- A happy state for all those who enter
into it, with a true sense of the utility of it, -- and the institution is
really the work of the Almighty; -- therefore it is an honorable state, --
which should only be performed by mutual consent; -- for an union of the
friends or relations of the bride and bridegroom should take place prior to the
nuptual solemnization; -- which, between the couple joined in wedlock, should
be pure and disinterested. -- At least so far as avarice is concerned, an
unmixed love should be poured out, in which the happy pair should partake
alike! -- For we daily see the fatal effects of forced compliance in this
respect, and what may well be deemed a Smithfield bargain! -- as, to the God of
Mammon, (sordid interest) are sacrificed multitudes! -- The consequences are
too obvious, as the annals of Doctor's Commons can set forth an abundance of
examples. -- Parents should be tender, and children dutiful, then mutual
happiness would ensue.

Another great bar to the matrimonial happiness in the lower class, is the
exorbitant sum a license amounts to, and of course is the cause of many
wretched prostitutes, with whose abandoned pageantry the streets of the
Metropolis are constantly thronged. -- The legislator would do well to devise a
means to lessen their number. -- To a mind fraught with the fear of God, or the
shame of man, a life of prostitution must appear most odious; -- for this step
must convince the frail female, who is so credulous as to believe a designing
man, that she acts directly against the laws of God; and is in a state of
everlasting punishment, unless a true repentance takes place; and at the same
time she is an outcast to society, -- despised and abhorred, -- a wretch
subject to disease and death by the iniquity she follows -- carrying evident
marks with it of the wrath of heaven for such a breach of God's commandment,
and in the words of good Bishop Cranmer, "a living sacrifice to the devil."

The alteration marriage made in Miss Dampier, now Lady Dacie, was evident: she
showed in her eyes a sparkling of joy. -- All present were festive, -- mirth
and good humor closed the day; -- his Lordship throwing off the gloom, every
face showed the mark of approbation. -- Night closed the scene, -- the rising
day renewed the festive board, which a third day closed without any accident to
affect the tranquillity of the assemblage.

Lord Dacie and his Lady were very soon reconciled and happy in each other, for
they were of a disposition not many degrees apart; therefore were the more
likely to assure an agreement in the road of life. -- He, by many solemn
formalities of sorrow for his past offenses against Miss Colville, craved her
forgiveness; -- the bountiful lady did not withhold the boon, as she saw he was
now fixed in the walk of life, and his pretensions to roam were at an end.

Letters of recall arrived by the special order of the British Court. -- Sir
James with his Lady, niece, daughter, and his new-made son embarked for
England, -- In the prosecution of their voyage we shall leave them, and see
what the island they were bent to produced previous to their arrival.

But this article should not be dismissed without remarking, that
notwithstanding the illiberal stigma thrown out on foreigners of all
denominations, by the generality of British subjects, and more especially
against those who do not profess the Christian faith, (for prejudice is of too
strong a composition to biass even principles of benevolence!) in the good Lord
Benhaded Mustapha, Sir James Dampier and all his family received the most pure
tokens of friendship and liberality; -- which in Miss Colville's delicate
sentiments she expressed "surpassed the boast of Christian hospitality."

The generous Mustapha parted with his Christian friends with all the visible
marks of regret, and furnished them with every necessary for the voyage;
wishing them a prosperous and safe return to the country of their destination.

Sir William Howard and his son were now busied in erecting a monument, sacred
to the memory of the noble Duke of Kingsborough, who was now no more; having
resigned his last breath in the presence of his brother-in-law, Sir William,
and of his nephew, Henry Howard, and agreeable to an act of settlement a long
time previously passed, the right of succession vested in Henry, -- who was now
the Duke of Kingsborough.

The sovereign, in consequence of the unblemished reputation Henry Howard had
supported, granted him the order, his uncle the late Duke, had been
distinguished by; -- so that the ensign was re-delivered by his Majesty, who
was pleased to order an installation, in which his Grace, Henry, Duke of
Kingsborough, received the mark of royal approbation from the hands of the
Monarch, as a Knight of the Garter. -- A distinguished honor was thus conferred
on this exalted genius of virtue and religion.

The good man is not always happy nor free from censure, -- and often falls,
instead of rising in his circumstances; -- owing to his using no acts to trepan
the unwary in bargains of advantage and overreaching, and often dies in a
prison. -- Whilst the reverse is attendant on the wicked man, who uses every
method to increase his wealth, wresting honesty whenever she oppses his
prospects of gain; thriving in all his undertakings, his schemes are so deep,
and his plans so well laid, that nothing comes amiss; -- wallowing in riches,
and dying possessed of coffers filled with gold!

This may seem strange to the superficial observer, who may be impious enough
to arraign heaven for such a distribution of its favors, -- that the object
who paid due reverence to its dictates, is of all men the most unfortunate; --
whilst the wretch, who hardly ever thought of virtue, morality, or religion, or
of the duties due to God or man, is the successful agent in collecting stores
and amassing wealth! -- But, serious speculators, only consider for one moment,
the difference of these two men; -- one was a good man and died in prison, --
his conscience was a faithful monitor, -- it did not accuse him of any flagrant
crime, -- he had in his breast a calm resignation to the will of heaven, nor
was ever known to repine, although he often wanted the necessaries of life; --
he praised the Deity for the past blessings he had bestowed, and with an
enlightened hope, through faith, trusted him for all that was to come; -- he
died as composed as though he was falling into a pleasant slumber; -- his last
words were an ejaculation to the throne of grace, to receive his departing
spirit, -- and he closed his eyes in charity with all men, having a lively hope
of the mercies he was to be a partaker of.

The latter end of the bad man, who breathes his last in a palace, is quite the
reverse of the dying moments of the good man. -- All his parade is nearly
ended, -- the turn of lawyers and physicians are now over, -- a deadly arrow is
placed in death's bow; -- the pangs of a tormented soul, the never dying worm,
conscience, now stares him in the face, accusing him of all the frauds, acts,
and deceptions he has used to amass his ill-gotten pelf, -- and reminding him,
that he had never spared an hour for serious reflection from the busied scenes
of his worldly cares, to fix upon a time for repentance! -- No, it is true he
did not, for death sent him a summons as he was calculating the annual account
of his interests by usury! -- two days more, left him a lifeless corpse; -- but
before his death, his will was hastily sketched, -- he left a sum to endow an
hospital, but the rest was devised and bequeathed in such terms of ambiguity,
that the law will necessarily swallow up the principal part of it, to ascertain
the right of the claimants. His last agonies, as he entered the valley of the
shadow of death, were for the wrongs he had done the good man, who died in
prison, -- and by whose first assistance he had gained reputation in the world;
he, with despair, painted on his brow, buffeted by the acuteness of the stings
of death and conscience, sighed out his last breath, with a declaration of hope
having entirely fled!

Now which of these conditions is the most desirable, or the most to be envied?
-- The reader will pardon this digression, when told it is intended to show the
common pictures of every day's exhibition, -- which should teach us never to
repine at the situation Providence has allotted us, but to be diligent to do
the best we can by honest means and methods; -- for a bad heart is the source
of evil actions; therefore an honest mind begets an active disposition, -- for
indolence is an inlet to every vice.

The resignation of Lord Fairford in favor of Captain Colville, at Ashbridge,
was not a matter of willingness in the former, -- it was a pusillanimous
spirit; -- he was fearful to rouse the latter, as he saw in him a potent
competitor, and who he was certain had Lady Ann's affections.

He turned his thoughts toward Miss Lee, the niece of the Marquis of
Languedoc, a lady whom we formerly mentioned as a person of a considerable
fortune and accomplishments. -- In this pursuit he was not an unsuccessful
adventurer, for the lady countenanced his addresses, by the order of the
Marquis, her uncle, and by the direction of the 'Squire, her brother, so that a
short courtship brought them as forward as those the crosses of human life had
buffeted, who began their courtships almost three years sooner; -- for there is
a something that may intervene, "were our determination to be ever so punctual,
-- time and chance happens to all men," -- as all the other characters of
this narrative experienced.

The Duke and Duchess of Ashbridge were now upon better terms with Lord and
Lady Colville, judging, that from the appearance of things, their son, Lord
Dacie and Miss Colville were by this time man and wife, though it appeared
extraodinary to all parties, that there was no authentic account of their
situation: -- Although the newspapers of Great Britain, as also those of the
most general resort on the continent, were authorized by public advertisements
to set forth their destination or residence, if it could be found out. --
However, as yet no news whatever had transpired, as Sir James had dispatched
his express from Algiers previous to the arrival of the parties in question,
and Lady Dampier and her daughter had embarked without knowing the result of
their voyage; -- and as public scandal was the incentive which made them seek
an asylum beyond the seas, -- it proved a lucky resolve. -- But these words,
luck, chance, fortune, etc. are not to be explained as they are generally
accepted, -- for these synonimous expressions for the providence of heaven,
must be supposed, and absolutely construed, as the order, direction, or
permission of the Supreme Power.

Captain Colville received an invitation from lady Ann's parents, and a
permission from his own, to renew the formality of courtship; -- and things
which affected that serious business were so nearly got over, that the marriage
settlements was in its draft for perusal and amendment; -- so that the Captain
wore a face of prosperity. -- Yet it was the determination of the parents of
both parties to delay the solemnization of their nuptials, until a true and
satisfactory account of the persons missing could be obtained. -- Pressed
d'accomplir -- Foy pour devoir.

The elegant monument which was erected to the memory of the late Duke of
Kingsborough, at Highmeadow, in the churchyard of that town, which contained
the remains of his Grace, the family vault being near it, (and which was but a
mile from Howard's-Castle, in Devonshire,) drew a great many polite families to
view it; -- as his Grace, Henry, Duke of Kingsborough, was the architect
himself, and had all the work performed under his immediate inspection and
direction. -- This employment diverting him a good deal from the melancholy
habit he had formed since he had lost his dear Henrietta, -- a name he never
mentioned without a deep sigh, and a trickling tear stealing down his cheek! --
So deep and firm had the impression sunk the dye, that during a life of the
greatest length, the noble Duke could not think of erasing an imagery view of
an object whose conduct was the admiration of envy herself!

The persons of taste and rank who were curious enough to examine the beauties,
elegance, and propriety of the recording marble at Highmeadow, were at once
surprised, pleased and ultimately astonished, at the taste and judgment of the
noble constructor and architect.

The season being now at the height for rural enjoyment, his Grace sent letters
of invitation to several of his friends, amongst whom were the entire family of
Lord Colville, including the General; -- the Marquis of Languedoc and his
family, which of course included all the younger branches; -- the Duke of
Ashbridge and his family; -- the latter he wished to see, that he might
exchange forgiveness of any supposed fault on either side, that had caused such
a singular change in his family.

The company was very numerous indeed, and all bestowed many compliments on his
Grace's tribute to his deceased uncle, in the excellence of the curious work
erected to his memory. -- The modest Duke on every such occasion denied his
ability; but the worthy Baronet displayed his properties and talents to the
advantage due to his merit, which intrinsically was of the utmost value to
benefit society in all ranks of life.

The weather being remarkably fine, the winds were laid asleep in the bosom of
the smooth beguiling glaze of the brackish element, -- the scaly brood wantoned
in the slow movement of the pearly flood, -- scarcely a zephyr whispered
through the lofty tops of the grove of pines, that overlooked the craggy
guardians of Neptune's domain, with an unbounded view of sea and sky; -- the
birds were warbling out their morning carols, extolling the beauties of the
scene, -- lambs ran frisking round each other, gently straying a small length
from their dams; -- the cattle were eager at their morning's repast,
instinctively foreboding the south declination of the luminary of day would
render the heat more than they could labor under, to crop the flowery
variegated stems which reared their heads in vegetative pride. -- Nature seemed
leisurely to put off her morning attire in the filtered waters of the ascending
dew, whose aromatic odours perfumed the air with the sweetness of fragrant
compositions.

This was the morn the worthy Baronet and his noble son had fixed on, with the
approbation of all the notables present, to form a summer camp along the plain,
that took in the little harbor of Bay-Mouth, -- in which it was usual for
coasters to put in, when a calm sea or contrary winds made it necessary for
their convenience, -- there to lay at anchor in safety. -- When the creek was
gained, all the points of the compass could not affect their safety, -- for it
was a dock, locked in from danger; -- but the difficulty of obtaining it in
boisterous weather, made many unskilful mariners suffer loss by the attempt.

Marquees were erected, -- a parallelogram was shaped, -- distinct streets were
formed transversely, so that an unobstructed view of the level surface of the
extended sheet was carefully preserved.

About ten o'clock the little town was completely built; -- a distant view was
beyond description beautifully picturesque.

The azure vaulted roof overspreading the amethyst of liquid particles, raised
in idea something superior to the admired works of nature, -- bespeaking at
once the residence of the Apologued Genii. -- The beautiful simplicity of the
canvass walls, -- and its more beautiful female inhabitants, with its gay
males, made the Duke's encampment look like the land of enchantment; -- for it
made its appearance, and possessed its inhabitants in so short a space of time,
as made the honest rustics stand aloof, rubing their eyes, questioning the
reality of the scene.

The day advanced with smiles to the southwest declivity of Sol's bespangled
path, and on removal of the dining covers, the charms of music enchanted all
around, and discord with her bristly young, made a quick decession; for concord
and her heaven-born offspring fancifully played their aerial transitions,
whilst echo answered to encore: -- and on the downy wings of the breathing
offspring of time, were pleasing thrills carried along the glassy surface of
the silent deep. -- Tout vient de dieu.

In this elysian hour of soft soothing into forgetfulness, a ship in full
rigged trim, just had hove in sight, and turning the point of the jutting
promontory, seemed to want the aid of the gentle blasts of Boreas to plough the
furrow of the yielding tide. -- Her royals were set, -- every wing was expanded
to assist her to catch the fleeting gale, -- but all her efforts seemed to fall
short of the necessary supply; -- and the friendly tide that drifted his sheets
along the shore, only assisted the floating castle.

By this time she reached the entrance of the secure harbor of Bay-Mouth,
resolving there to pass the night, and the next morning proceed up the channel.
-- The tars were busied in their necessary employ, -- the bower anchor dropped,
and in five minutes space, she rested safe within the verge of land's
protection.

The sea-sick passengers were struck with the enchanting sounds of harmony's
assembly, and hasted from their hard beds to ascend the steps of the cabin.

The first who stood on deck was Sir James Dampier, the next Lord Dacie, and
then the ladies followed; but what words can paint the astonishment of the sea
voyagers, when they recognized the mansion of Howard's-Castle.

Poor Henrietta, in the feelings of her heart was overcome, lest her once
beloved Henry was this day wed to some more happy fair; and that the sound she
heard was the festive board's attendant. -- She could not prevent her loss of
motion, and a fainting fit followed. -- This naturally created a bustle on the
deck; -- the new inhabitants of the canvass town flocked down to give friendly
assistance; -- amongst the foremost was the gallant Duke of Kingsborough, --
but the sight of her he loved above himself, -- his dear Henrietta, -- his all,
-- his care, was just recovered from her weakening sensation! -- He sprung from
land upon the deck, and in his arms clasped the dear idol of his affections! --
He with enraptured voice, cried, "my dear! my long lost Henrietta!" -- She in
the same juncture exclaimed, "my dearest Henry, oh!" -- Utterance failed, and
they both dropped down insensibly in each other's arms. -- The scene drew tears
from all the spectators, -- no eye was dry, -- joy had her torrents -- and a
speedy release was given to all fears by Sir James Dampier, who in a few words
gave the history of all their adventures. A second torrent of joy took place,
and diffused itself to all around.

Henry and his charming Henrietta were now reanimated. -- a thousand soft
embraces took place, -- the happiness of seeing each other without the most
trivial spot to fully their native purity, rendered them all the happiness a
terrestrial state could admit of.

A thousand greetings were given and as often returned by the rural and the
debarked friends, -- parents and children became overjoyed, -- it was a scene
of inexpressible happiness -- formed in the most romantic strain, to charm and
surprise!

The noble Henry took the fair partner of his soul into his tent; -- but as the
sea had made her health yield to a temporary indisposition, it was judged
necessary that she should, as well as the rest of her company who had debarked,
retire to the mansion, to take the refreshment of sleep on the settled solidity
of terra firma.

It was a matter of curious investigation, the means by which Lord Dacie was
ensnared. -- His parents seemed mightily pleased that he had it in his power to
heal the wounds the family reputation had sustained. -- The noble Henry shook
his Lordship's hand and wished him joy! -- at this the crowding spectators were
surprised: -- His Lordship would have coined a form of words, to palliate the
course his villainy had taken; -- but to the generous Duke a repetition of the
errors of human life was a painful sensation. -- He politely entreated his
Lordship to repeat no grievances, -- that with the works, their remembrance was
forgotten, oblivion having enveloped all traces of their existence.

An universal approbation of the liberal minded Duke's method of forgetting
injuries on granting forgiveness then succeeded; -- peace and harmony walked
hand in hand to conduct the well paired couples to the castle of hospitality;
-- where sincerity, honor, and beneficence, sat at the door ready to receive
the guests.

The next day the scene opened with the approbation of prudence, on the
re-inforcements of content and happiness.

Sir William Howard addressed the seniors of the assembly, -- who one and all
coincided in his opinion, that an union between the junior matched ladies and
gentlemen, should take place in a few days. -- The first couple who received
the address were, the long afflicted pair, his Grace the Duke of Kingsborough
and the honorable Miss Henrietta Colville; -- with a salute of acquiescence the
happy, happy pair, gave notice of their readiness to comply. -- The honorable
Captain Colville, and the right honorable Lady Ann Catesby were the next.

Then the right honorable and reverend Earl of Bellview, and the right
honorable Lady Olivia Beaumont. -- The right honorable Lord Fairford and the
honorable Miss Lee were the fourth and last whose assent were requested. -- All
of these, well-paired happy persons were content to attend at the altar.

The necessary documents were transmitted to the metropolis, -- special
licenses were procured, -- and after a few days delay, the several persons
abovementioned attended the solemn ritual ceremony, and became of the nearest
kindred to each other. -- The connubial knot was tied by each pair in
succeeding order; -- the neighboring villagers partook of the festivity; --
Hogsheads of elevating drink, and barrels of sound rectified liquors, with
provisions in plenty were provided, as the beveridge of the populace; -- the
bells rang a joyful peal; -- music echoed through the glade and adjacent
groves; -- bonfires and illuminations crowned the night; -- and Howard's-Castle
consummated the happiness of Wedlock. -- The succeeding day ushered forth the
honorable appellation of man and wife, between four new made couples; -- and we
may also venture to say a fifth -- for Lord and Lady Dacie, were then but in
their second moon.

Thus the sport of time became the serious work of completion; -- and in the
full scope of imagination, we may indulge ourselves a little, in reviewing the
truly happy state of ten ladies and ten gentlemen of rank and fortune.

A fortnight had nearly elapsed before any of the assembly counted the days, --
so easy did time steal on the wings of pleasure and contentment, who were
united to lull the group from thoughts of care.

A day was appointed for the collection of friendship's numbers to disperse, --
but prior to their separation, an excursion on the smooth settled sheet of the
ocean, in a large barge constructed on purpose for coasting jaunts of pleasure
and recreation, was proposed.

The day arrived, -- the aged persons who were of this notable assembly, did
not partake of the entertainment on the water, -- they chose the safety of firm
sooting; -- and in land vehicles pursued the pleasures of the day, -- and all
parties were to meet at an appointed place of rendezvous; -- a cold collation
and the canvass coverings of the tent equipage, were sent before.

The morning was remarkably serene, -- a solemn silence reigned over the face
of the deep, -- all nature seemed hushed in drowsy slumbers; -- no noise
ventured to wing its course in any direction, -- a still solemnity sat to judge
the events of the day. -- The sun ascended from his watery pillow with a drowsy
appearance, as though he was bloated with the intemperance of the night; -- his
bright golden locks seemed tinged with singy red; -- the azure roof was
vineer'd with streaks of pale reflecting tumors partaking of a watery galaxy;
-- no one present professed prognostication from the appearance of heaven, --
for every one was intent on the business of preparation.

About eight o'clock in the morning, on Thursday the 29th day of July, the ten
new married persons, with general Mounsey and his lady, and a set of necessary
attendants to work the barge, embarked with alacrity on board the pleasure
boat, which was decorated with taste and elegance by and under the order and
direction of his Grace the Duke of Kingsborough. -- The tide with gentle
shifting assisted their endeavors; -- and with an easy sail, slow in motion,
they quitted Bay-Mouth Harbor.

The Duke and Duchess of Ashbridge, -- Lord and Lady Colville, -- the Marquis
of Languedoc, and his Marchioness, -- Sir James Dampier and his Lady, -- and
Sir William Howard, accompanied by 'Squire Lee, (who did not much approve of
the watery element) took open carriages that gave them a constant view of the
barge, which by mutual agreement, was to keep in sight of the shore.

Thus equipt, the debarkation and alighting was to be precisely at four o'clock
in the afternoon. -- The next day at that hour was the time appointed for their
return.

The day was pleasant at the hour of setting out, -- everyone was pleased with
the prospect of the pleasures of it. -- Views from sea and land were equally
delightful; -- every angle of the shelving shore showed something of a
different prospect, to that which a few minutes before had opened to the view.
-- Meandering brooks, -- purling rills, shady groves -- flowery valleys, --
wooded copses, -- craggy summits of weathered beaten rocks, -- thus the
variegated face of nature showed its rural and natural appearance.

Anon the show of art, industry, and toil. -- The new mown fields -- the yellow
beds of thriving grain, -- the ripened vegetable root, showed by its stem the
mature state it enjoyed; -- with these might be viewed the neat, snug, and
well built farm-house, with the convenient yard adjoining, -- the domestic
animals with busy care seeking their food in receptacles of their wonted usage.
-- The cattle in peaceful plenty enjoying the spoils of nature's spontaneous
herbage; -- the sheep in wandering flocks on the sweet tasted verges of the
bounded plain, cropping the honey-suckle, -- the arch-notioned goat ascending
the steep ridge of the almost perpendicular mount, where rocks ledging as
steps, serve the turn of the adventuring beast's clambering disposition to nip
the bitter herbage of the craggy precipices, which in his taste is delightfully
palatable. -- The laborious horses are with a servile concordance yoked, and
harnessed to the loaded team wagon. -- The early farmer and his sturdy
assistants are with their brawny limbs, exposed to the insults of the weather,
at the various employments of reaping, mowing, binding, pitching, or stacking
of the various productions of harvest's extensive toils.

The shifting scenes affording a wide field for instructive lessons to the idle
and dissolute. -- To see the laborious cares that were necessary to bestow, to
foster the productions of the prolific furrowed land, so as to present them
ready for the use of the mincing epicurean! -- should not those laboring sons
of the plough, be honored as the first in arts? -- Their science is of
comfortable reflection; -- transposing the weak leas of rising grass in
November's snowing reign, to the fine contexture of the wheaten leaf of July.
-- The calf of March to the sirloin of Christmas, -- with many other branches
equally useful and indispensibly necessary.

These prospects pleased the eye, and gave an agreeable allusion to active
life, in the parties that were traveling both by sea and land; -- who passed
near four hours in pleasing confabulation. -- The sea voyagers, as we may style
them, were remarkably happy, as they were all on deck, in view of every scene
of delight; and were in regular pairs, to match in the participation of
instructive or recreative conversation.

The planet of day was now got to his greatest altitude; and ere the time-piece
pointed it was five minutes past noon, there arose a murmuring in the breezes
that had just then sprung up. -- The trees with a silky consistence made a
sudden rustling, as though their boughs were crushed by an invisible power; --
the waters curled, verging in oblong sheets, and seemed to bear marked sinking
points, as though engraved with a pungent machine.

The rarefied atmosphere, which in the endless boundary of sight showed a
lively blue, by a raised density of particles which arose with the south west
wind, (an awful layer of woolpack forms,) filled with the moon's attractive
christalized element, opposed themselves with the pale or red repositories of
Sol's meteors; -- the caverns of the earth at the same juncture yielded up the
confined fluid of the roving winds; -- thus the face or heaven brought quickly
in view the threats of contention between the four elements: -- and as man is a
composition of these four, it behooves him at all times upon such appearances to
provide for his safety.

The land party perceived the approaching storm, and were fearful of its
effects, -- and by signs, made known their wishes, for the barge to gain the
shore, -- but to perform this desirable work, the waterman found impracticable;
-- as no creek of safety was now nearer than two leagues, and to gain it great
hazard would accrue: -- for the part of the country which they now were
coasting, was all along a high ridge for nearly the last six miles, -- and was
of the same appearance for the like number of miles, which they were obliged to
pursue to obtain any place of safety in the threatening storm. -- It was a
dilemma of equal conclusion; -- to return or to pursue were difficulties of
like delay, -- the wind being on their larboard bow one way, and on their
starboard the other: -- so a prosecution of their voyage to the creek was
determined; there to land and remain during the night, if the weather continued
boisterous, was the resolve of the gentlemen on board.

The ladies were terrified by the timidity of the watermen, who were ten in
number, but who were to a man fearful of the agitated element, well knowing the
danger of the rocky shore. -- But as cowardice adds to danger, the gentlemen
made light of the fears of the piloting watermen, -- by which the ladies were
somewhat calmed.

It was strikingly awful in the aspect of the persons whose consciences
threatened them in the hour of danger; -- and of those whose monitor held out a
transcript of the ease and comforts of the heart, and whose works knew no
pollution. -- His Grace of Kingsborough and his Duchess sat with composure, --
serene innocence in the latter, and resignation in the former, both joining in
a doxology to heaven for all former blessings, being confident of heaven's
future care, as their lives were without reprehension, except in the state of
nature; -- in this they were well versed, and knew the necessity of being
partakers of the living sacrifice, at whose table they were constant
attendants, -- the preceding Sabbath being their last.

Others of this polite company were not to, -- Lord Dacie and his consort felt
themselves differently, -- for the terrors of their consciences represented
death in a more horrible view, than the fabled appearance of Tisiphone, the
worst of the three furies of hell. Their hearts failed them, they almost
fainted through the extreme of fear.

The Earl of Bellview and his charming Countess were like the noble Duke and
Duchess, just now mentioned; -- they were not at all dismayed, cheerfulness
appeared in each of them. -- Lady Ann Colville was the same. The captain was in
tolerable good spirits, as were General Mounsey and his lady. -- Lord and Lady
Fairford were greatly terrified; -- the former from conviction, the latter from
a timidity of opinion, that it was inevitable death, if the storm should
overtake them; -- not considering the hand of Providence, that could raise and
lay the power of the winds, or of any other of the elements.

Here we see the uncertainty of human enjoyments! -- all were happy an hour
before, -- and now the lowering face of heaven affrighted the greatest part
into the most abject opinion of the power of the omipotent being. -- But the
bruised consciences of sinners will, sooner or later, convict them of the
unregenerate state they are in, if a sight of danger presents itself.

The land party were not much better off! -- Every one of them felt exceedingly
for the danger their children or relations were exposed to. -- The storm made a
beginning, by repeated peals of awful thunder! -- no house was near for
shelter, except a barn, which was now opened for the reception of early
harvest. -- No person was therein, so that the foremost of the travelers were
housed on the falling of the first drops of the thunder shower. -- Sir William
Howard and 'Squire Lee were in the rear a quarter of a mile; -- the shower
commenced so heavy, that a large spreading oak, which was but a few paces from
the highway, seemed a shelter from the impending storm.

By this time the smooth element which the morning had presented with such
bewitching temptation, was now become a turbulent, boisterous, and furious sea;
frothing and foaming, driving its agitated mountains, in mighty torrents
against the opposing rocks! -- Now the happiness the morning boasted of, was
sunk as far below the mediocrity of hope, as it had risen before on the
approach of pleasure! -- This is the barometer of man's fluctuating state! --
His glass rises high, low, and perhaps runs out within the hour! -- So, whoever
places his happiness in the superficial appearance of things, may be assured he
will be deceived; -- and if not provided against the worst, to his utter and
irreparable loss.

The barge, although a good sea boat, was by this time tossed at the pleasure
of the furious winds. -- All the rigging and ornamental decorations were torn,
as if composed of paper; -- and drifted into the overflowing tide. -- Nothing
was left to obstruct the blast but a bare mast, -- the boom having been torn
from it and forced overboard; -- the sea rolling so dreadfully, that it was
imagined, every minute by all on board, that she must overset, -- therefore the
company were seated all between decks, -- every man in possession of his wife;
-- whilst the very coloring of horror was to be seen in several faces! -- but
an earnest cry to him, in whose hands the earth, sea, and winds are, was
unremittingly poured forth.

The thunder's sounding hoarseness seemed to increase, and lightning flashed
through every crevice. -- The mast was shivered into a thousand pieces,
although no person received any material hurt! -- This dreadful crash might
well be supposed to rouse the very inmost thoughts of those who were so nigh
the danger. -- Scarce had their panic subsided, and they were again seated,
when a deluge of water stove in the quarter deck, by which they were all
completely wet; -- and the Duke and Lord Belview were slightly wounded by some
splinters that flew from the forced joists.

Death now seemed to all inevitable, so each resigned himself to God in prayer!
-- but Lord Dacie essayed to go up to the rails, which formed the netting on
the quarter deck, -- in this he was opposed by the two wounded Noblemen, who
remonstrated with him on the impropriety of such conduct; -- but he replied,
death was as certain between decks as above, and as he could swim well, perhaps
he might save his life. -- In this whim, or rather presuming notion, he was
joined by Lord Fairford, who said he had the like abilities. -- Lord Belview
advanced every thing he could against such a step, -- adding, it was a piece of
cruelty to leave the Ladies in this minute of trying danger and extremity; --
and that it was an offense to the Deity to act upon such principles; for a man
should at all times hazard as much on his wife's account as his own: -- and
that in men of exalted parts and exemplary lives, it had been known, that they
could have saved their own lives, if they had chosen to relinquish their wives;
but no instance ever occurred wherein any such men abandoned their wives in the
hour of danger, -- as it betrayed every thing beneath the dignity of human
nature.

His Lordship's words had no effect. -- The Duke then conjured them to stay and
share their fate, observing, that God's power was not abated; -- and that there
were still hopes if they could put faith in that Beneficent Being, who never
deceived any who really and sincerely relied on his mercy; -- and further
observed, that notwithstanding the violence of the tempest, and the impetuosity
of the waves, he had a full assurance in his mind, and rested confident, through
his hope in God, that they should all get safe to shore. -- He therefore
entreated those Lords not to abandon their wives, nor betray their confidence
in the goodness of the Supreme Being.

All that either the Duke or Lord Bellview could advance, had not any effect on
those congenial characters, who were in their feelings equally agitated. -- The
perturbed state of their minds raised them nearly to lunacy, -- for to receive
death calmly, they supposed to be a dangerous plan, as the word chance was of
efficacy with them; therefore they went on deck and laid fast hold of the rail
that supported the net work, of the fair weather seats. -- In this posture they
continued for nearly twenty minutes, notwithstanding they were within hearing
of the lamentable cries of Lady Dacie and Lady Fairford; who would have been
tossed against the benches, as the barge rolled, were it not that the Duke of
Kingsborough and Lord Bellview, took each one of them under the opposite arm to
that in which their Ladies were placed.

As the sea rolled with such heavy shocks, it was impossible for any of the
gentlemen to quit their situations to entreat the absent Lords who were almost,
spectators of the horrors of the deep! -- However, General Mounsey repeatedly
called aloud to them to return; -- but it was in vain, -- they were deaf to all
entreaties. -- The horrors of death were of too dreadful an aspect for either
of them to open their ears to any other care than that of self-preservation. --
(A most striking representation of a conscious guilt of preying upon the
spirits, even in the very hour of death.) -- The sea beat over their heads like
mountains of earth, depriving; them of day light.

At about twenty minutes past three o'clock in the afternoon, the railing was
heard to give way; and so in a great swell, in which the barge shipped a heavy
sea, were carried away the netting, rails, and of consequence the two
unfortunate obstinate Lords! -- Thus they perished through a perverse
disposition! -- When they meant to save their lives, they lost them! -- For
their trust was not in God, but in their own cunning! -- A deadly and a
deceitful enemy to the true happiness of human nature.

The watermen, or as we should call them, seamen, as they had to encounter that
boisterous element, were of opinion that the barge was off the creek; as she
was hitherto at liberty to drift along the shore at the pleasure of the wind
and tide. The Duke ordered them to stand to the helm, and endeavor to put her
before the current, which beat up the creek. -- But still the sea kept her
vehement tossing, and the winds their howling! -- the rain and lightning rolled
like incorporated sheets upon the shattered deck! yet, by the direction of that
power, whose unerring skill surmounts all difficulties, which to man often times
seems an impossibility, the barge or sea boat got to the entrance of the creek,
and with a flowing tide took the further end at one tack, and stuck fast in the
mud, which secured her from the ebbing of the surge. -- Thus the votaries to
pleasure gained the land! -- which they all with uplifted hands and hearts
thanked the Supreme Power for the attainment of.

The unfortunate sons of obstinancy were now to be regretted, -- but it was in
vain to repine at the decrees of heaven; -- they were no more!

The gay embarquants now in sadness debarked; yet thankful to heaven for their
escape from the surrounding terrors of a momentary threatening death.

In their wretched plight, the humane inhabitants of the little town gave all
the comfort their humble life afforded. -- Beds were got ready, and each couple
thought themselves happy to find a roof over their heads, and a firm ground
beneath their feet.

In the mean time, the land party were not much better off, -- for corroding
care, and restless suspense, heightened the anxiety and almost despairing
condition of those who occupied the barn. -- The barge was lost sight of by
them! -- the dark clouds of rising billows towered above the sides of the
little vessel, which at repeated times would have been enveloped in the surging
waves, had it not been for the all preserving power of the invisible hand that
was stretched out to help and save those for whom further work on earth was
designed. -- The barn lost its roof in the whirlwind of a tremendous and awful
clap of thunder! -- and the lightning in a vivid flame set the sedgy covering
on fire.

The housed sanctuary was now become a place of imminent danger! -- All of its
temporary inhabitants fled with the utmost precipitation, and sheltered
themselves beneath the roof of an humble cottage, which presented itself at
some distance, where they found undissembled hospitality; -- the cottager and
his family removing themselves from the convenient seats of their unadorned
dwelling, found thereby a means to seat their hapless guests, who were now
beyond the limits of patience in their anxious cares.

During the former part of the storm, we have observed the goodly Knight with
'Squire Lee, had taken their shelter under the spreading branches of a
venerable oak; -- in which situation they continued for a considerable time,
which, according to the relation of Mr. Lee, might have been an hour or
thereabouts. -- During this time the venerable sage seemed enwrapped in the
scenes of the awful majesty of heaven; observing to his companion, the
happiness of being at peace with that power, whose works were now in
performance! -- that when the pleasure of the author of our being was made
known to the messengers of his presence, to require our attendance, we were
like the wise virgins in the parable, ready with our lamps, burning the incense
of a clear conscience.

The worthy man then with uplifted eyes to heaven, in a doxology of some
length, expressed his acknowledgments due to the bounty of his God! -- then
earnestly invoked a blessing on his children, to preserve them from the dangers
of the seas, and every casual vicissitude; and that they might continually have
before their faces, a view of the requisites to perform the commands, and
conform to the will of the Most High; -- granting them an emancipation from the
works and words of their spiritual enemy, whose power was in the vanity of
depraved mortals greatly advanced. -- He further added, with devotional
fervency, the hope he had in the tribunal and eternal power of the Almighty, --
and in the good time of the wisdom of the deity to give him a release from the
precarious situation of human life, which was a round of chequered scenes, in
which the proneness of evil had gained superior numbers; -- concluding with a
commendation of his friends and enemies to the throne of grace, and a
resignation of himself to the will of the Supreme Being.

These last words were just gone forth, the breath being scarcely departed from
his lips, when a deafening clang and dreadful rumble of etherial fire, broke
through the fable cloud that over hung the oak, and in the space of a lightning
flash, the ball of liquid fire descended on the trunk of the sturdy overgrown
druid favorite; -- dividing it from the topmost shoot to the roots! -- and in
that instant left the speaking monitor of truth and honor, lifeless, at the
verge of the grassy circumscription of the sapient suckers under the blasted
tree!

Mr. Lee, who was attentive to the words of the departed son of wisdom, was
beyond measure astonished, -- affrighted, -- and struck with terror, agony, and
surprise! -- and though he stood within a hand's breath of the fallen great good
man, he received no hurt whatever; only the electrical sensation of being
stunned by the proximity of the volatile flame which had lodged itself in the
earth.

Some minutes passed before he collected his reason! -- then on his knees, with
fervent zeal, he thanked, and asked a blessing of further preservation from
heaven; -- and with eyes rivetted to the spot whereon Sir William lay, he
gazed, wonder still remaining in his sight. -- For upwards of two hours
continuance he stood by his deceased friend; -- the storm then abating, he
pursued the loansome road, to overtake his fellow travelers, -- and on his
arrival at the consumed barn, saw the footsteps of both sexes, in the moistened
mould. He lifted up his eyes, and perceived the cot wherein the company of the
barn had found a further shelter! -- he hasted thither, where he found his
companions and their ladies well wet, affrighted, and fatigued. -- But all
their troubles slept in forgetfulness, on hearing of the fate of the honorable
Baronet! -- All were in tears, -- terror, -- and surprise! -- They then, with
redoubled pangs of anxious care, doubted of the existence of the sea toiled
party. -- Horror and amasement sat ghastly on every brow! --

Let blanks supply the place of words, -- all that the cottager's guests
conceived, felt, and suffered on Mr. Lee's relation.

The town of Barpoint, which was adjacent to the coving creek in which the
barge arrived, was about six miles distant. -- The cottager related the safety
of the sea company, if they had arrived there; -- to know the truth of
conjecture, the company remounted their open carriages, and with the guidance
of the peasant, hasted thither.

About seven o'clock in the evening they arrived, -- but were told the company
of the barge had separate lodgings, and were gone to rest, through the fatigue
they suffered at sea; -- their garments being quite wet through with the rolling
waves that the vessel had shipped in the storm. By advice of each other, the
late arrived company proposed to keep silent the matter of Sir William Howard's
premature death until the next morning; -- judging it would, without any good
accruing, or service obtained, prevent the Duke and Duchess, his son and
daughter from rest; -- and with equal suprise mar the comforts of the others of
the harrassed company.

A worthy clergyman, who was the only man of elevated rank or easy
circumstances in the village, (for the name of a town, Barpoint could scarcely
claim) having just heard of several persons being in distress, -- with all the
humanity his sacerdotal habit should possess, entreated the weatherbound
visitants to accept of his humble roof, where he would, in the best manner he
was able, accommodate them; -- and expressed his regret at being absent from
his house on the arrival of the barge, -- else he should have lodged her
company, who were obliged to accept the offers of his peasant parishioners.

The grateful company thanked the good clergyman for his urbanity and
hospitality, and without hesitation accepted his kind offer; where they
remained, well provided with wholesome provisions and christian care until the
next morning.

The attendants, with more assistants, took care of the body of the deceased
worthy Baronet, and in a shell conveyed it into the Church, where his remains
were deposited for that night.

The bargemen were equally successful in picking up the bodies of Lord Dacie
and Lord Fairford, which the surfy shore had gained, at some distance from the
creek of Barpoint; -- their bodies also were lain in shells, and deposited in
the church where Sir William Howard was laid.

Next morning ushered in a glorious fine day of settled weather, -- and the
attentive parson who had lodged the land travelers, called on all the sea
voyagers at their respective lodgings, to come to his dwelling, informing them
of their friends being there. -- They all obeyed the summons very thankfully,
when the humane rector acquainted the sea and land travelers with their
different misfortunes. -- For as yet the accidents of the one party were not
known to the other.

The conjunction of parties would have afforded a real pleasure, -- had it not
been for the preceding accidents. -- For on a perfect understanding of their
misfortunes, all were blended in the lamentable scene of woe; -- the day of
nominal pleasure brought forth a day of irretrievable loss, grief and anguish.

The noble Duke of Kingsborough and his amiable consort were inconsolable in
the loss of their honorable father, who was a character of respectability,
worthy of example. -- The Duke of Ashbridge, his Duchess, Sir James Dampier,
and his Lady (...) exceedingly sorrowful for the untimely death of their son.
-- The good 'Squire Lee, and his relation, the Marquis and his family, were all
extremely grieved for the unhappy fate of Lord Fairford. -- Proper steps were
taken to pay a due compliment to the deceased; -- the whole company returned to
the seat of the late Sir William Howard, now the mansion of the Duke his son;
-- hearses were provided, and the bodies removed, -- when after a period of
lying in state, due to their rank, they were severally deposited in the vaults
of the Howard and Kingsborough families, at Highmeadow, where each raised a
record in marble to the memorable merit of their deceased near relations.

The Duke of Kingsborough caused to be erected under his own direction, a
superb monument, with emblematical representations, trite inscriptions, and
faithful records and delineations of his father's never dying fame! -- For in
the good and great Sir William Howard, pure philanthropy, with mild benevolence
and Christian charity, found their abode; -- and have made a name in Howard,
which will ever grace human nature; -- and at this period gives a name to a
congenial mind, whose words and works can only be equalled by the deceased Sir
William Howard -- the patron of the poor, and the husband and parent to the
widow and fatherless! -- Pense a bien, J'ai bonne cause.

After the interment, each family returned to their respective seats: -- the
Duke and Duchess of Kingsborough remained at Howard's-Castle. -- They solaced
each other with peaceful lessons of piety, harmony, love, and tenderness, and
which were their constant attendants. -- Discord, irreligion, and pride, were
as in the life time of the deceased worthy proprietor, denied any kind of
employ or admission. -- The worthy parson of Barpoint was called to the living
of Highmeadow, on the presentation of his Grace, the rector having departed
this life to enjoy a better, which it is to be hoped he succeeded to, as he was
truly a Christian

This change to the Barpoint parson, was happy indeed; -- for it gave him a
means to provide comfortably for a wife and six children, which he had done
tolerably well at an income only of forty pounds a year; -- but his Grace's
unsolicited kindness, raised him, with the chaplaincy to the Duke, to a living
of eight hundred pounds per annum.

Ten months after marriage, the charming Duchess of Kingsborough brought forth
a pledge of her love, which gave to her and her Lord the happy name of parents.
-- The child was a male, and was baptized William, in memory of his grandfather.

The Countess of Bellview did the like honor to her Lord, in about the same
time; a daughter was the fruit of their love.

The other characters which are drawn we don't recollect had such early pledges
of their affections. -- But we remember, that about this time, Lady Dacie
changed her name for that of Lee, which was a happy marriage; -- for 'Squire
Lee, the brother of Lady Fairford, was the person who became her husband. His
settled principles and sedate deportment, made a reformation in the disposition
of that Lady; -- for Lady Dacie is now a prudent, virtuous person, and does the
graces of her rank with a due sense of honor -- Her son which was born as heir
to Lord Dacie, in the expectant rank of the Dukedom of Ashbridge, is a fine
promising child; -- and his grandfather the Duke, has applied to the upper
house, and settled in him the right of succession.

Lady Dampier's pride is somewhat humbled; -- she now begins to think she
cannot live for ever; -- and although she has worn gray hairs these ten years,
she has retained the vanity of dress, fashion, and conversation until within
these last six months. -- It is to be hoped, in six months more, she will have
forgotten that paint, pride, and ostentation, in advanced life, is incompatible
with religion, mortification, and repentance.

The moralist may deem the victims of an untimely death, a singular instance of
the visitation of heaven, and rather a forced method to raise a tragic scene;
-- but here it will be proper to observe to such a class of readers, -- " That
God is not the author of evil." -- "That the wicked man shall not live half his
days." -- "That God delights not in the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should repent and live." -- and " That time and chance happens to all men."

In Sir William Howard we see superficially, a sudden and unprovided death! --
But only comment for a moment, -- " God is not the ^^^^or of evil," therefore,
as in Elijah, who by etherial fire had his mortal parts instantly consumed as a
favor from Heaven, that by sudden death he might receive sudden glory, " for
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven," -- why not the same
manifestation of God's bounty to that wise man, who possessed wisdom and
understanding, -- " In fearing God, and in departing from iniquity?" --
Therefore it was a gracious call and a glorious change! -- He was fit to live
or die, as all God's elect certainly are! -- By the two drowned Lords, we see
plainly the end of the wicked! -- they were dreadfully cast down on the
approach of death; and by their fears and negligence, in mistrusting or
requiring assistance from heaven, ran headlong into danger, and perished
through the perverseness of their own hearts! -- Besides, the wicked man
shortens his days most certainly, by lewdness, excess, riot, quarrels,
distempers, or a violation of the laws of society, which brings him to an
ignominious death.

Thus life is shortened by the wicked man! -- And that agreeable to the
preacher of wisdom, " time and chance happens to all men." -- Certainly they
do, for time is the measure of his probationary stay in a sublunary state. --
Chance is a synonymy of the manner of his exit, whether naturally or violently;
-- so that on the whole review of human hature, it must be allowed, " that vice
like envy, carries the sting of its own punishment; -- whilst virtue like
innocence, ^^^ries its reward with it, in a conscience void of offense toward
God and Man."

THE END.
New Books, American Editions, Wholesale and Retail, sold by W. SPOTSWOOD,
Front-Street, between Market and Chesnut-Streets, PHILADELPHIA.
Prayers for the use of families; containing, one week's prayers -- general
forms of prayers -- and occasional prayers and thanksgivings. By the Rev.
William Enfield, L. L. D. Editor of the English Preacher, Biographical Sermons,
etc. The fourth edition, enlarged. Beauties of Johnson, consisting of his
Maxims and Observations, moral, critical, and miscellaneous, accurately
extracted from his works, and arranged in alphabetical order after the manner
of the Duke de Rochefoucauld's maxims; to which is added the life of Dr.
Johnson, with occasional remarks on his writings, an authentic copy of his
will, a catalogue of his works, and some papers written by Dr. Johnson, in
behalf of a late unfortunate character. Pope's Essay on Man. The Night Cap. 2
vols. Essays on Shakespeare's Dramatic Characters, to which is added, an Essay
on the Faults of Shakespeare. By Mr Richardson, Professor of Humanity in the
University of Glasgow. Thirty-two Fables, addressed to the ladies. By Dr.
Cozens. The Philadelphia Vocabulary; English and Latin, put into a new method,
proper to acquaint the learner with things as well is pure Latin, adorned with
twenty-six pictures. Pr^^^^y made Easy. By the Rev. William Nixon. A Collection
of Voyages and Travels, containing, 1. The Voyage of Peter Kolben, A. M. to the
Cape of Good Hope* 2. A Voyage to China, by Lewis Le Compte. 3. Anecdotes of
the Elephant, from Wolf's Travels. Love A-la-mode, a comedy of two acts. The
Poor Soldier, a Comic Opera. Life of Baron Frederick Trenck; containing his
adventures, his cruel and excessive sufferings, during ten years imprisonment
in the fortress of Magdeburg, by command of the late king of Prussia; also
Anecdotes, historical, political and personal. The Maid of the Mill, a Comic
Opera. The Lord of the Manor, a Comic Opera. Economy of Human Life. Clarke's
Introduction -- Aesop -- Corderius -- and Erasmus. The Art of Speaking. Ash's
Introduction to Louth's English Grammar. Watts' Hymns and Spiritual Songs, and
Psalms. Psalms, carefully suited to the Christian Worship in the United States
of America, being an improvement of the old version of the Psalms of David,
allowed by the Rev. Synod of New York and Philadelphia, to be used in churches
and private families. Wesley's Methodist Hymns, collected from various authors,
designed as a companion for the pious. Miscellanies, moral and instructive, in
prose and verse; collected from various authors, for the use of schools.
Recommended by Dr. Franklin. Beauties of Stern; including all his pathetic
tales, and most distinguished observations on life, selected for the heart of
sensibility. The tenth Edition. Dodsley's select Fables of Aesop, with elegant
engravings. The comical Adventures of Gil Blas of Santillane. Perry's Standard
Pronouncing Dictionary. Ela; or the Delusions of the Heart: a tale founded on
facts. To which is added, Henry and Emma, a poem, by M. Prior, Esquire. also, the
Deserted Village, by Dr. Goldsmith. A History of the late Siege of Gibraltar,
with a description of that garrison. By a Captain in the late 72d regiment, or,
Royal Manchester Volunteers. The Charmer; being a select collection of the
newest and most celebrated Songs in the English language. The new Complete
American Letter Writer; or, the Art of Correspondence, containing letters on
the most important subjects, viz. Business, Friendship, Courtship, Love and
Marriage, Politeness, Economy, Affection, Amusement, Duty, Advice, Religion,
etc. composed by writers eminent for their perspicuity and elegance of
expression. To which are added, the Complete Gentleman; or, Principles of
Politeness, extracted from the letters of the late Earl of Chesterfield. Also,
Moral Reflections and Maxims, written by the late Duke de la Rochefoucauld.
With forms of Message Cards, Instructions how to address persons of all ranks,
and a copious English Spelling Dictionary. The Apollo; being a collection of
such English Songs as are most eminent for poetical merit. Fisher's Young Man's
Best Companion. The American Jest Book; containing, a curious variety of Jests,
Anecdotes, Bon Mots, Stories, etc. The Merry Fellow's Companion; being the
second part of the American Jest Book; containing, a choice selection of
Anecdotes, Bon Mots, Jests, Repartees, Stories, etc. etc. Humphreys' Poems. A
Father's Legacy to his Daughters, by Dr. Gregory. Resignation, a poem, by Dr.
Young. Gough's Arithmetic. -- Scot's Lessons on Elocution. Paradise Lost, a
poem, in 12 books, by John Milton. Sheridan's Pronouncing Dictionary. The Works
of Peter Pindar, Esquire. The Accomplished Gentleman, or Principles of Politeness;
extracted from the letters of the late earl of Chesterfield to his son Philip
Dormer Stanhope, Esquire. To which is added, Moral Reflections and Maxims, written
by the late Duke de la Rochefoucauld. Paley's Principles of Moral and Political
Philosophy. Nicholson's Introduction to Natural Philosophy, illustrated with
Copperplates. Smith's Enquiry into the Wealth of Nations, 3 vols. Cullen's
Materia Medica, a new edition, 2 vols 8 vo A curious Hieroglyphic Bible, or
select passages in the Old and New Testaments, represented with emblematical
Figures, for the amusement of Youth, illustrated with nearly five hundred cuts.
P. OVIDII NASONIS METAMORPHOSEON, LIBRI X. Or, Ten select Books of Ovid's
Metamorphoses; with an English Translation, compiled from the two former
translations, by Davidson and Clarke; a Prosody Table and References, (after
the manner of Mr. Stirling) pointing out at one view, the scanning of each
verse; and Davidson's English notes. The Life and Adventures of MARIA CECILIA,
daughter of Achmet III. Emperor of the Turks. This extraordinary piece of
Biography, the heroine of which is probably still inexistence, being alive at
Paris in the year 1786, cannot fail to interest and entertain the reader; and
what must render it still the more acceptable is its authenticity, which the
editor of the French edition vouches for, in the following address prefixed to
the work. -- "Of the substance of the following History, I will warrant the
truth. I have before me the most authentic papers, which confirm it. There may
be some episodes, the reality of which I cannot equally affirm, as the original
pieces sufficient to prove them were wanting; so that the most part of them I
could only recite as they were related to me." * At said Store may be had a
general Assortment of other books, for supplying Colleges, Academies, Schools
and Country Stores, which will be sold on the most reasonable terms. -- Also, a
variety of Blank Account Books and other Stationary Ware.
THE FAIR SOLITARY, OR, FEMALE HERMIT. A NOVEL.

FROM THE FRENCH OF THE MARCHIONESS DE LAMBERT.

PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD. M,DCC,XC.

THE FAIR SOLITARY, OR, FEMALE HERMIT. A NOVEL.
AT a visit Alicia, and some ladies of her acquaintance, paid Belinda at her
country seat, a motion was made to put the horses to the coach and take an
airing. The season of the year admitted of getting out early, and their journey
was to a meadow by a river side, with a large wood at the end. On one side of
this wood was a pretty steep rock, on the top of which stood an hermitage, and
at the foot of the rock ran a pretty broad stream, which seemed to forbid a
farther passage. This water rises from a torrent, which falls from the hill on
the rocks. The murmuring noise it makes, together with the natural cascades it
forms, in the gloom of the wood, presents the eye with as agreeable an
entertainment as the most cultivated spot of ground can do.

"This is my usual walk, says Belinda, I like the silence of the place. It
inspires a soothing melancholy. Hither I often repair alone, or without any
company but my thoughts."

"But do you never meet with the Hermit, and have you not yet ventured into his
habitation," said one of the ladies? "I have not had a sight of him yet,
answered she."

Well, said Alicia, I love these hermits, and should be glad of a little talk
with one of them. A way of life so much out of the common course makes me
fancy, that they must needs be either vastly superior to, or very much below
other men.

Here the company alighted, and walked over a green, close by the side of a
brook. On going further they came to a place, where the tall poplars which grew
on the banks of the river hung very much over, and by their bending formed a
kind of a bridge, at the foot of which appeared a small path in the rock, by
which the ascent was easy to the top; but whether made by nature, or contrived
by art, is uncertain.

The ladies, guided by their curiosity, followed this small track, and soon got
to the door of the hermitage. They saw at the same time a tall handsome woman
hastily enter this rural habitation, and pull the wicket after her; upon which,
said they, since women are admitted here, we may also claim the same right.
Accordingly they knocked at the door, but nobody would answer. Continuing
however to make a loud noise, and giving thereby to understand that they would
not be denied, the same person they had seen before, came out, and told them,
her little dwelling was not worthy the notice of ladies of their fashion. They
made answer, that their business was with the Hermit who lived there, and that
they must see him; upon which the woman, perceiving it would be in vain to make
any further resistance, opened the door, but at the same time told them that
they would find nobody there but herself. The company stepped in hastily, and
having soon looked over the little cottage, which was plain and homely, but
neat, were indeed much surprised to find no other person but the woman.

"Our curiosity increases, says Belinda: How can you live here by yourself?
What an odd sort of life is this for a woman, and what could make you embrace
it? The more I view you, the more my astonishment increases. By your age and
appearance you seem unfit for so wild a dwelling, you might be an ornament to
cities." -- And indeed through a dejected air, and a sweet modest countenance,
she discovered much beauty. "Alas! replied the Solitary, I am unable to answer
such compliments. I am almost a stranger to the usual language of the world,
neither have I, during four years abode in this retreat, seen or conversed with
any human creature." -- Who then supplies you with the necessaries of life?
asked they. -- "A young woman, returned she, who had an affection for me, would
fain have accompanied me hither, but, having a family, she could not leave it.
However she is settled in a neighboring town, whence she brings me twice a
week more than is sufficient for the support of a life, which I wish I had, and
which I ought to have lost long ago."

These words were followed by a flood of tears, which, together with her
appearance and distress, soon gained her the compassion of her fair guests, "In
seeing you, cried they, it is impossible to avoid pitying you, whilst the
interest we take in your misfortunes intitles us to their recital. Let their
cause be what it will, we shall still pity you. If you are wretched through the
fault of others, we will join in your resentment; if by your own, fortune only
shall be to blame, and you shall never appear guilty in our eyes."

"Your indulgence and goodnature, ladies, replied she, will not reconcile me
to myself. I have quitted the world to shun my own being, but am still always
present to myself. I thought that, when I should no longer have witnesses to my
follies, I might then possibly forgive and forget them. But, merciless to
myself, I am ever condemning and punishing them. The silence of these woods
brings them fresher to my mind, and adds new feeling to their sting. Disengaged
from all things else, they alone are the employment of my whole leisure time.
-- "Perhaps, fair lady," resumed Alicia, "it is an over delicacy only that
makes you thus cruel to yourself. However, you cannot well refuse the recital
of your misfortunes to people that already take so large a share in them."

She would have excused herself, but the ladies, whose curiosity was greatly
raised, assuring her they would not leave her till she had acquainted them with
her unfortunate history. She began thus.

"Since then, ladies, you insist upon it, I shall give you a plain narrative of
my life, in which, though I may not have the merit of appearing innocent in
your eyes, I shall at least have that of being sincere. -- I am born of a noble
family. My father had the happiness of having served his king and country well
in many important occasions, and enjoyed great places at court; but, meeting
afterward with some injustice in having a rival preferred to a post he thought
his due, he grew highly disgusted. At that very time he had done the king of S
-- a considerable piece of service, so that, thinking all his obligations to
his country, and an ungrateful prince, cancelled by the unjust treatment he had
met with, he engaged in a rebellion that was raised against him. As he had the
chief command in a great province, it was an easy matter for him to bring about
a change of masters amongst the people of his government; he was very
indifferent about making terms for himself. The services he was doing the
cause, and a large province he was subduing, were his hostages and securities
for the promises they made him, whilst on our part we had nothing but bare
words to depend upon. In the mean while all our estates and preferments were
forfeited; in lieu of which we had only fine promises, which were but
indifferently performed. I was then very young, had lost my mother, and was the
delight of my father. I had an only brother, some years older than myself, who
went to the army with my father, and learned the art of war under his direction.

As for myself, I was to be sent to one of those houses that are destined for
the education of young ladies, but the princess Zaide, whose husband had
formerly commanded in our province, being very intimate with my father, begged
of him to leave me with her, which he consented to. This lady was fond of
children, they were her chief diversion, and she had but one son. I was brought
up with as much care as if I had been her own daughter: she appointed me
governesses and proper masters, who cultivated all my good inclinations. She
took a kind of pleasure and amusement in dressing me, and often gave little
entertainments to the young children of my age. I had the good luck to please
in them, and always strove to outdo even what was thought well in the rest.

The prince Camillus (that was her son's name) was some years older than I. He
had a noble and graceful person. We lived together, and whenever he had done
with his masters, he would seek my company with great fondness. In all his
actions he gave me a remarkable preference over my companions. As I advanced in
age, the graces, I am told, were not wholly unmindful of my person, and his
liking to me increased every day. I too early experienced the pleasure of being
loved, and found a satisfaction in it. It is an unhappy thing to contract such
an habit from our infancy.

Prince Camillus's friends had designed him for the duke of * * *'s daughter.
Her name was Valeria: she was the heiress of the family, so that an ample
fortune and distinguished titles made her a match worthy of him. He was often
conducted to pay his court to her; she likewise came to wait on the old
princess, and we often met together at our little plays and entertainments. She
was handsome, and could not bear the remarkable preference our young lover gave
me: in revenge she would often reflect with scorn and contempt on my fortune;
but the prince's commendations and my glass made me perfectly easy; for I was
already of an age to find a satisfaction in being handsome.

His reluctance to visit the lady Valeria soon grew remarkable. Hitherto we had
lived together without any manner of constraint and his attachment to me had
been looked upon as of no consequence; but as it increased every day, it began
to grow serious, and he was therefore forbid to enter my apartment.

His love quickened by this prohibition. He grew sad and melancholy; and as he
was of a hot and fiery temper, the restraint that was laid upon his
inclinations acted upon his health in such a manner, that he fell sick. His
mother was greatly alarmed at the accident. Valeria too came several times to
visit him, but he paid her regard with so much coldness, that she was
prodigiously nettled at the return. In the mean while his illness gained so
much upon him, that other considerations were laid aside to apply to the saving
of his life. He was therefore allowed to see me, and I was accordingly
conducted to his apartment by the women who had the care of me. The sight of me
had a speedier effect upon him than all the art of the physicians, and his
health returned in proportion to the liberty he had of being in my company. His
mother, however, was revenged on me for the necessity she was reduced to of
allowing an intercourse, the consequences of which were so much dreaded. She no
longer retained the same tender friendship for me; the commendations that were
bestowed on me, and with which she was formerly so well pleased, now grew
offensive to her, and I was often punished for being liked too much.

The prince, having at last perfectly recovered his health, became in a short
time the most accomplished lord in the court. He began now to assume an air of
haughtiness and independance, and slight the assistance of his masters, but
retained still an infinite respect for his mother; though I was the limit of
his obedience. He obeyed her in every thing except in what related to me.

At length she expostulated the matter one day with him, and asked what he
meant at last to do by his attachment for me? "Every thing, madam, answered he;
for when I meet with birth, virtue and beauty in the object of my affections, I
think I may, without blushing, own my passion and further intentions." So smart
and resolute an answer made her tremble; she represented to him the great
distance there was between him and me, the mis^^^^unes of my family, the loss
of our preferment and the forfeiture of our estates; to all which he replied,
"There fortune only is to blame, not she; and may you not too, madam, be a
little in fault, to set so high a value on that sort of advantages which do not
depend on us?" -- But, answered the princess, "you find in Valeria both those
you are taken with, and the others you reproach me with making too great an
account of." Oh, madam! replied the young prince, my heart and your eyes are
widely different in their judgments. You see, but I feel; and whatever
inequality there is between persons, love brings them all to a level."

The princess now saw that there was no time to be lost, but that I must be
sent out of the way, and accordingly I was put into a house designed for a
retreat from the world. The prince was no sooner apprised of the news, but he
flew to the place, and threatened the persons appointed for my keepers to have
recourse to the last extremities, if they did not produce me. His menaces were
of no effect; they persisted in their refusal, and protested they would let no
body see me without an order from the princess, his mother. He went to her
next, and spoke with a transport of heat, which offended her. He said, that he
was not obliged to her for a life she was endeavoring to make so wretched;
that the happiness of his days would be to unit^ ^^s fortune with mine, and
that her power did not extend to an empire over the mind; and, upon her
attempting to set before him her authority and his duty, he told her smartly,
that the heart had rights and dues of its own apart from all others.

The princess was prudent; she saw it would be in vain to struggle against the
stream, and therefore told him that she would sacrifice her just resentment to
her regard for him; that she looked upon him as a person out of order, who
claimed her pity; but that he could not refuse her to be six months without
seeing me, since such a compliance would cost him the less, as the campaign was
approaching, and he must set out to take upon him the command of the troops the
king had thought fit to trust him with; and that she was persuaded the passion
that possessed him, had not quite extinguished the love of glory in his soul.
-- This, indeed, was true; never man enjoyed those two sentiments in a higher
degree; neither did the one in the least take from the other.

He could not well deny the princess, but assured her withal that his passion
was not to be lessened by time, and that reflection, which never fails curing
ordinary flames, would but increase his.

Whatever he could say to the contrary, she was still in hopes that time and
absence would do much for her, and therefore now bent her thoughts on
endeavoring to divert one idea by another. She procured him a most magnificent
equipage, and provided for his retinue the most pompous attendants that could
be found, and joined to these several old officers who had behaved best in the
king's service, to train him up to greatness. Nothing was forgotten that might
inspire him with the love of glory, and, as he had a vast share of honor, he
did not hesitate to embrace a course so much becoming his birth. He prepared
therefore to set out for the army, where his sense of glory was equalled by the
shining opportunities he had to pursue it.

A young man of merit who belonged to his retinue soon became his confidante.
He was born of a good family, and could take the liberty of often discoursing
him about his present situation, and pitying his being abandoned to a passion,
which, as it distracted his mother, so it might likewise cast a stain upon his
own reputation. Love, he told him, was not justifiable in great men till they
had paid the tribute due to glory, and that it might indeed be a state of
passage in the life of an hero, but that glory was a qualification that claimed
a lasting place therein. "Descended from the blood you spring from, continued
he, and with the merit you possess, you have vast expectations of courage and
magnanimity to answer."

This was in vain, he was not to be heard yet. The prince was abandoned to a
despair, from which every thing might be feared. He had often repaired to the
place of my confinement, and, not having been able to obtain a sight of me, had
with difficulty been withheld from the last violences. His confidante
Timander, who soothed his anguish by his gentleness, and the complaisant
discharge of the trust he placed in him, promised him at last to bring me a
letter from him. Accordingly he waited on the princess, and represented to her,
that it was necessary to compound a little with the prince's grief; that were
she to insist upon a strict compliance with her orders, and exact obedience
with too much rigor, she might drive him to the greatest extremities; that she
ought not to put her power in competition with the force of love, nor set up
her rights against those of the heart, for neither were to be controuled by
authority; that the prince ought to be pitied and diverted by some great
object, without being made sensible of their design; and that in exalted and
haughty souls there were great resources to be found to work them to our ends.
He concluded by accquainting her, that the prince had desired him to bring me a
letter, that he was accordingly come to receive her orders, and that as to
himself, she might rest assured she had nothing to fear from the confidence her
son placed in him.

The princess having yielded to these arguments, Timander came and found me
melancholy and thoughtful. Your beauty, madam, said he, makes strange work
already. Is this the first trial of your skill? I gave him no answer, but what
he could read in my confused countenance and bashful looks: however, continued
he, here is a letter the prince has ordered me to deliver into your hands. -- I
must not take it, said I, and am extremely sorry for the effect, what you are
pleased to call, beauty has had upon him. I know what I am, and at how great a
distance the misfortunes of my family place me from him. I am bound by the ties
of gratitude and respect to the princess, his mother; and if my eyes have had
the misfortune to please him, my heart has had no share in the design.
Therefore tell him I beseech him to forget me. Timander here again pressed me
to receive the billet he had obtained leave to bring me; and the person, whose
care I was under, bidding me take and read it, I accordingly opened it, and
found these words.

"Nothing, madam, but the passion you have inspired in me can exceed the
affliction I am under. Expressions are too poor for what I feel. You are
persecuted for my sake, and your sufferings alone cause all the tortures that
distract me. I now discover my love without disguise or reserve, a boldness I
borrow from the innocence of my intentions; and as every thing opposes my
designs, my desires become the more inflamed, and my resolutions the better
confirmed. Are not you formed, madam, to be loved? In you I find all my
excuses. -- When a man loves as much as I do, the greatest pleasure he can
feel, is to find that he loves with the justest reason; and this, madam, is a
satisfaction I must owe you all the moments of my life."

Well, madam, says Timander, will you not favor us with an answer to this
billet? -- I do not think it at all proper, answered I. -- Why so, added he,
you are not forbid it? -- My duty to myself, returned I, forbids it.

After an hour's conversation he took his leave, and desired to know what he
should tell the prince? Tell him, said I, that I have a grateful heart, and am
moved with his sorrow; but that, in the circumstances we are in, the best thing
for him to do is, to think no more of me, and for me to forget him, if I can.
He went back to the prince with this answer, which did not seem to displease
him.

Returning to my chamber, I read the prince's letter over again with a concern
of tenderness, which would have given him the highest satisfaction. Not long
after this message, I heard he was upon his departure for the army. His mother
had procured him the most splendid equipage in the world, and purchased him one
of the first posts in the army. She was, by this, opening a door to honors, and
he was setting out with distinction in the road to glory. Timander called once
more upon me before his departure, and brought this second letter.

"I am departing for the army, madam. I must answer the call of glory to reach
the throne of love, and become worthy of you. I therefore fancy you are the
prize I am going to conquer. -- But alas! love is not to be merited, and I must
abandon myself to a grief worthy of your absence and my heart. Do but think,
madam, that I am without you; that will be sufficient to deserve your pity. --
I would sacrifice my life to my evil stars, but that I know it is consecrated
to you, and love will claim an account of it at my hands."

Timander painted, in the liveliest colors, the distress the prince was in.
The picture affected me prodigiously. I felt my bosom rent by a thousand
different agitations. I thought myself vastly indebted to him: I had hopes,
fears, and even desires; yet all these passions were not well distinguished in
my soul. I was flattered with the prince's love; but then again I was too much
reminded of the distance between him and me. This startled my pride, and, when
self-opinion took up the scales to weigh our merits, I own I did not find
myself so vastly beneath him. It is true, I might indeed have renounced an
alliance I was made to buy at too high a price, but in the attempt the prince's
love and distress stopped me short. -- He was sacrificing his greatness to me,
and I my pride to him. He had not been long in the army before he gave proofs
of his bravery. In him courage was joined with a great share of sense and
prudence (though the latter was still confined to his head, and had not yet
reached his heart) whilst reading and reflection supplied his want of
experience; all which gave reason to hope he would one day be a great general.

There was a great battle fought a few days after his arrival. The enemies
finding themselves hard pressed in the post they occupied, and fearing to be
attacked in their intrenchments, resolved to be beforehand with us. Accordingly
having made all the previous dispositions to a battle, they fell upon us at a
time, when by their situation we would have thought they should only have kept
on the defensive. However they came up like desperadoes, determined to sell
dearly their lives, and victory had long remained doubtful, when the left wing,
which my father commanded, began at last to give way. The prince, who was at
the head of the infantry, flew immediately to his assistance. He found him
wounded, fallen under his horse, and all about him either dead, or put to
flight. He ran to him, lifted him from the ground, re-mounted him on a spare
horse, bound up his wound with his handerchief, and rallying the troops,
charged briskly the enemy, routed them entirely, and obtained a complete
victory, which cost them all their artillery and baggage, besides a great
number of prisoners.

My father began to feel his hurt after he was out of the heat of the action,
and was obliged to be carried to his tent, where the surgeons searched his
wound, and found it very considerable. The first thing he did was, to enquire
after the person to whom he owed his life, and being told that it was the
prince who had thus saved him, he could not conquer his concern for being so
greatly obliged to him: is it possible, said he, that I must be so infinitely
in his debt? All the time of his illness, the prince never ceased his generous
offices; he sent for the most eminent surgeons to dress his wound; had his own
officers to wait on him, and more than once offered him his purse, which he
constantly refused to accept. Word was sent me of my father's wound, how I owed
his life to the prince, and of all the kind offices he had received from him
during his illness. On this, the infinite regard and affection I had for so
dear a parent, made me think I might send the prince my acknowledgments,
without trespassing against the rules or decency. Accordingly, without
consulting any body, I wrote him the following letter.

"I don't think I transgress the laws of decency, by thus expressing the
grateful sense of my obligations to you for having preserved a life so precious
to me as is that of a father, whom I honor beyond all expression. -- Alas! Sir,
must esteem, gratitude, and natural sentiments, all join to force a heart,
which would have chosen to yield only to its inclination and your tenderness?
Fame is already wholly taken up with you. For this am I to thank glory alone,
and must not love claim some share of the debt?"

I feared a long while for my father's life; but at last he gave some hopes of
a recovery, to hasten which he caused himself to be carried into the country,
whither I followed immediately to wait on him, and employ my cares for a health
that was so dear to me.

The prince returned covered with glory. He often came in a friendly manner to
visit my father, and I found him still the same toward me as when we parted. I
acknowledged the obligations I lay under, and the sentiments of gratitude he
could claim from me; but these expressions offended him. I must have no returns
but from your heart, said he: delicacy of sentiments is an attendant of love,
which quickens all its pleasures, though it often prepares us many vexations.
But what must become of me, if with sentiments so natural, so strong, and so
fond as mine, you should not answer them, and I could inspire you with nothing
but thoughts of gratitude? -- Yet, replied I, I must not entertain any others.

There began now to be some talk of peace, and the prince, notwithstanding his
youth, held so distinguished a rank, that he was called into all the
consultations held upon that subject. They ended at last in a general
pacification, and the prince took particular care to have my father included in
the treaty. Accordingly, by virtue of a general amnesty, and a separate article
for our family, our estates were to be restored to us as well as the places my
father held before the war, which he was left at liberty either to take
possession of again, or to accept of an equivalent in lieu thereof.

My father's health returned with the satisfaction of once more seeing his
family in a flourishing condition. The peace occasioned an universal joy
throughout the kingdom, and nothing was thought of at court, but the
celebrating of it by festivals and rejoicings. My father now left the country
to take a house in town, and set up an equipage suitable to his birth. As I was
already passed my childhood, he took me home, but desired a lady of his
acquaintance, who had lost her husband, and had suffered from the frowns of
fortune, to come and live with us, and have an eye over my conduct. Her name
was Leonora: I was ordered to show her as much obedience as if she were my
mother: she had a great share of understanding, had seen the world, and took
care that I did not stir a step without her.

Very soon after I was presented to the queen. Her majesty received me with
great kindness, treated me with distinction, and said very handsome things of
my person.

The whole winter season was spent in diversions. The queen was young, and had
a taste for pleasures. There was not an assembly but what she was so kind as to
admit me into, and I showed away with pretty good success. Prince Camillus made
likewise one at every ball that was given. He danced exceeding well; his person
was above any Lord's at court, and the glory he had acquired in the late
campaign, seemed to cast a new luster on him. I had the satisfaction of hearing
him praised, and he the pleasure of finding his choice universally approved.
Whenever we were dancing together, busy whisperings behind us declared how
every body agreed in pronouncing us made for one another.

The princess Valeria bore with impatience the figure I made at court, and the
queen's kindness to me, but much more the prince's fondness. She fell into so
deep a melancholy, that I could not help pitying her condition. Her passion
glowed in her eyes; a secret languor was spread over her whole person; grief
preyed upon her beauty; and, though Nature intended her fair, Love had now
ordered it otherwise. She had handsome features, but a wan and pale look robbed
them of all their charms.

She comforted herself by easing her mind to a young relation who lived with
her, and had her confidence. One day as I was walking in the palace-garden with
Leonora, we espied the princess and her confidante entering into a pretty dark
grove, upon which I proposed to my friend to follow them. Accordingly we stepped
after, and entered a side alley next to that where she was sitting with her
companion. She spoke with heat enough to be heard. What said she, would you
have me do with myself? I live but for him, and yet I shall never gain his
love. -- Forgive him this piece of levity, said the other, he will soon return
to you. How? replied Valeria, you would have me not concerned at his usage! And
you call levity a natural passion which he cannot resist! A passion, to which
he sacrifices his love to me, his glory, his fortune, and all he owes to the
best of mothers! My heart has too often found his excuses: when we love, we
forgive long; but you do not see him with eyes as interested as mine. What cold
insensibility has he not shown for my pains! -- There is a kind of meanness in
feeling and suffering for those that do not feel for us. I can no longer bear
the rackings of my heart, and the stinging reproaches of my pride; I must, I
will silence them, and fall upon some method worthy of me. What may that be?
answered her relation. Why, to retire for ever from court, replied she; -- she
could not proceed further, a flood of tears interrupting her speech. -- Strange
resolution! answered her confidante; you would punish yourself, because another
is guilty! Here night coming on, they withdrew.

I seemed so affected with the princess's affection, that Leonora could not
help expressing her surprise. What! said she to me, must one enter into a
rival's grief? -- I never feared her, replied I, and, as I have had nothing to
dispute with her, I cannot now enjoy the ill-natured pleasure of triumphing in
her distress. The prince's heart was tendered me without my wishing or desiring
it, and therefore, as she gives me neither fear nor uneasiness, I cannot hate
her. I have some share of goodnature, and must pity her condition.

At my return home I found one of the queen's gentlemen, who brought me word,
that she had engaged me to an entertainment the king was to give, on account of
the marriage of the princess Flavia, one of her majesty's relations; that in
case I had not jewels enough, she would send me some, and desired to know what
I might want. I told him, I had a suit of green velvet and gold, which would do
very well with a set of rubies, if I could get them. I withdrew afterward to
prepare my dress, and, out of complaisance to her majesty, took more pains
about it than otherwise I would have done.

The day appointed for this magnificent entertainment was spent in all manner
of diversions. There was a play acted in the evening, which was followed by a
grand supper and a ball; and nothing in the world could be more gallant and
better conducted. The princess Flavia looked perfectly charming: for, though
she is not a regular beauty, she has so much youth and bloom, with so beautiful
a color, that she may surpass others handsomer than herself.

About the middle of the ball there was a great stir at the door, which engaged
the attention and eyes of the whole company. It was the duke of Praxede who was
just arriving from the army. His coming was quite unexpected; he had made a
shining campaign, had beaten the enemy, and entered the room with an air of
confidence, supported by his natural valor and good mien. I had never seen him
before: he was not better acquainted with me; and, in casting his eyes toward
me, I heard him say some very fine things. His words, his looks, and the very
found of his voice threw my soul into an agitation, which I had never felt
before. The prince and he were then at variance; they were both driving toward
the same goal, and each other's rivals in glory and merit; upon which account
they had been separated, and the court had not thought fit to employ them both
in the same army.

As soon as he arrived, the princess Flavia offered him her hand to dance: he
took me next, but I was so confused, that had I dared, I would have refused his
civility.

All the time the ball lasted, he kept his eyes constantly on me: I turned mine
from him, and would fain refuse him my looks, as a favor he had no right to.
However he took me several times to dance, and made himself so remarkable, that
it was thought he did it on purpose to spite the prince. You may be sure I had
no share in the design, and indeed, as soon as the ball was over, I ran home in
great haste, and the prince left the company to conduct me.

"Your charms, madam, said he, (when at liberty to speak) operate on every
body, and the duke of Praxede comes to swell the number of your conquests.
Indeed, Sir, replied I, his affecting to take me so often to dance, and his
staring at me has given me a great deal of uneasiness. -- But why so, madam?
answered her. So much care, never to cast a look toward him, shows that you
dreaded his eyes, and was diffident of your own. A person that feels nothing,
is always free and open; and over-acting our part, on certain occasions, often
betrays a consciousness of not being always right. -- But, replied I, what
would you quarrel with me about? I never saw him before in my life. -- That may
be, answered he again, but he has has seen you, and you were handsomer than
usual today: nay, he loves you, and that alone, even though you were not
guilty, is enough to make me wretched."

Ever after this the prince watched me with a caution that gave me offense. The
duke on his part followed me every where, and I always found him ready to catch
my looks in all public places. The prince was informed of all his steps; he
became peevish and suspicious, and, though he could lay nothing to my charge,
yet he was not satisfied with me. He thought the duke very insolent to pretend
to a person, to whom he had been so long engaged; but for my part, I own I
fancied he wanted only to teaze and alarm the prince, and believed, that, he
thought if I could not serve the purpose of his heart, I might at least gratify
his vanity. Such a notion was highly offensive to me, and therefore I shunned
him carefully. The prince himself took notice of this; whereupon I opened my
mind to him one day, telling him I could not believe I was any ways concerned
in his grief, since, were it so, it would be doing me the highest injustice; to
which he answered, "You do not indeed seem to join with the duke against me;
you avoid him, and show me even a greater regard than ever, and yet you are
guilty: nay, you are so without knowing it, and you would fain, by an increase
of kindness, make amends for the wrongs you are doing me. -- Good Heavens,
cried I, what then is my crime! -- You love the duke, answered he: yes,
Mademoiselle, you dote on him, and it is I that must inform you thereof, I know
I am going to appear whimsical and ridiculous, and justify all your wrongs. I
provide you with weapons against myself, which you will turn to a proper use. I
see and feel the whole of my wretchedness, but I am driven to it." All this was
attended by a flood of tears, and taking leave he told me further, that he was
going to conceal his distraction and despair from my sight.

He left me in a greater confusion than I can well describe: I found I wanted
to shake off myself, and durst not yet enquire into the cause of the various
emotions, I felt raised in my breast; when having thrown myself on a couch,
Leonora entered the room.

I was surprised at her coming, and ashamed she should be witness of my
disorder. Which she perceiving, Come, said she, recover yourself: I see you
would conceal your uneasiness and sentiments from my knowledge; but you are to
blame. Don't take me for a severe censor, that would condemn all your motions,
but look upon me as a friend on whom you may depend, and one capable of
comforting and conducting you in the most delicate circumstance of your life.
Do not fancy I shall make a crime of your sensibility. A heart may be sensible
and innocent too; and, to merit your confidence, by my example, I am willing to
let you into mine." Here she paused a while, and seemed to repent having gone
so far; but I pressed her with so much tenderness to proceed in her story, that
she continued thus:

I am acquainted with love, and have but too dearly paid the tribute due to
that little god. You have no doubt heard of the misfortunes of my family, and
how I lost my husband and brother both at the same time. The one was the
support, and the other the hope of our house. My brother was taken in arms
against his sovereign, and left his head upon a scaffold. Soon after my husband
paid with his life a victory he gained over the enemies of the state. Thus was
I in one moment stripped of all my present advantages and hopes to come; reduced
to lament a dead husband in place, and much esteemed, and to sue for a
brother's life and honor: but, alas! he forfeited both together, with his
estates, so that I was left without wealth or fortune. The notions of greatness
disappeared, and all the charms that are the attendants of a distinguished
station in life vanished in an instant. I found myself forsaken and without
support, and my only hopes were, that, having been exposed to the frowns of
fortune, I should at least be forgotten by love; but both joined forces to
persecute me. Dispense me, madam, with the rest --

And now, ladies, though every thing she said is still fresh in my memory, from
my having been very attentive to this mark of confidence she gave me (wherein
she acted very artfully to come at my heart and secret) yet as she is unknown
to you, the repetition will not perhaps be thought very material, therefore you
will give me leave to drop her history here. -- By no means, said we all, pray
let us know the rest of Leonora's adventures; whereupon the Solitary continued
in these words:

-- We like to be let into the weaknesses of people we esteem. We always long
to resemble them in something; if their eminent qualities leave us far behind,
their foibles bring us to a nearer affinity. That is no small comfort, and in
my particular circumstance, it was too important for my repose, to find a
friend in a person who had been set as a watch over my actions. The confidence
she was going to place in me, was a kind of security that answered for her, and
I was in those moments, when a secret lies so heavy on the heart. I longed to
speak to her of what I felt, and was too happy to find in her, not only advices
for my conduct, but the same dear weaknesses which render us more indulgent
toward those of other people, I pressed her therefore to proceed.

You will then, said she, have the full extent of my secret. I am very much
afraid the recital will make all my wounds bleed afresh, and give new life to
my passion; but howeever, that shall not prevent my complying with your
request. My sentiments being the only pleasure left me, I will indulge them in
their full career. They are indeed of a quite new nature. Olindo in Tasso is
quoted as a model of sentiments. He is made to say, that he desires much, hopes
little, and asks nothing; but for my part I neither wish, hope, nor ask at all.
My passion is supported by nothing; it subsists, feeds, and increases by
itself: and thus have I for a long time been taken up with a sentiment most
singular in its kind.

I saw at a friend's some years ago the count ***, you will excuse me telling
his name. To me he appeared a most amiable person, though, with so great share
of the qualifications of the mind, personal advantages would be less requisite.
From the first moment I beheld him he engaged my attention, (which is doing a
great deal with me) and I continued seeing him both at my friend's and my own
house. There was at that time a gentleman that laid some pretensions to my
heart. We had formerly been on the point of marriage, and, when my family had
disposed of my liberty in favor of my late husband, he had been afflicted
beyond expression. His stars had decreed he should ever love me; therefore,
unable yet to resolve to give me over, he still diverted his sorrow with the
notion that my heart did not go along with my hand. His esteem and respect for
me had indeed stopped and repressed his sentiments, but he was ever watching
mine, and telling me every day, that, if I disposed of them to another, he
should die with grief.

He soon observed, that my regard for the count was changing into tenderness;
my eyes had informed against me, and revealed my secret: and upon this he
vented himself in reproaches that very much offended me.

All this was yet unperceived by the happy man. Not but that he seemed to have
some slender inclination for me, and I was ready prepared to reject his
declaration, if he should make any. He has since been fully revenged for my
idle resolution. If he had any sentiments at all, they have stopped short, whilst
mine have had their full run. It was long before I could be clear in what I
felt. Heavens! how artfully does the heart in those cases conceal its
inclination, not to alarm our reason and modesty? It is a bare nothing at
first: it is the mind we are taken with; and, in short, till love has got the
mastery, he remains almost always unknown. He soon discovered himself to me in
all his power; and the disorder, which the presence of the count always threw
me into, made me sensible of my defeat.

About that time all my misfortunes came showering upon me, and, as I have told
you, I lost my husband and brother. It was the most complete and strongest felt
distress in the world. My friend, who often came to comfort me, used to bring
the count with her at a time when I saw no body; and I found, to the shame of
my grief, that he alone was able to suspend it.

I was afterward plunged into a world of affairs; my family ruined; my brother
perishing with all the infamy of guilt and rebellion, and none but I to assist
him, and save all I could out of the ruins of the family. I was in hopes that
so many troubles would at least wear out the sentiment I nourished in my heart,
but my misfortunes ever kept up a strong remembrance of it.

After many years vexation, time, without the help of reason, effected what the
latter had not been able to compass; for we must own, to the shame of our
affliction, that it does not last for ever. In short, having made the most of
the wrecks of my fortune, I hoped to enjoy a little quiet. But I had lost the
repose of the heart, and, when restored to myself, I found I was wholly funk in
love. An active hurrying life had, indeed, encroached on its rights; but I have
paid dear for it since. I could no longer mistake my situation; I was forced to
own it, and begin to settle with myself.

Most women, void of thought or design of action, are hurried away by the first
sentiment that pleases them. But for my part I considered what I had to do,
and, after weighing the count's character and my own, found that I must
absolutely avoid him: and, to show you that my resolution was grounded on
knowledge, I will draw you his picture. -- But no; I am not in a condition to
paint him such as he is. Love would needs conduct the pencil, and I could not
suffer any want of merit in the object of my affections.

But, said I, interrupting her, how is it possible that with a heart,
overflowing with so great a passion, you should have made no attempts toward
either inspiring the same in his, or expressing your own to him? -- I have my
answer ready, replied she.

I was born with a heart greatly susceptible of tenderness, but yet at the same
time with a deal of pride. The one cannot be gratified but at the expense of
the other. To make me happy, they ought both to agree, which is a difficult
matter; and my condition is still more miserable when my glory is wounded, than
when my heart bleeds; and I have therefore resolved to gratify it. Had I shown
my sentiments, and they been slighted, I should have died with grief; and that
was my reason for avoiding him. I was sure of my lips, but could not answer for
my eyes; and yet, whilst I was shunning his looks, I was ever seeking for them.
What storm would they not raise in my soul, when my eyes happened to glance on
him! My tenderness and pride always stepped in between him and me. The one
forced me toward him, the other withheld my fondness; and these different
impressions gave me a confused and bashful air, which I was afraid might betray
me. Yet there is not one moment of my life, wherein my heart does not require,
and I refuse him to its eager desires. My sentiments are as violent now, as
when new; and more than once an increase of tenderness has exhausted the whole
stock of courage I had collected by reflection. My thoughts are still on him
without intermission. He falls in between every object and me; in all the
projects I form, I have him still in view: I fancy his esteem is to be the
reward of all the good I do, and I prize it yet more than all the tender
sentiments I am able to suppose in him. I have set myself the hardest task in
the world, a strictness of behavior that denies me even the pleasures of
imagination; but especially, I have promised to avoid him, and accordingly keep
my word with myself.

One heart alone is unequal to so mighty a struggle; and a friend who visited
me often, seeing me pensive and melancholy, at last wrested my secret from me.
The confession cost me as much as if it had been something criminal. He
endeavored to quiet my timorousness, and said -- Do you think we owe as much
fidelity to this whim of honor imposed by custom, as to the other which is the
real attendant of virtue? Believe me, madam, the world is not too hard, you owe
it but the appearances of decorum, no more is required of you. -- I cannot be
of your way of thinking, answered I, and I have never met with a woman good for
any thing, after once throwing off the prejudice of honor. Besides, I have more
regard for myself than for the world: I stand in need of my own good opinion,
and the testimony of my conscience is more necessary to me, than all the
suffrages of the public. -- But will you, said he again, fall a sacrifice to
your passion? You must either get the better of, or yield to it. -- If my heart
could have obeyed me, replied I, I should have got rid of it long ago, but I
can bring it to no manner of terms. Nay, scarce can I forgive my sensibility,
and it is you that have recalled me to the attention I owe myself.

But after all, madam, an inclination is not a thing that depends on us; it
insinuates into our hearts without our leave: passions seize and hold us in
their power as long as they please, and the whole guilt lies in the use we make
of them. What have I not done to tear him from my heart? I attempted to leave
my native country, and go over to a foreign court. I thought change of place
and objects, might give a new turn to my ideas; but love, more diligent than
me, flew and overtook me on the road. Seeing therefore that all my precautions
were useless, and my affairs requiring my presence at home, I returned back.
Next I endeavored to force myself into a liking to some persons that made
their addresses to me, hoping to weaken one passion by another, and thus at
last to give them both the slip. But, alas! all to no purpose. I have
sacrificed every thing to my imaginary love, and my fidelity to this phantasm
of a passion, is proof against all. It is really wonderful what lengths I have
gone with this mere idea. I have personalized it, so that I keep a social
intercourse with it; nay, we have our quarrels and reconciliations: at other
times again we are upon easier terms, and, my melancholy being then more
soothing, I would not barter it for the highest gratifications of pleasure. It
is love alone that can give those endearing fits of sadness which we enjoy with
thanks. My ideas are so strong, that there are moments when I fancy him near
me, and love wears away the whole space that separates us.

Would you know what has led me to this excess of passion? It is my extreme
severity to myself. It is not those that yield, who love most, but those who
resist. All you deny the senses, adds to the hoard of tenderness. I was let
loose to the exaggerations of my mind, and, as possession seldom furnishes all
the gratifications our desires lend it, I have loved not in proportion to the
merit I have found, but to that which I imagined.

I heard much about that time, that the count had an affair with a lady; a new
addition to my grief. My passion, I fancied, gave me a right over his. When we
love dearly, we would fain be loved again, and always fancy ourselves worthy of
such a return. I was as much piqued at his amor, as if he had really been
guilty of an infidelity to me, and his affection for another raised a barrier
betweeen him and me. From his engagement he shifted to another. From thence I
fancied he was inconstant, and neither serious nor respectful of love, and I
found I was doomed to the laborious task of effacing from my heart a sentiment
that was deeply engraven in it. But, alas! even now, a hundred times a day I
say I will forget him, and say it, but to think still more of him. What must I
do with the vast stock of love thus swelling in my heart? Lovers are often
cured by reflections; but mine distemper me the more, and reason is too weak to
assist me against my passion. -- But it is too much expatiating upon what I
feel. What, madam, must you now think of me? Or what impressions does my
madness make upon you? -- Think! replied I, why, that it is a sort of
consolation to find so estimable a person as you, in some shape, partaking of
my weakness. --

After all this, now suffer me, madam, resumed she, to do my office, (for it is
what we must do sometimes;) by desiring you to consider, that, though I have
not fallen into the greatest precipices of love, I have nevertheless been
excessively miserable. From a conduct tolerably laudable, what advantages have
I reaped? Myself the only witness of so many difficulties and strugglings. In
love every thing of this nature is lost, because unknown, besides that the
heart is never well composed again after having been once agitated with that
passion. How amiable and desirable is virtue, even barely with regard to our
repose! Take the most fortunate passions, and sum up, if possible, all the
alarms, the pangs, the anxieties, the fears, the jealousies that attend them:
lay all these aside, and leave to love none but its pure joys; how few will
they appear? Yet, for the shadow of these few pleasures, we vitiate our taste,
and lose the relish of true pleasures for all our lives. Pardon, madam, this
small touch of morality. If, by laying myself open to you as I have now done, I
have forfeited the privilege of giving advice, I hope by a mutual confidence to
regain a new right to your heart, and make myself believed a friend free from
suspicion.

Here I was going, in return, to unbosom my soul to her, in full liberty, in
regard to my situation, when we were told that my father wanted us. Having
waited on him, he asked me in a rough angry tone, what I had done to prince
Camillus? "His mother has been telling me this moment, continued he, that he
grieves most terribly, and you are taxed with being the cause of it: it is very
cutting, says she to me, first to bear so much against my will, my son's
passion for your daughter, and then to find that very passion serves but to
make him unhappy. I believe you too much my friend, not to join with me in
breaking an engagement which is not at all agreeable to me, and you are too
much a man of honor not to think rather of fulfilling the duties of gratitude,
than of aggrandizing your family at the expense of the friendship you owe me.
Since, therefore, your daughter helps us by her ill-treatment of my son, let
us, concluded she, complete a rupture, which we durst not have attempted
without her concurrence; and for this purpose I beg of you to carry, or send
her down into the country. I answered, that I desired her to be persuaded that
no interests were dearer to me than her own; that I had nothing more at heart
than to give her satisfaction, and that I should immediately order you away.
Therefore, Mademoiselle, get yourself ready to set out for my country seat in
two or three days. The gratitude and fidelity I owe the princess prevent my
talking to you in the strain of an offended father, but I had rather serve her
than you. Certainly, pursued he, turning to Leonora, who had followed me,
nothing can come up to my daughter's ingratitude to an amiable prince, who has
a violent passion for her, who sacrifices the greatest advantages to his love,
and is the support of our tottering family. When the princess, his mother, out
of indulgence to him and kind regard to me, is going give a consent which costs
her so much, she, my daughter, alone raises an obstacle to an affair, which she
ought to buy at the expense of half her life! -- Oh! in spite of resolution, I
shall lose my temper, anger resumes its rights, and will have vent! Begone, and
never more appear in my sight." I would have answered, but he was too much
exasperated, and I found the best way was to withdraw immediately to my
chamber. Leonora staid however some time behind to try to pacify him, but his
passion ran so high, and his rage was so violent, that she found it a hard
matter to calm him.

That very moment the prince came to pay him a visit, and finding him
prodigiously ruffled, asked him the reason of his discomposure: "My daughter,
replied the old gentleman, has been unhappy enough to displease you, for which
I cannot punish her too much, and therefore have just now ordered her away into
the country." The prince immediately threw himself at his feet to beg I might
be allowed to stay, but my father replied, that his word was too strongly
engaged to the princess ever to go from it. The prince assured him I was no
ways guilty: "Must parents, said he, interfere in the quarrels of lovers, which
have often no other foundation but their delicacy? It is I, sir, that am in
fault. Love is never satisfied, and often unjust. But at least give me leave to
see your daughter. -- You have it, my lord, replied my father. -- Well then,
continued the prince, I will go to my mother, and entreat her to desire you
herself to break off this cruel journey. -- Were she even to order it, answered
my father, it would be all to no purpose. She might think you and I are of a
party in it; and I owe more to my honor than to any consideration whatever."

Leonora had withdrawn, when she saw the prince enter my father's closet,
though not so far but she overheard this part of their conversation, after
which she came up to my room, where she found me sinking under a dejection of
spirits that cannot be expressed. "O my dear, cried I, my father's anger
distracts me; but what afflicts me most is, that he is not angry without a
cause. Alas! but a moment ago you were talking of the trials of love: could I
have thought I was destined to be so soon an instance of them?" Leonora on this
repeated to me what the prince had said to my father, but his generosity and
virtue served only to add to my guilt and affliction.

The prince that moment entered my room, and finding me drowned in tears; --
though I am ignorant of the cause of those tears, said he, and dare not flatter
myself they are meant for me, yet, madam, you are afflicted, and that is a
sufficient motive for me to partake in your sorrow. -- My lord, replied I,
abandon a wretched creature that disturbs the tranquillity of your family: do
not add your constancy to my load of misfortunes. You have already done too
much for me, and it is time to think of yourself, and what you owe the princess
your mother. -- Why will you, madam, answered he, ever take upon you the care
of my duty? It no longer becomes you to affect such a generosity. This last
speech offended me. -- What, sir, do you mean by this, said I, and what am I
accused of? -- I accuse you of nothing, replied the prince, and you will never
find a persecutor in me. In the piques of lovers, the delicacy of the person in
fault is always sufficient revenge to the injured; I ask no other: but at
least, Mademoiselle, help us not to lose you. I have not been able to prevail
with your father. It is the first time in my life I have seen him angry with
you, and I must die with grief, if he continues much longer in the same temper.

Here I was told that one of the princess Flavia's gentlemen wanted to speak
with me. He brought me word that her highness had engaged me for a party of
hunting the next day. I desired Leonora to go and know my father's pleasure
what I must do. His answer was -- To be sure she must obey the princess: since
she has done her the honor to name her for the party, she ought to go. -- I
therefore sent the gentleman back with my thanks to the princess, and to assure
her I would not fail to comply with her orders.

I was now obliged to get my things ready and think of my dress, but indeed I
was very little disposed for joy. One of the inconveniences of a court is, that
we must have the sentiments that reign there, or do as if we had them; so that,
often under an outward appearance of mirth, the inward anguish of the heart is
concealed.

I joined the company the next day with a very heavy heart, but dissembled my
uneasiness by saying I had had a violent headache. Nothing in the world could
be more gallant than our hunting match, which was to conclude with an
entertainment at a pleasure seat in the country. The ladies made a very fine
appearance on horseback. My father, who neglected nothing that could give an
addition of graces to my person, had made me learn to ride, and my dress was
blue trimmed with gold. I was liked better than I could have wished, and the
princess, who was very obliging, complimented me upon it in the handsomest
manner in the world. The first persons my eyes glanced on were the prince and
the duke, very regularly paying their court to her highness. My confusion was
inexpressible: I was at a loss how to dispose of my looks; the prince was
observing me, and that increased my disorder.

The chase began at last, and the duke contrived means to get near me. When he
came up, I expressed so much uneasiness at his sight, that he withdrew very
respectfully, saying, I hope, then, madam, you will take for done, all the
services I do not render you.

When the sport was over, the company repaired to a country seat, which was
finely illuminated; and, as soon as they arrived, the ladies withdrew to the
apartments prepared for them, in order to refresh themselves, and shift their
dresses. Here, pulling out my handkerchief, I found a letter in my pocket,
without being able to know how it came there; and, just as I was reading it,
the prince stepped in to my chamber. I hid it in a great hurry, but he
perceived my confusion, and said to me, I find, madam, I am troublesome, and
shall therefore withdraw. The time was now come for my evil destiny to prevail
over my life.

When I had changed clothes, I was obliged to go down to the company. How
difficult a matter it is to put on a pleasant air with a bleeding heart! In the
course of the conversation I told the princess I was going down into the
country. She asked me upon what account; I replied, my father was willing to
spend a few weeks of the spring at his seat, and assured her I should carry
with me the most grateful sense of the obligations I lay under to her goodness.
She inquired likewise how far the house might be; and upon my telling her that
it was but two or three leagues off, she had the complaisance to promise to
come down and see me. I received all these marks of distinction as I ought. The
duke was present when I mentioned my journey, and seemed to express a concern.
But as for the prince, he did not appear the whole evening, which gave me much
uneasiness. The company went to cards; there was also a concert in the
drawing room, whither I followed the princess, because I found my account
better with the music: for there I had nothing to do but feel and be silent.
Supper was served up; every thing was in the most magnificent taste; and there
was a grand ball after.

The duke made the most brilliant and graceful appearance in the world at this
entertainment, and I own I found myself possessed with quite new sentiments,
which I perceived very well were those the prince had been so long requiring of
me in his behalf, but which till then I had been utterly unacquainted with.
Though I was very sorry not to see him, because his absence was a sure sign of
his discontent, yet I could not help finding myself more at ease for a moment:
my looks and sentiments had a greater liberty of action, and I saw with sorrow,
though not without a mixture of joy, the most violent passion written in the
duke's eyes. Whenever I happened to be his partner, he was thought to dance
better than usual, and the princess made us repeat together several dances,
which she fancied we performed better than the rest.

In short, he was endeavoring to please, and was, perhaps, very sensible that
he did so.

After the ball was over, I hurried home to my apartment, whither Leonora, who
had been so kind as to keep always with me, also followed. As soon as I saw
her, I ordered my maids to retire, and then she began to tell me, how dearly I
was like to pay for the moment's pleasure I had had. I gave her an account of
all that had passed, but she knew it better than myself, having observed me all
the time. I showed her the letter I had received, and told her how the prince
had surprised me reading it, and that no doubt he suspected it came from the
duke of Praxede. Indeed, answered she, you are to be pitied, madam; but what
can be done for you? We spent part of the night in consulting upon the
different methods I could take, but daylight appearing before we could fix on
any, we went to our beds unresolved.

The prince called upon Leonora betimes in the morning: it is perhaps
ill-mannerly, madam, said he, to come so early to disturb people that go to bed
by daylight. He had, it seems, passed the night on a terrace that lay under my
window, and had seen how late we had sat up together; he knew also all that had
happened at the ball, having been present in disguise. He expressed a lively
and deep concern to Leonora, telling her how he had caught me reading a letter,
which, upon sight of him, I had put up with a disorder that had betrayed me;
and, upon my friend's endeavoring to dissuade him from the notions he had
formed of that letter, he answered, I do not seek to accuse her, and should be
very sorry to have any cause to do it. Alas! far from it: so great was my good
opinion of her sincerity, that she might have attempted any thing upon the
strength of my confidence. -- What then is it you complain of, replied Leonora,
what has she done more than common civility required? (for, as to the letter
affair, she made him believe he was mistaken, and folks in love are easily
deceived) I cannot, answered he, ground either my suspicions, or even my
discontent, on any thing certain; but a secret foreboding disturbs my heart: my
fears are not quieted by her love, and, when she is with the duke, methinks I
see in her eyes a something she never has with me. Leonora was not wanting in
her endeavors to calm those apprehensions. He begged her to obtain leave of my
father to visit me in the country, and assured her at parting, that his
suspicions and uneasinesses on my account should never reach him, and that he
would owe nothing to paternal authority, nor accept of my hand if my heart did
not tender it.

The prince having obtained the liberty he desired, I sat out without daring to
take leave of my father, and under his displeasure I found myself more easy in
the country. Our seat was a noble building, though not in the modern taste:
there was a large park, fine woods, and pleasant water. Nature seemed every
where at liberty, without being forced by art. I was in hopes that the calm
tranquillity that reigned in this place might diffuse itself into my soul: but,
alas! the passions delight in silence, they increase and strengthen by
solitude. I found myself with dispositions till then unknown, and in a disorder
and agitation, which nevertheless had a secret charm.

Leonora often intruded upon my solitary moments to rouse me out of my
reveries, and obligingly reproach me with shunning her. Then, said I, I must
also shun myself, for you are my sole comfort. But the truth is, that all my
time is not sufficient to bestow on what I feel of late -- Your reflections,
answered she, might be better employed on the misfortunes love has in store for
you. I know my advices will be in vain against a growing passion, but, though
useless, I still owe them to you: consider, madam, continued she, that you are
wanting to every thing that is most sacred, to yourself, to your father, and
what is still more, to the most lovely prince in the world, and to the truest
and best proved passion that ever was; and for whom? For one you do not know,
and who will most assuredly render your life miserable. You must not fancy that
all passions carry their excuses with them. -- Here we were interrupted and
parted. I was very sensible she was in the right, but her reason and mine were
both too weak to help me. She was threatening me with misfortunes, and
troubling my life, without effectually arming me against my evil destiny.

I do not know by what enchantment every thing about me served the duke. I
cannot tell whether he had bribed any of my people, but I met with marks of his
passion in every place. Once I found a letter on my toilet; at other times
verses would be offered to my view in the woods and most bye places, whither I
liked to retire. Here is the letter I have spoken of. At first I made a scruple
of unfolding it; and, had it been possible, would have sent it back, whence it
came unopened: but we can hardly deny ourselves a pleasure that presents
itself, and the receiving of which is to be unknown. I therefore opened it, and
read these words.

"I tremble, Mademoiselle, to appear before you, and am under a dread of your
displeasure; yet what makes my crime, ought to be my excuse. -- I cannot
forbear telling you that you have taught me to love, without knowing yourself
those tender sentiments you have taught me. Though, were you to judge of
yourself only by the passion you have inspired in me, you could not be ignorant
that you are the most adorable creature in the world. But by the infinite sense
I have of your worth, methinks I am still placing you at a greater distance
from me. I have a love and respect which you only can inspire, and which no one
but myself is capable of feeling."

The next day as I was going to sit down by a large canal in a grove, I found
this other letter on a seat of green turf, on which I used to rest myself.

"You need not be under any fear on my account, Mademoiselle. The sentiments
you have raised in me have all the warmth of passion, with the innocence of
virtue. I dare glory in the avowing them, and will believe I have no other
merit but what is derived from them. Let the disinterestedness of my affection
plead in its behalf; since there can be no greater proof of love, than to be
more eager to love and to be loved again. For my part, I am rewarded for my
passion by what I feel, and am pleased with the expectation of happier days:
judge, then, madam, if I can ever fail of honoring and respecting you."

Another day this third billet was offered to my view in a closet, whither I
used to retire.

"I pass the days and nights under your walls, and, though I cannot live from
the place that holds my bliss, I know not how to approach; all the ways that
lead to my charmer appear full of difficulties. But even this becomes an
advantage, since finding you, at last, must claim some merit. -- I cannot
return to court; I have not power to discharge my duty there: -- and think,
wherever you are not, I am obliged to no duty but that of regretting your
absence. Much less can I seek for pleasure. Can any be found without you? I
find at least there is none for me in the world but where you are. In you
alone, love has centered all my hopes, my wishes, and my pleasures. -- Will you
not then, through pity, relieve what I suffer through love?"

Thus every thing spoke in his behalf, and was ever reminding me of what I
could not forget. I believed easily the agreeable truths that closed with my
desires. He was by degrees using me to hear him talk of his passion, and
insensibly gaining upon my delicacy and bashfulness, whilst I allowed and
forgave my loving him.

A few days after my arrival in the country, the countess Emilia came to see
me. She was a friend of the family's, and had always expressed a high
friendship for me. She brought with her a very amiable daughter, who, after the
first acquaintance, observing that I was alone, and might be glad of company,
offered very kindly to stay behind with me, if I would but ask her mamma leave.
At any other time I should have been very glad of such an offer, but I was now
so melancholy, and so much taken up with my passion, that, though sometimes I
endeavored to divert my thoughts, I still fell into my old way, and my
tenderness made me believe that I owed myself wholly and entirely to my
sensations of love, and that to deviate from them was no better than an
infidelity. However, I could not well decline asking her of her mother, and
therefore made the proposal, which she readily came into.

I diverted my new companion as well as I could. We soon contracted a
familiarity with one another, and yet she was not open with me, but seemed
rather pensive and taken up with something at heatt. I did not choose to let
her know I perceived it, for fear of giving her uneasiness, nor press to be let
into her secrets, because I was glad her reservedness toward me, gave me a
right of behaving in the same manner to her. She would often be alone, which
pleased me much, as I had thereby the liberty and opportunity of being so too.

Going one day into her apartments, I was greatly surprised to find the duke
with her, and I believe they both perceived the disorder his presence threw me
into. At first I had a great mind to resent it, but contained myself upon
reflection, that, not being acquainted with the secret of my heart, she could
mean no harm in introducing the duke. I could not hinder her from seeing her
friends at my house, and the duke, knowing nothing of what I had suffered upon
his account, could have no notion of disobliging me by a visit to a lady of his
acquaintance. These reasons calmed my resentment -- I made but a short stay
with them, and ran immediately after to Leonora. I told her I had just seen the
duke in my friend's apartment, and what concern it gave me, lest my father and
the prince should think I had an hand in it, begging her to tell me what I had
best do. She knew me too well to suspect any artifice in my conduct. My fears
answered for me; and she knew I could feel, but that was all. She therefore
told me she would wait on my father with an account of the whole of the matter,
and would take his orders how to act, but that she was pretty sure he would
suspect nothing further.

It fell out accordingly. He was persuaded that it was a mere chance accident,
and, that as it was not possible to turn out of doors a young lady of my
friend's quality, so was it likewise impossible to prevent her receiving what
visits she pleased in her apartment; but he desired her never to be one moment
from me. They agreed also that he should now and then take a trip down to us,
to conceal from the world the knowledge of my disgrace with him, and prevent
people's talk about it to my disadvantage.

Leonora's return made me easy as to my father, but I was certain all our
precautions would avail nothing with the prince, and that he would not hearken
to reason like the old gentleman. Going into my room, I found a letter laid
upon a couch, and indeed few days passed without my receiving some, one way or
another. I opened it, and read these words.

"I appear no more at court, Mademoiselle, out of regard for my love. I cannot
help thinking my passion is legible in my eyes, and by looking at me I fancy
every body can discover that you are the person I adore. -- What! must I make a
secret of loving you? The only merit I would boast of is a high sense of your
value, and a respect equal to your worth. -- My sentiments, madam, want only to
be felt, and I words to express them."

Everafter I avoided going into my friend's apartment, but she was fonder of my
company than ever. You shun me, said she, one day, you have found out the
duke's inclination to you, and fancy me deep in some plot against you; but do
me the justice to believe, that though he is very much my friend, I am
incapable of acting any part unworthy of you, or myself. -- But, said I, where
did you get acquainted with this man, for I am sure I have never seen him at
your house? -- I have known him a long while, replied she, and the reason of
your not seeing him was, because he was at the army at the time you visited us.
I became acquainted with him at the marchioness * * *, and shall one day or
another tell you the history of our friendship; but at present give me leave to
inform you, that he feels the strongest passion for you. What part therefore
will you have me act? Will you not take it amiss if I receive his professions
to deliver them to you? Tell me how I can serve you. If this does not please
you, and his love is offensive, I will have nothing more to say to him. My
friend was much too hard for me. She wanted to know the dispositions of my
soul, and people in love are apt to be communicative, for these two sentiments
always go hand in hand. Besides, she was a fitter person to make a confidante
of than Leonora, our ages agreeing better with one another. I therefore
unbosomed my soul, and told her my secret upon honor not to mention a word of
it to the duke, which she promised, and I am willing to believe she has kept
her word with me. I informed her without reserve of all I have related to you:
my story surprised and affected her much, and she gave me new assurances of
doing nothing but what I should think fit.

The next day we took a walk at a small distance from our seat. It was a very
fine place. Whilst we were abroad, prince Camillus came to pay us a visit, but
was told I was gone out. He thought, I suppose, that in the country one was
always to be met with at home, and could not conceive, that having so large and
fine a park, we should go to seek a walk abroad. Yet, had he thought proper, he
might have been satisfied of the truth. If he had but asked the servants, they
could have told him where I was. But, without making the least enquiry, he went
away in a passion, and the next day sent me the following letter.

"Love led me yesterday to your solitude, Mademoiselle, but even Cupid himself
met with a disappointment. I found nothing but a melancholy solitude,
everything that could please was fled with you. However, do not fear that my
complaints shall ever more come to disturb your pleasures. No; I value them as
yours: though I cannot taste any, where you are absent, may you still partake
of a great deal where I am far off; proofs of love become offensive when we are
not in a disposition to make them a ret^^^."

That very evening we took a walk by ourselves; my friend made me vast
protestations of friendship, and spoke with great sensibility of all I had
mentioned to her. Our conversation was long and tender, but at last it grew
late, and we were obliged to return homewards.

As we were walking back to the castle, I heard a noise near me, and was
mightily surprised to find myself stopped by somebody that lay at my feet. I
gave a shriek, upon which a voice, which I soon knew for the duke's, said, --
Do not be frightened, madam, I am no enemy. -- Yes, sir, answered I, you must
be one, cruelly thus to expose me. -- You will not be exposed, replied he; no
body can know I am here, and your reputation is dearer to me than my passion:
but what can I do with the mighty store of love you have inspired me with? -- I
now turned to my friend, and asked whether she had a hand in this piece of
treachery? -- No, madam, answered he for her, she has no manner of share in
what I do, and it is from the innocence and purity of my sentiments alone I
have borrowed this presumption. He then threw himself again at my feet, and
said the most passionate things in the world. I would have got from him and
called my friend, but could not stir, something invisible, unknown, too
prevailing seized my soul, and my legs refused to perform their office.
Fortunately I had not power to speak, and therefore only answered him with my
heart, but my eyes would easily have betrayed their meaning, could he have seen
them. In short, he persuaded me of his passion. Heavens! what did he not say,
and how did it not affect me? But, at last, my friend informing us that
daylight was approaching, and that we must part, he asked leave to return
again the next day. I had not power to deny him, and withdrew in a disorder and
agitation that cannot be expressed.

I passed the remainder of the night awake, and was never taken up with such a
variety of sentiments: for joy, grief, hopes, fear, and remorse, took their
turns, and raised such a storm in my breast, that day appeared before sleep
could approach my eyelids.

I went very early to my friend's apartment, and finding her pensive and
sorrowful, enquired into the reason. I shall be loath to tell it you, answered
she, but yet I cannot betray the confidence you repose in me, and should think
myself wanting in my obligations to you, if I did not acquaint you with the
duke's engagements. What! cried I, has he then placed his affections elsewhere?
Perhaps that is all over, replied she; you are capable of effacing the deepest
impressions; but, however, hear me out if you can: I am going to reveal to you
his secret and my own. -- Sure, said I, it is not you that he is in love with?
-- No, madam, replied she hastily, compose yourself and hear me; for you must
know the bottom, in order to take the course that can fit you best. --

I have known the duke some time. He was somewhat forward in courting an
acquaintance with me, and got one of my relations to introduce him. I was
astonished that a man of his youth, and so taken up with gay pleasures, should
come to seek a person much retired, and who thought more of leading a rational
life, than one diversified with mirth and gaiety. I enquired therefore into his
views, and self-love made me believe, that, not being a bad match as to
fortune, they might relate to me. But I was not long in that error. You know
there is a friendship between madam L * * * and me. She is very amiable. I
suspected his assiduity at our house might be meant for her, and accordingly,
by often talking to him about her, and telling him all the handsome things I
could think of her, I was soon convinced that his fondness was all intended for
that friend. The discovery nettled me a little; I avoided some time enquiring
why, and my heart would fain have spared me an insight into my weakness; but,
as I feared its surprises, I was not deceived, and thought I must apply the
necessary remedies.

At first I made a resolution never to see him more. Alas! it would have proved
more for my satisfaction, had I followed this, than the conduct I afterward
imposed upon myself.

Indeed, fancying I could do still better, I set about wresting his secret from
him, and was even at the advance of the whole expense of the confidence, by
telling him the misfortune I had had to lose the Marquis ***, with whom my
family had entered into some engagements relating to a match between us; how
sensibly I had been affected with the breaking off of the intended alliance;
with what regret I forbid him my doors, when decency and the commands of my
relations would no longer allow of his visits; how much this conduct increased
my passion; and how I found by experience, that severity serves love, and
strengthens the impression. I made him this confidence, with a view of placing
an eternal obstacle between him and my own heart. I likewise gave by this a
pretense and excuse to my sorrow, and ascribed to another, the effects of my
passion for him.

This confidence displeased him; whether it was contrary to his designs, or
that his vanity had been flattered with the belief that my heart inclined to
him; but yet I thought I perceived he had some secret views, and would have it
in his power to attempt me when he should think fit. -- It is pretty much the
way of the men to have some object in reserve, after letting their imaginations
rove, and losing their taste for their present pleasures.

My confidence had quite a contrary effect to what I imagined, for he became
eager and fond. He was inconsolable, as he said, at my having such sentiments
for another; and when I told him, that it took nothing from him, he thought me
guilty of want of delicacy in not understanding there were passions of esteem
infinitely above those of the senses. The truth was, I wanted no other from
him, but the difficulty lay in convincing me that his was of that kind.
Whatever he could say, I did not believe him the more for it, and there were
even some moments when I esteemed him the less on that account. He continued
always in the same strain, and, had I been willing to flatter my self-love, I
might have believed that I had inspired him with a very sublime passion. But
this did not satisfy me; I wanted to come to some conclusion, and fix my
situation by his.

Many ways offered to that end. I was mistress of his secret. He had entrusted
me with his repose, had desired me to direct him; and I could without
treachery, act a part consistent with my interest, by refusing to serve him in
his amor. Another would have taken the opportunity to be revenged of the
preference given to a rival, and nothing was easier than this, for my friend
was timorous; she was afraid of the world and her family; she feared the duke
himself, and I had nothing to do but to indulge her in her own way.

A more worthy conduct, however, presented itself at the same time. I kept off
all the low resentments we women are susceptible of. I examined his case and my
own, and did not find him guilty in feeling for another, what I could have
wished he had felt for me. I thought it was my business to punish myself for a
misplaced affection, by turning it to his advantage, and that my affection
ought to be pure and powerful enough to be assisting in making him more happy
in another. I laid aside all my tenderness, and forgot my own interest, in
order to impose upon myself the most difficult conduct in the world which,
however, I have hitherto been able to keep up to. I fancied, that if he could
be touched by an honorable behavior, I should thereby make a worthy friend of
him; and that, however, if it was all lost upon him, it would not be so for me.
In short, my deluded imagination has served him so well, that it has been able
to persuade me, that nothing would be more worthy of me than to conquer myself.

I therefore set about advancing his interest with my friend, as if on their
happiness the whole of mine had depended. I spoke to lady L*** of the great
passion he had for her. I painted it in the strongest colors, and drew a
picture, sketched by truth, but ornamented by love. My friend was somewhat
prepossessed against him, but I found means to combat her prejudices. I calmed
her fears; I answered for him; I took all upon myself; I touched her heart; I
moved her inclination to tenderness, and relieved her modesty. In short, when
he came to see her, he had nothing to do, but to finsh what I had so well
begun. He found the impression ready made to his hands.

There were, indeed, some moments when I could not help thinking the part I had
acted very much out of character. "I am wanting to every thing, said I; I act
against my own principles; I forget the regard I owe to myself, and know no
other duty, but that of expressing my attachment to him. What a scene is this
for indifferent people to see?" -- Yet when I consulted my heart and affection,
I thought there could be nothing greater than to give him up to another. I
judged of the merit of my conduct by what it cost me. Thus, without regard to
myself, without the least tender concern for my own situation, I have admitted
no thought, but that of effecting his happiness.

There was a time when I hoped to enjoy the sad comfort of seeing him no more:
he seemed to have taken some disgust, and I advised him to break off with my
friend and me. That was less cruel, in my opinion, than the labourious task I
had taken upon me. Indeed I suspected he was at this time in love with madam C
* * * *, but he would not own it.

In the mean while I was attentive to every thing that happened. I watched all
his steps and motions, and was ready to magnify every fault he committed,
through the desire I had of finding him guilty; and indeed I was not in humor
to invent excuses for him.

But, at last, after an eclaircissement, he was reconciled, and became fonder
than ever of my friend. I now found how cutting it was to know the object of
our affections attached to something perfect; yet, far from allowing my
interest to encroach on the justice I owed my friend, my delicacy, and fear of
being wanting to her, increased her merit with me. Ever since they admitted me
into their confidence, I cannot reproach myself with having once thought of
what would have been for my own advantage. All my advice has been sincere, and
has served their interests against my own heart; so that the greatest passion
that ever was, has all along been subservient to friendship. I have thought
only of conquering my inclinations, and punishing myself for a passion, which
it was not in my power to suppress, since the heart involuntarily yields to
impressions.

On a time, the like would fain have persuaded me he had changed his mind, and
was always telling me things very much to my friend's disadvantage. This lost
him my esteem. He redoubled his complaisance to me: when she was present, he
would seem fonder of me, than of her: he offered me a preference which might
have flattered my vanity. He followed me in all places; he grew jealous of
every thing that came near me, and his jealousy was real, for he would have
been very unwilling to lose me. But he conducted a passion and a design alike;
a person less upon her guard might have mistaken the one for the other, but my
mind could see all his faults, though my heart was not yet sensible of them. --

If I had not spoke, during this long narrative, it was because I really had
not power to do it; and my friend, quite intent upon her story, had not taken
notice of the condition I was in all the while. But now, unable to bear any
longer, I gave a shriek, and cried out, -- It is enough. O! tell me no more; --
and with that, the violent constraint I had put upon myself, having quite
exhausted my spirits, I sunk down in a swoon, and was a long while in the arms
of my women without recovering from my fit; but, to my misfortune, they
recalled me at last to life.

Scarce had I opened my eyes, and began to recover my spirits, but a great
noise and bustle was heard about the house, and some of my maids left me to run
and see what it might be. But as they did not return, and the loud cries
continued, I leaned upon the arm of one of them, and staggered toward the
place from whence they proceeded. Just as I got to the hall, I saw four men
bringing in another bathed in his blood, whom, as he turned his head toward
me, I knew to be the prince. This sight almost rivetted me to the ground; but,
making an effort, I moved forwards to follow the mournful spectacle. They laid
him on a couch in the parlour, and I made signs to the servants to run for
help, for I could scarce speak. The prince seeing me, turned his expiring eyes
toward me, and said, -- I have not been able to touch your heart, madam, nor
convince you of my love: I shall, however, die contented, if in my last moments
I can persuade you that no one ever loved you so truly as I have, though a more
happy man puts me in the condition I am now in. -- At this instant the eyes of
all present, who were not a few, flashed upon me with indignation, but I was
yet more hateful to myself than to them; and Leonora, who came running at the
noise, seeing my condition, dragged me away from this dismal sight.

I was led up to my chamber. I begged of her, however, to go and take care of
the prince, and to send away with all expedition for the ablest surgeons that
could be got. They had already taken care of that, and as we were not at a
great distance from town, they were not long in coming. They examined his
wounds, and found them mortal I sent every moment to know his condition, but
could see very well by the looks of my women that there was no hopes of him.

My friend came at last, and, by the grief she expressed, I guessed the
prince's condition. -- It is the duke, said she to me, that has fought him, --
Can you, answered I, be the bearer of such cruel news: -- Why, replied she, you
must be informed of what is become a public talk, that you may be able to
regulate yourself accordingly. -- Though she was in the right, I could not help
thinking her cruel to talk so; but grief is often unjust. I begged her to
return to the prince's assistance, and not to leave him.

I then withdrew to my closet, with one of my women, in whom I confided most,
and, throwing myself on a couch, said, "I have nothing more to do in this
world, and yet am not allowed to bring death to my relief! What a cruelty to be
obliged to support life under such circumstances! -- But, come; I have always
depended upon your attachment to me; follow me. I can no longer endure the
sight of human kind. -- Whither, madam, must we go? replied she. -- No matter
where, answered I, provided I avoid the eyes of all my acquaintance." The girl
endeavored to oppose my design, but to no purpose. I opened a door on the back
stairs that led to the garden, and was going out, when she stopped me, by
telling me how improper it would be to go away with the clothes I had on, and
all my jewels about me, desiring me to stay at least till she had dressed me in
one of her plainest suits. I was persuaded, and bid her make haste, not being
able to tarry a moment longer in this fatal house. "But, will you not wait the
utmost of the prince's fate, resumed she again, and must not that, madam,
regulate your destiny? -- Alas, answered I, do thou not hear the dismal
shrieks of the whole family, too expressive of his not having one moment longer
to live."

Saying these words, I flew down stairs. We passed the garden without meeting
any body, and got out by a back door that opened into a large wood. The day was
beginning to close: I walked some time without uttering a word: shame and fear
sunk all my spirits. At last, quite spent and overcome, I fell to the ground,
and leaned my head on the lap of the woman that attended me. The poor creature
was inconsolable to see me in that condition. She spoke, but I neither
answered, nor hearkened to her. The night grew dark and dismal. Overpowered by
grief and weariness, I fell asleep as I lay, for nature will take care of
herself, and will lose nothing of her dues.

I opened my eyes just as the day began to break, and my misfortunes glaring
afresh with the light, I was filled with horror when I saw them distinctly. I
recalled them all to my mind. I lose an accomplished prince, said I; I have not
loved him, when his passion, meeting with a return of mine, might have made us
happy, and I adore him now I am on the point of losing him! Merciless love
means to revenge him, and make me the object of its most cruel persecutions. --
And by what hand do I lose him? By the hand of a perfidious man, who perhaps,
has never loved me. I have been the victim of his vanity. My life, my
reputation, all is to be enveloped in the odium of guilt. I shall be confounded
with those of my sex, who have forsaken glory and forfeited their honor. What a
heartbreaking story for a father, whose delight and darling I once was? But in
what condition must the prince's mother be, she who lived but for him? Must it
be my fate to involve so many people in my misfortunes? Why do I fly? It would
be too happy for me to be sacrificed to their just resentment." -- And, indeed,
in some moments, I was for going back to offer myself to their fury, but then
again, shame getting the better of my desperate resolution, I could think of
nothing but hiding myself from their eyes, and seeking some forlorn cave where
I might spend the remainder of my days. -- "But after all, said I again to
myself, what is my crime, good God! thou know the bottom of all hearts. An
involuntary passion has entered my soul. I have rejected and opposed its
gratificatications. I never have transgressed my duty nor modesty. What then am
I punished for?"

The young woman that bore me company, was all this while melting into tears.
"Alas, madam, said she, what resolution are you taking? So fair and so young,
what are you not going to expose yourself to? -- Perhaps, replied I, I shall
meet with some friendly villain who will deprive me of a life, which the Deity
orders me to retain as a punishment. No, answered she, you can find no enemies
amongst men: but if you will be ruled by me, I have a sister settled in a small
town not far off; I will conduct you to her; you will not be known, and will be
less disagreeable there, than thus wandering about from place to place."

I took her advice; we set out, and in a little time arrived at the place,
whither she designed to carry me. Her sister received us very kindly; I went
for her friend, as it had been agreed between us; I found them busy in marrying
one of their children. But, on the wedding day, as I did not choose to be seen
by the company, I went out early in the morning, with my companion, under
pretense of taking an airing, and, walking by the edge of a little hill, I saw
a wood. I took a fancy to go into it, and perceiving a hutt, which my friend
told me was an hermitage, I went up to it, and found it open. A shepherd, that
was attending his flock near the place, informed us, that the hermit, who used
to inhabit it, was thought to be lately dead in going his rounds about the
country. Upon this information, I stepped in, and finding it convenient for my
purpose, cried out immediately to my maid, "This is a dwelling kind fortune
offers me; here I am determined to spend the remainder of my sorrowful days." I
have accordingly put my project in execution, and, to this day, ladies, no body
but you have been here to interrupt my solitude and grief.

THE END.

