ESSAY ON AGRICULTURE.

BY F. C. H. B. POELLNITZ.

NEW YORK, PRINTED BY FRANCIS CHILD'S AND JOHN SWAIN. M DCC XC.

ESSAY ON AGRICULTURE,
I HAVE investigated, for several years past, various systems of Husbandry,
with a view to collect what may have a tendency to improve Agriculture.

From a careful perusal of these works, I flatter my self I have been enabled
to improve upon, and render more simple, many of those machines and instruments
of Agriculture, which, in their formation require most labor, time and
expense; and in such a manner as to make them casy, cheap and prompt in their
operations.

However all this may be, and how far I have succeeded in such an undertaking,
I cheerfully submit in this essay, to the judgment of the impartial public of
America.

In the mean time I beg leave to apologize, that I lay before them, and perhaps
under the eye of gentlemen of the learned and distinguished societies of arts
and sciences in the Commonwealth, thoughts not expressed with that energy that
the subject requires: Considering, moreover, that I write in a language foreign
to me, I hope from their known liberality, that allowance will be made for
deficiency in general, and that they will judge facts, independent of
expressions.

Therefore, sensible as I am of my inadequate abilities, I have comprised in as
few words as I am able, the description, the special use, and the effect, of
four instruments of Husbandry; from the use of which it appears to me will
arise an improvement in Agriculture.

I. A SOWING PLOUGH, II. A HORSE HOE, III. A THRESHING MILL, IV. A RIPPLING
CART.
For a particular description of those four implements, a geometrical one would
be the best, but as it requires expensive plates I have therefore limited
myself to four imperfect sketches, and added to it what words can convey, to
give an idea of the whole.

CHAP. I.
THE SOWING PLOUGH.
THIS machine has occupied the attention of mathematicians, farmers and
mechanics, above a century; it has undergone many shapes, simple and
complicated, but not altogether answering their proposed end: It is needless
however to recite the several unsuccessful attempts, be they what they may, the
one in my possession, I conceive answers all the necessary purposes.

The Sowing Plough, plate I. is the lately improved one by the Rev. James Cook,
in London. The whole is a kind of a cart with two shafts, in which a horse or
ox is put; behind these shafts is a box, A. containing the sowing grains, at
the end of which is a cylinder, B. connected by a cog-wheel C. with the wheels
of the cart, D. it moves nearly as swift as the horse: This cylinder has spoons
fastened to it, which dip constantly into the seed box, and drop what they
catch into five funnels E.; five coulters F. cut the furrows; behind each
coulter and the pipe of the funnels, stands a small harrow, G. The imperfection
of the drawing is the cause that the plate shows but one coulter, one funnel,
and one harrow.
so that when the coulters open the earth, the seed drops out of the spoons
into the funnels, which convey them into the furrows, and the harrows fill the
furrows up with ground.

When at the end of the field the horse is to be turned, by lifting the lever
H. up, the connection of the cog-wheel with the cylinder is interrupted, and
there is no distribution of the seed until the lover is again lowered.

On this machine is another lever I. which compels the coulters to cut the
furrows at any required depth; it is charged with a weight, K. as it stands in
this plate, it presses the coulters in the ground to cut deep furrows, and when
the lever is moved forward toward the shafts, and the weight placed there,
then it lists the coulters out of the ground, and they cut shallow furrows.

CHAP. II.
THE HORSE HOE,
IS like the former, not a new invention. Various shapes have been given to
this machinery; the last improvement it received, was in London, by William
Winlaw, guardian to the machines of the society of arts; from him I procured
one, and since I have seen an opportunity to change its construction, so as to
make it stronger, and more simple, in the form as represented in plate II, fig.
I, 2, and 3.

In this, A. is the iron hoop on which the horse draws. B. are two bars of iron
in which the axis of the wheel C. and the hoop A. are fastened. The regulator
is D. by which the plough is set shallow or deep. E. is the beam. F. a single
handle. G. a cross bar of iron, in which the two back coulters H. are fastened,
each by a finger nut I. The foremost coulter K. is fastened in the beam, and in
a triangular iron plate L. N. M. fig. 2, Two long shaped iron mould boards are
O. and P. those and the foremost triangular one also marked L. N. M. in fig. 1,
can either partially or all of them be taken off; and when all the mould boards
are taken away, then the hoe becomes a skimmer, see fig. 2. In this Q. and R.
are two branches movable like scissors, fitted to be set close or wide apart;
and a small triangular rectangular mould board S. fig. 3, closes the
description of the machine.

CHAP. III.
THE THRESHING MILL.
THIS Instrument was invented in 1786, by Wm. Winlaw. I then bought one. Since
my return to America I have noticed its defects; and they were so great, that
the use of this capital instrument is also now in England laid aside, on
account of its being soon out of order, and incapable of repair.

However, with the help of the ingenious hands who work in the casting-furnace
of Messrs. P. Curtenius and Co. this instrument is now brought to answer its
design perfectly well, and will be found durable.

The improved construction is the following, (see Plate III.) Two hollow and
truncated pyramidical Cones are of cast iron, one of a large, and the other of
a small diameter; the largest, A. stands fastened in a wooden frame, and is cut
inside in grinders like a female screw; the smaller Cone, B. goes easily into
the large one, and has its outside cut in grinders -- it operates as a male
screw; this small inner Cone is fastened on an iron axis, C. which passes
through his center, terminating in a pin, on which it rests and moves, besides
the circular motion of the smaller Cone, by a screw, D. which catches the pin
of his axis, C. it is also moveable up and downwards -- this movement sets the
intervals between it, and the larger Cone apart, in a proportional diameter to
the kernels of the grain.

Above the small Cone the axis C. is connected with an iron cog-wheel E. and
with a pinion F. fastened to a separate small axis, at the end of which stands
a large iron fly H. which sets all in action; a wooden hopper I. is shaken by
the fly, and by three springs, which accelerate or lessen the motion of the
hopper at pleasure.

To prevent the fly from turning the wrong side, a stopper, K. has been applied
to the pinion.

Finally, the machine may with some propriety be compared to an improved
coffee-mill; and it is probable that such an engine has furnished the idea to
the artist.

CHAP. IV.
THE RIPPLING CART.
THE origin of this implement dates from the remotest antiquity: Pliny, hist.
not. chap. 30, edit. Basil, 1535; and Palladius, lib. 7, tit. 2, edit.
Commelin, 1595, record that the ancient Gauls reaped their harvest with an ox
put to a cart; but so imperfect is their account, that very little information
is got by it: However it was taken into consideration by the society of arts,
manufactures and commerce in London, and gentlemen of a mechanical turn were
desired to digest the matter, and to send their plans. The one made in 1785, by
William Pit, Esquire. of Pendeford, was approved, and I believe that the gold
medal, or 301. sterling, as a premium offered for that purpose by the society,
was given to that gentleman; This plan I procured, and have simplified as it
stands in plate IV,

The horse or ox pushes the cart forward, as if it was a wheelbarrow; it rests
on an iron axletree: To both wheels A. a wooden shive B. of a large diameter is
fastened, and between the shive on the knobs of the wheels a wooden lever C. is
moveable; by means of two gages D. provided with bolts and finger nuts, those
levers can be set high or low. E. is a cylinder of wood, of four feet in
length, through the center of which passes an iron axis, which connects it on
both sides with the end of the levers in which it moves: This cylinder is armed
with steel combs, F. terminating in sharp edges, which run in length parallel
over its circumference, on both sides is fastened to it a wooden shive, G. of a
small diameter, connected by a rope with the large shive on the wheels; a small
pully, H. stiffens the rope, to set the cylinder in a steady motion.

A separate piece of the cart I. is connected with the back part by hinges, and
a bar, K. which will give to it more or less declivity, in proportion to the
central height of the cylinder.

CHAP. V.
THE SPECIAL USE OF THE BEFORE DESCRIBED IMPLEMENTS.
IN this explanation I shall avoid as before, all prolixity, as I take it for
granted that the majority of my readers are better acquainted with agricultural
operations than myself.

1st. The Sowing-Plough makes the furrows for the reception of the seed at any
proper depth, conveys it into the ground, and harrows under, all in one
operation, it will sow broad cast, single, double and triple rows at any
intervals; it sows from the bean to the clover, and all the intermediate sizes
of grain inclusive, and garden seeds also, with great regularity; some of the
most difficult ones, as carrots, and the prickly spinnage, mixed with sawdust
slightly moistened, are sowed thick or thin, easily and with precision; thus
one diffuses a small parcel of seed over a great extent of ground, nay, even by
the weight one acre will receive no more of the same kind of seed than the
other. By taking a cylinder with smaller or larger spoons, the proportioning
the quantity to the nature of the seed or soil is also obtained, and likewise
by stopping part of the spoons up with beeswax.

One man and one horse performs the business, and the machine will of course
sow more than the best sower can do with the hand.

2d. The Horse Hoe either cuts drains, when all the mould boards are adapted to
it, or hills up the ground toward the stem of the plants, when one of the long
mould boards, and the small triangular one is left on; or cuts part of their
side roots perpendicularly off, when one of the moveable scissors is set
inwards, parallel with the foremost coulter, and in the place of the triangular
mould board, the triangular rectangular one; or it will skim the earth
horizontally, when all the mould boards are taken away.

In light ground one horse will do all this; but in clay for draining or
hilling up, two will be necessary, the one before the other.

3d. The Mill requires, preparatory to threshing, that the ears of wheat,
barley or rye, be cut off from the straw; the Rippling Cart is constructed for
that purpose, of which hereafter a proper account will be given.

Two men would be required to perform this kind of threshing; however, the work
is so trifling that two lads or two women will do it; one turns the fly, which
moves easily, the other feeds the hopper with ears, and sweeps the grain,
together with its husks, from under the mill, so that the quantity of produce
may not obstruct the motion of the smaller cone.

4th. The use of the Rippling Cart demands very little explanation: A boy only
will be required to gather the ears; he stands inside the back part of the
cart, with a rake in his hand, commands the horse or oxen to go forward, and
rakes the ears which the cylinder throws in the forepart of the cart, backwards.

CHAP. VI.
THE EFFECT OF THOSE FOUR IMPLEMENTS OF HUSBANDRY.
AS I shall often cast a retrospective view to what has been said, I beg to be
indulged in repetitions.

The usefulness of the Sowing Plough would alone be admitted, when the
regularity with which it sows is considered: But other considerations speak
still more forcibly in its favor. By giving reasonable intervals between the
rows of plants of any kind, the horse hoe can come between to destroy weeds;
and as also the hoe cuts the side roots perpendicularly off, this amputation is
beneficial to the plants, as there is pretty generally a provision in nature,
that for one root cut, several new ones spring out of the stump, extend
themselves into the loosened ground, and carry more nourishment to the mother
trunk; which by this operation will increase, and give abundant, but above all,
better fruits than in the common way.

From those intervals thus cultivated, arises this benefit, that the ground is
in order for the next year; then you shift your rows, and sow in the places
which were intervals the year before. The utility of this cultivation is very
extensive; to me it appears unobjectionable, In corroboration of this, I have
ground cultivated in this manner; this, and the described machines, and others
not mentioned, can be seen at my little farm. Should any gentleman think it
worth his while to honor me with his call, every information in my power will
be at his command.
yet as it seems to overthrow the old practice, which has its peculiar
advantages, I am diffident to enlarge upon the subject of sowing wheat, rye,
barley or oats, in rows, as this admits of exceptions, and to make these
distinctions would lead me beyond my plan, without removing the fear that I had
expressed left I should not be sufficiently understood; and the more so as the
sowing plough has also great merit in broad cast sowing.

In future I will make mention but of wheat alone, as being one of the richest
produces of the farmer, and beyond doubt the most precious to society. It has
been proved that half the quantity ordinarily used by broad cast hand sowing,
is not only sufficient for this machine, but, that it will even yield a better
crop; as sowing regularly, at equal depths under furrow, where the wheat is
secured, and out of the reach of birds in its first stage of vegetation.

The following experiments done in England in 1785, and in 1786, will be
specially acceptable. H. Cecil, Esquire. (Hanbury-Hall, near Droitwich,
Worcestershire) reapt wheat by the machine, five bushels per statue acre more
than by hand sowing; the calculation is made from two year's experiment.
Colonel Wilson Didlington, near Stoke, Norfolk, reapt wheat sown by the
machine, exactly half as much more as by broad cast hand sowing.

I will not swell this essay by a catalogue of experiments, though ascertained
by respectable gentlemen, but close the information by this -- That the machine
cost me in England fifteen pounds sterling; however, this is a patent price and
I am of opinion that for fifteen pounds, New York currency, it can be made
here, with a good profit to the manufacturers; as the chief part is cast iron,
it will be done as well in Messrs. P. Curtenius, and Co's. furnace, and the
wooden part in no less perfection, by Mr. H. Brevoort in the Bowery. On any
tolerable farm, the costs at this rate will be saved in one year on the savings
alone, without reckoning the better crop.

Though I have already spoken at large of the horse hoe, I must still add, that
where intervals are kept, the effect of this machine is great; the plants are
cultivated from the moment they spring out of the ground, until they are
gathered; it perfectly reduces the field and the garden culture under one head,
(plants with running vines only excepted.) One man with change of horses,
cleans the weeds from the intervals between the plants in one day, on six acres
of ground and more, as nicely as a gardener would do with hoe or spade; how
many gardeners might be required, to perform this work, I cannot tell; yet by
the horse hoe much work will be done in a short time, with small cost and
trouble, and not the weeds alone, but likewise many of the insects and their
breed, will be destroyed.

The horse-hoe has already been made here; the iron work at Mr. John Youle's,
Water-street, and the wooden part at Mr. Brevoort's, on reason able terms.

From this subject I step over to consider the effects of the Threshing Mill
and Rippling Cart; but as the rippling the ears from the straw is a preparatory
operation for the threshing mill, I will in this place speak first of the (...)
obtained by this implement.

It is no small consideration of (...) farmer, to know where he will find hand
(...) wheat, and when it is cut it must lay to (...) arises then, where he
shall find for (...) those hands to take it in, and often (...) weather
intervenes and spoils his harvest. -- The costs are no less than in the former
article, the chief objects of his care.

Those difficulties are removed by the rippling cart, because oxen or horses
only an required to gather the ears; the waste, it there is any, can be but
trifling; the costs are inconsiderable in comparison with those of the old
method; the straw is either moved or burned on the field, where it will equally
benefit the ground as manure, and by its fire destroy insects: whilst by
providing the boy who manages the whole, with bags, he can fill and drop them
at the end of the field, and thus alone perform the work of many hands, in a
short space of time.

I am sorry I cannot speak with sufficient ground of the quantity this machine
will reap; the next harvest will be required to ascertain this with precision.
If I have been premature in the communication of this useful implement, it is
out of zeal for the service of the public: I hope that the motive will plead
for my hurry; in general I have not the smallest doubt of its answering the
proposed end. But supposing the worst, should this my present plan be
defective, I pledge myself to bring the machine to the nicest perfection, and
to give immediate notice of it in the newspapers or monthly reviews.

However, to give for the present the probable quantity of its reaping by
guess, I say an ox in the long harvest days will go 20 miles, or thereabouts;
this, by changing others in his place, may be the distance the cart can be
pushed by that animal: the rippling cylinder cuts from the field a slice of
ears of four feet wide, with the same swiftness of the step of the animal; this
establishes, that four feet broad of ears, and 20 miles in length, is the
possible quantity that the cart can cut in one day.

But as defalcation must be made, for turning about, filling the bags, and
sharpening the knives of the combs, less than the said proportion will be the
case; but upon the whole, there will remain an expeditious reaping, without
example in our times.

The price of such a machine will not be an exorbitant one; it is in hands to
be made by Mr. You Will and Mr. Brevoort, and notice will be given of its amount.

The ears are reaped in manner as before mentioned, and threshed as explained
in Chap. V. yet one might expose them under a shed, or in the granary to the
draught of air, well stirred about; and this I suppose will be no detriment;
though I have threshed barley with the old machine, only cut 24 hours from the
ground, still soft and milky, yet it came well out, not any of the kernels
being crushed: At this experiment Mr. Brevoort was present.

To ascertain the powers of the new improved mill, the following experiment was
made with ears of bearded wheat. On the 22d of January 1790, two boys, the one
of thirteen, the other of twelve years of age, performed the threshing; the
time was exactly minuted, and they threshed at the rate of two bushels clean
wheat per hour; the wheat was full dry, but much damaged by mice.

The first experiment did not answer my expectation, however, as by chance I
observed the cause, I was enabled to correct the fault. On Feb. the 9th, his
Excellency Governor Clinton, the Honorable Mr. Burke, one of the members from
South Carolina, in the House of Representatives of the United States, and
several members of the Legislature of this State, desirous to see the Threshing
machine at work, honored me with their presence; the result was, that it
threshed then, at the rate of three bushels good measure, in one hour. The
wheat was of the same kind, and a remnant of that made use of in the first
experiment; it was also thresh'd by the same hands.

I would in this place observe, that it is unnecessary to keep the wheat till
perfectly dry; on the contrary, it may be threshed with this machine as it
comes from the field; and as the work is not fatiguing, it follows, that in the
long harvest days, twelve hours may be allowed for it; there will then be,
according to the last improvement made in the construction of the mill,
ascertained the 9th of February, thirty-six bushels of wheat clean threshed by
two lads in one day.

When it is considered that wheat is never more liable to damage from mice,
than when laying in the field or barn -- that none is left in the straw -- that
none flies off as when threshed out with flails, and that very few kernels are
crushed by the mill, it will be but a moderate computation, to say, that
compared to the old method, there is by this way of threshing ten per cent.
savings, independent of the other advantages arising from it.

The original mill I bought in the first stage of its invention, for twenty
pounds sterling, afterward Mr. Winlaw sold them for fifteen, and now he sells
no more.

The new improved mill costs, the iron work in the furnace, L. 12 7 10; the
wooden frame, the axletree of the cone, some small articles of forged iron, and
the setting up the whole will be done by Mr. Brevoort, for L. 7; thus the
improved mill will cost but L. 19 7 10, New York currency.

The original mill I have chiefly cut up to make a model out of it, after which
the new one is made of cast iron; and notwithstanding the high price of the old
mill, and the great expense it occasioned to make it into a model, I have left
this model for the service of the public in the casting furnace of Messrs. P.
Curtenius, and Co.

Considering what has been said, I proceed to sum up and make appear, that even
the threshing mill and rippling cart may equally operate as an improvement in
agriculture.

Both operations, reaping and threshing, have been among the most laborious
talks the farmer had to perform, and now from men's work, it is lowered to the
capacity of a few women or boys; from considerable expenses this business
occasioned, it is reduced to small costs. Time, which is so precious to the
husbandman, of which so much is spent, is by these machines greatly abridged,
and in lieu of a tedious work, an encouraging one arises from their use. --
Leisure takes the place of hurry, and profit that of loss; -- the consequence
must be, PLENTY.

Hitherto the farmer was rather averse to sowing a large quantity of wheat; the
time to gather it, the hands, the expenses, large barns, all this he had
anxiously to calculate. Having gained so much time on his harvest, and on his
threshing, he may apply it with success to plough up his estate: in lieu of
barns, he wants but sheds and granaries; at most a month after harvest he will
bring his wheat to the market -- his trouble and expenses being lessened, he
will sell cheaper; and the merchant has a sure market for it in all countries
where either despotic or mismanaged governments prevent the increase of
agriculture.

The effect of those machines upon the price of bread, is to society of the
highest moment. Excuse me then, reader, should I give way even to enthusiasm,
and deviate from the conduct I had prescribed to myself. And I will on this
subject detect erroneous arguments in all their shelters.

In the year 1788, I paid for a barrel of rye flour 14 shillings this currency,
and in 1789, even four months after harvest, I paid for the same quantity L. 1:
8; the cause of those prices may be various, but commonly for about three
months after harvest we pay at rates not adequate to the produce of the year.
-- The chief reason seems to be that the farmer cannot lower the price of
bread, by bringing his grain earlier to market; though the market prices are
established by quantity, demand and competition; yet the real value of things
is previous to the market price, established by agriculture.

Consequently those machines will annihilate the enormous fluctuation of cent.
per cent. and ensure shortly after harvest the price of the bread in proportion
to the quantity which has been raised; in proportion to the greater quantity
they collect, in proportion to the smaller expenses they occasion, and in
proportion to the greater extent of ground they have enabled the farmer to sow.

In favorable years, the quantity of grain will make men of property store up
wheat, and in lieu of a hurtful monopoly, this will be a propitious one, it
will nearly establish an equal price of bread in less favorable years.

It will be said, to stony, boggy and mountainous land, those implements before
mentioned are useless, to this objection I answer, before we can expect great
benefits from agriculture, the coarser implements ought to do their business:
It is proper that stones should be removed, bogs drained and converted into
meadows, uneven ground levelled, and mountains left to their natural
destination for wood and pasture; the benefits arising from the use of those
machines, will hereafter pay abundantly for the work.

It may also be said, how can farmer of a small tract, and little property,
find the ready money to buy a rippling cart, and a threshing mill; and will
those inventions not occasion his ruin, by producing a disproportion in the
prices of his grain, to those of the wealthy farmer, who can purchase all the
machines.

Was the remedy not easy, the evil would be important: Though various are the
means of redress, I shall mention but two: --

Five, six or more neighbors, may join in the purchase the rippling cart is
known to be moveable; the threshing mill is 680 weight only; it can be
constructed on a cart, which one horse can draw from one farm to another; the
business of all will then stand nearly on an equal scale. Or can there not be
husbandry implements to hire as well as hack coaches, or hack sleds? I think
there might with great propriety.

I will not admit the objection made in general to machines calculated to
abridge manual labor -- "That they take the bread out of the mouth of the
journeyman." Though this argument is a wrong one, and easily refuted in any
country, yet it would be twice as erroneous were it admitted in this western
world, where hands are wanting in all quarters: Besides, when machines increase
the quantity, and lower the price of bread, I think it would be doing an injury
to the understanding of my readers, were I to dwell any longer upon the subject.

Here I beg leave to mention, that in the year 1784, the Bath Society of
Agriculture voted a silver cup of five guinea's worth to Mr. Thomas Robins, for
ploughing four hundred and fortytwo acres of land in one year, with a pair of
horses only, without a special driver, in Arthur Young, Esquire's most valuable
works, (see Annals of Agriculture, vol. 3, p. 50.) This instance shows what the
hands of Freemen can do.

And again, the four implements will enable to pay (with an increased patriotic
pleasure for the protection of liberty and property, fairly ensured by our
excellent laws and constitution) the land tax, which will no doubt appear to
the freemen of enlightened America, to be of all the taxes the most rational
one; as it will also by such exertions become the burden least felt.

I come now to a period which I rather wished to leave untouched; but, as to
what is slated, an important objection is to be made: It may be asked, where
shall we get dung to sow a larger quantity of wheat? This subdues my
reluctance, and enforces the display of a theory.

In the dark, as we are in general, about the means of nature, there is now and
then a glimpse of light which shines in our eyes, and will guide us to some
discovery! One great man, by seeing a pear drop from a tree, discovered the
laws of gravitation; another no less renowned, by seeing a kite, the plaything
of children, fly, conceived from it, and executed to command the thunder of
heaven: So will often a trifle be seized by men of superior genius, and they
will make it the basis for instruction to mankind.

But the enquiry is to be, how Nature has produced wheat? Was there a previous
dunghill, or is it by means of dung the produce of man's industry? A smile will
be the answer; NO will be the result of the question.

What are then the laws, whereby to all appearance nature fructifies the earth,
and produces plants of every kind? 'Till convinced of error, by arguments
grounded on physical and chemical experiments, I will be bold to say, that
though there may be various concurrent ones, nevertheless, as simple laws are
commonly the promoters, those which I will mention stand probably foremost in
rank.

I say, the ^^^^rence of air, with all its different character and
vicissitudes, the sun or light, the mixture of earths carried on by strong
rains and overflow of waters, are the laws and vehicles of vegetation.

How far it is in man's power to apply these principles to agriculture, I shall
cursorily consider; and in this, as well as in what I have said in the former
paragraph, I am warranted, by what the learned have proved by experimental
philosophy, and by what I have been taught by my own small experience.

John Tull was the first who went off from the beaten tract, and put new rules
of agriculture in practice; his system was in part erroneous, thought part of
it entitles him to our grateful remembrance. John Tull was laughed at, so was
Christopher Columbus, till facts gave credit to his discovery, and proclaimed
his merit. But, without going into discussions of old systems, or in all the
quotations of new ones, I will come to the point.

By deep and frequent plowing, we expose the surface of the earth to more
light, and to all the influences of air; hereby we help the operation of nature
in that case. By mixing our soil with soils of different qualities, we obtain
what nature does by rains, and overflow of waters: By those manuductions, art
improves, facilitates, and amplifies the means of nature to procure vegetation,
and thus wheat may be raised in any quantity.

I mean not to detract from the use of dung; patrified animal and vegetable
bodies, accumulated in our dung-hills, are ^^^^ul accessories to vegetation:
but is the surface of (...) ^^th not also a composition of those ingredients,
though therein contained, no doubt for the best, with other mixtures. Dung
gives a strong additional heat, and some plants will not thrive without; but
wheat can be raised independent of a dunghill.

I go farther and say, that sowing wheat upon fresh dunged land is prejudicial.
-- Commonly I use no dung to my wheat, but only on a previous summer fallow;
and I call a summer fallow land well dunged early in the spring, and sown in
with turnips, cabbages, carrots, beans, peace, lentils, parsnips, potatoes,
flax, hemp or early corn, on this I sow wheat in the fall with success, and so
avoid smut, numbers of weeds and insects promoted and fostered by fresh dung.

Finally, I beg leave to mention an axiom easily acknowledged, that when we
lessen our expenses, we increase our riches. -- But in what has been shown, the
consequence is more extensive; because, when we are enabled to raise a greater
quantity of bread, the benefits of society at large become by it as important
as our own.

Resuming the whole, I conceive that I have shown that any quantity of wheat
may be raised without dung, without distress for reaping, threshing, barns, or
want of hands, and that great costs for laborers may be no longer the object of
concern.

To consider the influence a thus improved agriculture is to have on commerce,
population, arts, manufactures, and on the general wealth and happiness of
society, are speculations not of my province.

(...), though what I have investigated is I believe of a much ampler nature,
nevertheless, here I shall drop the pen, as both the scope of this essay, and
inability, will not permit me to extend the matter. Happy shall I think myself,
if any thing contained in the foregoing lines is thought useful to the public;
and may it receive improvement by abler hands than mine.

THE END.



