REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE, ON THE SUBJECT OF ESTABLISHING A UNIFORMITY
IN THE WEIGHTS, MEASURES AND COINS OF THE UNITED STATES.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY FRANCIS CHILD'S AND JOHN SWAIN. MDCCXC.

NEW YORK, July 4, 1790. SIR,
IN obedience to the order of the House of Representatives, of January 15th, I
have now the honor to enclose you a REPORT on the subject of MEASURES, WEIGHTS,
and COINS. The length of time which intervened between the date of the order
and my arrival in this city, prevented my receiving it till the 15th of April;
and an illness which followed soon after, added, unavoidably, some weeks to the
delay; so that it was not till about the 20th of May that I was able to finish
the Report. A desire to lessen the number if its imperfections, induced me
still to withhold it awhile, till, on the 15th of June, came to my hands, from
Paris, a printed copy of a proposition made by the Bishop of AUTUN, to the
National Assembly of France, on the subject of Weights and Measures; and three
days afterward I received through the channel of the public papers, the speech
of Sir JOHN RIGGS MILLER, of April 13th, in the British House of Commons, on
the same subject. In the report which I had prepared, and was then about to
give in, I had proposed the latitude of 38, as that which should fix our
standard, because it was the medium latitude of the United States; but the
proposition before the National Assembly of France, to take that of 45 as being
a middle term between the Equator and both Poles, and a term which might
consequently unite the nations of both hemispheres, appeared to me so well
chosen, and so just, that I did not hesitate a moment to prefer it to that of
38. It became necessary of course to reform all my calculations to that
standard; an operation which has been retarded by my other occupations.

These circumstances will, I hope, apologize for the delay which has attended
the execution of the order of the House: And, perhaps, a disposition on their
part, to have due regard to the proceedings of other nations, engaged on the
same subject, may induce them still to defer deciding ultimately on it till
their next session. Should this be the case, and should any new matter occur in
the mean time, I shall think it my duty to communicate it to the House, as
supplemental to the present Report.

I have the Honor to be, With Sentiments of the most profound Respect, SIR,
Your most obedient, and Most humble Servant, Thomas Jefferson.

The SPEAKER of the House of Representatives.
In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES of the United States. FRIDAY, the 15th of
January, 1790.
ORDERED,

THAT it be referred to the Secretary of State to prepare and report to this
House a proper Plan or Plans for establishing Uniformity in the Currency,
Weights and Measures of the United States.

Extract from the Journal, JOHN BECKLEY, Clerk.

The SECRETARY OF STATE, to whom was referred, by the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
to prepare and report a proper Plan or Plans for establishing Uniformity in the
CURRENCY, WEIGHTS and MEASURES of the United States, in obedience thereto,
makes the following REPORT:
TO obtain uniformity in Measures, Weights and Coins, it is necessary to find
some measure of invariable length, with which, as a standard, they may be
compared.

There exists not in nature as far as has been hitherto observed, a single
subject or species of subject, accessible to man, which presents one constant
and uniform dimension.

The globe of the earth itself, indeed, might be considered as invariable in
all its dimensions, and that its circumference would furnish an invariable
measure; but no one of its circles, great or small, is accessible to
admeasurement through all its parts; and the various trials to measure definite
portions of them, have been of such various result, as to show there is no
dependence on that operation for certainty.

MATTER then, by its mere extension, furnishing nothing invariable, its MOTION
is the only remaining resource.

The motion of the earth round its axis, though not absolutely uniform and
invariable, may be considered as such for (...) ^uman purpose. It is measured
obviously, but unequally, by the departure of a given meridian from the sun,
and its return to it, constituting a solar day. Throwing together the
inequalities of solar days, a mean interval, or day, has been found, and
divided, by very general consent, into 86,400 equal parts.

A Pendulum, vibrating freely, in small and equal area, may be so adjusted in
its length, as, by its vibrations, to make this division of the earth's motion
into 86,400 equal parts, called seconds of mean time.

Such a Pendulum then, becomes itself a measure of determinate length, to which
all others may be referred, as to a standard.

But even the Pendulum is not without its uncertainties.

1. The difficulty of ascertaining, in practice, its center of oscillation, as
depending on the form of the bob, and its distance from the point of
suspension; the effect of the weight of the suspending wire toward displacing
the center of oscillation; that center being seated within the body of the bob,
and therefore inaccessible to the measure, are sources of considerable
uncertainty.

2. Both theory and experience prove, that to preserve its isochronism, it must
be shorter toward the equator, and longer toward the poles.

3. The height of the situation above the common level, as being an increment
to the radius of the earth, diminishes the length of the Pendulum.

4. The pendulum being made of metal, as is best, it varies its length with the
variations in the temperature of the atmosphere.

5. To continue small and equal vibrations, through a sufficient length of
time, and to count these vibrations, machinery and a power are necessary, which
may exert a small, but constant effort to renew the waste of motion: And the
difficulty is, so to apply these, as that they shall neither retard nor
accelerate the vibrations.

1. In order to avoid the uncertainties which respect the center of
oscillation, it has been proposed by Mr. Leslie, an ingenious artist of
Philadelphia, to substitute, for the pendulum, an uniform cylindrical rod,
without a bob.

Could the diameter of such a rod be infinitely small, the center of
oscillation would be exactly at two thirds of the whole length, measured from
the point of suspension. Giving it a diameter which shall render it
sufficiently inflexible, the center will be displaced, indeed; but, in a second
rod not the (1.) 600,000th part of its length, and not the hundredth part as
much as in a second pendulum, with a spherical bob of proper diameter. This
displacement is so infinitely minute then, that we may consider the center of
oscillation, for all practical purposes, as residing at two thirds of the
length, from the center of suspension. The distance between these two centers
might be easily and accurately ascertained in practice. But the whole rod is
better for a standard, than any portion of it, because sensibly defined at both
its extremities.

2. The uncertainty arising from the difference of length requisite for the
second pendulum, or the second rod, in different latitudes, may be avoided by
fixing on some one latitude, to which our standard shall refer. That of 38, as
being the middle latitude of the United States, might seem the most convenient,
were we to consider ourselves alone; but connected with other nations by
commerce and science, it is better to fix on that parallel which bids fairest
to be adopted by them also. The 45th, as being the middle term between the
equator and pole, has been heretofore proposed in Europe; and the proposition
has been lately renewed there, under circumstances which may very possibly give
it some effect. This parallel is distinguished with us also, as forming our
principal northern boundary. Let the completion of the 45th degree, then, give
the standard for our union, with the hope that it may become a line of union
with the rest of the world.

The difference between the second rod for 45 of latitude, and that for 31, our
other extreme, is to be examined.

The second pendulum for 45 of latitude, according to Sir Isaac Newton's
computation, must be of (2.) 39.14912 inches English measure; and a rod, to
vibrate in the same time, must be of the same length between the centers of
suspension and oscillation, and consequently its whole length 58.7 (or more
exactly 58.72368) inches. This is longer than the rod which shall vibrate
seconds in 31 of latitude, by about 1/670 part of its whole length; a
difference so minute that it might be neglected, as insensible, for the common
purposes of life: But in cases requiring perfect exactness, the second rod,
found by trial of its vibrations in any part of the United States, may be
corrected by computation for the (3.) latitude of the place, and so brought
exactly to the standard of 45.

3. By making the experiment in the level of the ocean, the difference will be
avoided, which a higher position might occasion.

4. The expansion and contraction of the rod with the change of temperature, is
the fourth source of uncertainty before mentioned. According to the high
authority so often quoted, an iron rod, of given length, may vary, between
summer and winter, in temperate latitudes, and in the common exposure of house
clocks, from 1/1728 to 1/2592 of its whole length, which, in a rod of 58.7
inches, will be from about two to three hundredths of an inch. This may be
avoided by adjusting and preserving the standard in a cellar, or other place,
the temperature of which never varies. Iron is named for this purpose, because
the least expansible of the metals.

5. The practical difficulty resulting from the effect of the machinery and
moving power, is very inconsiderable in the present state of the arts; and, in
their progress toward perfection, will become less and less. To estimate and
obviate this, will be the artist's province. It is as nothing when compared
with the sources of inaccuracy hitherto attending measures.

Before quitting the subject of the inconveniences, some of which attend the
pendulum alone, others both the pendulum and rod, it must be added that the rod
would have an accidental, but very precious advantage over the pendulum in this
country, in the event of our fixing the foot at the nearest aliquot part of
either; for the difference between the common foot and those so to be deduced,
would be three times greater in the case of the pendulum, than in that of the
rod.

Let the standard of measure then be an uniform cylindrical rod of iron, of
such length, as, in latitude 45, in the level of the ocean, and in a cellar, or
other place, the temperature of which does not vary through the year, shall
perform its vibrations, in small and equal ares, in one second of mean time.

A standard of invariable length being thus obtained, we may proceed to
identify, by that, the Measures, Weights and Coins of the United States: But
here a doubt presents itself, as to the extent of the reformation meditated by
the House of Representatives. The experiment made by Congress in the year one
thousand seven hundred and eighty-six, by declaring that there should be one
money of account and payment through the United States, and that its parts and
multiples should be in a decimal ratio, has obtained such general approbation,
both at home and abroad, that nothing seems wanting, but the actual coinage, to
banish the discordant pounds, shillings, pence, and farthings of the different
States, and so establish in their stead, the new denominations. Is it in
contemplation with the House of Representatives to extend a like improvement to
our Measures and Weights, and to arrange them also in a decimal ratio? The
facility which this would introduce into the vulgar arithmetic, would,
unquestionably, be soon and sensibly felt by the whole mass of the people, who
would thereby be enabled to compute for themselves whatever they should have
occasion to buy, to sell, or m measure, which the present complicated and
difficult ratios place beyond their computation, for the most part. Or, is it
the opinion of the Representatives that the difficulty of changing the
established habits of a whole nation opposes an insuperable bar to this
improvement? Under this uncertainty the Secretary of State thinks it his duty
to submit alternative plans, that the House may, at their will, adopt either
the one or the other, exclusively, or the one for the present, and the other
for a future time, when the public mind may be supposed to have become
familiarized to it.

I.
And first, on the supposition that the present Measures and Weights, are to be
retained, but to be rendered uniform and invariable, by bringing them to the
same invariable standard.

The first settlers of these States, having come chiefly from England, brought
with them the Measures and Weights of that country. These alone are generally
established among us, either by law or usage, and these, therefore, are alone
to be retained and fixed. We must resort to that country for information of
what they are, or ought to be.

This rests, principally, on the evidence of certain standard Measures and
Weights, which have been preserved, of long time in different deposits. But
differences among these having been known to exist, the House of Commons, in
the years 1757 and 1758, appointed committees to inquire into the original
standards of their weights and measures. These committees, assisted by able
mathematicians and artists, examined and compared with each other the several
standard measures and weights, and made reports on them in the years 1758 and
1759. The circumstances under which these reports were made, entitle them to be
considered, as far as they go, as the best written testimony existing, of the
standard measures and weights of England; and as such, they will be relied on
in the progress of this report.

MEASURES OF LENGTH.
The measures of length in use among us, are, The league of 3 miles; The mile
of 8 furlongs* The furlong of 40 poles or perches; The pole or perch of ^^
yards; The fathom of 2 yards* The ell of a yard and quarter; The yard of 3
feet; The foot of 12 inches; and The inch of 10 lines.


On this branch of their subject, the committee of 1757, 1758, says that the
standard measures of length at the receipt of the exchequer, are a yard,
supposed to be of the time of H. 7. and a yard and ell supposed to have been
made about the year 1601; that they are brass rods very coarsely made, their
divisions not exact, and the rods bent: and that in the year 1742, some members
of the Royal Society had been at great pains in taking an exact measure of
these standards, by very curious instruments, prepared by the ingenious Mr.
Graham; that the Royal Society had had a brass rod made pursuant to their
experiments, which was made so accurately, and by persons so skilful and exact,
that it was thought not easy to obtain a more exact one; and the committee in
fact found it to agree with the standards at the exchequer, as near as it was
possible. They furnish no means, to persons at a distance, of knowing what this
standard is. This, however, is supplied by the evidence of the second pendulum,
which, according to the authority before quoted, is, at London, 39.1682 English
inches, and consequently, the second rod, there, is of 58.7523 of the same
inches. When we shall have found, then, by actual trial, the second rod for 45
by adding the difference of their computed length, to wit, 287/10000 of an
inch, or rather 3/10 of a line (which in practice will endanger less error,
than an attempt at so minute a fraction as the ten thousandth parts of an inch)
we shall have the second rod of London, or a true measure of 58 English inches.
Or, to shorten the operation, without varying the result,

Let the standard rod of 45 be divided into 587 1/^ equal parts, and let each
of these parts be declared a line; 10 Lines an inch; 12 Inches a foot; 3 Feet a
yard; 3 Feet 9 inches an ell; 6 Feet a fathom; 5 Yards a perch or pole; 40
Poles or perches a furlong; 8 Furlongs a mile; 3 Miles a league.


SUPERFICIAL MEASURES.
Our measures of surface are, the acre of 4 rood, and the rood of 40 square
poles; so established by a statute of 33 E. 1. Let them remain the same.

MEASURES OF CAPACITY.
The measures of capacity in use among us, are of the following names, and
proportions.

The gill, 4 of which make a pint; 2 Pints make a quart; 2 Quarts a pottle; 2
Pottles a gallon; 2 Gallons a peck, dry-measure; 8 Gallons make a measure
called a firkin, in liquid substances, and a bushel, dry; 2 Firkins or bushels,
make a measure called a rundlet, or kilderkin, liquid, and a strike, dry; 2
Kilderkins, or strikes, make a measure called a barrel, liquid, and a coomb,
dry; this last term being ancient and little used; 2 Barrels, or coombs, make a
measure called a hogshead, liquid, or a quarter, dry; each being the quarter of
a ton; A Hogshead and a third make a tierce, or third of a ton, 2 Hogsheads
make a pipe, butt, or puncheon; and 2 Pipes make a ton.
But no one of these measures is of a determinate capacity. The report of the
committee of 1757 -- 8, shows that the gallon is of very various content: and
that being the unit, all the others must vary with it.

The Gallon and Bushel contain 224 and 1792 cubic inches, according to the
standard wine gallon preserved at Guildhall; 231 and 1848, according to the
statute of the 5th Anne; 264.8 and 2118.4 according to the ancient Rumford
quart of 1228, examined by the committee; 265.5 and 2124, according to three
standard bushels preserved in the Exchequer, to wit, one of H. 7. without a
rim, one dated 1091 supposed for 1591, or 1601, and one dated 1601. 266.25 and
2130 according to the ancient Rumford gallon of 1228, examined by the
committee; 268.75 and 2150 according to the Winchester bushel, as declared by
statute 13.14. W. 3. which has been the model for some of the grain states;
271. less 2 spoonfuls, and 2168, less 16 spoonfuls, according to a standard
gallon of H. 7. and another dated 1601, marked E. E. both in the Exchequer; 271
and 2168, according to a standard gallon in the Exchequer, dated 1601, marked
E. and called the corn gallon; 272 and 2176, according to the three standard
corn-gallons last mentioned, as measured in 1688, by an artist for the
Commissioners of the Excise, generally used in the seaport towns, and by
mercantile people, and thence introduced into some of the grain states; 277.18
and 2217.44, as established for the measure of coal by the statute 12 Anne;
278, and 2224, according to a standard bushel of H. 7. with a copper rim, in
the Exchequer; 278.4 and 2227.2 according to two standard pints of 1601, and
1602, in the Exchequer; 280, and 2240, according to the standard quart of 1601,
in the Exchequer; 282, and 2256, according to the standard gallon for beer and
ale, in the Treasury.


There are moreover, varieties on these varieties, from the barrel to the ton
inclusive: for, if the barrel be of herrings, it must contain 28 gallons by the
statute 13. El. c. 11. If of wine, it must contain 31 gallons by the statute 2.
H. 6. c. 11. and 1. R. 3. c. 15. If of beer or ale, it must contain 34 gallons
by the statute 1. W. and M. c. 24. and the higher measures in proportion.

In those of the United States which have not adopted the statutes of W. and M.
and of Anne before cited, nor their substance, the wine gallon of 231 cubic
inches rests on the authority of very long usage before the 5th of Anne, the
origin and foundation of which are unknown; the bushel is the Winchester
bushel, by the 11. H. 7. undefined; and the barrel of ale 32 gallons, and of
beer 36 gallons, by the statute 23. H. 8. c. 4.

The Secretary of State is not informed whether there have been any and what
alterations of these measures, by the laws of the particular States.

It is proposed to retain this series of measures, but to fix the gallon to one
determinate capacity, as the unit of measure, both wet and dry; for convenience
is in savor of abolishing the distinction even between wet and dry measures.

The wine gallon, whether of 224 or 231 cubic inches, may be altogether
disregarded, as concerning, principally, the mercantile, and the wealthy, the
least numerous part of the society, and the most capable of reducing one
measure to another by calculation. This gallon is little used among the mass of
farmers, whose chief habits and interests are in the size of the corn bushel.

Of the standard measures before stated, two are principally distinguished in
authority and practice. The statute bushel of 2150 cubic inches, which gives a
gallon of 268.75 cubic inches, and the standard gallon of 1601, called the corn
gallon of 271, or 272 cubic inches, which has introduced the mercantile bushel
of 2176 inches. The former of these is most used in some of the grain states,
the latter in others. The middle term of 270 cubic inches may be taken as a
mutual compromise of convenience, and as offering this general advantage, that
the bushel being of 2160 cubic inches, is exactly a cubic foot and a quarter,
and so facilitates the conversion of wet and dry measures into solid contents
and tonnage, and simplifies the connection of measures and weights, as will be
shown hereafter. It may be added in favor of this, as a medium measure, that
eight of the standard or statute measures before enumerated, are below this
term, and nine above it.

The measures to be made for use, being four-sided, with rectangular sides and
bottom: The Pint will be 3 inches square, and 3 inches deep; The Quart 3 inches
square, and 7 inches deep; The Pottle 3 inches square, and 15 inches deep, or
4, 5, and 6 inches; The Gallon 6 inches square and 7 inches deep, or 5, 6, and
9 inches; The Peck 6, 9, and 10 inches; The Half-bushel 12 inches square, and 7
inches deep; and The Bushel 12 inches square, and 15 inches deep, or 9, 15, and
16 inches.


Cylindrical measures have the advantage of superior strength: but square ones
have the greater advantage of enabling every one, who has a rule in his pocket,
to verify their contents, by measuring them. Moreover, till the circle can be
squared, the cylinder cannot be cubed, nor its contents exactly expressed in
figures.

Let the measures of capacity then for the United States be, A Gallon of 270
cubic inches; The Gallon to contain two pottles; The Pottle 2 quarts; The Quart
2 pints; The Pint 4 gills; 2 Gallons to make a peck; 8 Gallons a bushel or
firkin; 2 Bushels or firking, a strike or kilderkin; 2 Strikes or kilderkins, a
coomb or barrel; 2 Coombs or barrels, a quarter or hogshead; A Hogshead and a
third, one tierce; 2 Hogsheads a pipe, butt or puncheon -- and 2 Pipes a ton.


And let all measures of capacity of dry subjects be stricken with a strait
strike.

WEIGHTS.
There are two series of weights in use among us; the one called Avoirdupois,
the other Troy.

In the Avoirdupois series,
The Pound is divided into 16 ounces; The Ounce into 16 drams; The Dram into 4
quarters.
In the Troy series.
The Pound is divided into 12 ounces; The Ounce (according to the subdivision
of the apothecaries) into 8 drams; The Dram into 3 scruples; The Scruple into
20 grains.
According to the subdivision for gold and silver, the ounce is divided into 20
penny-weight; and the penny-weight into 24 grains.

So that the pound Troy contains 5760 grains, of which 7,000 are requisite to
make the pound Avoirdupois; of course the weight of the pound Troy, is to that
of the pound Avoirdupois, as 5760 to 7,000, or, as 144 to 175.

It is remarkable that this is exactly the proportion of the ancient liquid
gallon of Guildhall of 224 cubic inches, to the corn gallon of 272; for 224 are
to 272, as 144 to 175. (4.)

It is further remarkable still, that this is also the exact proportion between
the specific weight of any measure of wheat, and of the same measure of water.
For the statute bushel is of 64 pounds of wheat. Now as 144 to 175, so are 64
lb. to 77.7 lb. but 77.7 lb. is known to be the weight of (5.) 2150.4 cubic
inches of pure water; which is exactly the content of the Winchester bushel, as
declared by the statute 13.14. W. 3. That statute determined the bushel to be a
cylinder of 18^ inches diameter, and 8 inches depth. Such a cylinder, as nearly
as it can be cubed, and expressed in figures, contains 2150.425 cubic inches: a
result which reflects authority on the declaration of Parliament, and induces a
favorable opinion of the care with which they investigated the contents of the
ancient bushel, and also a belief that there might exist evidence of it at that
day, unknown to the committees of 1758, and 1759.

We find then in a continued proportion 64 to 77.7 as 224 to 272, and as 144 to
175, that is to say, the specific weight of a measure of wheat, to that of the
same measure of water, as the cubic contents of the wet-gallon, to those of the
dry; and as the weight of a pound Troy to that of a pound Avoirdupois.

This seems to have been so combined as to render it indifferent whether a
thing were dealt out by weight or measure, for the dry gallon of wheat, and the
liquid one of wine were of the same weight; and the Avoirdupois pound of wheat,
and the Troy pound of wine, were of the same measure. Water and the vinous
liquors, which enter most into commerce, are so nearly of a weight, that the
difference, in moderate quantities, would be neglected by both buyer and
seller; some of the wines being a little heavier, and some a little lighter
than water.

Another remarkable correspondence, is, that between weights and measures. For
1000 ounces avoirdupois of pure water, fill a cubic foot, with mathematical
exactness.

What circumstances of the times or purposes of barter, or commerce, called for
this combination of weights and measures, with the subjects to be exchanged or
purchased, are not now to be ascertained. But a triple set of exact
proportionals representing weights, measures, and the things to be weighed and
measured, and a relation so integral between weights and solid measures, must
have been the result of design and scientific calculation, and not a mere
coincidence of hazard. It proves that the dry, and wet measures, the heavy and
light weights, must have been original parts of the system they compose:
Contrary to the opinion of the committee of 1757 -- 1758, who thought that the
avoirdupois weight was not an ancient weight of the kingdom, nor ever even a
legal weight, but during a single year of the reign of H. 8. and therefore,
concluded, otherwise than will be here proposed, to suppress it altogether.
Their opinion was founded chiefly on the silence of the laws, as to this
weight. But the harmony here developed in the system of weights and measures,
of which the avoirdupois makes an essential member, corroborated by a general
use, from very high antiquity, of that, or of a nearly similar weight under
another (6.) name, seem stronger proofs that this is a legal weight, than the
mere silence of the written laws is of the contrary.

Be this as it may, it is in such general use with us, that, on the principle
of popular convenience, it is higher denominations, at least, must be preserved.
It is by the avoirdupois pound and ounce that our citizens have been used to
buy and sell. But the smaller subdivisions of drams and quarters, are not in
use with them. On the other hand, they have been used to weigh their money and
medicine with the penny-weights and grains troy-weight, and are not in the
habit of using the pounds and ounces of that series. It would be for their
convenience, then, to suppress the pound and ounce troy, and the dram and
quarter avoirdupois; and to form into one series the avoirdupois pound and
ounce, and the troy penny-weight and grain. The avoirdupois ounce contains 18
penny-weight 5 grains troy-weight. Divide it then into* 18 penny-weight, and
the penny-weight, as heretofore, into 24 grains, and the new penny-weight will
contain between a third and a quarter of a grain more than the present troy
penny-weight; or, more accurately, it will be to that, as 875 to 864, a
difference not to be noticed, either in money or medicine, below the
denomination of an ounce.

But it will be necessary to refer these weights to a determinate mass of some
substance, the specific gravity of which is invariable. Rainwater is such a
substance, and may be referred to every where, and through all time. It has
been found by accurate experiments, that a cubic foot of rainwater weighs 1000
ounces Avoirdupois, standard weights of the Exchequer. It is true that among
these standard weights, the committee reports small variations; but this
experiment must decide in favor of those particular weights, between which and
an integral mass of water, so remarkable a coincidence has been found. To
render this standard more exact, the water should be weighed always in the same
temperature of air, as heat, by increasing it is volume, lessens it is specific
gravity. The cellar of uniform temperature, is best for this also.

Let it, then, be established that an ounce is of the weight of a cube of
rainwater, of one tenth of a foot, or rather, that it is the thousandth part
of the weight of a cubic foot of rainwater, weighed in the standard
temperature: that the series of weights of the United States shall consist of
pounds, ounces, penny-weights, and grains; whereof 24 Grains shall be
one-penny-weight; 18 Penny-weights one ounce; 16 Ounces one pound.


COINS.
Congress in 1786 established the money unit at 375.64 troy grains of pure
silver. It is proposed to enlarge this by about the third of a grain, in
weight, or a mill, in value; that is to say, to establish it at 376 (or more
exactly ^76.^2985) instead of 375.64 grains, because it will be shown, that
this, as the unit of coin, will link in system with the units of length,
surface, capacity, and weight, whenever it shall be thought proper to extend
the decimal ratio through all these branches. It is to preserve the possibility
of doing this, that this very minute alteration is proposed.

We have this proportion then, 875 to 864 as 376.02985 grains troy to
371.30261, the expression of the unit in the new grains.

Let it be declared, therefore, that the money unit, or dollar of the United
States, shall contain 371.3 American grains of pure silver.

If nothing more then, is proposed than to render uniform and stable the system
we already possess, this may be effected on the plan herein detailed; the sum
of which is, 1. That the present measures of length be retained, and fixed by
an invariable standard: 2. That the measures of surface remain as they are, and
be invariable also as the measures of length to which they are to refer: 3.
That the unit of capacity, now so equivocal, be settled at a medium and
convenient term, and defined by the same invariable measures of length: 4. That
the more known terms in the two kinds of weights be retained, and reduced to
one series, and that they be referred to a definite mass of some substance, the
specific gravity of which never changes: And 5. That the quantity of pure
silver in the money unit be expressed in parts of the weights so defined.

In the whole of this no change is proposed, except an insensible one in the
troy grain and penny-weight, and the very minute one in the money unit.

II.
But if it be thought that, either now, or at any future time, the citizens of
the United States may be induced to undertake a thorough reformation of their
whole system of Measures, Weights and Coins, reducing every branch to the same
decimal ratio already established in their Coins, and thus bringing the
calculation of the principal affairs of life within the arithmetic of every man
who can multiply and divide plain numbers, greater changes will be necessary.

The unit of Measure is still that which must give law through the whole
system: And from whatever unit we set out, the coincidencies between the old
and new ratios will be rare. All that can be done will be to choose such an unit
as will produce the most of these. In this respect the second rod has been
found, on trial, to be far preferable to the second pendulum.

MEASURES OF LENGTH.
Let the second rod, then, as before described, be the standard of Measure; and
let it be divided into five equal parts, each of which shall be called a FOOT:
For, perhaps, it may be better generally to retain the name of the nearest
present Measure, where there is one tolerably near. It will be about one
quarter of an inch shorter than the present foot.

Let the Foot be divided into 10 inches; the Inch into 10 lines; the Line into
10 points; Let 10 feet make a decad; 10 Decads a rood; 10 Roods a furlong; 10
Furlongs a mile.
SUPERFICIAL MEASURES.
Superficial Measures have been estimated, and so may continue to be, in
squares of the measures of length, except in the case of lands, which have been
estimated by squares, called roods and acres. Let the rood be equal to a
square, every side of which is 100 feet. This will be 6.483 English feet less
than the English (7) rood every way, and 1311 square feet less in its whole
(contents, that is to say, about one eighth, in which proportion also 4 rood
will be less than the present acre.

MEASURES OF CAPACITY.
Let the unit of capacity be the cubic foot, to be called a bushel. It will
contain 1620.23 cubic inches, English; be about less than that before proposed
to be adopted as a medium; 1/10 less than the bushel made from 8 of the
Guildhall gallons; and 1/14 less than the bushel made from 8 Irish gallons of
217.6 cubic inches.

Let the bushel be divided into 10 pottles; each Pottle into 10 demi-pints;
each Demi-pint into 10 metres, which will be of a cubic inch each. Let 10
bushels be a quarter, and 10 Quarters a last, or double-ton.
The measures for use being foursided, and the sides and bottoms rectangular,
the bushel will be a foot cube; The Pottle 5 inches square and 4 inches deep;
The Demi-pint 2 inches square, and 2 inches deep; The Meter, an inch cube.


WEIGHTS.
Let the weight of a cubic inch of rainwater, or the thousandth part of a
cubic foot, be called an ounce; and let the ounce be divided into 10 double
scruples; the Double scruple into 10 carats; the Carat into 10 minims, or
demi-grains; the Minim into 10 mites. Let 10 Ounces make a pound; 10 Pounds a
stone; 10 Stone a kental; 10 Kental a hogshead.


COINS.
Let the money-unit, or dollar, contain eleven twelfths of an ounce of pure
silver. This will be 376 troy grains (or more exactly 376.02985 troy grains)
which will be about a third of a grain (or more exactly,.38985 of a grain) more
than the present unit. This with the twelfth of alloy, already established,
will make the dollar or unit, of the weight of an ounce, or of a cubic inch of
rain water, exactly. The series of mills, cents, dimes, dollars, and eagles, to
remain as already established (8).

THE second rod, or the second pendulum, expressed in the measures of other
countries, will give the proportion between their measures and those of the
United States.

Measures, weights and coins thus referred to standards unchangeable in their
nature (as is the length of a rod vibrating seconds, and the weight of a
definite mass of rain water) will themselves be unchangeable. These standards
too are such as to be accessible to all persons, in all times and places. The
measures and weights derived from them, fall in so nearly with some of those
now in use, as to facilitate their introduction; and, being arranged in decimal
ratio, they are within the calculation of every one who possesses the first
elements of arithmetic, and of easy comparison, both for foreigners and
citizens, with the measures, weights and coins of other countries.

A gradual introduction would lessen the inconveniences which might attend too
sudden a substitution, even of an easier, for a more difficult system. After a
given term, for instance, it might begin in the custom-houses, where the
merchants would become familiarised to it. After a further term, it might be
introduced into all legal proceedings; and merchants and traders in foreign
commodities might be required to use it in their dealings with one another.
After a still further term all other descriptions of people might receive it
into common use. Too long a postponement, on the other hand, would increase the
difficulties of its reception with the increase of our population.

Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of State.

APPENDIX. Containing ILLUSTRATIONS and DEVELOPEMENTS of some Passages of the
preceding Report.
(1.) IN the second pendulum with a spherical bob, call the distance between
the centers of suspension, and of the bob, 2 x 19.575, or 2d. and the radius of
the bob = r. then 2d:rr:rr / 2d. and of this last proportional expresses the
displacement of the center of oscillation, to wit, ^ Two inches have been
proposed as a proper diameter for such a bob. In that case r. will be = 1.
inch, and ^ inches.

In the cylindrical second rod, call the length of the rod 3 x 19.575, or 3d.
and its radius =r. and ^ will express the displacement of the center of
oscillation. It is thought the rod will be sufficiently inflexible if it be of
an inch in diameter. Then r. will be =.1 inch, and ^ inches, which is but the
120th part of the displacement in the case of the pendulum, with a spherical
bob; and but the 689,710th part of the whole length of the rod. If the rod be
even of half an inch diameter, the displacement will be but 1/1879 of an inch,
or 1/110356 of the length of the rod.

(2.) Sir Isaac Newton computes the pendulum for 45 to be 36 pouces 8.428
lignes. Picard made the English foot 11 pouces 2.6 lignes, and Dr. Maskelyne 11
pouces 3.11 lignes. D'Alembert states it at 11 pouces 3 lignes, which has been
used in these calculations as a middle term, and gives us Pouces / 36
Lignes./8^428 = 39.1491 inches. This length for the pendulum of 45 had been
adopted in this report before the Bishop of Autun's proposition was known here.
He relies on Mairan's ratio for the length of the pendulum in the latitude of
Paris, to wit, 504:25772 pouces to a 4th proportional, which will be
Pouces./36.714^8 = 39.1619 inches, the length of the pendulum for latitude 48
50. The difference between this and the pendulum for 45 is.0113 of an inch: So
that the pendulum for 45 would be estimated, according to Mairan at 39.1619
-.0113 = 39.1506 inches, almost precisely the same with Newton's computation
herein adopted.

(3.) Sir Isaac Newton's computations for the different degrees of latitude
from 30 to 45, are as follows: Pieds. Lignes. 30 3 7.948 35 3 8.099 40 3 8.261
41 3 8.294 42 3 8.327 43 3 8.361 44 3 8.394 45 3 8.428

(4.) Or more exactly, 144:175224:272.2.

(5.) Or more exactly 62.5:172877.7:2150.39.

(6.) The merchant's weight.

(7). The English rood contains 10890 square feet = 104.355 feet square.

(8). The measures, weights and coins of the decimal system, estimated in those
of England, now used in the United States.

1. MEASURES OF LENGTH.
Feet. Equivalent in English Measure. The Point.001.011 inches. Line.01.117
Inch.1.1174 about 1/7 more than the English inch. Foot 1. 11.744736.978728
feet, about 1/48 less than the English foot. Decad 10. 9.787 about 1/48 less
than the 10 feet rod of the carpenters. Rood 100. 97.872 about 1/16 less than
the side of an English square rood. Furlong 1000. 978.728 about more than the
English furlong. Mile 10000. 9787.28 about 1 6/7 English mile, nearly the
Scotch and Irish mile, and the German mile. 2. SUPERFICIAL MEASURE.
Rood. Square feet. The Rood 1. 9579.^85 about less than the English rood. 3.
MEASURES OF CAPACITY.
Bushels. Cub. inches. The Meter.001 1.6202 Demipint.01 16.202 about 1/24 less
than the English half pint. Pottle.1 162.022 about more than the English
pottle. Bushel 1. 1620.229596620920160256.937632868414884352 cub. feet. about
less than the middle sized English bushel. Quarter 10. 9.376 about less than
the English quarter. Last 100. 93.763 about 1/7 more than the English last. 4.
WEIGHTS.
Pounds. Avoirdupois. Troy. The Mite.00001.041 grains about less than the
English mite. Minim or Demigrain.0001.4102 about less than the half grain Troy.
Carat.001 4.102 about 1/46 more than the carat Troy. Double Scruple.01 41.021
about 1/46 more than 2 scruples Troy. Ounce.1 937632868414884352 oz.
410.214379931511904.85461 oz. about 1/16 less than the ounce Avoir. Pound 1.
9.376.586020540093 lb..712175 lb. about less than the pound Troy. Stone 10.
93.763 oz. 5.8602 lb. 7.121 about less than the English stone of 8 lb.
Avoirdupois. Kental 100. 937.632 oz. 58.602 lb. 71.217 about 4/10 less than the
English Kental of 100 lb. Avoirdupois. Hogshead 1000. 9376.328 oz. 586.0205 lb.
712.175 5. COINS.
Dollars. The Mill.001 Cent.01 Dime.1 Troy grains. The Dollar 1. 376.02985 Pure
silver. 34.18454 alloy. 410.21436 Eagle 10.


