REPORT OF THE SECRETARY of the TREASURY TO THE HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES,
RELATIVE TO A PROVISION FOR THE SUPPORT OF THE PUBLIC CREDIT OF THE UNITED
STATES, IN CONFORMITY TO A RESOLUTION OF THE TWENTY-FIRST DAY OF SEPTEMBER,
1789.

PRESENTED TO THE HOUSE ON THURSDAY THE 14th DAY OF JANUARY, 1790.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY FRANCIS CHILD'S AND JOHN SWAIN. M,DCC,XC.

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, January 9, 1790.
THE Secretary of the Treasury, in obedience to the resolution of the House of
Representatives, of the twenty-first day of September last, has, during the
recess of Congress, applied himself to the consideration of a proper plan for
the support of the Public Credit, with all the attention which was due to the
authority of the House, and to the magnitude of the object.

In the discharge of this duty, he has felt, in no small degree, the anxieties
which naturally flow from a just estimate of the difficulty of the task, from a
well-founded diffidence of his own qualifications for executing it with
success, and from a deep and solemn conviction of the momentous nature of the
truth contained in the resolution under which his investigations have been
conducted, "That an adequate provision for the support of the Public Credit, is
a matter of high importance to the honor and prosperity of the United States."

With an ardent desire that his well-m^ant endeavors may be conducive to the
real advantage of the nation, and with the utmost deference to the superior
judgment of the House, he now respectfully submits the result of his enquiries
and reflections, to their indulgent construction.

In the opinion of the Secretary, the wisdom of the House, in giving their
explicit sanction to the proposition which has been stated, cannot but be
applauded by all, who will seriously consider, and trace through their obvious
consequences, these plain and undeniable truths. --

That exigencies are to be expected to occur, in the affairs of nations, in
which there will be a necessity for borrowing. --

That loans in times of public danger, especially from foreign war, are found
an indispensable resource, even (...) the wealthiest of them. --

And that in ^ c^untry, which, like this, is possessed of little active wealth,
or in other words, little monied capit^^ the necessity for that resource, must,
in such emergencies, be proportionably urgent.

And as on the one hand, the necessity for borrowing in particular emergencies
cannot be doubted, so on the other, it is equally evident, that to be able to
borrow upon good terms, it is essential that the credit of a nation should be
well established.

For when the credit of a country is in any degree questionable, it never fails
to give an extravagant premium, in one shape or another, upon all the loans it
has occasion to make. Nor does the evil end here; the same disadvantage must be
sustained upon whatever is to be bought on terms of future payment.

From this constant necessity of borrowing and buying dear, it is easy to
conceive how immensely the expenses of a nation, in a course of time, will be
augmented by an unsound state of the public credit.

To attempt to enumerate the complicated variety of mischiefs in the whole
system of the social economy, which proceed from a neglect of the maxims that
uphold public credit, and justify the solicitude manifested by the House on
this point, would be an improper intrusion on their time and patience.

In so strong a light nevertheless do they appear to the Secretary, that on
their due observance at the present critical juncture, materially depends, in
his judgment, the individual and aggregate prosperity of the citizens of the
United States; their relief from the embarrassments they now experience; their
character as a People; the cause of good government.

If the maintenance of public credit, then, be truly so important, the next
enquiry which suggests itself is, by what means it is to be effected? -- The
ready answer to which question is, by good faith, by a punctual performance of
contracts. States, like individuals, who observe their engagements, are
respected and trusted: while the reverse is the fate of those, who pursue an
opposite conduct.

Every breach of the public engagements, whether from choice or necessity, is
in differ^nt degrees hurtful to public credit. When such a necessity does truly
exist, the evils of it are only to be palliated by a scrupulous attention, on
the part of the government, to carry the violation no farther than the
necessity absolutely requires, and to manifest, if the nature of the case
admits of it, a sincere disposition to make reparation, whenever circumstances
shall permit. But with every possible mitigation, credit must suffer, and
numerous mischiefs ensue. It is therefore highly important, when an appearance
of necessity seems to press upon the public councils, that they should examine
well its reality, and be perfectly assured, that there is no method of escaping
from it, before they yield to its suggestions. For though it cannot safely be
affirmed, that occasions have never existed, or may not exist, in which
violations of the public faith, in this respect, are inevitable; yet there is
great reason to believe, that they exist far less frequently than precedents
indicate; and are oftenest either pretended through levity, or want of
firmness, or supposed through want of knowledge. Expedients might often have
been devised to effect, consistently with good faith, what has been done in
contravention of it. Those who are most commonly creditors of a nation, are,
generally speaking, enlightened men; and there are signal examples to warrant a
conclusion, that when a candid and fair appea^ is made to them, they will
understand their true interest too well to refuse their concurrence in such
modifications of their claims, as any real necessity may demand.

While the observance of that good faith, which is the basis of public credit,
is recommended by the strongest inducements of political expediency, it is
enforced by considerations of still greater authority. There are arguments for
it, which rest on the immutable principles of moral obligation. And in
proportion as the mind is disposed to contemplate, in the order of Providence,
an intimate connection between public virtue and public happiness, will be its
repugnancy to a violation of those principles.

This reflection derives additional strength from the nature of the debt of the
United States. It was the price of liberty. The faith of America has been
repeatedly pledged for it, and with solemnities, that give peculiar force to
the obligation. There is indeed reason to regret that it has not hitherto been
kept; that the necessities of the war, conspiring with inexperience in the
subjects of finance, produced direct infractions; and that the subsequent
period has been a continued scene of negative violation, or noncompliance. But
a dimunition of this regret arises from the reflection, that the last seven
years have exhibited an earnest and uniform effort, on the part of the
government of the union, to retrieve the national credit, by doing justice to
the creditors of the nation; and that the embarrassments of a defective
constitution, which defeated this laudable effort, have ceased.

From this evidence of a favorable disposition, given by the former government,
the institution of a new one, clothed with powers competent to calling forth
the resources of the community, has excited correspondent expectations. A
general belief, accordingly, prevails, that the credit of the United States
will quickly be established on the firm foundation of an effectual provision
for the existing debt. The influence, which this has had at home, is witnessed
by the rapid increase, that has taken place in the market value of the public
securities. From January to November, they rose thirty-three and a third per
cent, and from that period to this time, they have risen fifty per cent more.
And the intelligence from abroad announces effects proportionably favorable to
our national credit and consequence.

It cannot but merit particular attention, that among ourselves the most
enlightened friends of good government are those, whose expectations are the
highest.

To justify and preserve their confidence; to promote the increasing
respectability of the American name; to answer the calls of justice; to restore
landed property to its due value; to furnish new resources both to agriculture
and commerce; to cement more closely the union of the states; to add to their
security against foreign attack; to establish public order on the basis of an
upright and liberal policy. -- These are the great and invaluable ends to be
secured, by a proper and adequate provision, at the present period, for the
support of public credit.

To this provision we are invited, not only by the general considerations,
which have been noticed, but by others of a more particular nature. It will
procure to every class of the community some important advantages, and remove
some no less important disadvantages.

The advantage to the public creditors from the increased value of that part of
their property which constitutes the public debt, needs no explanation.

But there is a consequence of this, less obvious, though not less true, in
which every other citizen is interested. It is a well known fact, that in
countries in which the national debt is properly funded, and an object of
established confidence, it answers most of the purposes of money. Transfers of
stock or public debt are there equivalent to payments in specie; or in other
words, stock, in the principal transactions of business, passes current as
specie. -- The same thing would, in all probability happen here, under the like
circumstances.

The benefits of this are various and obvious. --

First. Trade is extended by it; because there is a larger capital to carry it
on, and the merchant can at the same time, afford to trade for smaller profits;
as his stock, which, when unemployed, brings him in an interest from the
government, serves him also as money, when he has a call for it in his
commercial operations.

Secondly. Agriculture and manufactures are also promoted by it: For the like
reason, that more capital can be commanded to be employed in both; and because
the merchant, whose enterprise in foreign trade, gives to them activity and
extension, has greater means for enterprise.

Thirdly. The interest of money will be lowered by it; for this is always in a
ratio, to the quantity of money, and to the quickness of circulation. This
circumstance will enable both the public and individuals to borrow on easier
and cheaper terms.

And from the combination of these effects, additional aids will be furnished
to labor, to industry, and to arts of every kind.

But these good effects of a public debt are only to be looked for, when, by
being well funded, it has acquired an adequate and stable value. Till then, it
has rather a contrary tendency. The fluctuation and insecurity incident to it
in an unfunded state, render it a mere commodity, and a precarious one. As
such, being only an object of occasional and particular speculation, all the
money applied to it is so much diverted from the more useful channels of
circulation, for which the thing itself affords no substitute: So that, in
fact, one serious inconvenience of an unfunded debt is, that it contributes to
the scarcity of money.

This distinction which has been little if at all attended to, is of the
greatest moment. It involves a question immediately interesting to every part
of the community; which is no other than this -- Whether the public debt, by a
provision for it on true principles, shall be rendered a substitute for money;
or whether, by being left as it is, or by being provided for in such a manner
as will wound those principles, and destroy confidence, it shall be suffered to
continue, as it is, a pernicious drain of our cash from the channels of
productive industry.

The effect, which the funding of the public debt, on right principles, would
have upon landed property, is one of the circumstances attending such an
arrangement, which has been least adverted to, though it deserves the most
particular attention. The present depreciated state of that species of property
is a serious calamity. The value of cultivated lands, in most of the states,
has fallen since the revolution from 25 to 50 per cent. In those farthest
south, the decrease is still more considerable. Indeed, if the representations,
continually received from that quarter, may be credited, lands there will
command no price, which may not be deemed an almost total sacrifice.

This decrease, in the value of lands, ought, in a great measure, to be
attributed to the scarcity of money. -- Consequently whatever produces an
augmentation of the monied capital of the country, must have a proportional
effect in raising that value. The beneficial tendency of a funded debt, in this
respect, has been manifested by the most decisive experience in Great Britain.

The proprietors of lands would not only feel the benefit of this increase in
the value of their property, and of a more prompt and better sale, when they
had occasion to sell; but the necessity of selling would be, itself, greatly
diminished. As the same cause would contribute to the facility of loans, there
is reason to believe, that such of them as are indebted, would be able through
that resource, to satisfy their more urgent creditors.

It ought not however to be expected, that the advantages, described as likely
to result from funding the public debt, would be instantaneous. It might
require some time to bring the value of stock to its natural level, and to
attach to it that fixed confidence, which is necessary to its quality as money.
Yet the late rapid rise of the public securities encourages an expectation,
that the progress of stock to the desirable point, will be much more
expeditious than could have been foreseen. And as in the mean time it will be
increasing in value, there is room to conclude, that it will, from the outset,
answer many of the purpos^s in contemplation. Particularly it seems to be
probable, that from creditors, who are not themselves necessitous, it will
early meet with a ready reception in payment of debts, at its current price.

Having now taken a concise view of the inducements to a proper provision for
the public debt, the next enquiry which presents itself is, what ought to be
the nature of such a provision? This requires some preliminary discussions.

It is agreed on all hands, that that part of the debt which has been
contracted abroad, and is denominated the foreign debt, ought to be provided
for, according to the precise terms of the contracts relating to it. The
discussions, which can arise, therefore, will have reference essentially to the
domestic part of it, or to that which has been contracted at home, It is to be
regretted, that there is not the same unanimity of sentiment on this part, as
on the other.

The Secretary has too much deference for the opinions of every part of the
community, not to have observed one, which has, more than once, made its
appearance in the public prints, and which is occasionally to be met with in
conversation. It involves this question, whether a discrimination ought not to
be made between original holders of the public securities, and present
possessors, by purchase. Those who advocate a discrimination are for making a
full provision for the securities of the former, at their nominal value; but
contend, that the latter ought to receive no more than the cost to them, and
the interest: And the idea is sometimes suggested of making good the difference
to the primitive possessor.

In favor of this scheme, it is alleged, that it would be unreasonable to pay
twenty shillings in the pound, to one who had not given more for it than three
or four. And it is added, that it would be hard to aggravate the misfortune of
the first owner, who, probably through necessity, parted with his property at
so great a loss, by obliging him to contribute to the profit of the person, who
had speculated on his distresses.

The Secretary, after the most mature reflection on the force of this argument,
is induced to reject the doctrine it contains, as equally unjust and impolitic,
as highly injurious, even to the original holders of public securities; -- as
ruinous to public credit.

It is inconsistent with justice, because in the first place, it is a breach of
contract; in violation of the rights of a fair purchaser.

The nature of the contract in its origin, is, that the public will pay the sum
expressed in the security, to the first holder, or his assignee. The intent, in
making the security assignable, is, that the proprietor may be able to make use
of his property, by selling it for as much as it may be worth in the market,
and that the buyer may be safe in the purchase.

Every buyer therefore stands exactly in the place of the seller -- has the
same right with him to the identical sum expressed in the security, and having
acquired that right, by fair purchase, and in conformity to the original
agreement and intention of the government, his claim cannot be disputed,
without manifest injustice.

That he is to be considered as a fair purchaser, results from this: Whatever
necessity the seller may have been under, was occasioned by the government, in
not making a proper provision for its debts. The buyer had no agency in it, and
therefore ought not to suffer. He is not even chargeable with having taken an
undue advantage. He paid what the commodity was worth in the market, and took
the risks of reimbursement upon himself. He of course gave a fair equivalent,
and ought to reap the benefit of his hazard; a hazard which was far from
inconsiderable, and which, perhaps, turned on little less (...) a revolution in
government.

That the case of those, who (...) with their securities from necessity, is a
hard one, cannot be denied. But whatever complaint of injury, or claim of
redress, they may have, respects the government solely. They have not only
nothing to object to the persons who relieved their necessities, by giving them
the current price of their property, but they are even under an implied
condition to contribute to the reimbursement of those persons. They knew, that
by the terms of the contract with themselves, the public were bound to pay to
those, to whom they should convey their title, the sums stipulated to be paid
to them; and, that as citizens of the United States, they were to bear their
proportion of the contribution for that purpose. This, by the act of
assignment, they tacitly engage to do; and if they had an option, they could
not, with integrity or good faith, refuse to do it, without the consent of
those to whom they sold.

But though many of the original holders sold from necessity, it does not
follow, that this was the case with all of them. It may well be supposed, that
some of them did it either through want of confidence in an eventual provision,
or from the allurements of some profitable speculation. How shall these
different classes be discriminated from each other? How shall it be
ascertained, in any case, that the money, which the original holder obtained
for his security, was not more beneficial to him, than if he had held it to the
present time, to avail himself of the provision which shall be made? How shall
it be known, whether if the purchaser had employed his money in some other way,
he would not be in a better situation, than by having applied it in the
purchase of securities, though he should now receive their full amount? And if
neither of these things can be known, how shall it be determined whether a
discrimination, independent of the breach of contract, would not do a real
injury to purchasers; and if it included a compensation to the primitive
proprietors, would not give them an advantage, to which they had no equitable
pretension.

It may well be imagined, also, that there are not wanting instances, in which
individuals, urged by a present necessity, parted with the securities received
by them from the public, and shortly after replaced them with others, as an
indemnity for their first loss. Shall they be deprived of the indemnity which
they have endeavored to secure by so provident an arrangement?

Questions of this sort, on a close inspection, multiply themselves without
end, and demonstrate the injustice of a discrimination, even on the most
subtle calculations of equity, abstracted from the obligation of contract.

The difficulties too of regulating the details of a plan for that purpose,
which would have even the semblance of equity, would b^ found immense. It may
well be doubted whether they would not be insurmountable, and ^^^lete with such
absurd, as well as inequitable consequences, as to disgust even the proposers
of t^^ measure.

As a specimen of its capricious operation, it will be sufficient to notice the
effect it would have upon two persons, who may be supposed two years ago to
have purchased, each, securities at three shillings in the pound, and one of
them to retain those bought by him, till the discrimination should take place;
the other to have parted with those bought by him, within a month past, at nine
shillings. The former, who had had most confidence in the government, would in
this case only receive at the rate of three shillings and the interest; while
the latter, who had had less confidence would receive for what cost him the
same money at the rate of nine shillings, and his representative, standing in
his place, would be entitled to a like rate.

The impolicy of a discrimination results from two considerations; one, that it
proceeds upon a principle destructive of that quality of the public debt, or
the stock of the nation, which is essential to its capacity for answering the
purposes of money -- that is the security of transfer; the other, that as well
on this account, as because it includes a breach of faith, it renders property
in the funds less valuable; consequently induces lenders to demand a higher
premium for what they lend, and produces every other inconvenience of a bad
state of public credit.

It will be perceived at first sight, that the transferable quality of stock is
essential to its operation as money, and that this depends on the idea of
complete security to the transferree, and a firm persuasion, that no
distinction can in any circumstances be made between him and the original
proprietor.

The precedent of an invasion of this fundamental principle, would of course
tend to deprive the community of an advantage, with which no temporary saving
could bear the least comparison.

And it will as readily be perceived, that the same cause would operate a
diminution of the value of stock in the hands of the first, as well as of every
other holder. The price, which any man, who should incline to purchase, would
be willing to give for it, would be in a compound ratio to the immediate profit
it afforded, and to the chance of the continuance of his profit. If there was
supposed to be any hazard of the latter, the risk would be taken into the
calculation, and either there would be no purchase at all, or it would be at a
proportionably less price.

For this diminution of the value of stock, every person, who should be about
to lend to the government, would demand a compensation; and would add to the
actual difference, between the nominal and the market value, an equivalent for
the chance of greater decrease; which, in a precarious state of public credit,
is always to be taken into the account.

Every compensation of this sort, it is evident, would be an absolute loss to
the government.

In the preceding discussion of the impolicy of a discrimination, the injurious
tendency of it to those, who continue to be the holders of the securities, they
received from the government, has been explained. Nothing need be added, on
this head, except that this is an additional and interesting light, in which
the injustice of the measure may be seen. It would not only divest present
proprietors by purchase, of the rights they had acquired under the sanction of
public faith, but it would depreciate the property of the remaining original
holders.

It is equally unnecessary to add any thing to what has been already said to
demonstrate the fatal influence, which the principle of discrimination would
have on the public credit.

But there is still a point in view in which it will appear perhaps even more
exceptionable, than in either of the former. It would be repugnant to an
express provision of the Constitution of the United States. This provision is,
that "all debts con^racted and engagements entered into before the adoption of
that Constitution shall be as valid against the United States under it, as
under the confederation," which amounts to a constitutional ratification of the
contracts respecting the debt, in the state in which they existed under the
confederation. And resorting to that standard, there can be no doubt, that the
rights of assignees and original holders, must be considered as equal.

In exploding thus fully the principle of discrimination, the Secretary is
happy in reflecting, that he is the only advocate of what has been already
sanctioned by the formal and express authority of the government of the Union,
in these emphatic terms -- "The remaining class of creditors (say Congress in
their circular address to the states, of the 26th of April 1783) is composed,
partly of such of our fellow-citizens as originally lent to the public the use
of their funds, or have since manifested most confidence in their country, by
receiving transfers from the lenders; and partly of those, whose property has
been either advanced or assumed for the public service. To discriminate the
merits of these several descriptions of creditors, would be a task equally
unnecessary and invidious. If the voice of humanity plead more loudly in favor
of some than of others, the voice of policy, no less than of justice, pleads in
favor of all. A WISE NATION will never permit those who relieve the wants of
their country, or who rely most on its faith, its firmness, and its resources,
when either of them is distrusted, to suffer by the event."

The Secretary concluding, that a discrimination, between the different classes
of creditors of the United States, cannot with propriety be made, proceeds to
examine whether a difference ought to be permitted to remain between them, and
another description of public creditors -- Those of the states individually.

The Secretary, after mature reflection on this point, entertains a full
convicton, that an assumption of the debts of the particular states by the
union, and a like provision for them, as for those of the union, will be a
measure of sound policy and substantial justice.

It would, in the opinion of the Secretary, contribute, in an eminent degree,
to an orderly, stable and satisfactory arrangement of the national finances.

Admitting, as ought to be the case, that a provision must be made in some way
or other, for the entire debt; it will follow, that no greater revenues will be
required, whether that provision be made wholly by the United States, or partly
by them, and partly by the states separately.

The principal question then must be, whether such a provision c^nnot be more
conveniently and effectually made, by one general plan issuing from one
authority, than by different plans originating in different authorities.

In the first case there can be no competition for resources; in the last,
there must be such a competition. The consequences of this, without the
greatest caution on both sides, might be interfering regulations, and thence
collision and confusion. Particular branches of industry might also be
oppressed by it. The most productive objects of revenue are not numerous.
Either these must be wholly engrossed by one side, which might lessen the
efficacy of the provisions by the other; or both must have recourse to the same
objects in different modes, which might occasion an accumulation upon them,
beyond what they could properly bear. If this should not happen, the caution
requisite to avoiding it, would prevent the revenue's deriving the full benefit
of each object. The danger of interference and of excess would be apt to impose
restraints very unfriendly to the complete command of those resources, which
are the most convenient; and to compel the having recourse to others, less
eligible in themselves, and less agreeable to the community.

The difficulty of an effectual command of the public resources, in case of
separate provisions for the debt, may be seen in another and perhaps more
striking light. It would naturally happen that different states, from local
considerations, would in some instances have recourse to different objects, in
others, to the same objects, in different degrees, for procuring the funds of
which they stood in need. It is easy to conceive how this diversity would
affect the aggregate revenue of the country. By the supposition, articles which
yielded a full supply in some states, would yield nothing, or an insufficient
product, in others. And hence the public revenue would not derive the full
benefit of those articles, from state regulations. Neither could the
deficiencies be made good by those of the union. It is a provision of the
national constitution, that "all duties, imposts and excises, shall be uniform
throughout the United States." And as the general government would be under a
necessity from motives of policy, of paying regard to the duty, which may have
been previously imposed upon any article, though but in a single state, it
would be constrained, either to refrain wholly from any further imposition,
upon such article, where it had been already rated as high as was proper, or to
confine itself to the difference between the existing rate, and what the
article would reasonably bear. Thus the pre-occupancy of an article by a single
state, would tend to arrest or abridge the imposition^ of the union on that
article. And as it is supposeable, that a great variety of articles might be
placed in this situation, by dissimilar arrangements of the particular states,
it is evident, that the aggregate revenue of the country would be likely to be
very materially contracted by the plan of separate provisions.

If all the public creditors receive their dues from one source, distributed
with an equal hand, their interest will be the same. And having the same
interests, they will unite in the support of the fiscal arrangements of the
government: As these, too, can be made with more convenience, where there is no
competition: These circumstances combined will insure to the revenue laws a
more ready and more satisfactory execution.

If on the contrary there are distinct provisions, there will be distinct
interests, drawing different ways. That union and concert of views, among the
creditors, which in every government is of great importance to their security,
and to that of public credit, will not only not exist, but will be likely to
give place to mutual jealousy and opposition. And from this cause, the
operation of the systems which may be adopted, both by the particular states,
and by the union, with relation to their respective debts, will be in danger of
being counteracted.

There are several reasons, which render it probable, that the situation of the
state creditors would be worse, than that of the creditors of the union, if
there be not a national assumption of the state debts. Of these it will be
sufficient to mention two; one, that a principal branch of revenue is
exclusively vested in the union; the other, that a state must always be checked
in the imposition of taxes on articles of consumption, from the want of power
to extend the same regulation to the other states, and from the tendency of
partial duties to injure its industry and commerce. Should the state creditors
stand upon a less eligible footing than the others, it is unnatural to expect
they would see with pleasure a provision for them. The influence which their
dissatisfaction might have, could not but operate injuriously, both for the
creditors, and the credit, of the United States.

Hence it is even the interest of the creditors of the union, that those of the
individual states should be comprehended in a general provision. Any attempt to
secure to the former either exclusive or peculiar advantages, would materially
hazard their interests.

Neither would it be just, that one class of the public creditors should be
more favored than the other. The objects for which both descriptions of the
debt were contracted, are in the main the same. Indeed a great part of the
particular debts of the States has arisen from assumptions by them on account
of the union. And it is most equitable, that there should be the same measure
of retribution for all.

There is an objection, however, to an assumption of the state debts, which
deserves particular notice. It may be supposed, that it would increase the
difficulty of an equitable settlement between them and the United States.

The principles of that settlement, whenever they shall be discussed, will
require all the moderation and wisdom of the government. In the opinion of the
Secre^^ry, that discussion, till further lights are obtained, would be
premature.

All therefore which he would now think advisable on the point in question,
would be, that the amount of the debts assumed and provided for, should be
charged to the respective states, to abide an eventual arrangement. This, the
United States, as assignees to the creditors, would have an indisputable right
to do.

But as it might be a satisfaction to the House to have before them some plan
for the liquidation of accounts between the union and its members, which,
including the assumption of the state debts, would consist with equity: The
Secretary will submit in this place such thoughts on the subject, as have
occurred to his own mind, or been suggested to him, most compatible, in his
judgment, with the end proposed.

Let each state be charged with all the money advanced to it out of the
treasury of the United States, liquidated according to the specie value, at the
time of each advance, with interest at six per cent.

Let it also be charged with the amount, in specie value, of all its securities
which shall be assumed, with the interest upon them to the time, when interest
shall become payable by the United States.

Let it be credited for all moneys paid and articles furnished to the United
States, and for all other expenditures during the war, either toward general
or particular defense, whether authorized or unauthorized by the United States;
the whole liquidated to specie value, and bearing an interest of six per cent.
from the several times at which the several payments, advances and expenditures
accrued.

And let all sums of continental money now in the treasuries of the respective
states, which shall be paid into the treasury of the United States, be credited
at specie value.

Upon a statement of the accounts according to these principles, there can be
little doubt, that balances would appear in favor of all the states, against
the United States.

To equalize the contributions of the states, let each be then charged with its
proportion of the aggregate of those balances, according to some equitable
ratio, to be devised for that purpose.

If the contributions should be found disproportionate, the result of this
adjustment would be, that some states would be creditors, some debtors to the
union.

Should this be the case, at it will be attended with less inconvenience for
the United States, to have to pay balances to, than to receive them from the
particular states, it may perhaps, be practicable to effect the former by a
second process, in the nature of a transfer of the amount of the debts of
debtor states, to the credit of creditor states, observing the ratio by which
the first apportionment shall have been made. This, whilst it would destroy the
balances due from the former, would increase those due to the latter. These to
be provided for by the United States, at a reasonable interest, but not to be
transferable.

The expediency of this second process must depend on a knowledge of the result
of the first. If the inequalities should be too great, the arrangement may be
impracticable, without unduly increasing the debt of the United States. But it
is not likely, that this would be the case. It is also to be remarked, that
though this second process might not, upon the principle of apportionment,
bring the thing to the point aimed at, yet it may approach so nearly to it, as
to avoid essentially the embarrassment, of having considerable balances to
collect from any of the states.

The whole of this arrangement to be under the superintendence of
commissioners, vested with equitable discretion, and final authority.

The operation of the plan is exemplified in the schedule A.

The general principle of it seems to be equitable, for it appears difficult to
conceive a good reason, why the expenses for the particular defense of a part
in a common war, should not be a common charge, as well as those incurred
professedly for the general defense. The defense of each part is that of the
whole; and unless all the expenditures are brought into a common mass, the
tendency must be, to add, to the calamities suffered, by being the most exposed
to the ravages of war, an increase of burdens.

This plan seems to be susceptible of no objection, which does not belong to
every other, that proceeds on the idea of a final adjustment of accounts. The
difficulty of settling a ratio, is common to all. This must, probably, either
be sought for in the proportions of the requisitions, during the war, or in the
decision of commissioners appointed with plenary power. The rule prescribed in
the Constitution, with regard to representation and direct taxes, would
evidently not be applicable to the situation of parties, during the period in
question.

The existing debt of the United States is excluded from the computation, as it
ought to be, because it will be provided for out of a general fund.

The only discussion of a preliminary kind, which remains, relates to the
distinctions of the debt into principal and interest. It is well known, that
the arrears of the latter bear a large proportion to the amount of the former.
The immediate payment of these arrears is evidently impracticable, and a
question arises, what ought to be done with them?

There is good reason to conclude, that the impressions of many are more
favorable to the claim of the principal than to that of the interest; at least
so far, as to produce an opinion, that an inferior provision might suffice for
the latter.

But to the Secretary, this opinion does not appear to be well founded. His
investigations of the subject, have led him to a conclusion, that the arrears
of interest have pretensions, at least equal to the principal.

The liquidated debt, traced to its origin, falls under two principal
discriminations. One, relating to loans; the other to services performed and
articles supplied.

The part arising from loans, was at first made payable at fixed periods, which
have long since elapsed, with an early option to lenders, either to receive
back their money at the expiration of those periods, or to continue it at
interest, 'till the whole amount of continental bills circulating should not
exceed the sum in circulation at the time of each loan. This contingency, in
the sense of the contract, never happened; and the presumption is, that the
creditors preferred continuing their money indefinitely at interest, to
receiving it in a depreciated and depreciating state.

The other parts of it were chiefly for objects, which ought to have been paid
for at the time, that is, when the services were performed or the supplies
furnished; and were not accompanied with any contract for interest.

But by different acts of government and administration, concurred in by the
creditors, these parts of the debt have been converted into a capital, bearing
an interest of six per cent. per annum, but without any definite period of
redemption. A portion of the loan-office debt has been exchanged for new
securities of that import. And the whole of it seems to have acquired that
character, after the expiration of the periods prefixed for re-payment.

If this view of the subject be a just one, the capital of the debt of the
United States, may be considered in the light of an annuity at the rate of six
per cent. per annum, redeemable at the pleasure of the government, by payment
of the principal. For it seems to be a clear position, that when a public
contracts a debt payable with interest, without any precise time being
stipulated or understood for payment of the capital, that time is a matter of
pure discretion with the government, which is at liberty to consult its own
convenience respecting it, taking care to pay the interest with punctuality.

Wherefore, as long as the United States should pay the interest of their debt,
as it accrued, their creditors would have no right to demand the principal.

But with regard to the arrear^ of interest, the case is different. These are
now due, and those to whom they are due, have a right to claim immediate
payment. To say, that it would be impracticable to comply, would not vary the
nature of the right. Nor can this idea of impracticability be honorably carried
further, than to justify the proposition of a new contract upon the basis of a
commutation of that right for an equivalent. This equivalent too ought to be a
real and fair one. And what other fair equivalent can be imagined for the
detention of money, but a reasonable interest? Or what can be the standard of
that interest, but the market rate, or the rate which the government pays in
ordinary cases?

From this view of the matter, which appears to be the accurate and true one,
it will follow, that the arrears of interest are entitled to an equal provision
with the principal of the debt.

The result of the foregoing discussions is this -- That there ought to be no
discrimination between the original holders of the debt, and present possessors
by purchase -- That it is expedient, there should be an assumption of the state
debts by the Union, and that the arrears of interest should be provided for on
an equal footing with the principal.

The next enquiry, in order, toward determining the nature of a proper
provision, respects the quantum of the debt, and the present rates of interest.

The debt of the union is distinguishable into foreign and domestic.

Dollars. Cents. The foreign debt as stated in the schedule B. amounts to
principal bearing an interest of four, and partly an interest of five per cent.
10,070,307 Arrears of interest to the last of December, 1789, 1,640,071 62
Making together, dollars 11,710,378 62

The domestic debt may be sub-divided into liquidated and unliquidated;
principal and interest.

Dollars. Cents. The principal of the liquidated part, as stated in the
schedule C, amounts to bearing an interest of six per cent. 27,383,917 74 The
arrears of interest as stated in the schedule D. to the end of 1790, amount to
13,030,168 20 Making together, dollars 40,414,085 94

This includes all that has been paid in indents (except what has come into the
treasury of the United States) which, in the opinion of the Secretary, can be
considered in no other light, than as interest due.

The unliquidated part of the domestic debt, which consists chiefly of the
continental bills of credit, is not ascertained, but may be estimated at
2,000,000 dollars.

These several sums constitute the whole of the debt of the United States,
amounting together to 54,124,464 dollars, and 56 cents.

That of the individual states is not equally well ascertained. The schedule E.
shows the extent to which it has been ascertained by returns pursuant to the
order of the House of the 21st September last; but this not comprehending all
the states, the residue must be estimated from less authentic information. The
Secretary, however, presumes, that the total amount may be safely stated at 25
millions of dollars, principal and interest. The present rate of interest of
the state debts is in general, the same with that of the domestic debt of the
union.

On the supposition, that the arrears of interest ought to be provided for, on
the same terms with the principal, the annual amount of the interest, which, at
the existing rates, would be payable on the entire mass of the public debt,
would be, Dollars. Cents. On the foreign debt, computing the interest on the
principal, as it stands, and allowing four per cent on the arrears of interest,
542,599 66 On the domestic debt, including that of the states, 4,044,845 15
Making together, dollars 4,587,444 81

The interesting problem now occurs. Is it in the power of the United States,
consistently with those prudential considerations, which ought not to be
overlooked, to make a provision equal to the purpose of funding the whole debt,
at the rates of interest which it now bears, in addition to the sum which will
be necessary for the current service of the government?

The Secretary will not say that such a provision would exceed the abilities of
the country; but he is clearly of opinion, that to make it, would require the
extension of taxation to a degree, and to objects, which the true interest of
the public creditors forbids. It is therefore to be hoped, and even to be
expected, that they will cheerfully concur in such modifications of their
claims, on fair and equitable principles, as will facilitate to the government
an arrangement substantial, durable and satisfactory to the community. The
importance of the last characteristic will strike every discerning mind. No
plan, however flattering in appearance, to which it did not belong, could be
truly entitled to confidence.

It will not be forgotten, that exigencies may, ere long, arise, which would
call for resources greatly beyond what is now deemed sufficient for the current
service; and that, should the faculties of the country be exhausted or even
strained to provide for the public debt, there could be less reliance on the
sacredness of the provision.

But while the Secretary yields to the force of these considerations, he does
not lose sight of those fundamental principles of good faith, which dictate,
that every practicable exertion ought to be made, scrupulously to fulfill the
engagements of the government; that no change in the rights of its creditors
ought to be attempted without their voluntary consent; and that this consent
ought to be voluntary in fact, as well as in name. Consequently, that every
proposal of a change ought to be in the shape of an appeal to their reason and
to their interest; not to their necessities. To this end it is requisite, that
a fair equivalent should be offered for what may be asked to be given up, and
unquestionable security for the remainder. Without this, an alteration,
consistently with the credit and honor of the nation, would be impracticable.

It remains to see, what can be proposed in conformity to these ^iews.

It has been remarked, that the capital of the debt of the union is to be
viewed in the light of an annuity at the rate of six per cent. per annum,
redeemable at the pleasure of the government, by payment of the principal. And
it will not be required, that the arrears of interest should be considered in a
more favorable light. The same character, in general, may be applied to the
debts of the individual states.

This view of the subject ^dmits, that the United States would have it in their
power to avail themselves of any fall in the market rate of interest, for
reducing that of the debt.

This property of the debt is favorable to the public; unfavourable to the
creditor. And may facilitate an arrangement for the reduction of interest, upon
the basis of a fair equivalent.

Probabilities are always a rational ground of contract. The Secretary
conceives, that there is good reason to believe, if effectual measures are
taken to establish public credit, that the government rate of interest in the
United States, will, in a very short time, fall at least as low as five per
cent. and that in a period not exceeding twenty years, it will sink still
lower, probably to four.

There are two principal causes which will be likely to produce this effect;
one, the low rate of interest in Europe; the other, the increase of the monied
capital of the nation, by the funding of the public debt.

From three to four per cent. is deemed good interest in several parts of
Europe. Even less is deemed so, in some places. And it is on the decline; the
increasing plenty of money continually tending to lower it. It is presumable,
that no country will be able to borrow of foreigners upon better terms, than
the United States, because none can, perhaps, afford so good security. Our
situation exposes us less, than that of any other nation, to those casualties,
which are the chief causes of expense; our encumbrances, in proportion to our
real means, are less, though these cannot immediately be brought so readily
into action, and our progress in resources from the early state of the country,
and the immense tracts of unsettled territory, must necessarily exceed that of
any other. The advantages of this situation have already engaged the attention
of the European money-lenders, particularly among the Dutch. And as they become
better understood, they will have the greater influence. Hence as large a
proportion of the cash of Europe as may be wanted, will be, in a certain sense,
in our market, for the use of government. And this will naturally have the
effect of a reduction of the rate of interest, not indeed to the level of the
places, which send their money to market, but to something much nearer to it,
than our present rate.

The influence, which the funding of the debt is calculated to have, in
lowering interest, has been already remarked and explained. It is hardly
possible, that it should not be materially affected by such an increase of the
monied capital of the nation, as would result from the proper funding of
seventy millions of dollars. But the probability of a decrease in the rate of
interest, acquires confirmation from facts, which existed prior to the
revolution. It is well known, that in some of the states, money might with
facility be borrowed, on good security, at five per cent. and, not
unfrequently, even at less.

The most enlightened of the public creditors will be most sensible of the
justness of this view of the subject, and of the propriety of the use which
will be made of it.

The Secretary, in pursuance of it, will assume, as a probability, sufficiently
great to be a ground of calculation, both on the part of the government and of
its creditors -- That the interest of money in the United States will, in five
years, fall to five per cent. and, in twenty, to four. The probability, in the
mind of the Secretary, is rather that the fall may be more rapid and more
considerable; but he prefers a mean, a^ most likely to engage the assent of the
creditors, and more equitable in itself; because it is predicated on
probabilities, which may err on one side, as well as on the other.

Premising these things, the Secretary submits to the House, the expediency of
proposing a loan to the full amount of the debt, as well of the particular
states, as of the union, upon the following terms.

First -- That for every hundred dollars subscribed, payable in the debt (as
well interest as principal) the subscriber be entitled, at his option, either

To have two thirds funded at an annuity, or yearly interest of six per cent,
redeemable at the pleasure of the government, by payment of the principal; and
to receive the other third in lands in the Western Territory, at the rate of
twenty cents per acre. Or,

To have the whole sum funded at an annuity or yearly interest of four per
cent. irredeemable by any payment exceeding five dollars per annum on account
both of principal and interest; and to receive, as a compensation for the
reduction of interest, fifteen dollars and eighty cents, payable in lands, as
in the preceding case. Or

To have sixty-six dollars and two thirds of a dollar funded immediately at an
annuity or yearly interest of six per cent. irredeemable by any payment
exceeding four dollars and two thirds of a dollar per annum, on account both of
principal and interest; and to have, at the end of ten years, twenty-six
dollars and eighty-eight cen^^, funded at the like interest and rate of
redemption. Or

To have an annuity for the remainder of life, upon the contingency of living
to a given age, not less distant than ten years, computing interest at four per
cent. Or

To have an annuity for the remainder of life, upon the contingency of the
survivorship of the youngest of two persons, computing interest, in this case
also, at four per cent.

In addition to the foregoing loan, payable wholly in the debt, the Secretary
would propose, that one should be opened for ten millions of dollars, on the
following plan.

That for every hundred dollars subscribed, payable one half in specie, and the
other half in debt (as well principal as interest) the subscriber be entitled
to an annuity or yearly interest of five per cent. irredeemable by any payment
exceeding six dollars per annum, on account both of principal and interest.

The principles and operation of these different plans may ^^w require
explanation.

The first is simply a proposition for paying one third of the debt in land,
and funding the other two thirds, at the existing rate of interest, and upon
the same terms of redemption, to which it is at present subject.

Here is no conjecture, no calculation of probabilities. The creditor is
offered the advantage of making his interest principal, and he is asked to
facilitate to the government an effectual provision for his demands; by
accepting a third part of them in land, at a fair valuation.

The general price, at which the western lands have been, heretofore, sold, has
been a dollar per acre in public securities; but at the time the principal
purchases were made, these securities were worth, in the market, less than
three shillings in the pound. The nominal price, therefore, would not be the
proper standard, under present circumstances, nor would the precise specie
value then given, be a just rule. Because, as the payments were to be made by
instalments, and the securities were, at the times of the purchases, extremely
low, the probability of a moderate rise must be presumed to have been taken
into the account. Twenty cents, therefore, seem to bear an equitable proportion
to the two considerations of value at the time, and likelihood of increase.

It will be understood, that upon this plan, the public retains the advantage
of availing itself of any fall in the market rate of interest, for reducing
that upon the debt, which is perfectly just, as no present sacrifice, either in
the quantum of the principal, or in the rate of interest, is required from the
creditor.

The inducement to the measure is, the payment of one third of the debt in land.

The second plan is grounded upon the supposition, that interest, in five
years, will fall to five per cent. in fifteen more, to four. As the capital
remains entire, but bearing an interest of four per cent. only, compensation is
to be made to the creditor, for the interest of two per cent. per annum for
five years, and of one per cent. per annum, for fifteen years, to commence at
the distance of five years. The present value of these two sums or annuities,
computed according to the terms of the supposition, is, by strict calculation,
fifteen dollars and seven hundred and ninety-two thousandth parts of a dollar;
a fraction less than the sum proposed.

The inducement to the measure here is, the reduction of interest to a rate,
more within the compass of a convenient provision; and the payment of the
compensation in lands.

The inducements to the individual are -- the accommodation afforded to the
public -- the high probability of a complete equivalent -- the chance even of
gain, should the rate of interest fall, either more speedily or in a greater
degree, than the calculation supposes. Should it fall to five per cent. sooner
than five years; should it fall lower than five before the additional fifteen
were expired; or should it fall below four, previous to the payment of the
debt, there would be, in each case, an absolute profit to the creditor. As his
capital will remain entire, the value of it will increase, with every decrease
of the rate of interest.

The third plan proceeds upon the like supposition of a successive fall in the
rate of interest. And upon that supposition offers an equivalent to the
creditor. One hundred dollars, bearing an interest of six per cent. for five
years; of five per cent. for fifteen years, and thenceforth of four per cent.
(these being the successive rates of interest in the market) is equal to a
capital of 122 dollars, 510725 parts, bearing an interest of four per cent.
which, converted into a capital, bearing a fixed rate of interest of six per
cent, is equal to 81 dollars, 6738166 parts.

The difference between sixty-six dollars and two thirds of a dollar (the sum
to be funded immediately) and this last sum is 15 dollars, 0172 parts, which at
six per cent per annum, amounts at the end of ten years, to 26 dollars, 8755
parts, the sum to be funded at the expiration of that period.

It ought, however, to be acknowledged, that this calculation does not make
allowance for the principle of redemption, which the plan itself includes; upon
which principle the equivalent in a capital of six per cent. would be by strict
calculation, 87 dollars, 50766 parts.

But there are two considerations which induce the Secretary to think, that the
one proposed would operate more equitably than this: One is, that it may not be
very early in the power of the United States to avail themselves of the right
of redemption reserved in the plan: The other is, that with regard to the part
to be funded at the end of ten years, the principle of redemption is suspended
during that time, and the full interest at six per cent. goes on improving at
the sam rate; which for the last five years will exceed the market rate of
interest, according to the supposition.

The equivalent is regulated in this plan, by the circumstance of fixing the
rate of interest higher, than it is supposed it will continue to be in the
market; permitting only a gradual discharge of the debt, in an established
proportion, and consequently preventing advantage being taken of any decrease
of interest below the stipulated rate.

Thus the true value of eighty-one dollars and sixty-seven cents, the capital
proposed, considered as a perpetuity, and bearing six per cent. interest, when
the market rate of interest was five per cent. would be a small fraction more
than ninety-eight dollars, when it was four per cent. would be one hundred and
twenty-two dollars and fifty-one cents. But the proposed capital being subject
to gradual redemption, it is evident, that its value, in each case, would be
somewhat less. Yet from this may be perceived, the manner in which a less
capital at a fixed rate of interest, becomes an equivalent for a greater
capital, at a rate liable to variation and diminution.

It is presumable, that those creditors, who do not entertain a favorable
opinion of property in western lands, will give a preference to this last mode
of modelling the debt. The Secretary is sincere in affirming, that, in his
opinion, it will be likely to prove, to the full as beneficial to the
creditors, as a provision for his debt upon its present terms.

It is not intended, in either case to oblige the government to redeem, in the
proportion specified, but to secure to it, the right of doing so, to avoid the
inconvenience of a perpetuity.

The fourth and fifth plans abandon the supposition which is the basis of the
two preceding ones, and offer only four per cent. throughout.

The reason of this is, that the payment being deferred, there will be an
accumulation of compound interest, in the intermediate period against the
public, which, without a very provident administration, would turn to its
detriment. And the suspension of the burden would be too apt to beget a
relaxation of efforts in the mean time. The measure therefore, its object being
temporary accommodation, could only be advisable upon a moderate rate of
interest.

With regard to individuals, the inducement will be sufficient at four per
cent. There is no disposition of money, in private loans, making allowance for
the usual delays and casualties, which would be equally beneficial as a future
provision.

A hundred dollars advanced upon the life of a person of a eleven years old,
would produce an annuity See Schedule F.


Dollars. Parts. If commencing at twenty-one, of 10 346 If commencing at
thirty-one, of 18 803 If commencing at forty-one, of 37 286 If commencing at
fifty-one, of 78 580

The same sum advanced upon the chance of the survivorship of the youngest of
two lives, one of the persons being twenty-five, the other, thirty years old,
would produce, if the youngest of the two, should survive, an annuity Table
Schedule G.
for the remainder of life of 23 dollars, 556 parts.

From these instances may readily be discerned, the advantages, which these
deferred annuities afford, for securing a comfortable provision for the evening
of life, or for wives, who survive their husbands.

The sixth plan also relinquishes the supposition, which is the foundation of
the second, and third, and offers a higher rate of interest upon similar terms
of redemption, for the consideration of the payment of one half of the loan in
specie. This is a plan highly advantageous to the creditors, who may be able to
make that payment; while the specie itself could be applied in purchases of the
debt, upon terms, which would fully indemnify the public for the increased
interest.

It is not improbable, that foreign holders of the domestic debt, may embrace
this as a desirable arrangement.

As an auxiliary expedient, and by way of experiment, the Secretary would
propose a loan upon the principles of a tontine. See Table Schedule H.


To consist of six classes, composed respectively of persons of the following
ages: First class, of those of 20 years and under. Second class, of those above
20, and not exceeding 30. Third class, of those above 30, and not exceeding 40.
Fourth class, of those above 40, and not exceeding 50. Fifth class, of those
above 50, and not exceeding 60. Sixth class, of those above 60.


Each share to be two hundred dollars. The number of shares in each class, to
be indefinite. Persons to be at liberty to subscribe on their own lives, or on
those of others, nominated by them.

Dollars. Cents. The annuity upon a share in the first class to be 8. 40 upon a
share in the second 8. 65 upon a share in the third 9. 0 upon a share in the
fourth 9. 65 upon a share in the fifth 10. 70 upon a share in the sixth 12. 80

The annuities of those who die, to be equally divided among the survivors,
until four-fifths shall be dead, when the principle of survivorship shall
cease, and each annuitant thenceforth enjoy his dividend as a several annuity
during the life, upon which it shall depend.

These annuities are calculated on the best life in each class, and at a rate
of interest of four per cent. with some deductions in favor of the public. To
the advantages which these circumstances present, the cessation of the right of
survivorship on the death of four-fifths of the annuitants, will be no
inconsiderable addition.

The inducements to individuals are, a competent interest for their money from
the outset, secured for life, and the prospect of continual increase, and even
of large profit to those, whose fortune it is, to survive their associates.

It will have appeared, that in all the proposed loans, the Secretary has
contemplated the putting the interest upon the same footing with the principal:
That on the debt of the United States, he would have computed to the last of
the present year: That on the debt of the particular states, to the last of the
year 1791; the reason for which distinction will be seen hereafter.

In order to keep up a due circulation of money, it will be expedient, that the
interest of the debt should be paid quarter-yearly. This regulation will, at
the same time, conduce to the advantage of the public creditors, giving them,
in fact, by the anticipation of payment, a higher rate of interest; which may,
with propriety, be taken into the estimate of the compensation to be made to
them. Six per cent. per annum, paid in this mode, will truly be worth six
dollars, and one hundred and thirty-five thousandth parts of a dollar,
computing the market interest at the same rate.

The Secretary thinks it advisable, to hold out various propositions, all of
them compatible with the public interest, because it is, in his opinion, of the
greatest consequence, that the debt should, with the consent of the creditors,
be remoulded into such a shape, as will bring the expenditure of the nation to
a level with its income. 'Till this shall be accomplished, the finances of the
United States will never wear a proper countenance. Arrears of interest,
continually accruing, will be as continual a monument, either of inability, or
of ill faith; and will not cease to have an evil influence on public credit. In
nothing are appearances of greater moment, than in whatever regards credit.
Opinion is the soul of it, and this is affected by appearances, as well as
realities. By offering an option to the creditors, between a number of plans,
the change meditated will be more likely to be accomplished. Different tempers
will be governed by different views of the subject.

But while the Secretary would endeavor to effect a change in the form of the
debt, by new loans, in order to render it more susceptible of an adequate
provision; he would not think it proper to aim at procuring the concurrence of
the creditors by operating upon their necessities.

Hence whatever surplus of revenue might remain, after satisfying the interest
of the new loans, and the demand for the current service, ought to be divided
among those creditors, if any, who may not think fit to subscribe to them. But
for this purpose, under the circumstance of depending propositions, a temporary
appropriation will be most advisable, and the sum must be limited to four per
cent. as the revenues will only be calculated to produce, in that proportion,
to the entire debt.

The Secretary confides for the success of the propositions, to be made, on the
goodness of the reasons upon which they rest; on the fairness of the equivalent
to be offered in each case; on the discernment of the creditors of their true
interest; and on their disposition to facilitate the arrangements of the
government, and to render them satisfactory to the community.

The remaining part of the task to be performed is, to take a view of the means
of providing for the debt, according to the modification of it, which is
proposed.

On this point the Secretary premises, that, in his opinion, the funds to be
established, ought, for the present, to be confined to the existing debt of the
United States; as well, because a progressive augmentation of the revenue will
be most convenient, as because the consent of the state creditors is necessary,
to the assumption contemplated; and though the obtaining of that consent may be
inferred with great assurance, from their obvious interest to give it; yet
'till it shall be obtained, an actual provision for the debt, would be
premature. Taxes could not, with propriety, be laid for an object, which
depended on such a contingency.

All that ought now to be done, respecting it, is, to put the matter in an
effectual train for a future provision. For which purpose, the Secretary will,
in the course of this report, submit such propositions, as appear to him
advisable.

The Secretary now proceeds to a consideration of the necessary funds.

It has been stated that the debt of the United States consists of Dollars.
Cents. The foreign debt, amounting, with arrears of interest, to 11,710,378 62
And the domestic debt amounting, with like arrears, computed to the end of the
year 1790, to 42,414,085 94 Making together, Dollars 54,124,464 56

The interest on the domestic debt is computed to the end of this year, because
the details of carrying any plan into execution, will exhaust the year.

Dollars. Cents. The annual interest of the foreign debt has been stated at
542,599 66 And the interest on the domestic debt at four percent. would amount
to 1,696,563 43 Making together, dollars, 2,239,163 09

Thus to pay the interest of the foreign debt, and to pay four per cent on the
whole of the domestic debt, principal and interest, forming a new capital, will
require a yearly income of 2,239,163 dollars, 9 cents.

The sum which, in the opinion of the Secretary, ought now to be provided in
addition to what the current service will require.

For, though the rate of interest, proposed by the third plan, exceeds four per
cent. on the whole debt, and the annuities on the tontine will also exceed four
per cent. on the sums which may be subscribed; yet, as the actual provision for
a part is, in the former case, suspended; as measures for reducing the debt, by
purchases, may be advantageously pursued, and as the payment of the deferred
annuities will of course be postponed, four per cent. on the whole, will be a
sufficient provision.

With regard to the instalments of the foreign debt, these, in the opinion of
the Secretary, ought to be paid by new loans abroad. Could funds be
conveniently spared, from other exigencies, for paying them, the United States
could ill bear the drain of cash, at the present juncture, which the measure
would be likely to occasion.

But to the sum which has been stated for payment of the interest, must be
added a provision for the current service. This the Secretary estimates at six
hundred thousand dollars; See Schedule I.
making, with the amount of the interest, two millions, eight hundred and
thirty-nine thousand, one hundred and sixty-three dollars, and nine cents.

This sum may, in the opinion of the Secretary, be obtained from the present
duties on imports and tonnage, with the additions, which, without any possible
disadvantage either to trade, or agriculture, may be made on wines, spirits,
including those distilled within the United States, teas and coffee.

The Secretary conceives, that it will be sound policy, to carry the duties
upon articles of this kind, as high as will be consistent with the
practicability of a safe collection. This will lessen the necessity, both of
having recourse to direct taxation, and of accumulating duties where they would
be more inconvenient to trade, and upon objects, which are more to be regarded
as necessaries of life.

That the articles which have been enumerated, will, better than most others,
bear high duties, can hardly be a question. They are all of them, in reality --
luxuries -- the greatest part of them foreign luxuries; some of them, in the
excess in which they are used, pernicious luxuries. And there is, perhaps, none
of them, which is not consumed in so great abundance, as may, justly,
denominate it, a source of national extravagance and impoverishment. The
consumption of ardent spirits particularly, no doubt very much on account of
their cheapness, is carried to an extreme, which is truly to be regretted, as
well in regard to the health and the morals, as to the economy of the
community.

Should the increase of duties tend to a decrease of the consumption of those
articles, the effect would be, in every respect desirable. The saving which it
would occasion, would leave individuals more at their ease, and promote a more
favorable balance of trade. As far as this decrease might be applicable to
distilled spirits, it would encourage the substitution of cider and malt
liquors, benefit agriculture, and open a new and productive source of revenue.

It is not however, probable, that this decrease would be in a degree, which
would frustrate the expected benefit to the revenue from raising the duties.
Experience has shown, that luxuries of every kind, lay the strongest hold on
the attachments of mankind, which, especially when confirmed by habit, are not
easily alienated from them.

The same fact affords a security to the merchant, that he is not likely to be
prejudiced by considerable duties on such articles. They will usually command a
proportional price. The chief things in this view to be attended to, are, that
the terms of payment be so regulated, as not to require inconvenient advances,
and that the mode of collection be secure.

To other reasons, which plead for carrying the duties upon the articles which
have been mentioned, to as great an extent as they will well bear, may be added
these; that they are of a nature, from their extensive consumption, to be very
productive, and are amongst the most difficult objects of illicit introduction.

Invited by so many motives to make the best use of the resource, which these
articles afford, the essential enquiry is -- in what mode can the duties upon
them be most effectually collected?

With regard to such of them, as will be brought from abroad, a duty on
importation recommends itself by two leading considerations; one is, that
meeting the object at its first entrance into the country, the collection is
drawn to a point, and so far simplified; the other is, that it avoids the
possibility of interference between the regulations of the United States, and
those of the particular states.

But a duty, the precautions for the collection of which should terminate with
the landing of the goods, as is essentially the case in the existing system,
could not, with safety, be carried to the extent, which is contemplated.

In that system, the evasion of the duties, depends as it were, on a single
risk. To land the goods in defiance of the vigilance of the officers of the
customs, is almost, the sole difficulty. No future pursuit, is materially, to
be apprehended. And where the inducement is equivalent to the risk, there will
be found too many, who are willing to run it. Consequently there will be
extensive frauds of the revenue, against which the utmost rigor of penal laws,
has proved, as often as it has been tried, an ineffectual guard.

The only expedient which has been discovered, for conciliating high duties
with a safe collection, is, the establishment of a second; or interior scrunity.

By pursuing the article, from its importation, into the hands of the dealers
in it, the risk of detection is so greatly inhanced, that few, in comparison,
will venture to incur it. Indeed every dealer, who is not himself the
fraudulent importer, then becomes, in some sort, a sentinel upon him.

The introduction of a system, founded on this principle, in some shape or
other, is, in the opinion of the Secretary, essential to the efficacy of every
attempt, to render the revenues of the United States equal to their exigencies,
their safety, their prosperity, their honor.

Nor is it less essential to the interest of the honest and fair trader. It
might even be added, that every individual citizen, besides his share in the
general weal, has a particular interest in it. The practice of smuggling never
fails to have one of two effects, and sometimes unites them both. Either the
smuggler undersells the fair trader, as, by saving the (...), he can afford to
do, and makes it a charge upon him; or he sells at the increased price
occasioned by the duty, and defrauds every man, who buys of him, of his share
of what the public ought to receive. For it is evident, that the loss falls
ultimately upon the citizens, who must be charged with other taxes to make good
the deficiency* and supply the wants of the state.

The Secretary will not presume, that the plan; which he shall submit to the
consideration of the house, is the best that could be devised. But it is the
one, which has appeared to him freest from objections of any, that has occurred
of equal efficacy. He acknowledges too, that it is susceptible of improvement,
by other precautions in favor of the revenue, which he did not think it
expedient to add. The chief outlines of the plan are not original, but it is no
ill recommendation of it, that it has been tried with success.

The Secretary accordingly proposes,

That the duties heretofore laid upon wines, distilled spirits, teas and
coffee, should, after the last day of May next, cease, and that instead of
them, the following duties be laid. --

Upon every gallon of Madeira Wine, of the quality of London particular,
thirty-five cents.

Upon every gallon of other Madeirs Wine, thirty cents.

Upon every gallon of Sherry, twenty-five cents.

Upon every gallon of other Wine, twenty cents.

Upon every gallon of distilled Spirits, more than ten per cent. below proof,
according to Dicas's hydrometer, twenty cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits under five, and not more than ten per cent.
below proof, according to the same hydrometer, twenty-one cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits of proof, and not more than five per cent.
below proof, according to the same hydrometer, twenty-two cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits above proof, but not exceeding twenty per
cent. according to the same hydrometer, twenty-five cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits more than twenty, and not more than forty
per cent. above proof, according to the same hydrometer, thirty cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits more than forty per cent. above proof,
according to the same hydrometer, forty cents.

Upon every pound of Hyson Tea, forty cents.

Upon every pound of other Green Tea, twenty-four cents.

Upon every pound of Souchong and other black Teas, except Bohea, twenty cents.

Upon every pound of Bohea Tea, twelve cents.

Upon every pound of Coffee, five cents.

That upon Spirits distilled within the United States, from Molasses, Sugar, or
other foreign materials, there be paid --

Upon every gallon of those Spirits, more than ten per cent below proof,
according to Dicas's hydrometer, eleven cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits under five, and not more than ten per cent.
below proof, according to the same hydrometer, twelve cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits of proof, and not more than five per cent.
below proof, according to the same hydrometer, thirteen cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits, above proof, but not exceeding twenty per
cent. according to the same hydrometer, fifteen cents,

Upon every gallon of those Spirits, more than twenty, and not more than forty
per cent. above proof, according to the same hydrometer, twenty cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits more than forty per cent. above proof,
according to the same hydrometer, thirty cents.

That upon Spirits distilled within the United States, in any city, town or
village, from materials of the growth or production of the United States, there
be paid --

Upon every gallon of those Spirits more than ten per cent. below proof,
according to Dicas's hydrometer, nine cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits under five, and not more than ten per cent.
below proof, according to the same hydrometer, ten cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits of proof, and not more than five per cent.
below proof, according to the same hydrometer, eleven cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits above proof, but not exceeding twenty per
cent. according to the same hydrometer, thirteen cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits more than twenty, and not more than forty
per cent. above proof, according to the same hydrometer, seventeen cents.

Upon every gallon of those Spirits, more than forty per cent. above proof,
according to the same hydrometer, twenty-five cents.

That upon all Stills employed in distilling Spirits from materials of the
growth or production of the United States, in any other place, than a city,
town or village, there be paid the yearly sum of sixty cents, for every gallon,
English wine measure, of the capacity of each Still, including its head.

The Secretary does not distribute the duties on Teas into different classes,
as has been done in the impost act of the last session; because this
distribution depends on considerations of commercial policy, not of revenue. It
is sufficient, therefore, for him to remark, that the rates, above specified,
are proposed with reference to the lowest class.

The Secretary conceiving, that he could not convey an accurate idea of the
plan contemplated by him, for the collection of these duties, in any mode so
effectual as by the draft of a bill for the purpose, begs leave respectfully to
refer the House to that, which will be found annexed to this report, relatively
to the article of distilled spirits; and which, for the better explanation of
some of its parts, is accompanied with marginal remarks.

It would be the intention of the Secretary, that the duty on wines should be
collected upon precisely the same plan with that on imported spirits.

But with regard to teas and coffee, the Secretary is inclined to think, that
it will be expedient, till experience shall evince the propriety of going
further, to exclude the ordinary right of the officers to visit and inspect the
places in which those articles may be kept. The other precautions, without
this, will afford, though not complete, considerable security.

It will not escape the observation of the House, that the Secretary, in the
plan submitted, has taken the most scrupulous care, that those citizens upon
whom it is immediately to operate, be secured from every species of injury by
the misconduct of the officers to be employed. There are not only strong guards
against their being guilty of abuses of authority; they are not only
punishable, criminally, for any they may commit, and made answerable in
damages, to individuals, for whatever prejudice these may sustain by their acts
or neglects: But even where seizures are made with probable cause, if there be
an acquittal of the article seized, a compensation to the proprietors for the
injury their property may suffer, and even for its detention, is to be made out
of the public treasury.

So solicitous indeed has the Secretary been, to obviate every appearance of
hardship, that he has even included a compensation to the dealers, for their
agency in aid of the revenue.

With all these precautions to manifest a spirit of moderation and justice on
the part of the government: And when it is considered, that the object of the
proposed system is the firm establishment of public credit; that on this
depends the character, security and prosperity of the nation; that advantages
in every light important, may be expected to result from it; that the immediate
operation of it will be upon an enlightened class of citizens, zealously
devoted to good government, and to a liberal and enlarged policy, and that it
is peculiarly the interest of the virtuous part of them to cooperate in
whatever will res^rain the spirit of illicit traffic; there will be perceived
to exist, the justest ground of confidence, that the plan, if eligible in
itself, will experience the cheerful and prompt acquiescence of the community.

The Secretary computes the nett product of the duties proposed in this report
at about one million seven hundred and three thousand four hundred dollars,
according to the estimate in the schedule K, which if near the truth, will,
together with the probable product of the duties on imports and tonnage,
complete the sum required. But it will readily occur, that in so unexplored a
field there must be a considerable degree of uncertainty in the data. And that,
on this account, it will be prudent to have an auxiliary resource for the first
year, in which the interest will become payable, that there may be no
possibility of disappointment to the public creditors, ere there may be an
opportunity of providing for any deficiency, which the experiment may discover.
This will accordingly be attended to.

The proper appropriation of the funds provided, and to be provided, seems next
to offer itself to consideration.

On this head, the Secretary would propose, that the duties on distilled
spirits, should be applied in the first instance, to the payment of the
interest of the foreign debt.

That reserving out of the residue of those duties an annual sum of six hundred
thousand dollars, for the current service of the United States; the surplus,
together with the product of the other duties, be applied to the payment of the
interest on the new loan, by an appopriation, co-extensive with the duration of
the debt.

And that if any part of the debt should remain unsubscribed, the excess of the
revenue be divided among the creditors of the unsubscribed part, by a temporary
disposition; with a limitation, however, to four per cent.

It will hardly have been unnoticed, that the Secretary has been thus far
silent on the subject of the post office. The reason is, that he has had in
view the application of the revenue arising from that source, to the purposes
of a sinking fund. The post-master-general gives it as his opinion, that the
immediate product of it, upon a proper arrangement, would probably be, not less
than one hundred thousand dollars. And from its nature, with good management,
it must be a growing, and will be likely to become a considerable fund. The
post-master-general is now engaged in preparing a plan, This plan, since the
framing of this report, has been received, and will be, shortly, submitted.
which will be the foundation of a proposition for a new arrangement of the
establishment. This, and some other points relative to the subject referred to
the Secretary, he begs leave to reserve for a future report.

Persuaded as the Secretary is, that the proper funding of the present debt,
will render it a national blessing: Yet he is so far from acceding to the
position, in the latitude in which it is sometimes laid down, that "public
debts are public benefits," a position inviting to prodigality, and liable to
dangerous abuse, -- that he ardently wishes to see it incorporated, as a
fundamental maxim, in the system of public credit of the United States, that
the creation of debt should always be accompanied with the means of
extinguishment. This he regards as the true secret for rendering public credit
immortal. And he presumes, that it is difficult to conceive a situation, in
which there may not be an adherence to the maxim. At least he feels an
unfeigned solicitude, that this may be attempted by the United States, and that
they may commence their measures for the establishment of credit, with the
observance of it.

Under this impression, the Secretary proposes, that the nett product of the
post office, to a sum not exceeding one million of dollars, be vested in
commissioners, to consist of the Vice President of the United States or
President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Chief
Justice, Secretary of the Treasury and Attorney General of the United States,
for the time being, in trust, to be applied, by them, or any three of them, to
the discharge of the existing public debt, either by purchases of stock in the
market, or by payments on account of the principal, as shall appear to them
most advisable, in conformity to the public engagements; to continue so
vested, until the whole of the debt shall be discharged.

As an additional expedient for effecting a reduction of the debt, and for
other purposes which will be mentioned, the Secretary would further propose
that the same commissioners be authorized, with the approbation of the
President of the United States, to borrow, on their credit, a sum, not
exceeding twelve millions of dollars, to be applied,

First. To the payment of the interest and instalments of the foreign debt, to
the end of the present year, which will require 3,491,923 dollars, and 46 cents.

Secondly. To the payment of any deficiency which may happen in the product of
the funds provided for paying the interest of the domestic debt.

Thirdly. To the effecting a change in the form of such part of the foreign
debt, as bears an interest of five per cent. It is conceived, that, for this
purpose, a new loan, at a lower interest, may be combined with other
expedients. The remainder of this part of the debt, after paying the
instalments, which will accrue in the course of 1790, will be 3,888,888
dollars, and 81 cents.

Fourthly. To the purchase of the public debt at the price it shall bear in the
market, while it continues below its true value. This measure, which would be,
in the opinion of the Secretary, highly dishonorable to the government, if it
were to precede a provision for funding the debt, would become altogether
unexceptionable, after that had been made. Its effect would be in favor of the
public creditors, as it would tend to raise the value of stock. And all the
difference, between its true value, and the actual price, would be so much
clear gain to the public. The payment of foreign interest on the capital to be
borrowed for this purpose, should that be a necessary consequence, would not,
in the judgment of the Secretary, be a good objection to the measure. The
saving by the operation would be itself, a sufficient indemnity; and the
employment of that capital, in a country situated like this, would much more
than compensate for it. Besides, if the government does not undertake this
operation, the same inconvenience, which the objection in question supposes,
would happen in another way, with a circumstance of aggravation. As long, at
least, as the debt shall continue below its proper value, it will be an object
of speculation to foreigners, who will not only receive the interest, upon what
they purchase, and remit it abroad, as in the case of the loan, but will reap
the additional profit of the difference in value. By the government's entering
into competition with them, it will not only reap a part of this profit itself,
but will contract the extent, and lessen the extra profit of foreign purchases.
That competition will accelerate the rise of stock; and whatever greater rate
this obliges foreigners to pay, for what they purchase, is so much clear saving
to the nation. In the opinion of the Secretary, and contrary to an idea which
is not without patrons, it ought to be the policy of the government, to raise
the value of stock to its true standard as fast as possible. When it arrives to
that point, foreign speculations (which, till then, must be deemed pernicious,
further than as they serve to bring it to that point) will become beneficial.
Their money laid out in this country, upon our agriculture, commerce and
manufactures, will produce much more to us, than the income they will receive
from it.

The Secretary contemplates the application of this money, through the medium
of a national bank, for which, with the permission of the House, he will submit
a plan in the course of the session.

The Secretary now proceeds, in the last place, to offer to the consideration
of the House, his ideas, of the steps, which ought at the present session, to
be taken, toward the assumption of the state debts.

These are briefly, that concurrent resolutions of the two Houses, with the
approbation of the President, be entered into, declaring in substance,

That the United States do assume, and will at the first session in the year
1791, provide, on the same terms with the present debt of the United States,
for all such part of the debts of the respective states, or any of them, as
shall, prior to the first day of January in the said year 1791, be subscribed
toward a loan to the United States, upon the principles of either of the
plans, which shall have been adopted by them, for obtaining a re-loan of their
present debt.

Provided that the provision to be made as aforesaid, shall be suspended, with
respect to the debt, of any state, which may have exchanged the securities of
the United States for others issued by itself, until the whole of the said
securities shall, either be re-exchanged, or surrendered to the United States.

And provided also, that the interest upon the debt assumed, be computed to the
end of the year 1791; and that the interest to be paid by the United States,
commence on the first day of ^^nuary, 179^.

That the amount of the debt of each state so assumed and provided for, be
charged to such state in account with the United States, upon the same
principles, upon which it shall be lent to the United States.

That subscriptions be opened for receiving loans of the said debts at the same
times and places, and under the like regulations, as shall have been prescribed
in relation to the debt of the United States.

The Secretary has now completed the objects, which he proposed to himself, to
comprise in the present report. He has, for the most part, omitted details, as
well to avoid fatiguing the attention of the House, as because more time would
have been desirable even to digest the general principles of the plan. If these
should be found right, the particular modifications will readily suggest
themselves in the progress of the work.

The Secretary, in the views which have directed his pursuit of the subject,
has been influenced, in the first place, by the consideration, that his duty
from the very terms of the resolution of the House, obliged him to propose what
appeared to him an adequate provision for the support of the public credit,
adapted at the same time to the real circumstances of the United States; and in
the next, by the reflection, that measures which will not bear the test of
future unbiassed examination, can neither be productive of individual
reputation, nor (which is of much greater consequence) public honor, or
advantage.

Deeply impressed, as the Secretary is, with a full and deliberate conviction,
that the establishment of public credit, upon the basis of a satisfactory
provision, for the public debt, is, under the present circumstances of this
country, the true desideratum toward relief from individual and national
embarrassments; that without it, these embarrassments will be likely to press
still more severely upon the community -- He cannot but indulge an anxious
wish, that an effectual plan for that purpose may, during the present session,
be the result of the united wisdom of the legislature.

He is fully convinced, that it is of the greatest importance, that no further
delay should attend the making of the requisite provision; not only, because it
will give a better impression of the good faith of the country, and will bring
earlier relief to the creditors; both which circumstances are of great moment
to public credit: but, because the advantages to the community, from raising
stock, as speedily as possible, to its natural value, will be incomparably
greater, than any that can result from its continuance below that standard. No
profit, which could be derived from purchases in the market, on account of the
government, to any practicable extent, would be an equivalent for the loss,
which would be sustained by the purchases of foreigners, at a low value. Not to
repeat, that governmental purchases, to be honorable, ought to be preceded by a
provision. Delay, by disseminating doubt, would sink the price of stock; and as
the temptation to foreign speculations, from the lowness of the price, would be
too great to be neglected, millions would probably be lost to the United States.

All which is humbly submitted. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the Treasury.

[ SCHEDULE A.] Supposititious Statement of Accounts between the United States
and Individual States.
STATES. Ratio. Balances due to the states respectively. Proportion of each
state of the aggregate of those balances according to the ratio. Balances
against certain States. Balances in favor of certain states. Proportion of each
state in the aggregate of the balances against certain states. Ultimate
balances in favor of certain states upon the principle of an extinguishment of
the balances owing by the debtor states, and a proportional allowance to the
other states, adjusted according to the ratio given, and to be paid by the
United States. New Hampshire 3 57,500 60,000 2,500 3,000 500 Massachusetts 8
180,000 160,000 20,000 8,000 28,000 Rhode Island 1 20,000 20,000 1,000 1,000
Connecticut 5 110,000 100,000 10,000 5,000 15,000 New York 6 135,000 120,000
15,000 6,000 21,000 New Jersey 4 72,500 80,000 7,500 4,000 Pennsylvania 8
170,000 160,000 10,000 8,000 18,000 Delaware 1 30,000 20,000 10,000 1,000
11,000 Maryland 6 110,000 120,000 10,000 6,000 Virginia 10 187,500 200,000
12,500 10,000 North Carolina 5 90,000 100,000 10,000 5,000 South Carolina 5
87,500 100,000 12,500 5,000 Georgia 3 50,000 60,000 10,000 3,000 65 1,300,000
1,300,000 65,000 65,000 65,000 94,500

EXPLANATION.

THE first column supposes a Ratio according to the present rule of
representation.

The second column exhibits the balances which, on the principles of the
statement suggested are supposed to be due to the several States.

The third column shows the apportionment of the aggregate of those balances
according to the ratio given among the States.

The fourth column shows the balances against some States in consequence of
this apportionment.

The fifth column shows the balances in favor of some States, in consequence of
the same apportionment.

This completes the first Process proposed.

THE second Process proposed is illustrated by the sixth and seventh columns.

The sixth shows the share of each State, according to the ratio given in the
amount of the balances against the Debtor States.

The seventh shows the ultimate balances in favor of certain States, crediting
them for their proportions of the balance due from the Debtor States.

[ SCHEDULE B.] A GENERAL STATEMENT of the FOREIGN LOANS, showing in Abstract,
the Capital Sums borrowed, and the Arrearages of Interest to the 31st December,
1789.
CAPITAL SUMS Borrowed. Livres. Dollars. Cts. Of the Royal French Treasury, on
Interest at 5 per cent. 24,000,000 In Holland, guaranteed by the French Court,
at 4 per cent. 10,000,000 Livres, 34,00,0000 6,296,296 Of the Royal Spanish
Treasury, at 5 per cent. 174,011 Lenders in Holland, Florins. First Loan, 5 per
cent. 5,000,000 Second ditto, 4 per cent. 2,000,000 Third ditto, 5 per cent.
1,000,000 Fourth ditto, 5 per cent. 1,000,000 Florins, 9,000,000 3,600,000
Capital, 10,070,307

ARREARAGES of INTEREST to 31st December, 1789. On the French Loan.
Livres. Dollars. Cts. 1789, Jan. 1, Five Years Interest on the 6,000,000 at 5
per cent. 277,777.77 Sept. 3, Six do. on the 18,000,000 do. 999,999.96 Nov. 5,
Four do. on the 10,000,000 4 per cent. 296,296.

On the Spanish Loan.
ARREARAGES on the Spanish Loan of 174,011 Dollars, to 21st March, 1782, at 5
per cent. 5,093.27 March 21, Seven Years Interest on do. 60,904.62 1,640,071.62
Total Dollars, 11,710,378.62

NOTE. There were certain parts of the Capital of the Dutch guaranteed Loan of
10,000,000 Florins, and of the French Loan of 18,000,000 Livres, which became
due at the following periods, and remain unpaid, viz. Dollars. Cts. 1787. Sept.
3, First Payment of the 18,000,000. 1,500,000 277,777.77 Nov. 5, First do. of
the 10,000,000. 1,000,000 185,185.19 1788. Sept. 3, Second do. of the
18,000,000. the same. 462,962.96 Nov. 5, Second do. of the 10,000,000. 1789.
Sept. 3, Third do. of the 18,000,000. the same. 462,962.96 Nov. 5, Third do. of
the 10,000,000. Dollars, 1,388,888.88

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's Office, 31st Dec. 1789. JOSEPH NOURSE,
Register.
To the ARREARAGE of INTEREST to 31st December, 1789, above stated, Amounting
to 1,640,071.62 Add one year's Interest from 1st January, to 31st December,
1789, on 186,427, dollars, and 69 cents, being the Amount Principal Sum due to
foreign officers, employed in the service of the United States, which Interest
is annually payable at the House of Mons. Grand Banker at Paris, at 6 per cent.
11,185.66 ARREARAGES of INTEREST to 31st December, 1789, Dollars, 1,651,257.28

THE above Addition was adverted to, after the conclusion of the Report; but as
it makes no material difference, an alteration in consequence of it, is deemed
unnecessary.

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the Treasury.


[ SCHEDULE C.] ABSTRACT of the LIQUIDATED and LOAN-OFFICE DEBT of the United
States, on the 3d March, 1789.
Dollars. 90 ths. REGISTERED DEBT, 4,598,462.78 Credits given to sundries on
the treasury books, by virtue of special acts of Congress, which are not yet
put on the Funded Debt, 187,578.65 Certificates issued by the commissioner of
army accounts, deducting those which have been cancelled and registered,
7,967,109.73 Certificates issued by the commissioners of the five departments,
deducting those which have been cancelled and registered, 903,574.59
Certificates issued by the late state commissioners, deducting those which have
been cancelled and registered, 3,291,156.37 Loan-office certificates issued in
1781, and expressed as specie value, deducting those which have been cancelled
and registered, 112,704.15 Loan-office certificates, old emissions, reduced to
specie value, agreeably to the scale made by Congress, by taking the medium of
the loans made in each month, viz. 3,787,900 loaned to 1st September 1777,
equal to Dollars. 90 ths. 3,787,900 On the certificates issued between the 1st
September 1777 and 1st March 1778, interest is payable on the nominal sum
(being 3,459,000 dollars) although the specie value of the principal is only
2,538,572 dollars.
3,459,000 ditto between 1st Sept. 1777 and 1st March 1778, 2,538,572
59,830,212 ditto between 1st March 1778, and the closure of the Loan-offices,
5,146,330 11,463,802 Deduct specie amount cancelled and registered, 365,983
1511,097,818.75 Foreign officers, amount to their credit, the interest whereof
is payable at the House of Mons. Grand Banker at Paris, and included in the
estimate of foreign interest, 186,427.69 From which deduct this sum received
into the Treasury on account of lands and other property, and cancelled,
28,344,833.21 960,915.44 Leaves the amount of the domestic debt, Dollars,
27,383,917.67

Register's-office, March 3, 1789, JOSEPH NOURSE, Register.


TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's-office, January 1, 1790
The above estimate was formed to the expiration of the late government -- Some
variation has since taken place in the several parts, without making any
material alteration in the aggregate amount of the domestic debt: This arises
from a daily exchange at the Treasury of Loan-office and Final Settlement
Certificates, for Treasury Certificates given as evidences of the registered
debt, whereby the increase of the latter is carried on in proportion to the
cancelment of the former.

JOSEPH NOURSE, Register.


[ SCHEDULE D.] An ESTIMATE of all the INTEREST which will accrue on the
DOMESTIC DEBT of the United States, from its formation to the 31st December
1790, of such partial payments as have been made on account thereof, and of the
balance which will remain to be provided for, to pay up the interest fully to
that period.
Dollars. Cts. THE total amount of interest arising on the loan-office debt,
from the opening of the several offices in 1776, to the 31st of December, 1790,
9,534,478 The total amount of interest arising on the army debt, from the
several periods of its drawing interest, to the 31st December, 1790, 5,105,099
The total amount of interest arising on certificates issued by the thirteen
state commissioners, estimated at 2,146,799 The total amount of interest
arising on certificates issued by the commissioners for the commissaries,
quarter masters, marine, clothing and hospital departments, estimated at
737,338 The total amount of interest arising on the debt registered at the
treasury, estimated at 366,646 The total amount of interest on debts entered in
the treasury books, but for which certificates have not been issued by the
Register, so as to become a part of the registered debt, estimated at 83,936
Total 17,974,296

From this total amount of interest, the following deductions are to be made,
viz.

Dollars. Cts. So much paid on the loan-office debt, in old emission, equal to
372,368.30 In new emissions, as specie, 39,433.49 In bills of exchange, as
ditto, 1,663,992 So much paid by the several states in indents, paid into the
treasury on account of their quotas on the existing requisitions of the late
Congress, 2,244,231.31 So much paid by the state of New Jersey to their own
citizens, on the domestic debt, not included in the schedule of taxes,
424,442.22 So much paid by the state of South Carolina, being two years
interest on 222,465 dollars, and 9-90ths, the amount of certificates iessud to
the line of that state, at 6 per cent. is 16,695.73 Total amount of Interest
paid, 4,771,163.5 Deduct three years interest, estimated in the foregoing, on
960,915 dollars, and 42-100ths, being so much of the capital of the domestic
debt received in payment for lands and other public property, 172,964.75 Total
amount of deductions, 4,944,127.80 Leaves a balance of thirteen million and
thirty thousand one hundred sixty-eight dollars, and 20 cents, which will
accrue on the domestic debt, and for which provision is to be made to pay the
interest fully up to the 31st December, 1790, 13,030,168.20

It is to be observed, that as the certificates which have been issued for the
principal of a debt of more than twenty-seven millions of dollars, are in
themselves exceedingly numerous; and that as those several certificates bear an
interest from different periods, it has not been practicable to form a
statement of arrearages, but by ascertaining in the most accurate manner, the
different periods of time from which the several parts of the domestic debt
bear interest, and therefrom calculating the interest to 31st December, 1790.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's Office, 31st December, 1789. JOSEPH NOURSE,
Register.

[ SCHEDULE E.] ABSTRACT of the PUBLIC DEBT of the STATES undermentioned,
agreeably to statements transmitted in pursuance of the resolution of the House
of Representatives of the 21st of September, 1789.
MASSACHUSETTS. Dollars. Cents. Principal with interest to the 1st day of Nov.
1789. L.1,548,040 7 9 Lawful. Due to sundries for which no certificates have
yet been issued, 20,000 Total, L.1,568,040 7 9 at 6s. per Dol. ^,226,801.29
CONNECTICUT. Principal bearing interest from the 1st of Feb. 1789, 560,404 To
which ought to be added for balance of state bills emitted in the year 1780,
bearing interest at 5 per cent. to the 1st March 1785, estimated at 24,948
Total, L.585,352 0 0 at 6s. per Dol. 1,951,173.33^ NEW YORK. Principal and
interest computed to the 1st day of January 1790, 1,032,616 2 0 From which
ought to be deducted for amount of principal and interest of continental
securities loaned to the state in pursuance of their act of the 18th day of
April 1786, estimated at 565,586 Leaves for state debt proper, L.467,030 2 0 at
8s. per Dol. 1,167,575.25 NEW JERSEY. Principal unredeemed, 295,755 4 11 at 7
s6 per Dol. 788,680.65^ VIRGINIA. Principal of domestic debt, 1,063,396 17 1
Ditto of foreign debt with interest to the 1st January 1790, 40,826 1 1 Total,
L.1,104,222 18 2 at 6s. per Dol. 3,680,743.2^ SOUTH CAROLINA. Principal of
domestic debt, 1,069,652 2 4 Indents of interest on ditto in circulation,
71,325 7 2 Foreign debt, principal and interest, due to the 1st of January
1789, 115,810 0 1 Total, L.1,256,787 9 7 at 4 s8 per Dol. 5,386,232.5 Total
dollars, 18,201,205.60^

It will be observed, that the period to which interest is calculated on the
debts abovementioned is only specified with accuracy on the statements which
have been transmitted from Massachusetts, Connecticut and New York. From the
best information which the Secretary can obtain, he presumes -- That in the
statement made of the debt of New Jersey, interest has been calculated to the
31st day of December 1788. That on the debt of Virginia, interest has been
calculated to the 31st day of December 1788. On that of South Carolina, to the
1st day of April 1790.

From the states of New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland,
North Carolina and Georgia, no accounts of their respective state debts have
been forwarded.

The Secretary is however of opinion from the result of enquiries made by him
-- That the state debt of New Hampshire may be estimated at about Dollars
300,000 That the state debt proper of Pennsylvania (that is exclusive of their
assumption of the continental debt) at about Dollars 2,200,000 And that of
Maryland, at Ditto 800,000

From the above statement and estimates, the amount of principal and interest
of the state debts (exclusive of Delaware, North Carolina, Georgia and
Rhode Island) appears to be about twenty-one millions and a half; but as the
debts of the four last states are not included in the above sum; and it is
possible that a greater arrearage of interest may be due on the state debts
than is at present ascertained, the aggregate of the principal and interest may
be computed at twenty-five millions of dollars.

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the Treasury.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. A STATEMENT of the DEBT of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, as it respects the notes issued by the several Treasurers, to
the first of November, 1789.
November 1, 1789, exclusive of half pay notes, L.1,403,459 16 11 Notes issued
to widows and orphan children of the deceased officers of the late continental
army, for the seven years half pay, agreeable to resolves of Congress, 8,246 11
10 Interest on the foregoing notes since October, 1781, L.579,660 6 4 Of which
has been paid 443,326 7 4 Interest remaining due, November 1, 1789, 136,333 19
0 L.1,548,040 7 9 Remains due on the books of the committee for settling with
the late continental army, to the widows and orphan children of deceased
officers of said army, and to officers and soldiers for their services, about
20,000

N. B. By an act of the legislature, one third part of the revenue of Excise is
appropriated to pay the exigencies of government, and the other two third parts
for the payment of interest of the notes, which pays about one quarter part of
the interest; the other three quarters are unprovided for.

Treasury-Office, Boston, October 31, 1789. ALEXANDER HODGDON, Treasurer.
COMPARED with the original, in the office of the Secretary of the Treasury.

WILLIAM DUER.



STATE OF CONNECTICUT. A STATEMENT of the PUBLIC DEBT of the State of
Connecticut, as it st^od November 1, 1789.
Notes issued to the Connecticut line, payable June 1, 1782, L.2,334 13 11
Ditto ditto 1783, 2,339 13 4 Ditto ditto 1784, 3,252 12 1 Ditto ditto 1785,
42,300 6 1 Ditto ditto 1786, 28,189 6 3 Ditto ditto 1787, 28,448 5 6 Ditto
ditto 1788, 21,593 0 4 Ditto ditto 1789, 20,097 5 7 Ditto dated February 1,
1781, issued per act of Assembly, Nov. 1780, 153,229 8 6 Ditto of various
dates, ditto per act of ditto, May, 1781, 33,947 11 8 Ditto dated June 1, 1781,
ditto ditto, for remounting dragoons, 1,932 8 0 Ditto of various dates, ditto
ditto, May, 1783, 41,841 6 1 Ditto issued per act of May, 1789, for old notes
re-loaned, 180,890 1 0 560,404 18 9 Notes issued per particular acts of
Assembly, payable out of civil list funds, 2,856 11 4 Certificates for
interest, etc. issued on the state debt, up to February 1, 1789, and remaining
unpaid November 1, 1789, 19,140 3 9 Balance of orders unpaid, drawn by Oliver
Wolcoot, Esquire. payable out of the 1 s. tax, granted in January 1783. 692 8 10
Balance of state bills, which were emitted in March, June and July, 1780, with
the interest at 5 per cent. to the 1st of March, 1785, estimated at 24,948 9 1

There are a number of pay table orders drawn on former taxes, the amount,
supposed not great, cannot be ascertained.

There is also out-standing, a sum of old emissions of paper, issued before the
war -- the amount unknown.

ACCOUNT of LOAN-OFFICE and FINAL SETTLEMENT CERTIFICATES in the treasury of
the State of CONNECTICUT.
Loan-office certificates, L.442 19 7 Final settlement certificates, 2,151 17 1
L.2,594 16 8 Amount of interest certificates that were issued upon the evidence
of the United States debt, received by the treasurer of the state of
Connecticut for taxes and impost duties, and delivered to William Imlay, Esquire.
continental loan-officer, from January 9, 1786, to November 1, 1789, L.33,996
15 3

COMPARED with the original in the office of the Secretary of the Treasury.

A STATEMENT of the FUNDS provided for the payment of the principal and
interest of the public debt of the state of CONNECTICUT.
BALANCES of taxes laid for the payment of interest on the state debt, and the
first three classes of army notes, as appears from the treasury books, November
1, 1789, being the balance of fifteen taxes, including abatements, collecting
fees, etc. L.40,489 14 10 Balance of excise and impost bonds payable, including
collecting fees, etc. 9,070 15 2 A tax of four pence on the pound, laid on the
list, 1788, amounting to L.1,462,860 10 11 for the payment of interest on the
state debt, and the balance of the three first classes of the state notes; the
nett avails estimated at 20,266 14 4 A tax of eight pence on the pound, on the
same list, laid for the payment of the balance of state bills, orders on 2s.
6d. and 1s. taxes, and part of the principal of the state debt; the nett avails
estimated at 40,533 8 8 Excise for the payment of interest on the state debt,
etc. estimated at 5,000 0 0

The first article in the above statement of funds will probably, upon
settlement of those old taxes, fall greatly short of the sum set down; to say
how much, is merely conjectural. There will also be a loss upon the excise and
impost bonds. The amount of the excise for the current year is very uncertain.

Comptroller's-Office; 1 st December, 1789. RALPH POMEROY, Comptroller.

STATE OF NEW YORK. A STATEMENT of the DEBT of the State of NEW YORK.
The following species of Certificates, etc. have been issued by the State, and
are still unredeemed, viz.

Principal Sum, Spec. val. Interest to Jan. 1, 1790. Certificates for Money
loaned, pursuant to resolutions of the 4th day of April, 1778, L. 111 13 3 L.
78 14 5 for do. pursuant to a law of the 30th of June, 1780, 741 6 0 422 10 9
for horses purchased in the year 1780, 904 5 0 515 8 5 for depreciation of pay
to the army dated 31st July, 1780, 54,520 1 7 25,669 17 4 for pay of the year
1781, to do. dated the 1st January, 1782, 17,972 6 9 8,626 14 0 for pensions to
widows of military officers, 8,104 18 2 3,647 4 2 for pay of levies, militia,
etc. etc. 42,871 4 3 18,220 5 3 for other certificates received on loan,
pursuant to a law passed the 18th April, 1786, 523,848 5 1 144,058 5 4 for
four-fifths of the interest due on those received on loan, 105,669 9 8 for
claims on forfeited estates 25,897 8 10 3,884 12 3 Bills of credit, called New
Emission, emitted pursuant to a law passed the 30th of June, 1780, bearing
interest, 3,612 16 0 1,174 3 1 Ditto, emitted pursuant to resolutions of
Congress, and Convention of this State, reduced to specie value, 1,047 0 0
L.785,300 14 7 L.206,297 15 0 There are large demands against forfeited
estates, unliquidated, and others liquidated, for which no certificates have
yet issued, to the amount of 41,017 12 5

There are no funds specially provided for redeeming the aforesaid
Certificates, except the following, viz. The arrears of old taxes may probably
produce about L. 10,000 0 0 Quit rents, about 20,000 0 0

Fifteen townships of new lands, or 375,000 acres, ordered to be sold (by a law
passed the 25th February, 1789,) and are now surveying.

GERARD BANCKER, Treasurer of the State of New York.
New York, November 30, 1789.
An ACCOUNT of CONTINENTAL SECURITIES now in the Treasury of the State of
NEW YORK, viz.
Principal. Int. 1 st Jan. 1790. Certificates issued by William Barber, L.
352,471 13 1 L. 105,741 9 11 Ditto, by loan-officers in this State, 277,448 16
4 83,234 12 11 Ditto, by John Pierce, Burrall, Denning, Bindon, and Fox,
299,614 4 5 89,884 5 4 Interest facilities, 2,^02 14 8 L. 932,037 8 6 L.
278,860 8 2

OF the abovementioned Loan-Office and Barbers's Certificates, the sum of
L.470,649 17 6 was received in on loan by the State in 1786, and one fifth of
the interest that was due thereon, to the 31st December, 1784, then paid, and
certificates for the remaining four fifths issued, payable in one year, of
which certificates three fourths remain unredeemed, as represented in the
former part of this statement.

GERARD BANCKER, Treasurer of the State of New York.
New York, November 30, 1789. COMPARED with the Original in the office of the
Secretary of the Treasury.



An ACCOUNT of CERTIFICATES due from the UNITED STATES to the INHABITANTS of
the State of NEW JERSEY, which draw interest at the TREASURY.
Principal. Annual Interest. 1st. Continental loan-office certificates, L.
420,511 0 10 25,230 13 3 2d. Certificates issued by John Pierce, commissioner,
for arrears of pay, etc. 147,118 15 2 8,827 2 6 3d. Certificates by Benjamin
Thompson, Commissioner, 344,237 11 2 20,654 5 0 L. 911,867 7 2 54,712 0 9
COMMUTATION. 4th. Certificates issued by John Pierce, Commissioner, and given
to the officers of the late Jersey line, for their commutation, 66,899 2 6
STATE DEBT. 1st. Certificate^ given to the officers and soldiers of the late
Jersey line, for the depreciation of their pay, of which there was outstanding
October 1, 1786, 99,526 11 4 2d. Ditto given by the Commissioners in the
several counties for militia pay, of which there was outstanding October 1,
1786, 55,565 17 7 3d. Certificates given by Silas Condict, Commissioner,
121,521 8 7 4th. Ditto given by the Treasurer and Auditor for demands against
confiscated estates, 32,020 2 9 5th. Ditto issued by the Auditor for militia
pay, 821 4 7 L. 309,255 4 11 Paid into the Treasury since October 1786, 13,500
0 0 L. 295,755 4 11 Annual interest of state debt, L, 17,745 6 3

COMPARED with the Original in the Office of the Secretary of the Treasury.

ABSTRACT of the PUBLIC DEBTS due from the State of VIRGINIA.
ON interest at 6 per cent. Army debt for pay and depreciation of the officers
and soldiers, L.936,830 7 6 Loan-office debt, 119,382 7 4 Certificates issued
for the paper money funded, 7,183 2 3 Balance due to Foreign creditors,
including the interest (at 6 per cent.) to the 1st January, 1790, on L.9,415 0
2 part of the said balance, for which warrants have not been drawn by the
creditors, 40,826 1 1

JOHN PENDLETON, Auditor of Public Accounts.
Virginia, Auditor's-Office, November 20, 1789. COMPARED with the original in
the office of the Secretary of the Treasury.



The Auditor-General reports the following STATEMENT of the DEBT due by the
State of SOUTH CAROLINA, viz.
PRINCIPAL INDENTS.
BALANCE issued from the treasury of the state aforesaid, and yet remaining to
be issued on the 1st of October, 1789, L.1,069,652 2 4 To be cancelled by
Balance of bonds for confiscated property, L.79,985 10 0 Purchases of ditto,
unsettled for, 12,910 0 0 Balance of amercements, 7,713 4 6 Ditto for bonds for
public property 35,065 10 6 Ditto for lands granted to 1st November, 1789,
42,568 1 7 178,242 6 8 Balance still to be cancelled, Sterling, L.891,409 15 8
SPECIAL INDENTS.
Amount issued, and to be issued, L.440,368 0 0 Deduct, for so much received
into the Treasury, 369,042 12 9 Balance in circulation, and yet to be issued,
L.71,325 7 2

Agreeably to a report of the committee of ways and means, the debts due to the
State for the arrears of taxes, etc. are sufficient to cancel the above balance.

FOREIGN DEBT.
Amount due to sundry persons, L.93,244 17 4 Balance of interest due 1st
January, 1789, L.29,558 4 11 Deduct, for so much paid I.S. Cripps, agent,
L.4,949 5 4 Balance paid to such creditors as were here or their attorneys,
2,043 16 10 6,993 2 2^ 22,565 2 9 Principal and balance due 1st January, 1789,
L.115,810 0 1 FUNDS appropriated by the Legislature.
Out of the taxes payable the 1st April, 1790, L.10,000 Interest on the paper
medium, to 1st May, 1791, 12,750 Balance of bonds given for confiscated
property, payable in specie, 1,610 17 3 The sums due, and that shall become
due, for amercements, in specie, 8,371 16 6 Balance of bonds given for duties,
payable by instalments, 6,2^0 14 3 Bonds for duties due prior to 1st Jan. 1788,
not installed, 233 3 4 1/^ A tax of 1-4th of a dollar per head, per annum, on
all negroes, mustizoes, and mulattoes, for ten years, from February 1791, the
number computed to be about 100,000, which will amount to 58,333 6 8 Sterling,
L.97,539 18 0

J. McCALL, Auditor.
Auditor's-Office, Charleston, 30 th November, 1789. COMPARED with the original
in the office of the Secretary of the Treasury.



( SCHEDULE F.) TABLE showing the ANNUITY which a person of a given age, would
be entitled to during life, from the time he should arrive at a given age, upon
the present payment of a hundred dollars, computing Interest at four per cent.
Age at the time of payment. Age when entitled. Annuity Age when entitled.
Annuity. Age when entitled. Annuity. Age when entitled Annuity. 1 21 23.453 31
42.625 41 84.522 50 174.11 2 22 20.376 32 37.365 42 74.936 50 143.14 3 23
19.415 33 35.775 43 72.440 50 128.46 4 24 18.826 34 34.970 44 71.697 50 117.64
5 25 18.457 35 34.660 45 71.840 50 108.95 6 26 18.280 36 34.619 46 72.584 50
101.60 7 27 18.188 37 34.767 47 73.752 50 95.210 8 28 18.258 38 35.235 48
75.720 50 89.971 9 29 18.383 39 35.830 49 78.025 50 85.238 10 30 18.617 40
37.006 50 81.960 11 21 10.346 31 18.803 41 37.286 50 75.500 12 22 10.414 32
19.072 42 38.162 50 73.058 13 23 10.519 33 19.382 43 39.249 50 70.246 14 24
10.608 34 19.704 44 40.493 50 66.279 15 25 10.727 35 20.088 45 41.638 50 63.151
16 26 10.818 36 20.489 46 42.957 50 60.129 17 27 10.939 37 20.911 47 44.358 50
57.258 18 28 11.065 38 21.354 48 45.888 50 54.520 19 29 11.195 39 21.821 49
47.519 50 51.907 20 30 11.352 40 22.313 50 49.415 21 31 11.515 41 22.836 50
47.038 22 32 11.687 42 23.386 50 44.770 23 33 11.846 43 23.987 50 42.534 24 34
12.028 44 24.719 50 40.460 25 35 12.253 45 25.396 50 38.510 26 36 12.462 46
26.128 50 36.572 27 37 12.682 47 26.902 50 34.726 28 38 12.913 48 27.749 50
32.967 29 39 13.155 49 28.647 50 31.329 30 40 13.385 50 29.643 31 41 13.629 50
28.073 32 42 13.884 50 26.580 33 43 14.190 50 25.161 34 44 14.547 50 23.812 35
45 14.827 50 22.483 36 46 15.157 50 21.217 37 47 15.512 50 20.023 38 48 15.896
50 18.886 39 49 16.301 50 17.806 40 50 16.783

( SCHEDULE G.) TABLE showing what ANNUITY would be enjoyed by the Survivor of
any two persons of certain ages, for the remainder of life, after the
determination of the life in expectation, upon the present payment of one
hundred dollars, computing Interest at four per cent. per annum, and the
duration of life according to Doctor Halley's Tables.
Age of the youngest. Age of the eldest Annuity of Survivor. Age of the
youngest. Age of the eldest. Annuity of Survivor. Age of the youngest. Age of
the eldest. Annuity of Survivor. Age of the youngest. Age of the eldest.
Annuity of Survivor. 10 28.248 20 28.169 30 28.555 45 30.620 15 26.392 25
26.041 35 26.001 50 27.005 20 24.545 30 23.923 40 23.496 55 23.375 25 22.716 35
21.753 45 21.061 45 60 20.040. 30 20.920 40 19.825 30 50 18.730 65 16.957 35
19.168 20 45 17.876 55 16.529 70 14.240 10 40 17.464 50 16.018 62 14.484 45
15.847 55 14.261 65 12.600 50 32.164 50 14.263 60 12.620 70 10.894 55 27.731 55
12.782 65 11.100 50 60 23.513 60 11.237 70 9.707 35 28.993 65 19.662 65 10.099
40 26.164 70 16.257 70 8.905 25 27.816 45 23.381 30 25.556 50 20.702 55 34.286
15 28.169 35 23.331 35 55 18.172 60 28.843 20 26.198 40 21.159 60 15.820 55 65
23.742 25 24.219 45 19.047 65 13.666 70 19.175 30 22.276 25 50 17.030 70 11.724
60 37.509 35 20.376 55 15.117 60 65 30.423 40 18.528 60 13.331 40 29.673 70
24.044 15 45 16.750 65 11.689 45 26.469 50 15.053 70 10.173 50 23.337 65 42.481
55 12.968 40 55 20.354 65 70 32.679 60 11.948 60 17.604 65 10.553 65 15.060 70
70 50.994 70 9.270 70 12.799

To find the Annuity upon the Survivorship of the youngest of any two lives,
expressed in this table, look for the respective ages under their respective
heads, and opposite the number, which corresponds with the age of the eldest
will be seen the Annuity required.

[ SCHEDULE H.] TABLE for a TONTINE of Six Classes, the number of lives in each
class being indefinite, calculated on a payment of two hundred dollars by each
subscriber, and at a rate of interest of four per cent. The computation on the
best life in each class, and on the supposition that the subscribers to each
class will not be less than the respective numbers specified in the first
column.
Number of Lives in each Class. Ages. Annuity whilst all are in life Dividends
at successive periods during the probable continuance of life. At the
expiration of 10 years. At the expiration of 20 years. At the expiration of 30
years. At the expiration of 40 years. At the expiration of 50 years. At the
expiration of 60 years. At the expiration of 70 years. 75 1 to 20 8,426 9,722
11,490 14,042 18,054 25 278 42,130 126,390 64 21 to 30 8,676 10,272 12,606
16,314 23,110 39,618 ^38,666 54 31 to 40 9,046 11,102 14,366 20,354 31,890
122,282 44 41 to 50 9,650 12,488 17,608 30,328 106,150 34 51 to 60 10,714
15,178 26,020 91,068 24 61 to 70 12,802 20,518 71,802

This Table, which is calculated on so small a number of persons, will serve to
show the greatness of the advantage to fortunate survivors, in case of a
numerous subscription.

[ SCHEDULE I.] GENERAL ESTIMATE for the Services of the Current Year.
Civil List, as per No. 1, 254,892.73 War department, No. 2, 155,537.72
Military Pensions, No. 3, 96,979.72 Dollars, 507,410.17

With an eye to the necessary provisions for the foreign department, and to
other arrangements which may be found requisite, it appeared advisable to state
in the report, to which this is annexed, a sum of six hundred thousand dollars
for the current service.

Treasury Department, January 5, 1790.
[ No. I.] ESTIMATE of the Expenditure for the Civil List of the United States,
on the present establishment for the year 1790.
Dollars. For the compensation to the President of the United States, 25,000
That of the Vice President, 5,000 Compensation to the Chief Justice, 4,000
Ditto to each of the five Associate Justices, 3500 dollars each, 17,500 To the
Judges of the following Districts, viz. District of Maine, 1,000 New Hampshire,
1,000 Massachusetts, 1,200 Connecticut, 1,000 New York, 1,500 New Jersey, 1,000
Pennsylvania, 1,600 Delaware, 800 Maryland, 1,500 Virginia, 1,800 Kentuckey,
1,000 South Carolina, 1,800 Georgia, 1,500 Attorney General, 1,500 Carried
forward, 69,700

Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts. Brought forward, 69,700 Compensation to the members of
Congress, estimating the attendance of the whole number for six months, viz.
Speaker of the House of Representatives, at twelve dollars per day, 2,199
Eighty members, at six dollars per day, 87,600 Traveling expenses computed,
15000 104,790 To the Secretary of the Senate, one year's salary, 1,500
Additional allowance estimated for six months, at two dollars per day, 365
1,865 Principal Clerk to the Secretary of the Senate, for the same time, at
three dollars per day, 547.50 Engrossing Clerk to the Secretary of the Senate,
estimated for same time, at two dollars per day, 365 Chaplain to the Senate,
estimated for six months, at five hundred dollars per annum, 250 Compensation
to the doorkeeper of the Senate, for the same time, at three dollars per day,
547.50 Messenger to the Senate, for the same time, at 2 dollars per day, 365
Clerk of the House of Representatives, for one year's salary, 1,500 Additional
allowance calculated for six months, at two dollars per day, 365 1,865
Principal Clerk in the office of do. estimated for same time, at three dollars
per day, 547.50 Engrossing Clerk for same time, estimated at two dollars per
day, 365 Chaplain to the House of Representatives, estimated for same time, at
five hundred dollars per annum, 250 Sergeant at arms, estimated for same time
at 4 dols. per day, 730 Doorkeeper, for same time, at 3 dollars per day,
547.50 Assistant doorkeeper for do. at 2 dollars per day, 365 183,100 TREASURY
DEPARTMENT. Secretary of the Treasury, 3,500 Assistant of the Secretary of the
Treasury, 1,500 Five Clerks, at 500 dollars per annum each, 2,500 Messenger and
office keeper, 150 Comptroller of the Treasury, 2,000 Principal Clerk to do.
800 Four Clerks, at 500 dollars each, 2,000 Treasurer, 2,000 Principal Clerk to
do. 600 Auditor of the Treasury, 1,500 Principal Clerk to do. 600 Twelve Clerks
to do. who, besides the current business under the New Government, has the
settlement of the accounts which arose under the Confederation, in the
quartermaster, commissary, clothing, hospital, and marine departments, and
ordinance stores; and also the accounts of the secret and commercial committees
of Congress, at 500 dollars each, 6,000 Register of the Treasury 1,250 One
Clerk on the books of the public creditors, called Funded Debt at the Treasury,
transfers, etc. 500 One Clerk in the office of the Register, employed in
keeping the accounts of interest arising on the domestic debt, 500 One do. on
the principal books of the treasury, in journalizing and posting into the
ledger, 500 25,850 Carried forward, 208,950

Brought forward, 208,950 One (...) in copying fair statements of the public
accounts, and other ^ranscripts as required from the treasury books, 500 One
do. in keeping the accounts of the registers, signed and sealed, etc. for ships
transmitted to the collectors of the customs at the several ports; filing
duplicates of registers issued by the collectors; keeping the accounts of the
transfers of vessels, and other business of record, arising from Act for
registering of vessels, regulating the coasting trade, and other purposes
therein mentioned, 500 Two do. on the old accounts of the treasury, and books
and accounts of the thirteen late state commissioners, at five hundred dollars
each, 1,000 Messenger and office keeper to the comtroller, auditor and
register's office, 150 2,150 DEPARTMENT OF STATE. Secretary of that department,
3,500 Chief Clerk, 800 Three Clerks, at 500 dollars each, 1,500 Messenger and
office keeper, 150 5,950 DEPARTMENT OF WAR. Secretary of the department, 3,000
Chief Clerk, 600 Two Clerks at five hundred dollars each, 1,000 Messenger and
office keeper, 150 4,750 GOVERNMENT OF THE WESTERN TERRITORY. The Governor for
his salary as such, and for discharging the duties of Superintendant of Indian
affairs in the northern department, 2,000 The Secretary of the Western
Territory, 750 The Three Judges, at eight hundred dollars each, 2,400 5,150
OFFICERS employed to settle the accounts between the United States and
individuals States. Three Commissioners of the General Board, at two thousand
two hundred and fifty dollars per annum, 6,750 Chief Clerk, 600 Four Clerks, at
four hundred dolla^^ each, 1,600 Messenger and office keeper, 150
Paymaster-General, and Commissioner of Army Accounts, 1,250 Eight Clerks, at
five hundred dollars each, 4,000 One do. at four hundred dollars, 400 One do.
at four hundred and fifty dollars, 450 15,200 PENSIONS granted by the late
Government. Isaac Van Vert, John Paulding, David Williams,
a pension of two hundred dollars per annum to each, pursuant to an act of
Congress of 3d November, 1780, 600 Dominique L'Eglise, per act of 8th of
August, 1782, 120 Joseph Traversie, per do. 120 Youngest Children of the late
Major General Warren, per act of 1st July, 1780, 450 Eldest Son of do. per act
of 8th April, 1777, estimated at, 600 Youngest Son of General Mercer, per act
of 8th April, 1777, estimated at, 700 James McKenzie, Joseph Brussells, John
Jordan,
per act of 10th September, 1783, entitled to a pension of forty dollars each
per annum, 120 Carried forward, 2,710 242,150

Dols Cts. Dols. Cts. Brought forward, 2,710 242,150 Elizabeth Bergen, per act
of 21st August, 1781, 53.33 Joseph De Beauleau, per act 5th August, 1782, 100
Richard Gildley, per acts of 17th November, 1775, and 26th February, 1781,
444.40 Lieutenant Colonel Touzard, per act of 27th October, 1778, 360 3,667.73
For INCIDENTAL and CONTINGENT EXPENSES relative to the CIVIL LIST
Establishment. Under this head are comprehended fire wood, stationary, together
with printing work, and all other contingent expenses for the two Houses of
Congress; rent and office expenses of the three several departments, viz.
Treasury, State, War, and of the General Board of Commissioners, and
Paymaster-General. Congress, estimated at, 5,000 Treasury Department, viz.
Rent, 500 Contingencies of the Secretary's office, 500 Comptroller's 400
Auditor's 200 Register's 200 Treasurer's 200 2,000 Ditto War Department, 600
Department of State, 500 Board of Commissioners, 500 Paymaster, and
Commissioner of Army Accounts, 425 9,025 Dollars, 254,892.73

THIS estimate corresponds with the existing provisions; but it will probably
receive additions from others in the course of the session: -- In particular it
will be observed, that there is no article respecting the salaries of Foreign
Ministers, their allowances not having been regulated by law. -- Neither does
the estimate include those objects which remain to be provided for in
consequence of some deficiency in the estimate for the services of last year,
and also from certain demands on the Treasury, founded on acts of the late
Government, which require an appropriation by Congress, previous to their being
discharged -- These will form an estimate by themselves under the head of
Contingencies.

Register's-Office, 5th January, 1790. JOSEPH NOURSE, Register.

[ No. II.] ESTIMATE of MONEYS Requisite for the DEPARTMENT of WAR, for the
year 1790.
INFANTRY.
Dollars. 1 Brigadier General with the pay of Lieutenant Colonel Commandant for
12 Months at 50 Dollars, 600 2 Majors, 45 1,080 7 Captains, 35 2,940 7
Lieutenants, 30 2,520 8 Ensigns, 20 1,920 1 Paymaster, 10 120 1 Adjutant, 10
120 1 Quarter Master, 10 120 1 Surgeon, 45 540 4 Surgeon's Mates, 30 1,440 28
Sergeants, 6 2,016 28 Corporals, 5 1,680 14 Musicians, 5 840 490 Privates, 4
23,520 Carried forward, 39,456 Brought forward, 39,456 ARTILLERY.
^ Major 12 Months, at 45 Dol. 540 4 Captains, 35 1,680 8 Lieutenants, 30 2,880
^^ Surgeon's Mate, 30 360 16 Sergeants, 6 1,152 16 Corporals, 5 960 ^^
Musicians, 5 480 240 Matrosses, 4 11,520 19,57^ SUBSISTENCE.
1 Brigadier General 12 Months, at 48 Dol. 576 3 Majors, 20 720 11 Captains, 12
1,584 23 Subalterns, 8 2,208 1 Surgeon, 16 192 5 Surgeon Mates, 8 480 5,760
RATIONS.
For 840 Non Commissioned Officers and Privates, one ration pr. day each for
365 days, is 306,600 rations at 12 cents pr. ditto, 36,792 101,580 Clothing,
840, Contingencies, 100,
940 suits at 26 dollars each, 24,440 QUARTER MASTER's DEPARTMENT.
TRANSPORTATION. Including the transportation of the recruits to the frontiers,
the removal of troops from one station to another, the transportation of
clothing, ordnance, and military stores for the troops on the frontiers -- the
necessary removal of ordnance military stores -- the hire of teams and
pack-horses -- the purchase of tents, boats, axes, camp-kettles, boards,
firewood; company books, stationary for the troops, and all other expenses in
the quarter-master's department, 15,000 HOSPITAL DEPARTMENT.
For medicines, instruments, furniture and stores for an hospital for the
frontiers, also for attendance when necessary at West-Point, 1,000 ORDNANCE
DEPARTMENT.
For salaries for the store keepers at the several deposits, viz. West-Point,
Virginia, Springfield,
3 at 40 dollars pr. month, 1,440 Charleston, 1 Store keeper at 100 dols. pr.
annum, 100 2 Assistants, at 15 do. pr. month, 360 1 Store keeper at
Philadelphia, 500 1 ditto, Rhode Island, 96 1 ditto, Lancaster, 96 1 ditto,
Fort Harkemer, 120 His subsistence, 1 dollar pr. week, 52 172 RENTS of
BUILDINGS for DEPOSITS. Philadelphia, 752.66 Virginia, 350 West-Point, 400
1,502.66 Laborers at the several Deposits, 400 8 Artificers at the posts on
the frontiers, including armourers, at 5 dollars pr. month, 480 Coopers,
armourers, and carpenters employed occasionally at the several arsenals, 500
The expense of materials and constructing twenty new carriages for cannon and
howitzers, 2,000 7,646,66 Carried forward, 149,666.66 Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts.
Brought forward, 149,666.66 Buildings for arsenals and magazines are highly
requisite in the southern and middle departments, for which particularly
estimates will be formed. CONTINGENCIES of the WAR Department, viz. For maps,
hiring expresses, allowance to officers for extra expenses, printing, loss of
stores of all kinds, advertising and apprehending deserters, 3,00^
CONTINGENCIES of the WAR Office, viz. Office rent, wood, stationary, desks,
book cases, sweeping, etc. 600 Subsistence due the officers of Colonel Marinus
Willet's regiment in 1782, 786.6 Pay due Lieutenant Joseph Wilcox, pay master
to the regiment lately commanded by Col. David Humphreys, 315 Pay subsistence
and forage due the officers appointed by the State of Rhode Island, under the
act of Congress of the 20th October, 1786, 1,770 2,871.6 156,137.72 Total
amount as ab^ve, 156,137.72 Deduct contingencies of the War Office, office
rent, wood, stationary, desks, etc. as above, the same being included with the
salaries in the civil list estimate, 600 Dollars 155,537.72

SUMMARY of the Foregoing.
Pay of the troops, 59,028 Subsistence of ditto, 42,552 Clothing of ditto,
24,440 Quarter masters department, 15,000 Hospital department, 1,000
Contingencies of the war department, 3,000 Contingencies of the war office, 600
Arrears of pay and subsistence unprovided for, 2,871.6 Ordnance department,
7,646.66 Dollars, 156,137.72
War-Office, December 29 th, 1789. (Signed) HENRY KNOX, Secretary for the
Department of War.

[ No. III.] ESTIMATE of the Annual PENSIONS of the INVALIDS of the United
States, viz.
Taken from returns in the War-Office, dated as follows: Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts.
November 28, 1789, New Hampshire, 3,024 December 14, Massachusetts, 11,166
December 1, Connecticut, 7,296 December 31, New York, 15,588 February 2,
New Jersey, 4,357.6 December 10, Pennsylvania, 16,506 For 1787, Virginia,
9,276.66 67,213.72 Conjectural -- No returns having been received.
Suppose Rhode Island and Delaware nearly equal to New Hampshire, 3,170
Maryland nearly equal to Connecticut, 7,000 North Carolina, South Carolina and
Georgia, nearly equal to New Hampshire, Connecticut and Virginia, 19,596 29,766
Dollars, 96,979.72

(Signed.) H. KNOX, Secretary for the Department of War.
War-Office, 31st December, 1789. For Schedule K, which should have been
inserted here, see the last page.

An ACT repealing, after the last day of (...) next, the Duties heretofore laid
upon distilled Spirits imported from abroad, and laying others in their stead,
and also upon Spirits distilled within the United States, as well to discourage
the excessive use of those Spirits, and promote Agriculture, as to provide for
the support of the Public Credit, and for the Common Defense and General
Welfare.
I. BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled, The four first of these classes of
proof correspond with the different kinds of spirits now usually imported: The
first with gin; the second with St. Croix rum; the third with Antigua rum; the
fourth with Jamaica spirits; the fifth corresponds with the usual proof of high
wines; the last with that of Alcohol. These distinctions are necessary, not
only to proportion the duty, but to prevent evasions of it. According to the
present act, high wines, or even Alcohol, which is from 30 to 40 per cent.
above Jamaica proof, might be imported liable only to the duty of Jamaica proof.
that after the last day of (...) next, the duties laid on distilled spirits by
the act entitled "An act for laying a duty on goods, wares and merchandises
imported into the United States," shall cease; and that upon all distilled
spirits which shall be imported into the United States, after that day, from
any foreign port or place, there shall be paid for their use the duties
following, that is to say,

1st. For every gallon of those spirits more than ten per cent. below proof,
according to Dicas's hydrometer, twenty cents.

2d. For every gallon of those spirits under five, and not more than ten per
cent. below proof, according to the same hydrometer, twenty-one cents.

3d. For every gallon of those spirits of proof, and not more than five per.
cent below proof, according to the same hydrometer, twenty-two cents.

4th. For every gallon of those spirits above proof, but not exceeding twenty
per cent. according to the same hydrometer, twenty-five cents.

5th. For every gallon of those spirits more than twenty, and not more than
forty per cent. above proof, according to the same hydrometer, thirty cents.

6th. For every gallon of those spirits, more than forty per cent. above proof,
according to the same hydrometer, forty cents.

II. And be it further enacted, that the said duties shall be collected in the
same manner, by the same persons, under the same regulations, and subject to
the same forfeitures and other penalties, as those heretofore said; the act
concerning which shall be deemed to be in full force for the collection of the
duties herein before imposed, except as to the alterations contained in this
act.

III. And be it further enacted, The extension of the time is for the
accommodation of the merchants in consideration of the increased rate. -- It is
proposed to reduce the discount, because ten per cent. is more than either the
interest of money, or the risk of non-payment seems to warrant. Generally
speaking, transient persons are those who avail themselves of the advantage;
and they, without it, would commonly pay down, from the inconvenience of
procuring and leaving sureties.
that the said duties at the option of the proprietor, importer or consignee,
may either be paid immediately, or secured by bond, with one or more sureties,
to the satisfaction of the collector, or person acting as such, with condition
for the payment of one moiety in four months, and the other moiety in eight
months: Provided that where the said duties shall not exceed fifty dollars, the
same shall be immediately paid; and that where the same shall exceed fifty
dollars, if the said proprietor, importer or consignee shall think fit to make
present payment thereof, there shall be an abatement to him or her, at the rate
of seven per cent per annum, only for such present payment, the allowance of
ten per cent. in the said former act notwithstanding.

And as not only a due regard to the exigencies of the public, and to the
interest and ease of the community, but justice to those virtuous citizens,
who, content with the emoluments of fair and honorable trade, disdain to
violate the laws of their country, and the principles of probity, requires that
every possible impediment should be opposed to the fraudulent views of those
who wish to profit at the expense both of the fair trader and of the community
--

IV. Be it further enacted, This appears to be the only practicable method of
compassing the details of so complicated a business.
that the President of the United States of America, be authorized to appoint,
with the advice and consent of the Senate, such number of officers as shall
appear to him necessary, to be denominated Inspectors of the revenue; and to
assign to them respectively such districts or limits for the exercise of their
respective offices, as he shall judge best adapted to the due execution
thereof; dividing the districts, if he shall think it advisable, into general
and particular, and placing the Inspectors of the latter under the
superintendance of the former, within the limits whereof they shall be
respectively comprehended; and also to make such allowances to the said
Inspectors, and to the Deputies and officers by them appointed and employed for
their respective services in the execution of this act, to be paid out of the
product of the said duties, as shall be reasonable and proper: Provided always,
that the whole amount of the said allowances shall not exceed (...) per cent.
of the said product, computed throughout the United States; and that, being
once regulated by the said President, they shall be alterable in such manner
only as shall from time to time be prescribed by law.

V. And be it further enacted, that the Inspector or Inspectors of the revenue
for each district, shall establish one or more offices within the same, and
that there shall be one at least at each port of delivery; and in order that
the said offices may be publicly known, there shall be painted or written, in
large legible characters, upon some conspicuous part outside and in front of
each house building or place in which any such office shall be kept, these
words, "Office of Inspection;" and if any person shall paint or write, or cause
to be painted or written, the said words, upon any other than such house or
building, he or she shall forfeit and pay for so doing, one hundred dollars.

VI. And be it further enacted, that within forty-eight hours after any ship or
vessel, having on board and distilled Spirits brought in such ship or vessel
from any foreign port or place, shall arrive within any port of the United
States, whether the same be the first port of arrival of such ship or vessel or
not; the master or person having the command or charge thereof, shall report to
the Inspector or other chief officer of Inspection of the port at which she
shall so arrive, the place from which she last sailed with her name and burden
and the quantity and kinds of the said spirits on board of her, and the casks
or cases containing them, with their marks and numbers on pain of forfeiting
five hundred dollars.

VII. And be it further enacted, that the Collector or other officer, or person
acting as Collector of any port, with whom entry shall have been made of any of
the said spirits, pursuant to the said act laying a duty on goods, wares and
merchandises imported into the United States, shall forthwith after such entry
certify and transmit the same, as particularly as it shall have been made with
him, to the Inspector of the revenue, or other proper officer of inspection, of
the port where it shall be intended to commence the delivery of the spirits so
entered, or any part thereof; for which purpose, every proprietor, importer or
consignee, making such entry, shall deliver two manifests or contents (upon one
of which the said certificate shall be given) and shall at the time thereof
declare the port at which the said delivery shall be so intended to be
commenced, to the Collector or officer with whom the same shall be made. And
every permit granted by such Collector for the landing of any of the said
spirits, shall previous to such landing be produced to the said officer of
inspection, who shall make a minute in some proper book, of the contents
thereof, and shall indorse thereupon the word "Inspected," the time when, and
his own name, after which he shall return it to the person by whom it shall
have been produced; and then, and not otherwise, it shall be lawful to land the
spirits therein specified; and if the said spirits shall be landed without such
indorsement upon the permit for that purpose granted, the master or person
having charge of the ship or vessel, from which the same shall have been so
landed, shall for every such offense forfeit the sum of five hundred dollars.

VIII. And be it further enacted, That whenever it shall be intended that any
ship or vessel shall proceed with the whole or any part of the Spirits which
shall have been brought in such ship or vessel from any foreign port or place,
from one port in the United States to another port in the said United States,
whether in the same or in different districts, the master or person having the
command or charge of such ship or vessel, shall previous to her departure,
apply to the proper officer of inspection for the port from which she is about
to depart, for a certificate of the quantity and particulars of such of the
said spirits as shall have be^n certified to him to have been entered as
imported in such ship or vessel, and of so much thereof* shall appear to him to
have been landed out of her at such port, which certificate the said officer
shall forthwith grant without fee or charge. And the master or person having
the command or charge of such ship or vessel, shall, within twenty-four hours
after her arrival at the port to which she shall be bound, deliver the said
certificate to the proper officer of inspection of such last mentioned port.
And if such ship or vessel shall proceed from one port to another within the
United States, with the whole or any part of the spirits brought in her as
aforesaid, without having first obtained such certificate; or if within
twenty-four hours after her arrival at such other port, the said certificate
shall not be delivered to the proper officer of inspection there, the master or
person having the command or charge of the said ship or vessel, shall in either
case forfeit five hundred dollars; and the spirits on board of her at her said
arrival, shall be forfeited, and may be seized by any officer of inspection.

IX. And be it further enacted, That all spirits which shall be imported as
aforesaid, shall be landed under the inspection of the officer or officers of
inspection for the place where the same shall be landed, and not otherwise, on
pain of forfeiture thereof, for which purpose the said officer or officers
shall at all reasonable times attend: Provided that this shall not be construed
to exclude the inspection of the officers of the customs as now established and
practiced.

X. And be it further enacted, That the officers of inspection, under whose
survey any of the said spirits shall be landed, shall, upon landing thereof,
and as soon as the casks and cases containing the same shall be guaged or
measured, brand or otherwise mark in durable characters, the several casks or
cases containing the same, with progressive numbers, and also with the name of
the ship or vessel wherein the same was or were imported, and of the port of
entry, and with the proof and quantity thereof, together with such other marks,
if any other shall be deemed needful, as the respective inspectors of the
revenue may direct. And the said officer shall keep a book, wherein he shall
enter the name of each vessel in which any of the said spirits shall be so
imported, and of the port of entry and of delivery, and of the master of such
vessel, and of each importer, and the several casks and cases containing the
same, and the marks of each, and if not an inspector of the chief officer of
inspection for the place, shall as soon as may be thereafter, make an exact
transcript of each entry, and deliver the same to such inspector or chief
officer, who shall keep a like book for recording the said transcripts.

XI. And be it further enacted, That the inspector of the revenue or other
chief officer of inspection within whose survey any of the said spirits shall
be landed shall give to the proprietor, importer, or consignee thereof, or his
or her agent, a certificate to remain with him or her of the whole quantity of
the said spirits which shall have been so landed, which certificate besides the
said quantity shall specify the name of such proprietor, importer, or
consignee, and of the vessel from on board which the said spirits shall have
been landed, and of the marks of each cask or case containing the same. And the
said inspector or other chief officer of inspection shall deliver to the said
proprietor, importer or consignee, or to his or her agent, a like certificate
for each cask or case which shall accompany the same wheresoever it shall be
sent as evidence of its being lawfully imported. And the officer of inspection
granting the said certificates, shall make regular and exact entries in the
book to be by him kept as aforesaid, of all spirits for which the same shall be
granted as particularly as therein described. And the said proprietor,
importer, or consignee, or his or her agent upon the sale and delivery of any
of the said spirits, shall deliver to the purchaser or purchasers thereof, the
certificate or certificates which ought to accompany the same, on pain of
forfeiting the sum of fifty dollars for each cask or case with which such
certificate shall not be delivered.

XII. And be it further enacted, The first class of proof here corresponds with
what is understood by common proof at our distilleries and answers to that of
gin. Hence our common rum, compared with the lowest kind of imported rum, and
including the duty on molasses, stands charged in the proportion of 14 to 21,
which difference it is presumed will afford due encouragement. The remaining
classes also correspond with those above.
That upon all spirits which after the said last day of (...) next, shall be
distilled within the United States, wholly or in part from molasses, sugar, or
other foreign materials, there shall be paid for their use the duties
following, that is to say --

1st. For every gallon of those spirits more than 10 per cent. below proof,
according to Dica's hydrometer, eleven cents.

2d. For every gallon of those spirits under five and not more than ten per
cent. below proof, according to the same hydrometer, twelve cents.

3d. For eve^^ gallon of those spirits of proof, and not more than five per
cent. below proof, according (...) hydrometer, thirteen cents.

4th. For (...) gallon of those spirits above proof, and not exceeding twenty
per cent. according to the same hy^^^meter, fifteen cents.

5th. For every gallon of those spirits more than twenty and not more than
forty per cent. above proof, according to the said hydrometer, twenty cents.

6th. For every gallon of those spirits more than forty per cent. above proof,
according to the same hydrometer, thirty cents.

XIII. And be it further enacted, The several classes of proof here agree with
those in the preceding section, but it will be observed that the rates are
lower. This will operate as an encouragement to distillation from our own
materials. It is evident that a higher duty being laid on spirits distilled
from foreign materials, than on those made from our own, the difference is a
bounty on the latter, and places it in a better situation than if there were no
duty on either; in general it may be remarked, that the rates proposed on these
different kinds of spirits, though considerably higher than heretofore, are
much less than they bear in most other countries.
That upon all spirits which after the said last day of (...) next, shall be
distilled within the United States, from any article of the growth or
production of the United States, in any city, town or village, there shall be
paid for their use the duties following, that is to say: --

1st. For every gallon of those spirits more than ten per cent. below proof,
according to Dicas's hydrometer, nine cents.

2d. For every gallon of those spirits under five and not more than ten per
cent. below proof, according to the same hydrometer, ten cents.

3d. For every gallon of those spirits of proof, and not more than five per
cent. below proof, according to the same hydrometer, eleven cents.

4th. For every gallon of those spirits above proof, but not exceeding twenty
per cent. according to the same hydrometer, thirteen cents.

5th. For every gallon of those spirits more than twenty and not more than
forty per cent. above proof, according to the same hydrometer, seventeen cents.

6. For every gallon of those spirits more than forty per cent. above proof,
according to the same hydrometer, twenty-five cents.

XIV. And be it further enacted, That the said duties on spirits distilled
within the United States, shall be collected under the management of the
inspectors of the revenue.

XV. And be it further enacted, That the said duties on spirits distilled
within the United States, shall be paid or secured previous to the removal
thereof from the distilleries at which they are respectively made. And it shall
be at the option of the proprietor or proprietors of each distillery, or of
his, her or their agent having the superintendence thereof, either to pay the
said duties previous to such removal, with an abatement at the rate of two
cents for every ten gallons, or to secure the payment of the same, by giving
bond quarter yearly, with one or more sureties, to the satisfaction of the
officer of inspection within whose survey such distillery shall be, and in such
sum as the said officer shall direct, with condition for the observance of the
regulations in this act contained, on his, her, or their part, and also for the
payment of the duties upon all such of the said spirits as shall be removed
from such distillery, within three months next ensuing the date of the bond, at
the expiration of six months from the said date.

XVI. And be it further enacted, This inspection is essential to a secure
collection. Experience has shown that proper dependence cannot be placed on any
plan which relies on the exactness of the accounts to be rendered by the
individuals interested, and such a reliance not only defeats the revenue, but
throws an undue proportion of the burden on the upright and conscientious.
That the inspector or inspectors of each district, shall appoint a proper
officer to have the charge and survey of each distillery within his or their
district, who shall attend such distillery at all reasonable times, for the
execution of the duties by this act enjoined upon him.

XVII. And be it further enacted, That previous to the removal of any of the
said spirits from any distillery, the officer of inspection within whose survey
the same may be, shall brand or otherwise mark each cask containing the same in
durable characters, and with progressive numbers, and with the name of the
acting owner or other manager of such distillery, and of the place where the
same was situate, and with the quantity therein, to be ascertained by actual
guaging, and with the proof thereof. And the duties thereupon having been first
paid, or secured, as above provided, the said officer shall grant a certificate
for each cask of the said spirits, to accompany the same wheresoever it shall
be sent, purporting that the duty thereupon has been paid or secured, as the
case may be, and describing each cask by its marks; and shall enter in a book
for that purpose to be kept, all the spirits distilled at such distillery, and
removed from the same; and the marks of each cask, and the persons for (...)
use, and the places to which removed, and the time of each removal, and the
amount of the duties on the spirits so removed. And if any of the said spirits
shall be removed from any such distillery without having been branded or marked
as aforesaid, or without such certificate as aforesaid, the same, together with
the cask or casks containing them, and the horses and wagons, with their
harness and tackling, employed in removing them, shall be forfeited, and may be
seized by any officer of inspection. And the superintendant or manager of such
distillery shall also forfeit the full value of the spirits so removed, to be
computed at the highest price of the like spirits in the market.

XVIII. And be it further enacted, That no spirits shall be removed from any
such distillery except by a person or persons licensed in the manner herein
after directed, nor at any other times than between the hour of (...) and the
hour of (...) and between the hour of (...) and the hour of (...) of each day,
from the (...) day of (...) to the (...) day of (...) in each year; and between
the hour of (...) and the hour of (...) and between the hour of (...) and the
hour of (...) of each day, from the (...) day of (...) to the (...) day of
(...) in each year.

XIX. And be it further enacted, This regulation would certainly add much to
the safety of the collection: But it is doubtful whether it would not be
exceptionable in some parts of the country. Perhaps it may be limited to the
principal cities; or it may be general, and a discretion vested somewhere, to
make the necessary exceptions.
That licenses to convey or carry spirits from the said distilleries, shall, in
each district, be granted by the inspector or inspectors of the revenue
thereof, to such discreet person or persons as shall appear to him or them
proper for the trust, who shall respectively give bonds, with one or more
sureties to the satisfaction of the said inspector or inspectors of the
revenue, in a sum not exceeding (...) dollars, nor less than (...) dollars,
with condition faithfully and diligently, to carry and deliver all such of the
said spirits as shall be committed to their care respectively, and in so doing
to observe the directions of this act: Provided always, That nothing herein
contained shall in any wise infringe or interfere with any exclusive privilege
which any individuals or bodies politic may have or be entitled to, by virtue
of any charter, grant or act of incorporation touching the right of carrying or
of licensing persons to carry-goods and commodities within particular limits.
But where any such privilege shall exist, the persons to be licensed pursuant
to this act, shall execute the trust thereby reposed in them, through and by
means of the person or persons who by virtue of such privilege shall be
authorized to carry within such limits; and in such manner as shall be
perfectly consistent with such privilege and not otherwise.

XX. And be it further enacted, The duty is here laid upon the stills because
it would be inconvenient, to extend the inspection of the officers in its full
extent throughout the country. The rates is adjusted according to an estimate
of what a still of any given dimensions, worked for the usual time is capable
of producing, but lest this rule should in any instance operate injuriously, it
is by a subsequent provision put in the power of the proprietor to redress
himself. This provision certainty opens a door to fraud, but it is presumed to
be (...) to submit to this inconvenience rather than to those which would be
apt to attend the supposition of inequality.
That upon stills which after the last day of (...) next, shall be employed in
distilling spirits from materials of the growth or production of the United
States, in any other place than a city, town or village, there shall be paid
for the use of the United States, the yearly duty of sixty cents for every
gallon, English wine measure, of the capacity or content of each and every such
still, including the head thereof: Provided that the said duty shall not extend
to any still of less than (...) except where such still shall be worked at the
same distillery, together with another of dimensions exceeding (...) gallons.

XXI. And be it further enacted, That the evidence of the employment of the
said stills shall be, their being erected in stone, brick or some other manner
whereby they shall be in a condition to be worked.

XXII. And be it further enacted, That the said duties on stills shall be
collected under the management of the inspectors of the revenue, who in each
district shall appoint and assign proper officers for the surveys of the said
stills and the admeasurement thereof, and the collection of the duties
thereupon; and the said duties shall be paid half yearly, within the first
fifteen days of the months of (...) and (...) upon demand made of the
proprietor or proprietors of each still at his, her or their dwelling, by the
proper officer charged with the survey thereof: And in case of refusal or
neglect to pay, the amount of the duties so refused or neglected to be paid,
may either be recovered with costs of suit in an action of debt in the name of
the inspector or inspectors of the district, within which such refusal shall
happen, or may be levied by distress and sale or goods of the person or persons
refusing or neglecting to pay, rendering the overplus (if any there be after
payment of the said amount and the charges of distress and sale) to the said
person or persons.

And whereas the duties hereby charged upon stills, have been estimated upon a
computation that a still of each of the dimensions herein before enumerated,
worked for the usual time would produce in the course of a year a quantity of
spirits, which at the rate of (...) cents per gallon, would amount to the duty
charged thereon: And as from different causes it may in some instances happen,
that the said computation may subject the said stills to greater duties than
are intended;

XXIII. Be it therefore enacted, That if the proprietor of any such still
finding himself or herself aggrieved by the said rates, shall enter or cause to
be entered in a book or on a paper to be kept for that purpose, from day to day
when such still shall be employed the quantity of spirits distilled therefrom,
and the quantity from time to time sold or otherwise disposed of, and to whom
and when, and shall produce the said book or paper to the proper officer of
inspection within whose survey such still shall be, and shall make oath, or if
a known Quaker, affirmation, that the same does contain to the best of his or
her knowledge and belief, true entries made at their respective dates of all
the spirits distilled within the time to which such entries shall (...) from
such still, and of the disposition thereof; and shall also declare upon such
oath or (...) the quantity of such spirits then remaining on hand, it shall be
lawful in every such case or the said officer to whom the said book or paper
shall be produced, and (...) required to ^stimate the duties upon such still,
according to the quantity so stated to have been actually made therefrom at the
rate of nine cents per gallon, which, and no more, shall be paid for the same:
Provided, That if the said entries shall be made by any person other than the
said prop^ietor, a like oath or affirmation shall be made by such person.

And the more effectually to prevent the evasion of the duties hereby imposed
to the no less injury of the fair trad^r than of the revenue;

XXIV. Be it further enacted, The provision in this section form an essential
part of the plan. They serve to bring all those who deal in the sale of spirits
in considerable quantities, and the places in which they are kept, under the
immediate eye of the law. It must always be very difficult to conceal any
quantity of spirits in a place which is not announced and entered in the manner
prescribed. Whoever sees them in any such place, or in going from it, will know
that they are liable to forfeiture, and will have inducements enough to give
intelligence of the fact. And when every man can, from so simple a
circumstance, discern that a fraud has been committed, it will be hardly
possible for it to escape detection. Besides this, the article, whenever it
leaves its concealment, is liable to discovery from the want of those
indications which are necessary to show that it was lawfully imported or made.
And it is not supposeable that it can continue concealed, and pass safe through
all its stages, from the importation or making, to the consumption. The
consumer himself, if not interested in the fraud, will detect and disclose it.
The necessity of entry is limited to a distance of ten miles, to prevent
inconvenience. -- In remote places, where little business is done, the
precaution may be relaxed, and offices of inspection will be found less
necessary. Articles must be carried, for sale, to places where there is
considerable demand; and if at such places the requisite guards are kept up
with strictness, the end will be substantially answered.
That every person who shall be a dealer or trader in distilled spirits (except
as a maker or distiller thereof) in the original casks or cases in which they
shall be imported, or in quantities of twenty five gallons at one sale, shall
be deemed a wholesale dealer in spirits, and shall write or paint or cause to
be written or painted, in large, legible and durable characters, upon some
conspicuous part outside and in front of each house or other building or place,
and upon the door or usual entrance of each vault, cellar or apartment within
the same in which any of the said spirits shall be at any time by him or her
deposited or kept or intended so to be, the words "wholesale dealer in
spirits;" and shall also, within three days at least before he or she shall
begin to keep or sell any of the said spirits therein, make a particular entry
in writing at the nearest office of inspection of the district in which the
same shall be situate, if within ten miles thereof of every such house or other
building or place, and of each cellar, vault or apartment within the same in
which he or she shall intend to put or keep any of the said spirits; and if any
such dealer shall omi^ to write or paint, or cause to be written or painted the
words aforesaid, and in manner aforesaid, upon any such house or other building
or place, or vault, cellar or apartment thereof, in which he or she shall so
have or keep any of the said spirits, or shall in case the same be situated
within the said distance of ten miles of any office of inspection omit to make
entry thereof as aforesaid, such dealer shall for every such omission or
neglect forfeit the sum of five hundred dollars, and all the spirits which he
or she shall have or keep therein, or the value thereof to be computed at the
highest price of such spirits in the market.

XXV. And be it further enacted, That every person who shall be a maker or
distiller of spirits shall write or paint or cause to be written or painted
upon some conspicuous part outside and in front of each house or other building
or place made use of or intended to be made use of by him or her for the
distillation or keeping of spirituous liquors, and upon the door or usual
entrance of each vault, cellar or apartment within the same in which any of the
said liquors shall be at any time by him or her distilled, deposited or kept,
or intended so to be, the words "Distiller of spirits;" and shall also, three
days at least before he or she shall begin to distill therein, make a particular
entry in writing, at the nearest office of inspection, if within ten miles
thereof, of every such house, building or place, and of each vault, cellar and
apartment within the same, in which he or she shall intend to carry on the
business of distilling, or to keep any spirits by him or her distilled. And if
any such distiller shall omit to paint or write, or cause to be painted or
written the words aforesaid, in manner aforesaid, upon any such house or other
building or place, or vault, cellar or apartment thereof, or shall, in case the
same be situate within the said distance of ten miles of any office of
inspection, omit to make entry thereof as aforesaid, such distiller shall for
every such omission or neglect, forfeit the sum of five hundred dollars, and
all the spirits which he or she shall have or keep therein, or the value
thereof, to be computed at the highest price of such spirits in the market:
Provided also, and be it further enacted, that the said entry, to be made by
persons who shall be dealers in or distillers of spirits, on the last day of
(...) next, shall be made on that day, or within three days thereafter,
accompanied (except where the duties hereby imposed are charged on the still)
with a true and particular account or inventory of the spirits, on that day and
at the time, in every or any house, building or place by him or her entered,
and of the casks, cases and vessels containing the same, with their marks and
numbers, and the quantities and qualities of the spirits therein contained, on
pain of forfeiting, for neglecting to make such entry, or to deliver such
account, the sum of five hundred dollars, and all the spirits by him or her had
or kept in any such house, building or place: And provided further, that
nothing herein contained shall be construed to exempt any such distiller, who
shall be, besides his dealing as a distiller, a dealer or trader in distilled
spirits as described in the twenty-fourth section of this act, from the
regulations therein prescribed; but every such distiller, so being also a
dealer or trader in distilled spirits, shall observe and shall be subject to
all the rules, regulations and penalties therein specified.

XXVI. And be it further enacted, that where any entry shall be made by any
such dealer, of any such house, building or other place for keeping of any of
the said spirits, no other such dealer, not being in partnership with the
dealer aforesaid, making such entry, shall on any pretense make entry of the
same house or building, or of any apartment, vault, cellar or place within the
same house, building or tenement in which such first entry shall then be
existing; but every such other dealer, making such further entry of the same
house, building or place, or of any apartment, vault, cellar or place within
the same, shall, notwithstanding such further entry, be deemed a dealer without
entry, and shall be subject to the like penalties and forfeitures as any
dealers without entry are subject to by this act.

XXVII. And be it further enacted, that the Inspector or Inspectors of the
revenue for the district wherein any house, building or place shall be situate,
whereof entry shall be made as last aforesaid, shall as soon as may be
thereafter, visit and inspect, or cause to be visited and inspected by some
proper officer or officers of inspection, every such house or other building or
place within his or their district, and shall take or cause to be taken an
exact account of the spirits therein respectively contained, and shall mark or
cause to be marked in durable characters, the several casks, cases or vessels
containing the same, with progressive numbers, and also with the name of each
dealer or distiller to whom the same may belong, or in whose custody the same
may be, and the quantities, kinds and proofs of spirits therein contained, and
these words, "Old Stock." And the said inspector or inspectors shall keep a
book wherein he or they shall enter the name of every such dealer or distiller
within his or their district, and the particulars of such old stock in the
possession of each, designating the several casks and cases containing the
same, and their respective quantities, kinds, proofs and marks. And he or they
shall also give a certificate to every such dealer or distiller^ of the
quantity and particulars of such old stock in his or her possession, and a
separate certificate for each cask, case or vessel, describing the same,
according to its marks, which certificate shall accompany the same wheresoever
it shall be sent. And in case there shall be no officer of inspection within
the said distance of ten miles of any such house or other building or place,
then it shall be the duty of such dealer to whom the same may belong, to mark
with the like durable characters the several casks containing the spirits
therein, and in like manner as above directed to be done by the said Inspector
or Inspectors. And the said dealer shall make entry thereof in some proper book
or in some proper paper to be by him or her kept for that purpose, specifying
particularly each cask, case or vessel, and its marks, and the quantity and
quality of the spirits therein contained (of which entry he or she shall, upon
request, deliver an exact copy to the Inspector or Inspectors of the revenue
for the district) and if required by him or them, shall attest the same by
oath, or, being a known Quaker, by affirmation. And the said dealer, with every
such cask, case or vessel which shall be delivered out of his or her house or
other building or place, shall give a certificate or permit, signed by himself
or herself, of the like import of that above directed to be given by the said
Inspector or Inspectors, which certificate shall in like manner accompany the
same wheresoever it may be sent. And if any such dealer shall in the said case
omit to mark the said several casks, cases or vessels containing the said
spirits, or to make entry thereof in some proper book, or on some proper paper
as aforesaid, he or she shall forfeit and pay for every such neglect two
hundred dollars. And if in the same case he or she shall deliver out or send
away any of the said spirits without such certificate by him or her directed to
be furnished as aforesaid, the said spirits so delivered out or sent away,
shall be forfeited, and may be seized by any officer of inspection, and the
said dealer shall also forfeit the full value thereof.

XXVIII. And be it further enacted, that every proprietor of any (...) on which
a duty shall be charged according to the twentieth section of this act, shall
brand (...) otherwise mark in durable characters, every cask, barrel or keg
containing any spirits distilled by him or her, previous to the sale thereof,
with his or her name, and with progressive numbers and shall grant a
certificate with each cask, barrel or keg by him or her sold, describing the
same by its marks, and purporting that the same was made by him or her, to
accompany such cask, barrel or keg. wheresoever it shall be sent.

XXIX. And be it further enacted, that when any such wholesale dealer in
spirits, shall bring in his or her entered house, building or p^ace, any of the
said spirits, if such house, building or place be within two miles of any
office of inspection, he or she shall within twenty-four hours after the said
spirits shall be brought into such house, building or place, send notice
thereof in writing to the said office, specifying therein the quantity and
kinds of the spirits so brought in. and the marks of the cask or casks, case or
cases containing the same, on pain of forfeiting, for every neglect to give
such notice, fifty dollars. And it shall be the duty of the officer to (...)
shall be given, forthwith thereafter to inspect and take an account of such
(...).

XXX. And be it further enacted, that if any distilled spirit^ (...) be found
in the possession of any such dealer, without the proper certificates which
ought to accompany the same, it shall be presumptive evidence that the same are
liable to forfeiture, and it shall be lawful for any officer of inspection to
seize them as forfeited; and if, upon the trial in consequence of such seizure,
the owner or claimant of the spirits seized, shall not prove that the same were
imported into the United States according to law, or were distilled as
mentioned in the twelfth and thirteenth sections of this act, and the duties
thereupon paid, or were distilled at one of the stills mentioned in the
twentieth section of this act, they shall be adjudged to be forfeited.

XXXI. And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the officers of
inspection of each district, at all times in the day time, upon request, to
enter into all and every the houses, storehouses, warehouses, buildings and
places, which shall have been entered by the said wholesale dealers in manner
aforesaid, and by tasting, guaging or otherwise to take an account of the
quantity, kinds and proofs of the said spirits therein contained, and also to
take samples thereof, paying for the same the usual price.

XXXII. And be it further enacted, that every such dealer shall keep the
several kinds of spirits in his or her entered warehouse, building or place,
separate and apart from each other, on pain of forfeiting upon every conviction
of neglect one hundred dollars; and shall also, upon request, show to the
officers of inspection of the district wherein he or she is so a dealer, or to
any of them, each and every cask, vessel and case in which he or she shall keep
any distilled spirits, and the certificates which ought to accompany the same,
upon pain of forfeiting every such cask, vessel or case, as shall be shown,
together with the spirits therein contained.

XXXIII. And be it further enacted, that if any person or persons shall rub out
or deface any of the marks set upon any cask or case pursuant to the directions
of this act, such person or persons shall, for every such offense, forfeit and
pay the sum of one hundred dollars.

XXXIV. And be it further enacted, that no cask, barrel, keg, vessel or case,
marked as "Old stock," shall be made use of by any dealer or distiller of
spirits, for putting or keeping therein any spirits other than those which were
contained therein when so marked, on pain of forfeiting five hundred dollars
for every cask, barrel, keg, vessel or case wherein any such other spirits
shall be so put or kept: Neither shall any such dealer have or keep any
distilled spirits in any such cask, barrel, keg, vessel or case, longer than
for the space of one year from the said last day of (...) next, on pain of
forfeiting the said spirits.

XXXV. And be it further enacted, that in case any of the said spirits shall be
fraudulently deposited, hid or concealed in any place whatsoever, with intent
to evade the duties hereby imposed upon them, they shall be forfeited. And for
the better discovery of any such spirits so fraudulently deposited, hid or
concealed, it shall be lawful for any Inspector of the revenue, or for any
Judge of any Court of the United States, or either of them, or for any Justice
of the peace, upon reasonable cause of suspicion, to be made out to the
satisfaction of such Inspector, Judge or Justice, by the oath, or, in the case
of a known Quaker, by the affirmation, of any person or persons, by special
warrant or warrants under their respective hands and seals, to authorize any of
the officers of inspection, by day or night, but if in the night time in the
presence of a constable or other officer of the peace, to enter into all and
every such place and places, in which any of the said spirits shall be
suspected to be so fraudulently deposited, hid or concealed, and to seize and
carry away any of the said spirits which shall be there found, so fraudulently
deposited, hid or concealed, as forfeited.

XXXVI. And be it further enacted, That no person shall carry on the business
of distilling, rectifying or compounding of spirituous liquors in any cellar,
vault, or other place below the surface of the ground; or have or use any
pipes, stop cocks, or other communications under ground, for the purpose of
conveying spiritous liquors from one back or vessel to another, or from any
such back or vessel to its still, or to any other place, on pain of forfeiting
for every such place, below the surface of the ground in which the said
business shall be carried on the sum of five hundred dollars, and for every
such pipe, stop-cock, or other communication under ground, the sum of two
hundred and fifty dollars. And in case the said person shall carry on the said
business in any such place below the surface of the ground, or shall have or
use any such communication under ground, it shall be lawful for any inspector
of the revenue, or Judge of any court of the United States, or Judge of any
court of a particular State, or Justice of the Peace, upon reasonable cause of
suspicion to be made out to the satisfaction of such inspector, judge or
justice, by oath or affirmation of any person or persons, by special warrant
under his or either of their respective hands and seals, to authorize any of
the officers of inspection, by day or night; but if in the night, in the
presence of a constable or other officer of the peace, to enter into all and
every such place or places after request first made, and the cause declared,
therein to search and examine for the same, and for that purpose to break the
ground, wall, partition or other place; and upon finding such cellar, vault, or
other building, or place below the surface of the ground, or such pipe,
stop-cock, or other communication under ground, to destroy the same, and to
seize such spirituous liquors as may be found below the surface of the ground,
or which shall have been conveyed through such pipe, stop-cock, or other
communication, which warrant or warrants may be lawfully executed by such
officer accordingly. Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed
to authorize any inspector of the revenue to issue any warrant to himself, or
upon his own oath, to any other officer. And provided further, That if upon
such search, no place below the surface of the ground, nor any such pipe,
stop-cock, or other communication be found, the said officer shall make good
the ground, wall, partition, or other place so broken up as aforesaid, together
with such reasonable damages as shall be adjudged by two neighboring justices
of the peace, or the party or parties injured may bring his, her or their
action against such officer of inspection, for the damages so sustained, which
damages in either case, shall be paid out of the revenue arising from this act.

XXXVII. And be it further enacted, The first part of this section seems to be
free from any solid objection. It will be constantly the interest of importers
(except with a view to smuggling) to bring spirits in large casks. But the
object of the latter part will not be without difficulty. It is however,
submitted. Perhaps, if the restriction to casks of one hundred gallons, should
appear improper, it may be limited to a less size, yet such an one as will be
less apt to elude the vigilance of the officers, than the smaller dimensions
now in use. The restriction would certainly add materially to the security of
the revenue.
That after the last day of (...) next, no spirituous liquors, except gin in
cases, shall be brought from any foreign port or place in any other way than in
casks capable each of containing one hundred gallons at the least, on pain of
forfeiture of the said spirits, and of the ship or vessel in which they shall
be brought. Provided always, That nothing in this act contained, shall be
construed to forfeit any spirits for being imported or brought into the United
States, in other casks or vessels than as aforesaid, or the ship or vessel in
which they shall be brought, if such spirits shall be for the use of the seamen
on board such ship or vessel, and shall not exceed the quantity of (...)
gallons for each such seaman.

XXXVIII. And be it further enacted, That in every case in which any of the
said spirits shall be forfeited by virtue of this act, the casks, vessels and
cases containing the same, shall also be forfeited.

XXXIX. And be it further enacted, That every dealer by wholesale, or distiller
of spirits, on which the duty is hereby charged by the gallon, shall keep or
cause to be kept, an exact account of all the said spirits which he or she
shall sell, send out or distill, distinguishing their several kinds and proofs;
and shall every day make a just and true entry in a book or on a paper, to be
kept for that purpose, of the quantities and particulars of the said spirits by
him or her sold, sent out or distilled, on the preceding day, specifying the
marks of the several casks in which they shall be so sold or sent out; and the
person to whom, and for whose use they shall be so sold or sent out: Which said
books and papers shall be prepared for the making such entries and shall be
delivered upon demand to the said dealers and distillers, by the inspectors of
the revenue of the several districts, or by such person or persons as they
shall respectively for that purpose appoint, and shall be severally returned or
delivered at the end of each year, or when the same shall be respectively
filled up, which shall first happen to the proper officers of inspection; and
the truth of the entries made therein shall be verified upon the oath, or in
the case of a known quaker, the affirmation of the person by whom those entries
shall have been made; and as often as the said books and papers shall be so
returned, other books and papers shall be furnished upon like demand by the
proper officers of inspection, to the said dealers and distillers respectively.
And the said books and papers shall from time to time while in the possession
of the said dealers and distillers, lie open for the inspection of, and upon
request shall be shown to the proper officers of inspection, under whose survey
the said dealers and distillers shall respectively be, who may take such
minutes, memorandums, or transcripts therefrom as they may think fit. And if
any such dealer or distiller shall neglect or refuse to keep such book or
books, paper or papers, or to make such entries therein, or to show the same
upon request to the proper officer of inspection, or not return the same
according to the directions of this act, he or she shall forfeit for every such
refusal or neglect, the sum of one hundred dollars.

And as a compensation to the said dealers for their aid in the execution of
this act:

XL. Be it further enacted, That for every quantity of the said spirits not
exceeding one hundred and twenty gallons, which shall be sold by any such
dealer, in one day, to one person or co-partnership, in the casks or cases in
which the same shall have been imported, after the said last day of (...) next,
or delivered out of any distillery (in respect to which the duty hereby imposed
is rated by the gallon) and distilled after the said day, and of the bringing
of which into his or her entered storehouse, building or other place, he or
she shall have given due notice according to the directions of this act, to the
proper officer of inspection, and for which he or she shall have produced to
the said officer the proper certificates corresponding therewith, the said
dealer shall be entitled to an allowance of one cent per gallon, which
allowance shall be estimated by the inspector of the revenue of each district,
according to the evidence of the entries in the books and papers kept and
returned according to the next preceding section of this act, confirmed as to
the production of the proper certificates, by the certificate of the officer to
whom they shall have been produced, and shall also be paid by such inspector,
according to such rules as shall be prescribed in that behalf, by the Secretary
of the Treasury, which said inspector shall be furnished with money for such
payment out of the product of the duties imposed by this act. Provided always,
That if more than one delivery shall be entered as made to one person or
copartnership in one day, the same shall be deemed but one delivery and one
quantity.

XLI. And be it further enacted, That the several kinds of proof herein before
specified, shall in marking the casks, vessels and cases containing any
distilled spirits be designated, corresponding with the order in which they are
mentioned by the words -- First Proof -- Second Proof -- Third Proof -- Fourth
Proof -- Fifth Proof -- Sixth Proof: -- which words may be expressed by their
respective initials. And that it be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury,
to provide and furnish to the officers of Inspection and of the Customs, proper
instruments for ascertaining the said several proofs.

And to the end that wanton and oppressive seizures may be effectually
restrained, and that the owners and importers of spirits, may suffer no
improper damage or burden;

XLII. Be it further enacted, That in any prosecution or action which may be
brought against any Inspector or other officer of Inspection for any seizure by
him made, it shall be necessary for such Inspector or Officer to justify
himself by making it appear, that there was probable cause for making the said
seizure, upon which, and not otherwise, a verdict shall pass in his favor. And
in every such action or prosecution, or in any action or prosecution which may
be brought against such inspector or other officer, for irregular or improper
conduct in the execution of his duty, the trial shall be by jury. And in any
action for a seizure, in which a verdict shall pass for such inspector, the
jury shall nevertheless assess reasonable damages for any prejudice or waste
(according to the true amount in value thereof) which shall be shown by good
proof to have happened to the spirits seized, in consequence of such seizure,
and also for the detention of the same, at the rate of six per cent. per annum,
on the true value of the said spirits, at the time of such seizure, from that
time to the time of restoration thereof, which shall be paid out of the
treasury of the United States; provided that no damages shall be assessed when
the seizure was made for want of the proper certificate or certificates or by
reason of a refusal to show any officer of inspection upon his request the
spirits in any entered house, or other building or place.

XLIII. And be it further enacted, That if any inspector or other officer of
inspection in any criminal prosecution against him shall be convicted of
oppression or extortion in the execution of his office, he shall be fined or
imprisoned or both at the discretion of the court, and shall also forfeit his
office, unless the judge who shall try the cause shall certify that he was
disatisfied with the verdict.

XLIV. And be it further enacted, That no fee shall be taken for any
certificate to be issued or granted pursuant to this act.

XLV. And be it further enacted, That if any of the said inspectors or other
officers of inspection, shall neglect to perform any of the duties hereby
enjoined upon them respectively according to the true intent and meaning of
this act, whereby any person or persons shall be injured or suffer damage, such
person or persons shall, and may have an action founded upon this act against
such inspector or other officers, and shall recover full damages for the same,
together with costs of suit.

To the intent nevertheless, that the officers to be appointed by virtue of
this act who may have undesignedly erred in the execution of their respective
offices, may be enabled by offering timely and sufficient amends to the party
aggrieved, thereby to avoid unnecessary expense and trouble;

XLVI. Be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for any inspector or
officer of inspection or other person acting in aid of the one or the other, at
any time before an action shall be commenced against him or them to tender
amends to the person or persons aggrieved, or to his her or their agent or
attorney, and in case such amends are not accepted, to plead such tender in bar
to any action which may be brought against him or them, together with the plea
of not guilty, and any other plea or pleas with leave of the court in which
such action shall be depending. And if upon issue joined thereon the jury shall
find the amends so tendered to have been sufficient, then they shall give a
verdict for the defendant or defendants. And in such case, or in case the
plaintiff or plaintiffs shall become nonsuited, or shall discontinue such
action, or in case judgment shall be given for the defendant or defendants upon
demurrer, then the defendant or defendants shall be entitled to, and shall
recover costs of suit: But if upon issue so joined, the jury shall find that
no, or insufficient amends were tendered, then they shall find a verdict for
the plaintiff or plaintiffs and such damages as shall be reasonable.

XLVII. And be it further enacted, That any action or suit to be brought
against any person or persons for any thing by him or them done, as in
pursuance of this act, shall be commenced within three months next after the
matter or thing done, and shall be laid in the proper county in which the cause
of action shall have arisen, and the defendant or defenddats in any such action
or suit may plead the general issue, and on the trial thereof give thi^ act,
and the special matter in evidence. And if a verdict shall pass for the
defendant or defe^^ants, or the plaintiff or plaintiffs become nonsuited, or
discontinue his, her or their action or prosecution, or judgment shall be given
against such plaintiff or plaintiffs upon demurrer or otherwise, then such
defendant or defendants shall have costs awarded to him, her or them, against
such plaintiff or plaintiffs.

And in order that persons who may have incurred any of the penalties of this
act without wilful negligence or inattention of fraud, may be relieved from
such penalties;

XLVIII. Be it further enacted, A discretionary power to remit or mitigate
penalties in laws of this nature is indispensable. It is peculiarly so in the
commencement. Heavy penalties are frequently incurred through inadvertence,
misconstruction or want of information. Instances of this kind have happened
under the existing system. The discretion however which is proposed to be given
in the outset, is to be abridged at the expiration of a period which will allow
sufficient time for persons to become acquainted with the law.
That it shall be lawful for the judge of the district court, of the district
within which such penalty or forfeiture shall have been incurred, upon petition
of the party who shall have incurred the same to inquire in a summary manner
into the circumstances of the case, first causing reasonable notice to be given
to the person or persons claiming such penalty or forfeiture, and to the
Attorney General of such district, to the end that each may have an opportunity
of showing cause against the mitigation or remission thereof; and if upon such
enquiry it shall appear to the said judge that such penalty or forfeiture was
incurred without willful negligence, or any design or intention of fraud, it
shall be lawful for him to remit the same, and to cause any spirits which may
have been seized, to be restored to the proprietor or proprietors upon such
terms and conditions as shall appear to him reasonable. And the decision of the
judge, if the terms and conditions prescribed by him be complied with, shall be
conclusive to the parties. Provided, That such penalty, or the value of the
spirits forfeited, does not exceed five hundred dollars: But if the amount of
such penalty or forfeiture exceed five hundred dollars, the person or persons
claiming the same, may, within three days after such decision shall be
pronounced, appeal from the same to the supreme court of the United States,
which court shall summarily hear the parties, and either confirm or reverse the
decision of the district judge, as shall appear to them proper. Provided
always, That after the last day of May, in the year one thousand seven hundred
and ninety, one such remission shall in no case exceed one half the penalty, or
one half the spirits forfeited, or the value thereof.

XLIX. And be it further enacted, That all penalties and forfeitures incurred
by virtue of this act, shall be for the benefit of the person or persons who
shall make a seizure, or who shall first discover the matter or thing, whereby
the same shall have been incurred, and if other than the inspector of the
revenue shall give information thereof to such inspector or inspectors,
reserving thereout for the United States the amount of the duties payable on
the spirits, in respect to which, such penalty or forfeiture may have been
incurred. And such penalty and forfeiture shall be recoverable with costs of
suit by action of debt, in the name of the person or persons entitled thereto,
or by information in the name of the United States of America. And it shall be
the duty of the Attorney General of the district, wherein any such penalty or
forfeiture may have been incurred upon application to him, to institute or
bring such information accordingly. Provided always that no officer of
inspection, other than chief officer or officers of a district shall be
entitled to the benefit of any forfeiture unless notice of the seizure by him
made, shall be by him given within twelve hours next after such seizure to the
said chief officer or officers. But in such case the United States shall have
the entire benefit of such forfeiture.

L. And be it further enacted, That if any person or persons shall counterfeit,
or forge, or cause to be counterfeited or forged any of the certificates herein
before directed to be given, or shall knowingly or willingly accept or receive
any false or untrue certificate with any of the said spirits, or shall
fraudulently alter or erase any such certificate after the same shall be given,
or knowingly or willingly publish or make use of such certificate so
counterfeited, forged, false, untrue, altered or erased, every person or
persons so offending, shall for each and every offense, severally forfeit and
pay the sum of one thousand dollars.

LI. And be it further enacted, That any person or persons that shall be
convicted, of wilfully taking a false oath or affirmation, in any of the cases
in which oaths and affirmations are required to be taken by virtue of this act,
shall be liable to the pains and penalties to which persons are liable for
wilful and corrupt perjury.

LII. And be it further enacted, That if any person or persons shall give or
offer to give any bribe, recompense or reward whatsoever, to any ^^^pector or
inspectors of the revenue, in order to corrupt, persuade or prevail upon such
officer, either to do any act or acts contrary to his duty in the execution of
this act, or to neglect or omit to do any act or thing which he ought to do in
execution of this act, or to connive at, or to conceal any fraud or frauds
relating to the duties hereby imposed on any of the said spirits, or not to
discover the same, every such person or persons shall for such offense, whether
the same offer or proposal be accepted or not, forfeit and pay the sum of one
thousand dollars.

LIII. And be it further enacted, That if any person or persons shall assault,
resist, oppose, molest, obstruct or binder any inspector in the execution of
this act, or of any of the powers or authorities hereby vested in him, or shall
forcibly rescue or cause to be rescued any of the said spirits, after the same
shall have been seized by any such inspector or officer, or shall attempt or
endeavor so to do, all and every person and persons so offending, shall for
every such offense, for which no other penalty is particularly provided by this
act, forfeit and pay the sum of five hundred dollars.

LIVE. And be it further enacted, That if any such inspector or officer, shall
enter into any collusion with any person or persons for violating or evading
any of the provisions of this act, or the duties hereby imposed, or shall
fraudulently concur in the delivery of any of the said spirits, out of any
house, building or place, wherein the same are deposited without payment, or
security for the payment of the duties thereupon, or shall falsely or
fraudulently mark any cask, case or vessel, contrary to any of the said
provisions, such inspector or officer shall for every such offense forfeit the
sum of one thousand dollars, and upon conviction of any of the said offenses,
shall forfeit his office and shall be disqualified for holding any other office
under the United States.

LV. And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the Inspectors of
the revenue, and when requested by any such dealer, they are hereby required to
provide blank certificates, in such form as ^^all be directed by the Secretary
of the Treasury, and in the cases in which certificates are hereby directed to
be issued or granted by the said dealers, to furnish them therewith the blanks
in which certificates shall be filled up by such dealers, according to the
nature and truth of each particular case, subject to the penalty heretofore
declared for granting or using false or untrue cerrificates. And every such
dealer shall from time to time, when thereunto requested, account with such
Inspectors respectively, for the number of certificates received by him, and
for the disposition of such of them as may have been disposed of, and shall
produce and show the residue thereof to the said Inspector, and shall pay for
every certificate for which he cannot satisfactorily account, the sum of fifty
cents.

LVI. And be it further enacted, that in every case in which an oath or
affirmation is required by virtue of this act, it shall be lawful for the
Inspectors of the revenue, or any of them, or their lawful deputy; or the
lawful deputy of one of them where not more than one in a district, to
administer and take such oath or affirmation. And that wherever there are more
than one Inspector for one district, a majority of them may execute all and any
of the powers and authorities hereby vested in the Inspectors of the revenue:
Provided, that this shall not be construed to make a majority necessary in any
case in which, according to the nature of the appointment or service, and the
true intent of this act, the authority is or ought to be several.

And for the encouragement of the export trade of the United States:

LVII. Be it further enacted, that if any of the said spirits (whereupon any of
the duties imposed by this act shall have been paid or secured to be paid)
shall after the last day of (...) next, be exported from the United States to
any foreign port or place, there shall be an allowance to the exporter or
exporters thereof, by way of drawback, equal to the duties thereupon, according
to the rates in each case by this act imposed, deducting therefrom one cent per
gallon, and adding to the allowance upon spirits distilled within the United
States from molasses, which shall be so exported, two cents and an half cent
per gallon, as an equivalent for the duty laid upon molasses by the said act
for laying a duty on goods, wares and merchandises imported into the United
States: Provided always, that the said allowance shall not be made unless the
said exporter or exporters shall observe the regulations hereinafter
prescribed: And provided further, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to alter the provisions in the said former act, concerning drawbacks
or allowances, in nature thereof, upon spirits imported prior to the said last
day of (...) last.

LVIII. And be it further enacted, that in order to entitle the said exporter
or exporters to the benefit of the said allowance, he, she or they, shall
previous to putting or lading any of the said spirits on board of any ship or
vessel for exportation, give twenty-four hours notice at the least, to the
proper officer of inspection of the port from which the said spirits shall be
intended to be exported, of his, her or their intention to export the same, and
of the number of casks and cases, or either of them, containing the said
spirits so intended to be exported, and of the respective marks thereof, and of
the place or places where the said spirits shall be then deposited, and of the
place to which, and ship or vessel in which they shall be so intended to be
exported. Whereupon it shall be the duty of the said officer to inspect, by
himself or deputy, the casks and cases so noticed for exportation, and the
quantities, kinds and proofs of the spirits therein, together with the
certificates which ought to accompany the same according to ^he directions of
this act, which shall be produced to him for that purpose; and if he shall find
that the said casks and cases have the proper marks according to the directions
of this act; and that the spirits therein correspond with the said
certificates, he shall thereupon brand each cask or case with the word
"Exportation;" and the said spirits shall, after such inspection, be laden on
board the same ship or vessel of which notice shall have been given, and in the
presence of the same officer who shall have examined the same, and whose duty
it shall be to attend for that purpose. And after the said spirits shall be
laden on board such ship or vessel, the certificates aforesaid shall be
delivered to the said officer, who shall certify to the Collector of the said
port the amount and particulars of the spirits so exported, and shall also
deliver the said certificates which shall have been by him received to the said
collector, which shall be a voucher to him, for payment of the said allowance.

Provided nevertheless, and be it further enacted, That the said allowance
shall not be made, unless the said exporter or exporters shall make oath, or if
a known Quaker, affirmation, that the said spirits so noticed for exportation,
and laden on board such (...), are truly intended to be exported to the place
whereof notice shall have been given, and (...) to be relanded within the
United States; and that he or she does verily ^^lieve that the (...) upon
charged by this act, have been duly paid; and shall also (...) to the
collector, with two sureties, one of whom shall be the master, or other person
having the command or charge of the ship or vessel in which the said spirits
shall be intended to be exported; the other, such (...) person as shall be
approved by the said collector, in the full value in the judgment of such
collector^ of the said spirits so intended to be exported, with condition that
the said spirits (the dangers of the seas and enemies excepted) shall be really
and truly exported to, and landed in such ports and places without the limits
of the United States, according to the late treaty of peace with Great Britain,
as shall be specified in such bond; and that the said spirits shall not be
unshipped from on board of the said ship or vessel, whereupon the same shall
have been laden for exportation, within the said limits, or any ports or
harbors of the United States, or relanded in any other part of the same
(shipwreck or other unavoidable accident excepted.)

Provided also, and be it further enacted, that the said allowance shall not be
paid until six months after the said spirits shall have been so exported.

LIX. And be it further enacted, That if any of the said spirits, after the
same shall have been shipped for exportation, shall be unshipped for any
purpose whatever, either within the limits of any part of the United States, or
within four leagues of the coast thereof, or shall be relanded within the
United States, from on board the ship or vessel wherein the same shall have
been laden for exportation, (unless in case of necessity or distress to save
the ship and goods from perishing, which shall be immediately made known to the
principal officer of the customs, residing at the port nearest to which such
ship or vessel shall be at the time such necessity or distress shall arise)
then not only the spirits so unshipped, together with the casks and cases
containing the same, but also the ship or vessel in or on board which the same
shall have been so shipped or laden, together with her guns, furniture,
ammunition, tackle and apparel; and also the ship, vessel or boat into which
the said spirits shall be unshipped or put, after the unshipping thereof,
together with her guns, furniture, ammunition, tackle and apparel, shall be
forfeited, and may be seized by any officer of the customs, or of inspection.

LX. And be it further enacted, That the said allowance shall not be made when
the said spirits shall be exported in any other than a ship or vessel of the
burden of (...) tons and upwards, to be ascertained to the satisfaction of the
collector of the port from which the same shall be intended to be extorted.

LXI. And be it further enacted, That the bonds to be given as aforesaid, shall
and may be discharged by producing within one year from the respective dates
thereof (if the delivery of the spirits in respect to which the same shall have
been given, be at any place where a consul or other agent of the United States
resides) a certificate of such consul or agent, and if there be no such consul
or agent, then a certificate of any two known and reputable American merchants
residing at the said place, and if there be not two such merchants residing at
the said place, then a certificate of any other two reputable merchants,
testifying the delivery of the said spirits, at the said place, which
certificate shall in each case be confirmed by the oath or affirmation of the
master and mate or other like officer of the vessel in which the said spirits
shall have been exported; and when such certificate shall be from any other
than a consul or agent, or merchants of the United States, it shall be a part
of the said oath or affirmation, that there were not upon diligent enquiry to
be found two merchants of the United States at the said place. Provided always,
that in the case of death, the oath or affirmation of the party dying, shall
not be deemed necessary: And provided further, that the said oath or
affirmation, taken before the chief civil magistrate of the place of the said
delivery, and certified under his hand seal, shall be of the same validity as
if taken before a person qualified to administer oaths within the United
States: or such bonds shall and may be discharged upon proof that the spirits
so exported, were taken by enemies or perished in the sea, or destroyed by
fire; the examination and proof of the same being left to the judgment of the
collector of the customs, naval officer, and chief officer of inspection, or
any two of them, of the place from which such spirits shall have been exported.

LXII. And be it further enacted, That the prosecution for all fines, penalties
and forfeitures incurred by force of this act, and for all duties p^yable in
virtue thereof, and which shall not be duly paid, shall and may be had before
any justice of the peace or court of any state of competent jurisdiction, or
court of the United States, of or within the state or district, in which the
cause of action shall arise, with an appeal as in other cases: Provided, that
where the cause of action shall exceed in value fifty dollars, the same shall
not be cognisable before a justice of the peace only.

LXIII. And be it further enacted, That this act shall commence and take effect
as to all matters therein contained, in respect to which no special
commencement is hereby provided (except as to the appointment of officers and
regulation of the districts) from and immediately after the last day of (...)
next.

( SCHEDULE K.) ESTIMATE of the probable product of the funds proposed for
funding the debt and providing for the current service of the United States,
including the present duties on imports and tonnage.
Dollars, Probable product of the duties on imports and tonnage, according to
the acts of the last session, 1,800,000 Including the State of North Carolina,
this estimate may be said to correspond with the statement made by the
committee of ways and means during the last session; which statement the
Secretary is inclined to think is as near the truth as can be now obtained. In
the preceding estimate are comprehended wines, distilled spirits, teas, and
coffee, amounting to about 600,000 Which being deducted, leaves 1,200,000 From
which deducting 5 per cent for expense of collection, 60,000 Leaves nett
product, 1,140,000

Probable product of duties proposed.
Imported. 1,000,000 gallons wine, at 20 cents, 200,000 4,000,000 gallons
distilled spirits, at 20 800,000 700,000 pounds bohea tea, at 12 84,000 800,000
pounds souchong and other black teas, at 20 160,000 100,000 pounds green tea,
average at 25 25,000 1,600,000 pounds coffee, at 5 80,000 Made in the United
States. 3,500,000 gallons distilled spirits from foreign materials, at 11
cents, 385,000 3,000,000 ditto, distilled from mat^rials of the United States,
at 9 cents, 270,000 2,004,000 Deduct for drawbacks, and expense of collection,
15 per cent, 300,600 1,703,400 Dollars, 2,843,40


