A TOUR IN HOLLAND, IN MDCCLXXXIV. BY AN AMERICAN.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS, SOLD AT HIS BOOKSTORE
IN WORCESTER, AND BY HIM AND COMPANY IN BOSTON. MDCCXC.

PREFACE.
THE author of this short Tour in Holland, had not an idea of submitting his
remarks in that country to the public, at the time they were made -- The
careless and irregular manner in which it is written will fully evince this
truth. -- However, as several of his friends importuned him to publish it, in
its original native state, he has assented; having previously solicited the
candid criticism of the celebrated author of M'Fingal, from whose letter on
this subject the author has made free to extract the following remarks, viz.

"IN America we know little of Holland -- nor do I believe the English in
general know much more. The nobility and gentry, who take the tour of Europe,
seldom visit the Netherlands, and the remarks of English travelers, which I
have seen, seem not to extend beyond the city of Amsterdam.

"THE best account of the Dutch manners I have met with, is contained in the
Adele and Theodore of the countess de Genlis, who occasionally paints the
manners in some of their towns, particularly in Broeck, Sardan, etc. in perfect
conformity to your descriptions.

"THE constitution of the United Netherlands has been attended to by writers on
government; but an accurate account of travels in that nation, describing the
face of the country, and the manners of the inhabitants, is, so far as my
reading extends, as yet unsupplied in English, as well as American literature.
I am of opinion that your essay will supply it, as far as can be expected from
so short a tour through the principal cities.

"I AM pleased with your descriptions, your sentiments, and your general manner
of expressing them, and must thank you for the valuable information I have
received from them, of the country and manners of the Dutch.

"YOUR style may be criticized by illnatured, scholastic pedants, but will not
be blamed with any severity by others. An easy, lively, familiar style,
approaching even to carelessness, is best suited to a work of this kind, and
will give more pleasure to readers in general, than the laborious stiffness and
pedantry of Johnson, or the florid elegance of Gibbon. Let mere scholars pay
more attention to words than things, and be praised by mere scholars, for their
skill in arranging them like soldiers on the parade, and marching them off
properly by divisions -- This is not the chief business of those who write to
instruct, entertain and be understood.

"IN many passages, which I have passed over, I should have suggested some
little alteration, if I could have had the pleasure of seeing you. But as they
would have required a change of a sentence, I could not alter them without
changing the color of the style, and often destroying its genuine naivete.
However, I think you may safely leave them as they are, for the small critics
to nibble upon; for as they are the proper domestics in the literary family,
it is but just that their masters should give them some crumbs for their
subsistence."

A TOUR in HOLLAND.
LETTER I. To Mr. -- in AMERICA.
LONDON, 24th May, 1784. DEAR BROTHER,
EXPERIENCE every day convinces me, that no situation in life is more
disgusting to an active mind, than to have nothing to do. -- The present moment
seems a vacuum in my existence; at night I look back with regret to find the
best hours of my life mouldering away in the cause of indolence.

THE mind of man must rest on some pursuit, or he will drift among the rocks of
dissipation.

THE only hours in which I can relish any satisfaction, are those I pass in the
country; but my affairs often call me to this vast metropolis, which to me is
the most soul sinking place I ever was in; and, in truth, the last retreat for
an American to enjoy that social pleasure, neighbourly intercourse, and cordial
friendship, which constitute so large a proportion of our happiness.

EVERY family here are wrapped up within themselves, and measure their
neighbor's merit by his purse and equipage: In short, the whole city is a
great gulf of riches and vice, and every particle of air seems impregnated
with corruption: Indeed I find there is no happiness equal to that which
results from virtue, temperance and industry. The more I see of mankind, the
more I am convinced of this truth, and the less reconciled to their vanities
and follies. Do not suppose that I have been posting about upon the globe for
nearly ten years together, and am at last divested of those liberal ideas I
have endeavored to cherish -- No! I have leisurely traversed old England in
almost every direction, and, divested of prejudice, I am ready to allow it the
full weight of its merit: Take the kingdom all in all, I am persuaded there is
no country which has a better claim to decisive bravery, and improvements in
agriculture and the arts; but we have found the important mystery of being much
happier than the English, which may perhaps be imputed to a great depravity of
their morals, as it seems generally confessed that their former envied national
character no more exists, and that we now inherit in New England those masculine
virtues which distinguished them so conspicuously in the last century.

HEAVEN defend our posterity from the same degeneracy! If the consequence is no
less than the loss of their happiness, how much ought we to exert ourselves to
preserve and perpetuate, our simplicity of manners, in their native purity?

I HAVE almost run through my letter without telling you the only thing I meant
to say at first; which was, that I am just on the wing for Holland, without any
view of business; but as I absolutely begin to rust for want of activity, I
mean to rub myself a little bright among the Mynheers and Mavrows. I have
hunted over half the bookstores in this city for some good description of that
artificial country, but, to my astonishment, I cannot find any sufficiently
accurate, either to furnish just ideas, or to satisfy my curiosity -- and as I
know we have but little better knowledge of Holland in America, than of
Otaheite, I will endeavor to make such remarks as will at least impress the
objects on my own mind, and perhaps amuse some of my American friends. Linked
as we are in our political connection with Holland, our ignorance on this head
is much to be lamented. -- Adieu!

LETTER II.
HARWICH, 26th May, 1784. JOURNAL,
FIVE o'clock this morning left the King's Arms Inn, on my way to Harwich, with
several jovial companions, bound to Holland.

THE morning was serene, with a clear blue sky, and the air sweetly perfumed.

THE country from London to Harwich is all in the county of Essex, and finely
cultivated. We passed through several considerable villages, and by many
elegant seats. Essex is celebrated for grain and cattle. We breakfasted at
Ingerstole, twenty three miles from London, and passed the time so merrily to
Colchester, fifty two miles, that we were hardly sensible of the ground or time
we measured.

COLCHESTER is a large town, built principally upon a pleasant, healthy
eminence, and celebrated for good oysters. The streets are clean, and the
houses all white; but the pavements rough. Our landlord tells us, they count
sixteen parishes, and fourteen thousand inhabitants, who carry on largely in
the manufactory of flannels and baizes, known by the name of Colchester baizes.

IN eight or nine miles from this town we arrived on the borders of the Stour,
or tide river, and found the country exceedingly romantic and agreeable until
we reached Harwich. In the neighborhood of this place we passed the superb
seat of Richard Rigby, Esquire upon our right, and a seventy four gun ship on the
stocks, on our left; immediately after which, from the summit of a hill, the
German ocean suddenly opened to our view.

HARWICH is a villainous dirty little hole, but the Packet being ready to weigh
anchor, we were speedily relieved from the impositions to which strangers are
ever subject in such places.

LETTER III. To T. R. Esquire -- SURRY.
HELVOETSLUYS, 27th May, 1784. DEAR SIR,
YOU will readily acknowledge my punctuality, when I assure you, that I arrived
here but a few hours since, and have already assumed my pen to give you an
account of a country I have hardly yet set foot into; but as the first
impression is always the most forcible, when one is plunged as it were into a
new region of phizes and fashions, where art and nature both assume a different
aspect, I shall endeavor to follow the current of my feelings from the moment
we set sail from Harwich, to the present; after which, you may expect a more
detailed account, as I become more thoroughly acquainted; for I will freely
confess my total ignorance both of the nation, and the geography of the
country. To paint the contrast of objects in strong colors admits of no delay,
for once familiarized with them -- the novelty ceases. Before I proceed I must
vent my spleen against the villainous search officers at Harwich, who extorted
money from each of us for doing what they are paid for. I contended in vain to
oppose their injustice, but was reluctantly forced to bend to the rod, or
submit to delay and inconvenience. We weighed anchor on board the Prince of
Wales, Capt. Hearn, at seven o'clock in the evening, and stood along the
Suffolk coast to the northward, to avoid some shoals, and then hauled E. S. E.
I wished much to remain on deck all the evening, but the atmosphere was wild,
and heavily charged with hanging clouds; which were so uncivil as to sift their
waters upon us, and oblige us to decamp below; where we immediately stowed
ourselves away in snug little cabins, which are particularly neat and
commodious; indeed I have never seen any packet altogether so neat. We had a
squally thundering night, but I was safe wrapped up in the arms of sleep until
four o'clock this morning. -- The morning's sun soon frightened away the sea
exhalations, which left to our view several vessels in the offing. Our vessel
had scarcely any motion, as the sea was only dimpled by a light breeze, which
wafted us gradually toward the Low Dutch coast in the afternoon; which we saw
nothing off until close aboard of it; owing to a mist, and a flat country.

WE sailed along the Zealand coast upon our right, where windmills,
lighthouses, rows of trees, and distant spires were continually rising to our
view. The breeze quickened up, and pushed us rapidly forward to the pier of
Helvoetsluys, where we doubled briskly round, and in an instant entered between
two long piers stretching out in the harbor, with the town directly before us.
The piers were both lined with curious spectators. -- The first object that
fixed my attention, was a smoking Dutchman, which marked the characteristick of
the nation so far. In this moment I felt such a spirit of universal
philanthropy possess my soul, that I could most cordially have given him a
friendly shake of brotherly love; this convinced me, how much our happiness in
this world depends on those social bonds which ought to link us all together.

TO return -- The pier is built of strong piles of timber one hundred and forty
feet in length, and sunk thirty feet in the mud; an immense work indeed, which
seems to bid defiance to the impetuosity of the waves. We found several ships
in the harbor, and the quay and streets well paved with small Dutch clinkers,
or bricks, as hard as stone, and placed edgeways. In the basin above the town,
we also saw several men of war, and some skeletons, said to be the remains of
the ships commanded by the famous Van Tromp, when he defeated the English.
Helvoetsluys is situated upon the west side of the Isle of Voorn in the
Province of Holland. It is small, but well fortified, and neat in the extreme,
as the clinkers are washed as clean as hounds teeth.

IN truth, the houses, dress, and every thing around us, wore the face of that
neatness so peculiar to this singular nation and country. The sudden change of
every object, had such an effect on me, the first moment we entered this town,
that I was almost inclined to imagine myself let off in an air balloon, or lost
in the moon, or some other region totally new and strange. We examined
carefully every object worth notice, and and were much amused with the
singularity of the houses, many of which are built in the old Spanish manner;
so that the attick story is quite lost in a narrow peek. The men and women in
the vulgar class, are quite boorish and inanimate, and appear characteristick
with their ships -- heavy and square. --

THE women are singularly dressed; we have not yet seen a single head elevated
beyond the bounds nature has prescribed; but they are all trussed up with caps
as tight as their skins; add to this, common brass ear rings of an enormous
size; and as a proof of their taste, what should you think of black beauty
spots over their temples, as big as a crown, and as ragged as if torn from the
silk?

I AM quite in raptures with the neatness which dazzles our eyes on all sides;
but as my head is not yet totally free from the dizziness of our sea passage, I
shall not venture any farther to night; but will reserve my other observations
for future letters, which you may regularly expect from post to post, until I
have nothing new to say, or otherwise until my return to England.

WE have now in company a young Oxonian, just fledged, and for the first time
adrift in the wide world, upon the grand tour: I left him an hour since,
industriously engaged in writing his journal in a back room, with his
traveling desk, and a variety of instruments paraded before him -- Were I a
Dutchman, I should have suspected him for a spy, and stealing a plan of the
fortifications: But how unjust my suspicions would have been! for I peeped
slyly over his shoulder, and found him innocently engaged in drawing a Dutch
wench scrubbing the pavements -- as the first specimen of his genius and
sagacity -- if father Stern had been in my place he would certainly have
ranked him in the class of "simple travelers." -- It is a chance if your eyes
are not fatigued by this time; I am sure my fingers are, so I shall leave you
abruptly, as I feel myself entirely disposed to try the good qualities of a
Dutch bed.

MY compliments wait on your amiable family, and believe me very respectfully,

Your devoted humble Servant, -- --.

LETTER IV. To the same.
ROTTERDAM, 29th May, 1784. DEAR SIR,
I PROMISED to continue my observations, but so many new objects have crowded
upon me since my last, that I am really at a loss where to seize the chain, so
as to run along from link to link, in some regular order to the end of the
sheet.

WE left Helvoetsluys yesterday morning, at seven o'clock, in a villainous coach
drawn by two horses across the Island of Voorn, to the pleasant town of Brill,
situated on the east side of the Island. We found the roads muddy and
disagreeable, and nothing which merits particular notice in the country, except
that their cows horns are shorter than those in England -- the sheep have none
at all -- and if we can judge from the appearance of the women, the husbands
are in no great danger of wearing horns any more than the sheep -- at least not
longer than the cows.

WE observed upon almost every church, as well as in the very heart of the
Brill, enormous great storks nests -- these birds enjoy the patronage and
protection of the States, we are told, from some religious prejudice -- and
from a notion that they are partial to Republics. Swans are called imperial
birds, as none but the nobility can keep them.

SEVEN miles traveling brought us to the Brill; however, I will say nothing of
this snug town, until I have told you how we were fleeced by the porters before
we set off; and what is worse, they are countenanced by the police: The truth
is, we could not prevail on our lubberly, smoking mule of a driver, to bring
his coach to our door to receive our baggage, though in the same street, and
only half a dozen doors distant; but we must employ porters. After much puzzle
about nothing, we put all our baggage into one wagon, and mounted six of us in
another, and jogged away through the mud. It is very curious to see how these
fellows steer their fore wheels with their feet. In approaching Brill, we
passed under a double grove of beautiful trees, a long draw bridge, leading
over a wide fosse; and then entered through the gates, and aversed the best
part of the city; while the skippers were settling by the dice, which should
take us up to Rotterdam. This place is celebrated in history for giving birth
to the Republic. It was here the malcontents planted their standard under
the Earl of March, in 1572, from on board some privateers (two hundred and
three years before the Lexington battle, which also gave birth to the American
Republic) and in spite of every effort made by the bloody Duke d'Alva, (who
was then prosecuting the horrid inquisition with barbarous rigor) they held
possession. The sparks of a revolt were thickly scattered, and only waited a
favorable breeze to blow up the flame, spreading in an instant throughout the
seventeen Provinces, which were soon after supported by the great Prince
William the first, at this time levying forces in Germany, to rescue his
country from the cruel hands of their biggoted, Spanish persecutors.

WE found every object upon a larger scale at Brill, than at the Helvoetsluys.

LET a man have traveled in every other quarter of the globe, still here he
would have found the charm of novelty. -- A certain whim and elegance mark
their old houses, which cannot be easily described, but must be seen, in order
to be properly conceived of.

THE streets are spacious, and all planted with trees upon each side of the
canals, which run along in the middle: The verdure of the trees reflecting
strongly upon large windows which are kept bright and free from dust, add
infinitely to their luster and magnificence.

IT had an odd appearance to us, to see reflecting glasses hitched upon the
outside of the most genteel windows, so that Madam (Mavrow) can set unobserved
by her window and reconnoitre at her ease every object passing up and down the
streets.

IN this town it seemed as if the only or chief business was scrubbing and
scouring on all sides. The church is a handsome structure, the steeple of which
is the sailors land mark. Ships sailing up the Maes to Rotterdam, pass close
under the ramparts of this city, upon which are pleasant walks under groves of
trees.

THE isle of Voorn, of which Brill is the capital, is about twenty miles in
length, and six in breadth; the soil appeared to us light, but fruitful in
grain.

UPON our return, we found our vessel ready to set sail, and with a fine fresh
gale at N. W. we immediately entered the Maes, and stood away directly before
it for Rotterdam.

THE river is one mile and a half broad opposite to Brill; but in general a
mile.

UPON the borders, are many groves, as well as rows of trees, and several
villages; particularly Delfthaven, two miles from Rotterdam, and rendered
famous for having produced the gallant Van Tromp -- the pride of Holland; who,
notwithstanding his persevering valor, never succeeded to any decided effect.
This village is strongly fortified, and defended against inundations by dams.
We saw three men of war, and several ships in the harbor as we passed. The
willow trees along the margin of the river appeared afloat in the water at a
little distance; indeed the country is so flat and low, that we had nothing in
our way but trees to intercept our view, which we overlooked mostly from our
deck. The meadows and pasture lands afford fine feeding for cattle, who stand
up to their eyes in rich clover. The skipper told us that the water is from
four to five fathoms deep in many parts of the river; but no vessel exceeding
nine or ten feet attempts to come up the Maes by Brill, and that the heavy
ships go round by Helvoetsluys and Dordrecht.

IN the neighborhood of Rotterdam, we passed several groves of trees upon our
right; and then sailed along parallel with the bomb quay, half a mile, where we
saw a lovely line of trees closely knit together, which half deprived us of the
sight of the most magnificent houses I can recollect to have seen any where.
The old skipper told us, that the walks under these trees were truly elegant,
and much frequented by the beau monde -- we found them broad, with distinct
walks finely shaded.

WE penetrated with our eyes into the heart of this beautiful city, through two
or three avenues as we passed; which showed us such a singular confusion of
masts, spires, trees, canals, and houses, all jumbled together, as led me
almost to think that nature and art had planned this enchanting compound in a
whimsical moment.

ROTTERDAM is the second grand emporium of the Republic -- the harbor is safe
from naval enemies, but inconvenient of access, on account of its distance from
the sea.

THE port is rendered particularly commodious, by large canals, which admit
ships of upwards of three hundred tons burden, quite up to the merchants doors
in every part of the city.

OPPOSITE to the bomb quay the greatest part of the shipping are moored, which
has a noble effect, much enlivened by the motion of ships and boats sailing up
and down the river.

THE town is very populous, and built in a triangular form; the houses mostly
very large and elegant, made of flat ground brick, neatly pointed with white
seams -- and the streets are spacious and well paved by the sides of the canals.

TO avoid a repetition on this head, I will endeavor to give you a general
idea at once of the principal cities in Holland. Imagine yourself traversing
one of these cities, and every other moment upon a neat draw bridge (built with
hewn stone and iron railings) leading over a canal running through a spacious
street, with a continual commotion of boats and barges upon each side -- a
clean paved wide street before you, and beautiful houses, with trees bordering
the canals. Hold fast to these grand outlines, and suppose yourself immerged in
a crowd of industrious mortals, all in pursuit of wealth, and you can easily
trace, by your fire side, most of the towns in the Seven Provinces.

I MUST not forget to tell you, that we walked in a pleasant grove just without
the gates, where we saw many of the gentry upon the wing for their country
seats, with good black horses, and clumsy carriages -- some of them
capriciously made in form of triumphant cars -- The Dutch gentlemen seldom ride
on horseback, and never without being exposed to the ridicule of the rabble at
such an uncommon sight.

WE were often puzzled in the streets for an interpreter, but seldom failed in
addressing ourselves in French to any people of genteel appearance. It is
really astonishing how generally this language is now spoken throughout Europe.
Indeed it is almost vulgar for a man to speak his native tongue with the beau
monde -- and a knowledge of the French is an indispensable criterion of an
accomplished gentleman; for a foreigner is always addressed in this popular and
charming language.

SINCE I am upon the subject of languages, a few words in defense of the Dutch
will not be improper. Every one knows it is in truth vulgar and harsh; but
perhaps no two languages bear a greater affinity to each other than the Dutch
and the English.

WHEN I first arrived in France, it was some weeks before I could understand a
collected French phrase; but the moment I landed in Holland, I heard entire
English phrases, or rather such as the English borrowed from the Dutch; for it
is well known, that the Dutch is an original language, and the English, on the
contrary, a compounded one; besides, in examining a Dutch letter, I found it
contained so many English words and phrases, that I had no difficulty to
understand the greatest part of it. It therefore ill becomes the English to
ridicule a language so much like their own.

WE saw near the market place the statue of the famous Erasmus, who was born
here; and viewed St. Lawrence, the principal Church -- where we ascended a
lofty tower, from whence we commanded a delightful picturesque coup d'oeil.

THE city of Rotterdam appeared like a high finished curious picture below us;
and the country beyond, a delightful back ground, cultivated like a continued
garden, all the way to our horizon.

I HAVE not yet, in any instance, experienced a more happy hour than in
contemplating this wonderful country, which seems like an enchanted fairy land.

IN ranging over this extended prospect, we encompassed within our view,
through spyglasses, Delft, Dort, Hague, Brill, Utrecht, and Amsterdam; which in
fact included the best part of Holland.

I THOUGHT it beyond the power of the most fertile conception to imagine a more
lovely sight; but I found this large picture much improved by reducing it to
miniature by a concave mirror, which we luckily had with us.

THIS country never fails to strike even Europeans (acquainted with high
cultivation) with wonder and admiration; but the effect is yet more powerful
upon an American, who has been accustomed from his infancy to a country of
nature, laid out upon a large and copious scale: This, on the contrary, is a
country of art, as it were, wrested from the sea, which necessarily produces as
great a contrast in objects as can be well conceived.

I AM terrified with the length of this letter: Should it afford you any
amusement adequate to the postage and trouble in reading it, my wishes will be
fully gratified. -- Adieu!

LETTER V. To the same.
ROTTERDAM, 30th May, 1784. DEAR SIR,
ALL nature seems to smile this delightful morn.

WE have just made a little excursion into the country, roving carelessly among
the yellow bosomed meadows, the fragrancy of which was a luxury I wish to
participate in common with my friends.

WE shall go on glutting our greedy eyes until the afternoon, when we intend
pursuing our travels on to the Hague.

I MUST not, however, leave Rotterdam without making my obeisance to our
thirteen American stripes, which are flying among the shipping. You know I am
particularly partial to them. Notwithstanding their youth, they are forward in
introducing themselves into the company of old European streamers, which have
been waving on the ocean until they begin to fade with age: But the Stripes
shine with the luster of a rainbow, after a thunder storm -- which, happily for
mankind, is blown over -- and has left the world in a dead calm.

IN addition to the American ships in this harbor, we saw several large
Dutchmen, freighted to carry over to America upwards of one thousand emigrants.

WHAT a feast for the soul, when we reflect that the present age in America
has, by a virtuous and arduous struggle, opened an asylum to the oppressed
nations of the earth: This consideration alone (when we reflect on its extended
effects, and probable duration) is worth all the dangers and toils we have
endured in the conflict.

SINCE the world first existed, no people ever had a more solemn, and important
charge committed to their hands; as the welfare of millions, for ages to come,
rests on the persevering virtue of the present generation.

AMERICA stands comparatively like the sun in the heavens -- the center of
light, and the wonder of the admiring world, who feel the influence of its rays.

THE persecuted will find ease and rest; and tortured virtue and exiled worth
will take refuge among us, from every quarter of this old world.

MILD laws, executed with energy, will secure us happiness, and bid astonished
probity defy its tyrant.

I PRAY God, that this infant fabric may never be shattered by the clashing
interests of the different States; and that they may continue their glorious
career, and nobly sacrifice partial views to the general good of the common
empire.

THERE is something so exceedingly musical in the Dutch chimes, that I often
stop in the middle of a street to listen to their shrill sounds: The bells
hang, in great numbers, in niches round the towers of the churches.

IN the church of St. Lawrence we saw a grave, where bones, and some old Dutch
skulls were sticking out at the sides, apparently eager once more to catch the
light: The old Sexton was busily employed in collecting the bones, and packing
them up in separate boxes, of about three feet square, to be reinterred in this
compact way, which I find is a custom.

OUR Oxonian companion took off a curious Latin Epitaph from a monument, of
which he gave me this translation in English:

JOHN BRAAKEL, THE TERROR OF THE SEA, TO WHOM FIRE, EARTH, AND WATER
SUBMITTED, IS COVERED WITH THIS STONE. HIS SPIRIT EVEN NOW SEEMS READY TO BURST
INTO FLAME, AND TO BREAK FROM ITS EARTHLY HABITATION, AS HE BROKE THE CHAINS OF
IRON.

I WAS much pleased with these bold thoughts; and upon examining the history of
the United Provinces, I find Braakel was a Dutch Admiral from Haerlem, who
distinguished himself in a memorable exploit in the holy war, in 1245.

WHEN the combined armies arrived in Egypt, the passage of the Nile was
intercepted by an extraordinary iron chain, which Braakel found means to break,
by the aid of enormous iron saws fixed on the stern of three of his ships; the
invention succeeded, and Damietta was in consequence taken: The idea was
suggested by a Haerlem boy, since which the city arms are, a sword between four
stars, and a cross over the point, with this motto: "VALOR OVERCOMES POWER."

AS an American, I feel myself deeply impressed with the superior dignity of my
country. Not from its present wealth or numbers, nor from those selfish and
narrow principles which lead most Englishmen to view themselves and their
country superior to the rest of the world; but from the happy situation of
America -- its natural advantages -- and indulging in the copious field of
anticipation.

IN February, 1778, I found myself in the south part of Georgia, and the trees
in full bloom, with every pleasing aspect of spring.

FROM February to May, I continued edging northerly as far as the borders of
Newhampshire, carrying with me for upwards of 1200 miles the same climate and
fragrancy.

IN this tour, I crossed eighteen noble rivers, and traveled over every
species of soil, blessed with such a diversity of climates as to render it
susceptible of all the productions the earth affords.

ENGLAND, France, and many other parts of Europe, after a succession of ages,
for some thousand years, have at length arrived to the highest stage of
improvements both in agriculture and the arts: Two centuries however have
hardly elapsed since America was a mere haunt for savages, and for animals; and
yet we find her already advanced to the intermediate stage between a state of
wild nature and the improved state of Europe.

HOLLAND is a perfect garden; but a continued sameness presents no new object
for the imagination to rest upon.

ENGLAND and France are more diversified and romantic, and in general richly
cultivated -- here and there an artificial forest -- venerable castles --
majestic country seats -- large populous in land cities -- charming roads; and
many other interesting objects, to engage the particular attention of an
American: But when we leave these objects, the effects of art, and enter upon
the broad scale of nature, we shall find her in miniature on this side of the
Atlantic, in comparison to the vast lakes and rivers, bold harbors, majestic
trees, and mountains of America, where the face of the country is pleasingly
chequered with high cultivation, and nature in its bold and original state.

VIEWING America from its first discovery to the present period, and then
carrying our ideas forward one hundred years, we may safely presume upon as
many millions of inhabitants, all circumstances considered; with wealth and
improvements in proportion.

SINCE no reason therefore can be assigned why America will not continue its
career with the same wonderful progress for the next hundred years, an American
may justly glory in his country, without falling under the imputation of
national prejudice.

FRANCE may boast of her Loire, and England of her Thames; but how many such
and superior rivers may not an American boast of? Besides, America is so
curiously intersected with inland water communications, that the connection
between the lakes and rivers, spread over an immense region, may be compared
(at least on a map) to the veins and arteries of the human body.

WHEN we contemplate a young empire, blessed with such singular advantages,
unconnected from its situation with the entangled politics of Europe, enjoying
the freest local governments on earth, and inhabited by a brave and
enterprising people, scattered over a great continent; I know of no limits we
can fix to our anticipations, in respect to her future power, wealth, and every
other perfection which can dignify human nature; especially should the
enlightened citizens of America be so peculiarly fortunate as to be blessed
with a just and virtuous government, which will draw all their views and
interests under one compact head, fairly represented from the pure and
uncorrupted body of the people. Yours, etc.

LETTER VI. To the same.
On board the --, on the Delft Canal, 6 o'clock, 30th May. DEAR SIR,
HERE we go! in a floating house sixty feet long and six wide.

I AM now seated in what is called the roof or cabin, which is very agreeable,
being calculated to hold conveniently eight or ten persons, who can secure it
to themselves by paying a small matter extra. This cabin has a table in the
middle, two sash windows, and a bench with velvet cushions on each side.

THE rest of the boat is covered with a flat roof, strewed over with small
shells cemented in tar, upon which passengers may walk with perfect safety:
Under the platform, or roof, the common passengers are seated; twenty eight is
the full complement, as stipulated by the police.

I HAVE just been upon deck, and wish now to introduce you into our company by
as concise a description of the country, and manner of traveling, as my pen
will allow me to give you.

IN the first place, we jumped on board just without the gates of Rotterdam,
and were then put in motion, by a single horse, trotting along upon the edge of
the canal, with thirty of us in tow. In this manner they travel three miles an
hour. In this progress they are so exact, that the Dutch manner of computing
distances from place to place, is by hours instead of miles.

LOATH to lose a single object, we paraded upon the top of the house, with a
crowded room under us, and clouds of tobacco smoke issuing out from little
windows on each side -- with a full view of the country all around -- being
entirely flat and no obstacle to impede the sight. In this manner we are now
traveling: -- But I am sure you will not forgive me to leave you on the top of
the boat, and say nothing of the country, and a pleasing variety besides.

ON one side of the canal, near Rotterdam, we passed a pleasant row of trees,
alive with carriages and people, as well as the canal with these cloudy boats
full of passengers, and loaded lighters.

YOU will naturally suppose that such a perpetual movement, with a chain of
draw bridges, leading over the canals, must necessarily produce confusion. --
Point du tout! You would be surprised to see with what dexterity, they avoid
each other, and pass under the bridges. All boats going one way are obliged to
drop the rope by which they are dragged until the others pass. Thus the
progress of neither is retarded.

THE season is all in our favor, and nature in full dress. The weather as fine
as we could wish, and our prospect on all sides animated by a charming variety.

YOU must know that most of the genteel people reside the best part of the
summer at their country houses; many of which are superb to a high degree; the
others are very neat, and all situated near the borders of some canal, with a
little pleasant summer house exactly upon the margin. These houses are in a
manner all windows, and many a la Chinoise -- the gardens are mere pictures --
the Dutch however seem too much attached to a profusion of evergreens, and box;
many of their pleasure houses are covered with them, and we often see them
formed into grottos, arches, and a variety of pleasing and whimsical forms.

THE fragrancy of the meadows and flower gardens, heightens exceedingly this
agreeable manner of traveling in Holland, in a fine summer's day, which we now
enjoy; and from the top of our floating house we have a fair peep into their
pleasure houses; where we see the happy citizens, regaling themselves in
parties, drinking tea, smoking, playing cards, hearing music, or reading
occasionally. I almost envied them their happiness; but have got myself between
two fires, and must leave you until we pass Delft, or else I shall be
suffocated under a heavy cloud -- two old Dutchmen are puffing up at my elbows.

IT is very singular I cannot suffer a pipe on water; but on terra firma I can
range myself comfortably in a battalion of smokers. -- Adieu! for a moment.

P. S. WE are now drawing fast to the city of Delft -- my next will be from the
Hague. -- Adieu! again.

LETTER VII. To the same.
HAGUE, 31st May, 1784. DEAR SIR,
I AM now to give you an account of occurrences since I left you in a tobacco
cloud, on the Delft canal.

I AM always fond of mixing with people in every situation, when I am
traveling; otherwise we might as well stay at home. The only true way to study
the human passions, and the grand spring which actuates the bulk of mankind, is
to analyze them in various positions; and by a disposition to be affable, every
one may easily induce a conversation: -- If he gain nothing by the bargain, it
is his own fault if he lose.

IN this frame of mind, I crawled into the body of the boat, and fortunately
filled a vacant seat by the side of a belle Bruxellois tout a faite a la
Francois, with her Monsieur upon her left. -- I found no difficulty to
introduce a badinage the first moment I was seated; and in the next, with all
the wanton assurance of a Newenglandman, to ask her, from whence she came?
where she resided? and if the gentleman by her side was her husband, gallant,
or brother? She, with all the good nature of a true Frenchwoman, as readily
gratified my curiosity. By the time we drew near Delft, our acquaintance was
refined into the true style of sans souce, and it seemed to me as if it was of
a month's standing at least -- how, or by what singular agency it happened, I
know not; but our hands were soon locked in one -- and I began to conceit that
I felt myself sensibly interested in her happiness.

HER husband was busily engaged in reading, and gave himself no anxiety about
us. -- Custom has in France established a certain innocent ladies' language --
which in England would be construed into a decided intrigue.

IN leaving the trukschute at Delft, Monsieur politely resigned up Madame to my
care, and trudged on before -- We linked arms, and trod over the pavements as
lightly as a young couple on the full march to the shrine of Hymen -- Every
moment in this crisis of our approaching separation, mutually interested us in
each other's welfare -- and while we were walking the streets of Delft, Madame
slipped her address at Rotterdam into my hand -- where I pledged myself to pay
her my respects on my return from Amsterdam. -- By this time we came up to the
house of her destination -- and I thought I could read more meaning in her
brilliant black eyes in the final adieu! than in all she had said -- thus we
parted. She made a transfer of her politeness to Monsieur; with him I rejoined
my comrades, and then viewed every thing of note in this large city.

DELFT is a pleasant and elegant place, situated thirty one miles south west
from Amsterdam, in the province of Holland, containing about five thousand
houses and twenty thousand inhabitants. It is of an oblong figure, and well
defended from enemies and the sea, by an old wall and three dams. The
inhabitants are principally people who have retired upon their fortunes. The
streets are consequently exceedingly neat, and free from the noise and bustle
of trade.

THE stadthouse is a handsome old Gothic structure, in which are many good
paintings; but the one that most merits attention, is that which represents the
assassination of William I, prince of Orange, which is affectingly tragic, and
finely executed. We next visited the old palace, where this great man resided
at the time of this fatal catastrophe, which was perpetrated by Balthazar
Gerard, who was first instigated by a monk, in consequence of a bounty the
brutality of Philip II led him to offer in a public edict for this purpose.

THEY showed us the spot where he fell at the foot of the stairs, and two holes
which the balls made in the wall after having gone through the prince's head.
On the wall is a Dutch inscription.

THE assassin desired to speak with the prince in private, just as he rose from
table, and plunged himself into a ditch, after having executed his bloody
design; but was immediately taken, and rolled naked in a cask, driven full of
sharp nails, until he expired.

THE old and new churches are capital buildings; each adorned with lofty
steeples, and uncommonly harmonious chimes, which quite delighted us as we were
entering the latter, a stupendous pile, where the ashes of the immortal prince
of Orange, already mentioned, rest in peace. In contemplating this magnifick
tomb, I cannot express what I felt in recollecting the series of hard and
virtuous struggles in which he contended, to stem against the persevering
barbarity of the duke of Alva. Recapitulating in my mind the variety of his
conflicts -- his fatal end -- and the striking similarity of his and our great
Washington's characters, my enthusiasm betrayed me into an involuntary sigh of
homage, accompanied by a tear, which I detected stealing slyly down my cheek.
Indeed their fame, and the importance of their achievements are such, in the
scale of human events, that their names deserve to be written by the rays of
the sun on the surface of the HEAVENS.

THE prince's statue in marble, lies upon the top of the tomb, with his
favorite dog at his feet, who, according to tradition, died with grief,
immediately after his master.

THE tomb lies under the representation of heaven, which is supported by twenty
two black marble columns, upon the top of which stands Fame with her trumpet
sounding over him, and this motto -- "te vindico tutor libertas." Besides the
statue on the tomb, there is another in brass, full length, and many other
ornaments in brass and marble.

THE succeeding princes of Orange are all interred in this church.

IN the old church we saw the monuments of the admirals Peter Heine, Van Tromp,
and the famous Luwenhock the physician. The arsenal, we are told, is the
largest in the republic, and worthy a traveller's inspection -- but our time
denied us the pleasure of seeing it.

DELFT is celebrated for its earthen ware, and formerly succeeded in a fine
imitation of porcelain, which are both on the decline.

THE streets are very broad, two of which are a mile in extent, and the fronts
of many houses are paved with black and white marble.

THE ringing of the seven o'clock bell hurried us on board of our trukschute,
upon a full canter through the streets; where we secured the roof all to
ourselves; but did not arrive in this superb city until late in the evening,
which was serene; but the thick exhalations from the canal prevented the moon
from showing us the country: Her pale beams quivered lightly upon the water,
but too dimly to enable us to distinguish objects; however, the lights from the
summer houses compensated in some degree.

THE dampness of the evening air, so pernicious in Holland, obliged us to box
up in our cabin; but we saw the country near the canal from our cabin windows,
as we passed.

WE had a merry evening, but the stench of the canal was intolerable as we
approached the Hague, which not a little surprised us.

WE were puzzled in the streets to find our hotel, but were soon relieved by a
genius watching his opportunity for new comers; he threw out his bait, which my
unguarded fellow travelers (who were green in the ways of the world) eagerly
catched at -- but as my experience in the broad world had taught me their
maneuvers, I only suffered him to show us the street, and then, with the best
grace in my power, wished him a decided good night.

WE took lodgings at l' hotel of English parliament, an excellent house, where
they speak French and English, and have the best attendance.

A PROPOS, I omitted to mention to you, that the great and wise Grotius was
buried in the new church, near the prince; this unfortunate man fell a victim
to the rash resentment of prince Maurice, successor to his father William I.

FAREWELL. -- I shall go on teazing you till my return, -- Adieu!

LETTER VIII. To the same.
HAGUE, 3d June, 1784. DEAR SIR,
IT will be presumptuous in me to attempt a description of this most beautiful
city, till I have fairly seen and examined it: For I find the objects are so
important, and the place, in every respect, so much beyond my conceptions, that
I shall be obliged to devote several pages to this subject alone; but I will
endeavor to be as concise as possible. -- Indeed my letters are of such horrid
lengths, that I will try to hash up my cookery of description in future in a
more laconick journal style, which is less formal, and often more interesting
and familiar than a stiff epistolary one.

Sunday, June 4.
I TOOK care to appear in print, especially as my first step was to pay my
respects to the American ambassador, John Adams, Esquire but his absence turned my
attention to the churches, it being then the height of their devotion.

THE Dutch churches I have seen are all divested of those gaudy ornaments, so
common in France and other catholic countries: On the contrary, they have a
certain melancholy gloom, owing to the walls being covered with the arms of the
principal families, worked upon black velvet, and bordered with broad black
frames. These give the appearance, or at least an idea, of the inside of large
tombs. The Dutch priests were thumping the cushions to large and crowded
audiences, who stood all with their hats on.

FROM the churches I repaired to the grand parade, where the garrison of the
Hague was reviewed by the prince of Orange, the two young princes, and a great
concourse of nobility and citizens.

THE troops are bold stout fellows, dressed in blue faced with red. I squeezed
in close to the prince, and had a fair chance to contemplate -- the man --
without being governed by appearances, which are indeed much against him. He is
of a middling stature, effeminate, with a disagreeable stooping gait; add to
which a stupid and inanimate countenance.

AFTER saying thus much of the prince, can I venture to observe to an
Englishman, that we were five in company, and were all struck equally with an
idea, that there is a strong family resemblance between the prince and the king
of England, who you know are related by the marriage of the princess Anne,
daughter to George II, and mother to the prince?

FROM parade we strolled through the principal squares, and many other parts of
this superb and truly elegant city, which delighted us extremely. Though the
magnificent buildings on the bomb quay at Rotterdam far excelled any others I
had then seen in Europe -- yet the Hague eclipses and must exceed, the most
brilliant imagination. It is generally allowed to be the most elegant city in
Europe -- perhaps in the world.

AT two o'clock I returned again to the grand hotel belonging to the thirteen
United States of America, lately purchased by Mr. Adams, for the residence of
our future ambassadors. It is decently furnished, has a large library, and an
elegant little garden. I was received in the most cordial manner, dined with
the ambassador, and in the afternoon we took an airing in his carriage, through
the best part of the city, and then to the pleasant fishing town of Schewling,
two miles from the Hague, upon the borders of the sea. The weather being fine,
the road and side walks were full of people, all pushing forward, on foot and
in carriages, to enjoy the sea breeze, and walk on the beach.

THE novelty, and the roaring of the uncouth cook maids, with which the wagons
were crowded, exceedingly amused me; but their singing, or rather yelling, was
comparatively like the squalling of as many cats, roasting over a roaring fire:
They seemed to vie with each other which should make the most noise, but
without the least harmony or unison; -- their mouths were frightfully distended
-- and their faces ready to burst with their efforts -- which, added to their
singular dress, produced a laughable scene. THIS scene brought to my mind a
very absurd and awkward custom, prevalent in America; though on the other
extreme. In France every one finds himself perfectly at ease with all around
him the first moment he enters a circle; and conversation is as animated, and
as unrestrained in a full company, as among a few select friends. In England
and America, the reverse is the case -- let a Frenchman be introduced into a
large circle at their first meeting -- he must suppose himself dropped into a
society of Quakers. Every one seems at first afraid to break silence, for fear
of the criticisms of the rest -- by degrees however the charm is dissolved, and
it is ten to one if another foreigner should be ushered in, four hours from the
first, that he would suppose himself in Bedlam; this extraordinary reverse
comes on progressively.

AS soon as the company begin to find themselves at ease with one another, and
their frozen tongues a little unbent; should a young lady be in the circle,
some gentleman, or perhaps the lady of the house, will call on her to sing --
she directly declares "she never sung in her life," though perhaps half the
company have been entertained with her singing before -- as this subterfuge
therefore will not avail her, the whole company fall upon her like hungry dogs
upon their prey -- then she protests -- "she has a bad cold" -- all mouths are
again opened -- sing! sing! you must sing! -- thus hunted down, after a sew --
hems -- and still persisting in her bad cold -- the fair siren opens her
harmonious throat, and quivers out perhaps a good song, or perhaps something
like the Dutch wagon girls -- as it may happen! -- and, at any rate, she calls
her veracity seriously in question in face of the whole company.

HAVING resided and traveled several years in most parts of France, I will
freely confess myself strongly prepossessed in favor of their general customs,
and I ardently hope we shall rub in our American composition a seasoning of the
French -- sant souci and vive la bagatelle. They undoubtedly are the happiest
people in Europe, owing to a charming climate, light diet, good wines,
vivacity, and living under a despotick government; which though unfriendly to
liberty, and that noble expansion of the human soul -- yet it has a tendency to
check ambition; they glide oh with easy gales in their passage through life, if
blessed with a good monarch, and a bad one is their greatest danger. -- One
half of the unhappiness of mankind arises from ambition; and as happiness is
the main end of this life, that government which produces the largest share,
is, in my humble estimation, the best,




THE ambassador's livery is the same as the American uniform, which is known by
all ranks of people, who pay so much respect to it, that a few more jaunts to
Schewling would have put me under the necessity of buying a new hat.

THE road is charming, and entirely shaded by a double row of trees, so exactly
lined that we saw the steeple of the village church from the gates of the city,
through an arch formed by the limbs of the trees.

THE north sea opened to our view all at once, at the end of the avenue. Nature
has kindly provided a barrier against the ocean, by the downs which are thrown
up along the principal part of the coast of this low country; which I also
observed on the coast of the Austrian Netherlands, in traveling through that
country a few years past. But they owe their principal security to the dykes
and dams.

I AM told there was in this village, a kind of wagon constructed by prince
Maurice's principal engineer, which they say would go upon the sand along the
coast at the rate of seven leagues an hour, by help of fails.

PEOPLE often bathe here in the summer; but what is very singular, I am assured
that the fishermen's daughters, not only guard the men's clothes, but wipe them
dry with towels as they leave the water; and this with perfect sang froid;
which plainly proves how far custom and habit may reconcile us to any thing.

THE coast was full of small fishing vessels. Some we saw at sea.

THE count de Bentinck's famous gardens are upon this road, and are well worth
seeing. They belonged formerly to the duke of Portland, who was particularly
patronized by William III. They are distinguished from all other gardens in the
province, by their style, simplicity, and picturesque views; such as a fine
orangery, a grotto, water spouts, a forest, terrace walks, hills, flower
gardens, a lake, and a menage; in short, the eye is on every side delighted.

ON our return we passed the prince, walking, with a numerous retinue. -- Spent
the evening with Mr. Adams, and the famous Monsieur Dumas, his secretary, who
eminently distinguished himself in the early part of our contest, at the court
of France, as well as by gaining us weighty friends in this republic.

WITH two gentlemen of such enlightened genius and deep erudition, it would
have been my own fault not to have sifted out every information I was so eager
to obtain relative to this country, and the present convulsed state of its
complicated government. -- I have taken my notes and shall touch upon this
string, when I am plus au faite.

Monday, June 5.
BREAKFASTED with Mr. Adams -- after which we visited la Maison du Bois, which
is situated about a mile from the Hague, in the center of the largest natural
wood in Holland, and the only one, except the wood near Haerlem.

THIS palace was built by the widow of prince Henry Frederick, for a house of
mourning. It is an elegant structure and entirely sequestered from the gay
world, being in a manner embosomed in a grove, cut into many romantic walks
leading from the palace, which has a large garden behind it. Over the gate we
saw the arms of Orange Nassau, and entered by a flight of steps.

THE grand saloon, with its exquisite paintings, are the principal objects of
attention, and mostly executed by those great masters, Rubens and Van der Worf,
representing in very large pieces, the brilliant triumphs of Frederick Henry,
who finished the fabric of independence for his country, which was founded by
his immortal father, and vigorously carried on by his gallant brother Prince
Maurice.

AS I was born with a tincture of a painter's soul, I found in this saloon, a
luxurious feast for the eyes. The widow Amelia in her weeds, is represented in
the middle of the ceiling of the cupola over the gallery, where the musicians
formerly played, to sooth her melancholy.

RUBENS' Vulcan in his shop, placed very properly near the fire, is esteemed
the finest in the collection: But what pleased me most, was the full length
portraits of William I, and Prince Maurice; who are also represented in busts
of marble placed over the chimney.

THE floors are black walnut, covered with rich carpets. In one of the
apartments we saw a valuable India japanned railing, enclosing the princess's
bed; which is inlaid with the mother of pearl, and cost twenty eight thousand
guilders. In another apartment was shown us a flower piece, the work of a
Flemish master, and valued at fifteen thousand florins. I was so enraptured
with the paintings, that after a full hour's eager examination, I left them
with regret.

MR. Adams then discharged his carriage, and we walked two hours more about the
forest, which was very pleasing to me, notwithstanding the road were heavy and
sandy. The lofty oak seemed to be so promiscuously thrown together, that it
revived in my breast a lively picture of many such situations I had seen in the
course of my tour through the United States of America, some years since. Our
eyes were delighted with the fine plumage of the birds, whose sweet melody
reechoed through the woods.

DINED at the American hotel; and in the afternoon we made an excursion to the
neat village of Ryswick, situated between the Hague and Delft, two miles from
the former. The road is well paved, and beautifully adorned by lofty trees and
fine meadows on each side. This village is famous for the peace concluded here
in 1697.

THE palace is situated about a quarter of a mile from the village. It belongs
to the prince of Orange, and is nobly built with hewn stone; but going fast to
ruin. The assembly chamber is celebrated for the echo of a whisper from the
opposite walls, the same as the whispering gallery at St. Paul's in London. It
is decorated with a marble stair case, marble floors, fine gardens, and a good
terrace.

SPENT the afternoon in viewing different places, which will come under a
general description of the Hague. The evening I passed with Mr. A --, who
introduced me to the Dutch ambassador (on the point of going to the court of
London) the famous author Dr. Mc Lane, and several other gentry who came to
make their visits.

TUESDAY NIGHT, 12 o'clock.
I AM amply provided with letters of introduction from Mr. A -- and Mons.
Dumas, for Leyden and Amsterdam; and intend leaving this charming place in the
morning, on my way thither: But I must now sum up all I have to say about the
Hague in as few words as possible.

I SPENT this forenoon in rambling at large in this city; dined again with Mr.
A --, and in the afternoon we took an airing to Delft. We passed through
several barriers, rode a circumference round the ramparts of that city, and
returned in the evening along the edge of the canal. But I must not omit to
tell you that if I had not exerted myself, I should probably have witnessed the
unpleasant scene of one of the most brilliant characters of the age (Mr. A --
--) scrambling in a muddy canal, his wig afloat upon the surface, and all from
a laudable zeal to save a child then drowning; the moment he saw the struggling
infant bobbing on the top, I thought he would have darted headforemost into the
canal, regardless of his personal safety: But I restrained his impetuosity for
a moment, as a lusty fellow had that instant soused himself in.

IN popularity and influence at this court, Mr. A -- undoubtedly bears the palm
in the diplomatick body. He is universally esteemed, for his profound
penetration and extensive political knowledge, the first character our western
world has yet produced.

HE talks but little -- thinks a great deal -- and what he says is always to
the purpose; and in point of future events, his words seem to be the words of
an oracle. He may indeed be considered as a veteran in politics, having long
acted a conspicuous and important part, and acquired vast experience at several
of the courts of Europe, in a very serious crisis.

THOUGH he does not ape the graces of a Chesterfield, yet we have found in him
the more important accomplishments of an ambassador; for his stern republican
virtues, have in every instance rose superior to the duplicity and affected
consequence of European courtiers. America stands indebted to him principally
for three important acquisitions -- The defeat of Sir Joseph York, and
securing the patronage of Holland, in a critical moment -- the extension of our
limits -- and the security of our fisheries. Having completely accomplished
every object of his ambition relative to America, it appears probable that this
country may yet be indebted to his active genius, as an instrument in producing
some reforms in the system of their heavy molded and convulsed government.

HAGUE is situated only two miles from the sea, and nine S. W. from Leyden: And
notwithstanding it is termed a village (because it is not walled and sends no
deputies to the States) yet it enjoys other advantages, sufficient to rank it
among the first cities of Europe, both for opulence and beauty.

LORD Chesterfield declares it to be the most elegant city in the world.

IT contains six thousand houses and forty five thousand inhabitants,
surrounded by a canal bordered by lofty trees. It is the seat of their
government, and the residence of all foreign ministers, which together draw
such a concourse as contributes principally to the support of the inhabitants.

THE situation is esteemed healthy, being somewhat elevated, and in the heart
of a fruitful country, surrounded by walled cities, villages, beautiful country
houses, magnificent gardens, and charming meadows. Many of the streets are
finely shaded, and in general spacious. The houses are for the most part built
with hewn stone, and of the first rate, both in size and elegance.

THE squares are numerous, and all planted with large trees. The inhabitants
are a model of the Parisians; very polite, and entirely a la Francois; seldom
speaking their native language, and much addicted to gambling. The ladies of
the beau monde are fond of gallantry and dissipation, and are in general very
handsome. The palace of the prince of Y -- g is esteemed the finest building at
the Hague; and those of the princes G -- t and V -- st, are all comparatively
like as many palaces; they are fronted by a handsome grove, and a canal.

THE prince G -- t's has a noble effect. It is half a mile long, very broad,
with a canal passing through it, and finely shaded with trees, and a number of
stone bridges (with iron railings) crossing it.

THE Vyverburg is also fronted by the most elegant houses on one side; opposite
to which are stately trees, with a spacious basin of water faced with hewn
stone between, and a romantic little island in its center, full of trees. Near
this is a very large grove of trees, with a railed mall in the middle. The most
material building is the court, situated nearly in the center of the town,
where the Stadtholder resides.

THE council of state, the council of nobility, the courts of justice, and in
short all public business, centres here. It is surrounded by a fosse, and the
entrances into it are by three draw bridges, where the guards are stationed
ready to raise them in case of a riot; this does not seem altogether an
eligible situation for the free debates of a republican assembly, eternally
jealous of their stadtholder; nor entirely consistent, as men are often under
influence from their local positions.

THIS palace is very old, which, in my estimation, makes more in favor of its
exteriors than any particular elegance it may be thought to possess.

THE great saloon is in the antique style, and full of the trophies of
victories gained over their enemies.

THE chamber of the states general is hung on one side with rich tapestry,
ornamented with the portraits of six stadtholders: On the other some excellent
pieces, and all at full length. The chamber where the twelve years truce was
settled, between Spain and Holland, in 1609, is also ornamented with the same
portraits, and the republic represented over the chimney, under the figure of
a woman -- the room is very luminous and overlooks the Vyver.

THE council chamber contains a string of paintings, representing the actions
of Claudius Civilius, by Holbein, for which lord Bolingbroke offered 10,000l.
sterling. This Claudius, was a Batavian by birth, and held a principal command
in the Roman army, but proved a traitor in the end, and, like our infamous
Arnold, was afterward their most implacable enemy.

IN the ambassadors audience room, there is an excellent painting of William
III. The prince's cabinet, on the opposite side of the court, is undoubtedly
the greatest curiosity at the Hague. Connoisseurs admire, with justice, his
collection of precious stones, fossils, minerals, petrefactions, and other
natural curiosities.

THE library pictures, and the gallery of paintings, next claim your particular
attention. These paintings consist principally of sacred and historical pieces,
some landscapes and portraits, the works of the famous Raphael, Rubens,
Holbein, etc.

THE celebrated de Witt's two patriot brothers, the mortal enemies of the
prince of Orange, were massacred by a misguided rabble at the state prison near
the palace.

THE other public buildings of note, are the cloister church, the hotel d'
Opdam, the Jews synagogue, the foundery, prince Maurice's palace, poor house,
lepers' house, spin houses, town house, and the French play house.

THE celebrated fair in the month of May was one of their principal amusements,
as they were formerly all masked in the streets, but now they only walk in
parties, to buy trinkets, etc.

WEDNESDAY, June 7.
THIS morning at nine o'clock, I left the Hague, on my way to Leyden. We had a
strong gale against us, which did not however sensibly check our progress.

WE were about three hours performing this trip. The canal, the whole way was
very spacious (say about fifty feet wide) and the water above the level of the
country, which added much to the advantage of our prospect; which was in every
respect equal in feats, summer houses, and the face of the country, to that
already described between Rotterdam and Delft: But from the continual passing
of trukschutes, and not understanding the abrupt orders of our skipper, I was
frequently in danger, on the top of the boat, of getting my legs tripped up by
the rope; but this may be easily avoided, by keeping below, which my eager
curiosity would by no means listen to.

I formed an acquaintance with an intelligible inhabitant of Leyden, who, on
our approach to the city, showed me the ground from whence the Spaniards under
general Baldsez besieged this place; as also the vestiges of one of their old
forts.

I COULD not contemplate the horrors of this cruel six months siege, without a
heart felt sympathy; especially when I recollected the tragic picture given of
it in Watson's Phillip.

HE says -- "When the Spaniards endeavored to intimidate them into a surrender
of the town, they nobly answered -- 'that they had maturely weighed their
situation, and were resolved to perish, with their wives and children, in the
flames of the city, kindled by their own hands, or die with hunger, rather than
submit to the Spaniards' -- the misery which only existed in imagination,
during the two first months of the siege, was at last fatally realized as they
were reduced to the hard necessity of eating their dogs and horses."

LEYDEN is situated six miles from the sea, and nineteen south of Amsterdam.

IN point of size, it yields only to Amsterdam, and is as neat and pleasant as
any town in the republic. It is supposed to contain forty thousand souls,
which is indeed a small number in proportion to its size.

THE city is well fortified, with a wide ditch, adorned with rows of trees; the
buildings are beautiful, and the streets in general very spacious, and
perfectly clean and white, particularly broad street, which runs quite through
the city, from the Hague gate to the Utrecht gate: This street rises in the
middle, and is finely paved. The others have in general a canal in the middle,
adorned as usual, with stately trees, some three rows on a side, which give
them the appearance of so many alleys of a beautiful garden.

THE city is built on the old Rhine, which divides it into fifty islands, of
which thirty one may be sailed round in boats. It has one hundred and forty
five bridges (built of stone) with iron railings, one hundred and eighty
streets, and forty two towers on the walls.

THE stadthouse is an old long structure, built in 1597, in the true Dutch
style. The building has nothing remarkable to claim a traveller's notice; but
there are however some fine paintings in the grand chamber -- particularly a
large one representing the citizens of Leyden, when relieved from the horrid
siege (already mentioned) by boats coming to their relief over an artificial
sea. The best painting is a whimsical representation of the day of judgment, by
the famous Luke Leyden, who is said to be the first modern painter who had true
ideas of perspective: This painting is certainly the production of the most
fertile imagination; but with what justness he has delineated the confusion of
this important and awful day, remains yet to be decided. -- He died in 1533.

THE largest church, is a vast pile, but in other respects, merits no other
particular notice, than to pay the tribute of homage due to the manes of that
great physician and philosopher, Boerhaave, who enlightened the world with the
flame of his genius; his monument is admired for its elegant simplicity.

THE reputation of this great man extended into China: A mandarin wrote to him
with this inscription -- "To BOERHAAVE in Europe;" -- and the letter came
regularly to him.

THE city of Leyden have raised a monument in the church of St. Peter to the
salutary genius of Boerhaave, "Salutifero Boerhaave genio sacrum." It consists
of an urn upon a pedestal of black marble; six heads, four of which represent
the four ages of life, and two, the sciences in which Boerhaave excelled, form
a group issuing between the urn and its supporters. The capital of the basis is
decorated with a drapery of white marble, in which the artist has shown the
different emblems of disorders and their remedies. Above upon the surface of
the pedestal is the medallion of Boerhaave; at the extremity of the frame a
ribbon displays the favorite motto of this learned man, Simplex sigillum very.
-- truth unarrayed. Boerhaave quitted the stage of an active and useful life in
1738, aged sixty nine years.

WE saw an old castle in the middle of the town, called the Burg, which was,
according to tradition, built in the ninth century; it is six hundred and ten
feet in circumference, and we ascended the top by fifty steps; from whence we
commanded a complete and charming view of the city, the adjacent meadows,
downs, and the Haerlem sea. Within the Burg there is a well of great depth, in
which (according to the history of the Spanish siege under Baldsez) the
inhabitants caught a large fish, which they showed in triumph from the walls to
the enraged Spaniards. They pretend also that there is a communication from the
bottom of this well under ground to Catwyk.

THE university is highly worthy attention. It was founded in 1575, by the
states, in gratitude for their brave defense, and is the principal of the five
which are in the United Provinces, viz. Leyden, Utrecht, Franeker (in
Friesland) Groningen and Harderwicke. The building is old and awkward; but the
professors have been the most eminent in Europe, such as Liprices, Scaliger,
Salmarius, Heinsius, and the renowned Boerhaave.

THE botanical garden, with its statues, the cabinet of natural curiosities,
the library, anatomy, petrefactions, and fossils, are very fine, and well
attended. In the physical garden we saw the American aloe, which blossoms only
once a century, green and bohea tea, coffee, and a vast variety of what I am
very inadequate to say much about, curiously displayed. Among the natural
curiosities I was shown many wonderful phenomena in nature.

THE library is only open to men of letters twice a week. This university
enjoys many great privileges, even to inflict death; but the professors are
subservient to the court of Holland.

THE manufactures of this place were formerly very extensive, particularly in
blue and black superfine broad cloths, which they had the secret of dying to
greater perfection than any other nation (as the French now have the scarlet;)
but they have declined very much of late years: They manufacture also narrow
cloths and camblets.

THERE are many fine seats in the vicinity of Leyden which strangers visit out
of curiosity. Their butter is excellent.

DINED at the Lion d'Or. Immediately after dinner I sallied forth alone, which
is not always the best method of acquiring knowledge in a strange country -- as
one is obliged to depend on very precarious information. -- But it is attended
with some advantages, as one is at leisure to make observations on the general
manners of the people unrestrained -- especially their treatment of strangers.
I went into a dozen shops; some understood me in French; but with those who did
not speak French I had like to have unhinged my under jaw in laboring --
without bringing forth six words of their language. I conceited myself looking
like one of their tobacco head signs, with my mouth horridly distorted. -- They
are indeed civil, but have not that pleasing anxiety to help out a stranger, so
peculiar to the French women, who hold a foreigner kindly by the button of his
coat, and in a manner hammer words into his brain, with their fore finger
pressing gently upon his sleeve.

I REMARKED in this Don Quixote excursion, that the common class of people
(such as shopkeepers, etc.) are very serious -- their sensibility keen -- they
are easy to blush -- they cannot support a joke or compliment -- the first
their jealousy construes into an insult -- the last confuses them: They laugh
with pain, and never without cause -- and when the laugh of the company falls
on one pair of shoulders, their sensibility is always stabbed to the quick, and
proclaimed openly to the whole company by messengers flying from the heart and
every irritable part of the body, bursting into a blaze upon their cheeks. Such
being the effect of a joke in Holland, surely every generous mind will wave
this resource of amusing company, and wisely measure his conduct in all
countries, by the prejudices and prevailing customs of its inhabitants; who are
always governed by some general caprice, peculiar to themselves.

I FELL in fortunately with the deacon of the presbyterian church, who spoke
French perfectly: The moment he found I was an American, the muscles of his
face and the expression of his eye plainly declared his partiality for my
country; he left his affairs, and I found him very intelligent; to his
information, with what I collected from Mons. Luzac, I am principally indebted
for the account I have already given of Leyden.

I FORGOT to mention that this church is the identical one, where the original
Brownists worshipped, previously to forming their first establishment in
Plymouth, New England, in 1620. The building is very old and inelegant; but I
viewed it with more abstracted satisfaction than a palace. The deacon assured
me that Mr. A -- could not refrain from tears, in contemplating this ancient
structure; a veneration and homage due to the virtuous founders of New England,
and worthy of this great man.

SUPPED with Mons. Luzac, the famous lawyer, to whom I had letters. I was
charmed with his conversation, and found him ready to answer me any questions,
in any language; but as I am confined to two, we conversed in them
indifferently.

THIS gentleman is celebrated throughout Europe for his uncommon talents and
extensive knowledge; and more particularly for his patriotism, and being the
editor of the Leyden Gazette, which is universally esteemed the best in
circulation.

AT eleven o'clock I returned home to my lodgings, along the sides of the
canals by the light of a dim moon; but what was very singular in so large a
city, all was as quiet and hush as in the open country, and not a soul stirring
-- owing to the decline of population. Mons. Luzac says they formerly estimated
seventy thousand inhabitants.

THE English woollen manufactories have given it a fatal stab.

THURSDAY, June 8.
AT nine o'clock this pleasant morning we were moving through another fine
canal, seemingly like going on the road to Paradise.

I POSSESSED the roof with a naval officer (of capital connexions, if I can
credit his assertion;) among other circumstances, he mentioned, a singular
method of dueling in Holland, among the vulgar, with short knives. The
contending parties are happily confined to the face, which they defend with as
much dexterity with their short knives, as Frenchmen do their bodies with long
swords; but they owe their safety more to a singular knack of throwing back
their bodies.

WHILE we were exchanging trukschutes on our way -- the men and women were all
piss ants promiscuously en concert -- which I find they can do with as good a
grace -- as Sterne's Madame Ramboulet at Paris.

WE traversed over a pleasant country between the downs of Haerlem lake on our
right, and the downs which run along parallel with the ocean on our left.
Within a few miles of Haerlem the country assumes a new aspect, being all
sweetly diversified, in a continued chain of beautiful and elegant seats; a
large forest, and a variety of delightful views.

IT was in this forest, that the celebrated Laurensz Jansez Koster, alderman of
Haerlem, first suggested the invention of printing with types, in 1440. He was
rambling carelessly alone, and amusing himself in cutting out letters in pieces
of wood; with which he made some impressions, which led to the types: And it is
to this fortunate chance that mankind owe the facility of communicating their
ideas. John Faust, a servant of the Alderman's, stole off the types to Mentz,
where he pretended to conjuration, and assumed to himself the merit of the
discovery. This is the same Doctor Faustus so much known among the vulgar in
America for his league with the devil, etc.

IMMEDIATELY after dinner we went to see the first essays Koster made with his
wooden types, which are to be seen in the type manufactory opposite to the old
cathedral. His statue, with an elegant Latin inscription, is in the town house.
The world stand indebted to the late ingenious Baskerville of Birmingham, in
England, for the most elegant improvement in the art of printing. We examined
the process of making types, which is very curious and expeditious.

From hence we viewed the old cathedral, where we saw the first organ in the
world, made at Haerlem by the ingenious Mullar, in 1738. It is a stupendous
piece of grandeur and ingenuity, containing eight thousand pipes, the largest
of which are sixteen inches diameter, and thirty eight feet long. It has sixty
eight stops, and imitates most admirably, the human voice, solus, or in chorus;
different kinds of birds, trumpets, flutes, fifes, and a kettle drum. They play
the organ two days in the week, for the amusement of strangers and the
citizens; but, if by particular desire, it will cost a ducat to the organist
and a gratuity to the blower.

There are two silver bells upon the church, which were taken by the famous
Admiral Braakel (whose tomb I saw at Rotterdam) at Damietta in Egypt; as also
three small ships suspended in the church, with saws on their sterns,
representing the cutting of the chain of the Nile already mentioned.

WE were shown in this church bullets sticking in the sides of the walls, which
were fired by the Spaniards during the terrible siege they sustained in 1572,
against the duke of Alva's son, count Frederick.

THE city was gallantly defended by four thousand men, who were heroically
supported by the women; but at length famine obliged them to yield; when two
thousand people were the instant victims of Spanish fury, contrary to the
express terms of capitulation.

HAERLEM lies about four miles from the sea, has eight gates, is built of
brick, and the streets resemble those of Leyden. By an exact estimation, made
about fifty years ago, this city contained seven thousand nine hundred and
sixty three houses, and fifty thousand people; at present the numbers do no
exceed forty thousand.

THEIR trade is chiefly with Amsterdam, and principally in linen, ribbons, some
guazes, and tapes, of which they weave fifty pieces at a time by the aid of
mills.

ITS situation, lying contiguous to Haerlem lake, and the peculiar slimy
qualities of its water being more favorable to bleaching than any other, gives
them a superior advantage in the whiteness of their linen.

THE Irish formerly sent vast quantities of linen to be bleached here annually.

THE meadows all around the country are as white as our American fields after a
snow storm.

THE stadthouse is a large building; where we saw several fine paintings in the
prince's appartment, particularly that which represents the golden age.

LATE in the afternoon, we left Haerlem and embarked for Amsterdam upon an
elevated canal, running in a direct line, with a row of trees and stone posts
upon our right. About half way we exchanged boats, and traversed across a
little causeway which divides Haerlem lake upon our right, from the river Y
upon our left, which falls by Amsterdam into the Zuder sea. This lake is
fourteen miles over each way, and was formed by an inundation about three
centuries past, which buried seventy two towns and villages in its progress,
and afforded a perfect representation of the flood in miniature -- every living
creature, and all the effects in the country, floating promiscuously -- some on
the tops of the houses -- others hanging to the limbs of trees, etc. etc. This
famous lake would be only ranked as a pond in America, where nature forms every
thing upon a broad scale -- here it is thought more of, than we think of our
lake Superior, which is capable of receiving three such republics upon its
area.

FROM the top of the causeway we had a full view both of the lake and river; as
well as the stately palace of Zwanenberg, where the directors of the dykes and
canals assemble.

THE canal led in a straight line from the causeway to Amsterdam, which we saw
most of the way before us: But the variety we so justly expected to meet near
the metropolis was by no means so pleasing as in entering Haerlem --
independent of a strong stench rising from the stagnated canal water.

I TRAVERSED over the best part of Amsterdam before I came to my lodgings, viz.
at the first bible in the Hier Graght. I find the best inns dignify their
signs, by so many bibles. Dust and fatigue obliged me soon to send off for a
hairdresser; and then to a surgeon to shave -- for you must know, there are no
shavers in Holland but professional surgeons -- and commercial shavers. --
Adieu! Good night!

LETTER IX. To the same.
AMSTERDAM, June, 1784. DEAR SIR,
AS my only object in this country is to see the ways of the world, and to
grasp at every useful or amusing information that comes within my reach; so I
shall go in my loose Journal style until I see you.

SATURDAY.
I EMPLOYED the whole day in taking a cursory view of this extensive metropolis
of the Seven Provinces; as well as the harbor, and a forest of shipping, which
do not appear so numerous as upon the Thames. Viewed the docks, and saw several
new men of war of seventy four guns, and several old ones, which they convey in
and out of their artificial docks, and quite to the Texel, by the aid of
camels; a curious invention, which receives their hulls within its body.

WE next viewed a clergyman's cabinet of natural curiosities -- a great, and
bigoted antiquarian: The collection was indeed extremely curious; but he dwelt
on the latent merits of every object with so much ardour that we were glad to
effect our retreat after some difficulty.

FROM thence, chance directed me into the Jews' synagogue; here I remained a
full hour; and as it was the first time I was ever in a synagogue of a Saturday
evening, I was much pleased with this singular novelty -- as well as the
angelick shrill notes of a beautiful young lad, accompanied with those of an
old fellow, (well known in the musical world by the name of Leonar) who was
piping with his hollow, grum belly, a most admirable basso -- indeed I could
hardly persuade myself I was not deceived by a fine instrument, until a near
approach to the altar convinced me the music was vocal.

AS the sun verged toward the horizon, the voices, and agitation of the whole
congregation, increased to such vehemence, and gave them such frightful looks,
that I was almost apprehensive they were falling into strong convulsions.
Stunned with their bellowing, I was glad to retreat to the open air, not only
for the safety of my head -- but pockets -- for in fact they looked, for the
most part, like shabby theives and pickpockets.

THE women were all in galleries, peeping through lattices.

SUNDAY.
DEVOTED this day to rambling at large; in the afternoon at church.

MONDAY.
VIEWED the stadthouse thoroughly, a description of which will come with
Amsterdam. We saw from the top, the Zuyder sea, Haerlem lake, and this vast
city, and a cloud of shipping below us; though the prospect encompassed a
considerable range of country, and a rich feast for contemplation, yet it does
not equal the prospect from St. Laurence's church in Rotterdam.

THE chime on the stadthouse is supposed to be the finest in Europe; we
examined it throughout -- an immense work indeed -- we waited on the roof until
it played; it is so contrived like an organ, that a man can play upon it with
the same ease.

WE were shown all the curiosities in this celebrated building, and were
charmed with the paintings; in particular the one by Vandyke, which represents
the duke of Alva, in conference with the burgeoise of Amsterdam, before they
abjured the Spanish yoke; this painting strongly represents that dark and
bloody character he afterward exhibited to the world; at the same time a bold
and martial aspect.

AT two o'clock I went upon the exchange and delivered my several letters of
introduction from Mr. A --. This exchange is longer than London, but not so
large, nor will it hold a comparison either with that of London, or Rotterdam,
in neatness or elegance, being built with brick, and divested of ornaments. At
full change it was completely crowded. As I had nothing more than curiosity to
engage my attention, I retired into one corner, to contemplate the scene; which
led me to compare this exchange to a glass beehive I saw at the famous
Wildman's at the foot of Highgate hill, which was to all intents Amsterdam
change in miniature. The buz was the same -- the eagerness of the bees crowding
into the hive; and their industry and ardour to collect the honey -- was all
the same -- but it would be rather illiberal to carry the idea so far, as to
suppose them all a set of insects, in general actuated by nothing beyond the
ideas of a be, who trips from flower to flower, and roams abroad in the wide
world, to suck in the sweets of every plant, with no other view than to lay in
a winter's stock for his dear self -- which in conscience is the main spring
that moves us sons of commerce, particularly in large cities: But happily for
mankind, there are many noble exceptions.

SPENT the evening at the French theater, which is a small thatched house like
a barn; the actors however were good; there were few genteel people at the
play, which is very extraordinary in a metropolis, especially as this is their
only summer's amusement, in this line. The Dutch play house for winter
amusements is much more elegant.

TUESDAY.
CROSSED the river Y, or Wye, in a mixed company of Germans, Americans, and
English; and landed at Sardan, six miles from, and nearly opposite to,
Amsterdam.

WE passed through the shipping in the harbor, and then had a complete view of
the river, and a forest of masts, arranged with much order.

IN approaching Sardan a battalion of windmills seemed to be drawn up in array
in our front. This extraordinary town appeared to us rather small, previously
to our landing; but words are too feeble to express my surprise at the
deception, as well as the singularity and disposition of the houses, gardens,
and almost every object in a style different from any I have yet seen.

SARDAN is situated in Northholland and contains near forty thousand wealthy
inhabitants; some say it is the richest town in Holland. They have acquired
this wealth principally by the wood trade, ship building, and a variety of
curious mills for different purposes, particularly paper, powder, tobacco,
boards, etc. etc. They showed us a sawmill which works forty saws at a time.

THEY have so much timber always prepared on hand that they can do as much work
as the building of a man of war in a week, by having three months previous
notice. In general they build three hundred sail of merchantmen yearly.

AFTER rambling through this charming and very curious place for some hours, we
were conducted to a small house, in which Peter the great boarded with the
common workmen, at the time he learned the ship carpenter's trade incog. and
was the most faithful and laborious man in the yard. He afterward worked at
Chatham docks in England.

THE woman of the house showed us a gold medal lately presented her by the
empress of Russia. This singular whim of Peter (who was one of the greatest
sovereigns Europe was ever blessed with) prepared him for the great fatigues he
afterward endured in contending with Charles XII, of Sweden, and civilizing
his extensive dominions.

THIS place is a perfect Chinese picture; the buildings are rather small, but
most whimsically beautiful; and for the most part painted in various colors,
and the roofs are of glazed tiles: They have in front handsome parterres; and
gardens behind, so finely disposed, as to exceed all belief.

THE town covers over a large space of ground, the canals are very long, with a
chain of these enchanting houses stretching in a line by their sides.

THE genius and customs of the North-Hollanders are different from the other
provinces, and many are very singular; for instance -- they push their excess
of neatness to such extremes that the masters of houses, are positively obliged
by custom to pull off their shoes at their own doors, where a servant stands
ready with a pair of slippers. Again, the front doors are never opened but in
cases of death and marriage. The women are strangely metamorphosed, and
differently dressed from the Southholland lasses: Their heads are bound up with
broad gold, or brass ridges, running across their foreheads, they have light
caps, their hair out short before -- prodigious large earrings, and broad flat
hats, cocked up in the air, made of calico; which have a singular effect: But
under all these disadvantages, I saw many beautiful faces, but vile shapes; the
girls look so much alike that one would be almost led to think they were all
sisters.

WEDNESDAY.
WE took a wagon for Bruck, six miles distant, which in many respects exceeds
Sardan, and is allowed by travelers to be the very model and pink of neatness,
for all Holland; and without exception, it might be drawn as the most perfect
picture of any city or town in the world.

IT is chiefly inhabited by commercial veterans, who have retired from
Amsterdam, immersed in wealth. They carry on largely in the banking and
insuring line. Neither horses or carriages, are suffered in the streets of this
fairy village, which are finely paved with different colored stones,
fancifully worked in various representations, and strewed lightly over with
sand, with as much care as the inside of their houses; which are very curious
indeed, and every thing we saw glittered so strongly with neatness, that our
eyes were fairly weakened with gazing.

THE preliminary article previous to a courtship, in Northholland, is very
singular, but generally observed. The miserable lover stands making under his
mistress's window, two or three hours every night, for three months
successively: If he holds out the siege firmly to the end of this time, he is
then admitted to her presence, upon the intended ties of matrimony -- but never
before: She indeed at times, deigns to solace his trembling doubts, with a word
of comfort. An intelligent English gentleman, residing in Holland, whom we met
in the streets of Sardan, says this custom prevails only in Northholland, and
originated from the Spaniards, who resided among them before the revolution.
Heavens! what a contrast between this and our bundling custom in New England?

THEY are remarkably coy of strangers, and always marry among themselves; in
consequence, the originality of their customs are preserved free from
contamination.

LATE in the afternoon returned to Sardan, and embarked immediately for
Amsterdam, with upwards of one hundred of us, crowded in, male and female,
under the hatches: Soon after we left the shore, we were suddenly attacked by a
thunder squall and heavy rain, so that our skipper was obliged to shut the
hatches, which gave us all the same complexion, and opened a wide field for
merriment.

MY situation was so odd -- wedged up between two Dutch lasses -- in the dark
-- and standing all like sheep in a pen -- as must have excited the mirth of
the most phlegmatic Englishman. I felt the full force of my situation, and it
put me in a fine flow of spirits. In spite of the danger of dislocating my
under jaw, I gagged out, by main force, a few Dutch words I had stolen, but so
highly seasoned with English and French, that I could hardly make myself
understood: However, as I always feel myself disposed to contribute to the
merriment of the company when traveling, I endeavored to make up, in gestures
and laughing, what I was deficient in Dutch. The Dutch however, as I observed
on another occasion, laugh with pain, and never without reason.

THURSDAY.
DINED at my friend Myer's upon the Hier Graght, in company with several
Americans -- among the rest was the lovely Miss P --. After dinner we made a
party and strolled through the best streets of this wealthy city. We crossed
the river Amstel, where we viewed with pleasure a vast number of sluices,
calculated to communicate the river and the Amsterdam canals; we viewed the
river from a high bridge, which afforded an extensive and pleasing prospect of
the town, river, trees, sluices and trukschutes.

FINISHED the evening at a place called Vauxhall. We had coffee in a large
room, filled with parties under cover of volumes of smoke. At the end of the
room we were entertained by a company of French and Italian singers.

ON our return, being curious to see the amusements of a spillhouse, we were
conducted to the most celebrated one. But, my stars! what a scence! -- I have
never heard Amsterdam mentioned but these spillhouses were esteemed a principal
curiosity; they are licensed by the police for the protection and safety of
modest women -- and are noted for the regulation they are under. I could not
however endure the sight five minutes -- my feelings were too sensibly attacked
-- the smoke was so thick, and the company so vulgar, that I was glad to decamp
after having satisfied my curiosity. In entering we were obliged to pay for a
bottle of vinegar, (called wine) whether we had it or not; and then we crowded
through a gang of smoking jack tars, boors, and vulgar citizens, to the other
end of the room; where I was much diverted to see a strapping negro fellow
dancing a jig with one of the spillhouse ladies, and an old man playing upon a
violin. The dancing was curious enough -- they seemed to dance, or rather to
slide, heavily upon their heels, scaling about the room, without the least
order or animation. Indeed they seemed to me like a couple of artificial
machines set in motion.

BUT alas! in casting my eyes about me, I was sickened to the soul with an idea
that darted across my brain. There were about forty or fifty of these devoted
wretches seated round the room -- they looked like so many painted dolls, stuck
up for sale: The scene carried with it an idea of entering a butcher's
slaughter houses, where the calves and sheep are hung up for the highest
bidder. Alas! poor human nature, how art thou fallen below the beasts of the
field! -- Enough of spillhouses. -- Good night.

FRIDAY.
CONTINUED viewing the city, and dropped in at the rasphouse, so much talked
of. It is in truth an excellent institution, but there is nothing in the
building or discipline so very remarkable. -- From the moment we entered until
we left it, we were followed close, and stunned by the cries of charity!
charity! From several of the windows they run out their naked arms -- but in
vain! as their punishments do not appear to be heavily inflicted.

THE method of rasping is nothing more than two men sawing lignum vitae with a
rasp saw.

THEY have in Holland, I am told, another curious method of punishing criminals
-- who are confined at a pump, in a cistern of water up to their chins, which
runs in as fast as they can pump it out; so that they are obliged to exert
themselves until their strength is exhausted to prevent drowning. I believe
this is the method taken to conquer the obstinacy of those who refuse to labor.

DINED in company -- the evening at the play.

SATURDAY.
DINED at Mynheer Van S -- ph -- st's (a capital merchant) with a brilliant
company, in the French style. Mum was the word two minutes before we attacked
the soup. In leaving the polite Dutchman's table, we paid our two florins to
the servant at the door, as regularly as at the table d' hot in Paris. A most
barbarous custom, which was exploded not many years since in England, where it
commonly cost a gentleman half a guinea to dine with his friend.

ON passent par une petite post du sallon a manger, dans la commodite. C'est
pire que la France.

IN the evening I had the pleasure of gallanting la belle Americane to the
French play, where the company was very briliant -- the beauty and majesty of
her person, while it gratified my pride, drew the eyes of the Dutch ladies; and
I thought I could read in them something like envy; they are however very
elegant, both in their persons and manners, as they rise above the vulgar.

I HAVE more than once had occasion to remark, that the English authors are too
apt to confine their remarks upon national characters, to the vulgar class of
mankind, (as though they associated with no others;) which is extremely
illiberal, and has a tendency to impress unfair ideas of a nation. In this
respect the French are infinitely more liberal and good natured. When a
Frenchman travels in England, he freely allows them all their merit. But how
different is it with the English who travel in France? Stern and Moore are
almost the only English authors who have soared above the prejudices of their
countrymen.

TO return -- my fair countrywoman seemed to be the polar star when she rose
between the scenes, as the rays of all eyes were centered upon her. Some Dutch
ladies politely introduced themselves in a pleasing tete a tete; but I was
under the agreeable necessity of officiating as interpreter in French, which I
found was perfectly familiar to all around us.

FROM the play we closed the evening at another Vauxhall, in imitation of the
one in London, on a small scale.

SUNDAY.
SPENT this day mostly at my lodgings in writing and reflecting.

MONDAY.
AT seven o'clock this morning I left Amsterdam, with two Americans, in company
with Mr. F --, of the house of de la L -- and F --, on our way to Haerlem,
purposely to hear them play on the famous organ already described.

AS my life has been fertile in adventures, I had a pleasing one in the line of
gallantry in this excursion to add to the number. As soon as I had seated
myself in the roof of the trukschute, a very facetious, sprightly Dutch lady
came in, and seated herself directly opposite to me, with only a narrow table
between. -- Thus situated -- inattention would have been too cold for a warm
constitution -- Her countenance expressed so much vivacity that we soon found
ourselves upon sociable terms -- which in its progress afforded merriment for
my brother travelers quite to Haerlem -- where I conducted her to her
lodgings, and parted with regret. -- The Dutch ladies seem as much addicted to
intrigue and gallantry as the French.

IN one hour I rejoined my companions at the church, and was charmed to hear
this astonishing organ perform. The human voice is so admirably imitated, that
I almost doubted the testimony of my own eyes and ears.

RETURNED in the afternoon in the body of a trukschute, full of passengers.
Another thunder storm attacked us -- we were obliged to drop our furled
curtains and submit to darkness. -- In this situation a singular incident
happened, which first alarmed and afterward diverted us extremely. A Dutch Jew
in the boat had a peculiar talent of imitating the crying of a child to the
nicest perfection, with an empty pipe, which he did as soon as the curtains
were dropped -- every one supposing a child in the canal, run their heads out
in the rain on all sides -- the crying instantly ceased, and we hunted in the
canal and in the boat in vain, for a child -- This artifice was practiced upon
us several times before we detected the imposture. The old women, never at a
loss for a cause, began to suspect the boat was haunted.

IN the morning I intend for Utrecht, and have it in contemplation to go from
thence to Berlin, to see the immortal old Frederick. I must devote this evening
to digest the materials I have collected relative to Amsterdam, its trade, etc.

AMSTERDAM, the capital of the seven provinces, lays in lon. 4.30. E. and lat.
52.20. N. two hundred and thirty miles north east from Paris, and two hundred
east from London, situated upon the river Wye, which empties into the Zuyder
Zee. It contains, according to popular estimation, three hundred thousand
souls, (I believe two hundred and fifty thousand) and twenty six thousand
houses, equal to the number in Paris, and perhaps in general as large, though
containing only half the number of inhabitants.

THIS city was hardly known in the thirteenth century, and owes its rise and
grandeur to the deluge of inhabitants which poured into it from Antwerp in the
civil wars.

IT is built in form of a crescent, and well fortified, with a strong wall and
twenty six bastions, each of which have a windmill in their center: The ditch
is environed with a spacious canal, embellished with a double row of trees. In
the extent of their commerce it is thought they will not yield to London,
though it is allowed to have been on the decline for many years; this copious
subject I shall enter more largely on in the appendix. Upwards of two thousand
ships enter annually in the Wye from every quarter of the globe. The
shallowness of the Zuyder Zee is a great obstacle in the way of dispatch; but
on the other hand protects them effectually from naval enemies. The city is
built principally upon piles, at an enormous expense, which may be easily
conceived when thirteen thousand were required for the foundation of the
stadthouse alone. The streets are generally wide and well paved, many of which
have canals in the middle, with trees on each side; some of them are esteemed
the finest in Europe. The squares are very mean, the most considerable of which
is the one the stadthouse is built on.

THIS is a noble structure, and the principal object in Amsterdam. It is two
hundred and eighty two feet long, two hundred and thirty five wide, and one
hundred sixteen high, constructed with hewn stone, and is said to have cost two
millions sterling. The armory, bank, bells, paintings, and burghers' hall, are
the material objects; particularly the hall, which is one hundred and twenty
feet long, fifty seven broad, and ninety high, all built with marble, which is
really astonishing, when we consider that there is scarcely a native pebble to
be seen in the whole country. The floor represents, in marble, the celestial
and terrestrial globes, and the constellations in the heavens, most curiously
inlaid.

THE houses are built, in general, of brick -- some of hewn stone. The streets
are not so clean, nor the houses so elegant, in general, as those of Rotterdam;
but the streets are well paved. All religions are tolerated -- but Calvinism is
by far the most extensive, and no other churches are allowed bells. The arsenal
well merits seeing, as well as the dock yard, which lies contiguous to it, and
is five hundred and eight feet long, and well supplied with naval stores.

THE air is strongly impregnated with noxious vapors, and the stench which
rises from the canals. The water is bad; the best for common use is that which
the clouds empty into their cisterns.

THE hospitals, and other charitable institutions, are very great, as they
support upwards of twenty thousand poor in this way -- but they do not hold a
proportion to the vast profusion the citizens of London bestow for these
benevolent purposes, much to their honor.

THIS city is governed by a Senate of thirty six persons. Trumpeters are kept
upon the steeples and towers in the night, to give the alarm in case of fire.
The revenues of Amsterdam, it is said, amount to fifty thousand florins a day.
Their trade extends to all quarters, but the most lucrative is to the
Eastindies.

TUESDAY.
AT six o'clock this cloudy morning I embarked on board the Utrecht trukschute,
with a Mr. Vanbiber (an American gentleman) and a full freight of passengers,
and in nine hours sailing we reached Utrecht. We sailed through a beautiful
country, more abounding in elegant seats and summer houses, (belonging to the
wealthy citizens of Amsterdam) than any part of Holland I have yet seen;
especially within a few miles of Utrecht, where we saw a continued chain of
them, some of which were mere palaces.

DINED at a Mr. Peterson's, a rich merchant, and an American by birth. After
dinner he conducted us into every part of this city, which is built upon a
natural elevation compared to the maritime cities. It lies twenty three miles
S. E. from Amsterdam, is esteemed healthy, and rendered remarkable in history,
for the celebrated treaty which cemented the union of the Seven Provinces, in
1579.

IT contains from twenty to thirty thousand inhabitants -- party spirit runs
high among the citizens, who are arming, and exercising every day in opposition
to the prince of Orange; whose party style it rebellion, and a French faction.
The citizens are so inveterate against the English, that it is almost dangerous
for one to be seen in the streets. Military distraction beats high in every
vein; but nature and humanity shrink from the tragic thought, that these
enchanting fields may be verging fast to the fatal change into parks of
bellowing murder, encampments, and scenes of death, where family kindred may be
darting the weapons of destruction at each other.

VIEWED the old cathedral, the middle of which is blown down, but the tower is
entire. Saw the monument of an old bishop, with fourteen others in basso
relievo, the heads of which were all battered to pieces, at the time of the
violent religious persecution, which occasioned the revolt in the bloody reign
of Philip II.

WE ascended the top of the tower, which is three hundred and seventy feet
high, by four hundred and sixty steps; where we had a most sublime view of all
the low country, the Downs, Haerlem lake, and Zuyder Zee; our horizon was
rather hazy, which obstructed a much more extensive prospect. I am told that in
a clear day, fifty walled cities may be comprehended in one view from this
place.

THE country in the vicinity of Utrecht appeared like a continued garden. A
chain of small hills and the Downs in some measure checked our view to the
eastward. The wind blew a gale, and I was almost apprehensive that this crazy
old tower, which has resisted sieges and tempests for near a thousand years,
would at last tumble down and bury poor me in its ruins: The roaring of the
winds through the hollow arches, and the ruins of the old church under us,
naturally excited these vapors; so I hurried down to examine the university;
after which I went to a famous garden, belonging to Madame Van Mollem, and
adjoining to a silk machine, which is constructed nearly upon the same
principles as the one I saw at Derby in England, in 1782. -- One water wheel (a
curiosity in Holland) set the whole machine in motion.

THIS garden is upon a very large scale, and contains every object which can
render a garden delightful and curious -- such as cascades differently
displayed, grottos, statues, vases, and a variety of imitations in evergreens,
viz. baskets, etc. etc. in a very ingenious manner.

THE two grottos, the gardener tells us, cost ten thousand pounds sterling
each, being mostly formed by a rare collection of shells from the different
quarters of the globe. In this charming garden we spent a full hour, and could
easily have found entertainment for a day THE Dutch are confessedly the best
gardeners in Europe.
.

THE antipathy between the English and the citizens of Utrecht, has subsisted
on the part of the English since the barrier treaty made with Louis XIV, so
obnoxious to them. On the part of the citizens, on account of the collusive
conduct of the stadtholder in the late war with the English.

WE next viewed the mall, which is said to be the largest in Europe -- It is
three quarters of a mile in length, and formed by four double rows of stately
trees. -- When Louis XIV subdued, or rather took quiet possession of Utrecht,
in 1672, he gave orders to protect this delightful promenade.

UTRECHT has no particular curiosities or elegant public buildings; but the
city is supposed to be larger than the Hague, though thinly peopled. Many of
the houses are very elegant, and the pavements exceedingly neat and white.

PREVIOUSLY to my leaving Amsterdam I had determined to continue my route with
Mr. Vanbiber, through Westphalia and Saxony, to Berlin; but receiving a letter
soon after my arrival here, from London, via Amsterdam, I am induced to set off
immediately for Helvoetsluys, as the packet will sail from thence in the
morning. -- Adieu!

LETTER X. To the same.
On board the Prince of Wales Packet, at sea, abreast of Helvoetsluys, 20th
June, 1784. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE but this moment got on board, and am so much worn down with fatigue
that I can scarcely stand. The wind now blows a complete gale, so I must
improve the moment, or otherwise I shall soon be too sick to tell you how I got
along.

LAST evening, at eight o'clock, I embarked on board the Leyden trukschute at
Utrecht, with a civil skipper, and, for the first time since I have been in
Holland, I found my French and English of no avail; of course I was obliged to
pound Dutch with the Captain.

I HAD the cabin or roof all to myself, which I wished to avoid, as I feel a
strong propensity to improve every moment in society; of which scarcely any
sort can come amiss to one who travels for information. -- Under this
impression I left the cabin and entered upon the list of smokers in the body of
the boat; but found no one disposed to be sociable with a poor fellow who had
not a word to say for himself. So, finding my tongue useless, I returned again
to my cabin, and spent the night upon cushions on the bench, sometimes viewing
the country from the cabin windows by a fair moon light, and reading
occasionally.

WE descended the canal as far as the town of Woerden, which is walled in --
here we entered a branch of the Rhine, and gave ourselves up to its gentle
current; and in this pleasing situation we continued descending the river, and
passing many villages and a pleasant country, till we reached Leyden, at six
o'clock in the morning. I found this new mode of traveling much more agreeable
than on the canals, as the river is wider and the water continually alive.
Besides, it was a sublime scene in the night to view the effect of the moon
upon the country, through a double row of trees planted on the banks of the
river.

I PASSED through the streets of Leyden, and immediately reembarked upon the
Delft canal. Saw the burgeoise under arms in the stadthouse. Since my last
passing, the contending parties have had a small push in the bayonet way. --
Unhappily the seeds of a civil war appear but too thickly scattered in this
delightful country. Heaven avert the impending storm!

AT nine o'clock I arrived in Delft, but fearful of trusting to a trukschute
passage, on account of their slow progress, I hired a man and chaise to drive
me to Maeslandsluice. We rattled over the pavements, and then traveled upon
the edge of the canal with great expedition, five miles, to Maeslandsluice,
which I found a considerable town, built partly on an eminence, which I suppose
is artificial. The harbor was full of fishing vessels; and though it is the
residence chiefly of fishermen, it will vie, I am told, with almost any town in
Holland, for neatness and pleasant streets, with canals, trees, etc. etc.

HALF a mile farther I embarked on board a ferry boat -- crossed the Maes in a
gale -- landed upon the little island Roosenburg -- crossed the island in a
cart -- ferried again to the Brille -- took a rattling wagon, and drove on
seven miles through the mud, to Helvoetsluys -- where I was immediately almost
stunned with the cry of run! run! the packet is just weighing anchor* I flew to
the commissary -- paid twelve shillings and six pence for my pass (a villainous
imposition by the way) -- and the instant I arrived at the head of the quay the
boat was pushing off into a boisterous sea. However, I tumbled on board -- any
how -- and just saved myself to a hair -- and shall now leave my journal,
entirely beat out with fatigue. I will venture to pronounce that there have
been but few instances of the same space of ground being measured in Holland,
within the same space of time. Our passengers were astonished to find how
expeditiously I flew across the country. -- Adieu!

LETTER XI. To the same.
GEORGE INN, LONDON, June 23, 1784. DEAR SIR,
IT is not an hour since I arrived, and you would laugh heartily to see what a
figure I make. I left off my journal very sea sick -- we had indeed a most
unpleasant passage of twenty four hours, and a tumultuous head sea, which kept
our packet dancing merrily upon the waves; but we miserable passengers were no
otherwise sociable than in cascading en concert over our lee quarter, which we
kept up sociably until the moment we landed on the coast of Suffolk. We fell in
off Yarmouth, and sailed along the high coast of England, till abreast of
Lestof, and then we embarked reluctantly, fourteen in number, on board of an
open fishing boat, two miles from the shore, with a squally black atmosphere
for our comfort. No consideration would have induced us to hazard such a risk
but the misery of confinement, perhaps twenty four hours longer, with the shore
aboard.

WE landed in the surges beating upon the shore, and refreshed ourselves most
comfortably -- with a reviving dish of good tea to settle our giddy heads. I
have frequently experienced, in different countries, the immediate good effects
of this favorite herb, after a fatiguing day's journey, or sea sickness -- It
operates as effectual relief as opium in other cases. The French use tea as a
medicine; the English, Dutch and Americans, by infatuation, on all occasions I
HAVE, in my travels, some where found a most excellent substitute for coffee,
in barley, ground and burnt in the same manner: Indeed I could hardly
distinguish the difference in the taste, when sweetened previously to boiling.
-- Barley grows plentifully in Northamerica, and if this beverage should become
prevalent there, it will not only save its inhabitants from the risk of a slow
poison in the use of teas, but nearly half a million specie annually, within
the United States.
. Consumptions and bad teeth are commonly attributed to the excessive use of
hot tea -- with what justice I know not: But the following fact has reconciled
me to that belief -- that consumptions are unknown in France, and their teeth
are generally good -- but in England, Holland and America consumptions are very
prevalent; and the American women in particular are cursed with bad teeth for
the most part, which I suppose may be partly owing to neglect as well as tea. A
fine set of teeth preserves in old age the appearance of youth.

WE immediately prepared for London, but for the want of a better conveyance,
we were obliged to travel in a common horse cart twenty five miles, across the
country to Sexmundy, like so many condemned criminals on their way to Tyburn.
The situation was indeed entirely novel, and pleased us of course; but we were
frequently incommoded by the rain, as well as by the ridicule of the country
people.

FOR my part, as I had scarcely been in bed since leaving Haerlem, and my eyes
were fairly swelled for want of sleep, I determined to enjoy this night
undisturbed; for which purpose I prevailed on one of my fellow travelers to
bear me company; but notwithstanding our endeavors to refresh the claims of
nature, a crazy young landlord burst into our room before midnight, wild -- and
frantic. -- We cursed his impudence most cordially, but were too much out of
humor to attempt a second sleep, and consequently we immediately set off for
Ipswich, where we arrived just at the dawn of day.

THE town appeared to us large, but the houses small, and every object
exceedingly flat and dirty, after leaving the magnificent and clean streets of
the Dutch cities.

WE took in two or three brisk young widows who accompanied us to Colchester.
We have had a fine day, and allowing for the heaviness of our leaden eyes, were
as merry as we could wish.

I SHALL now sum up with some general observations respecting the United
Provinces at large, and their commerce, with a short sketch of each province in
particular, which will complete my tour to that country; and I think you will
do me the justice to confess I have not been idle in the short space of four
weeks, which has afforded me matter for a little volume.

I am, dear Sir, Yours, etc.

ORIGIN and DESCRIPTION OF THE UNITED PROVINCES.
HOLLAND belonged originally to the house of Burgundy, and fell under that of
Austria, which united it to the Spanish crown, by the succession of Charles V,
to that throne. The bigoted and bloody persecutions of his son Philip II,
produced a revolt in the seventeen provinces, ten of which returned to their
allegiance; and the present United Provinces pursued their opposition (with a
degree of bravery and perseverance that reflects honor on human nature) until
the year 1648, when they were declared independent, after a glorious struggle
of seventy six bloody years, valiantly fighting through four succeeding
generations, for every blessing of civil and religious liberty, dear to
mankind. The vast possessions they had wrested from the Portuguese in the
Eastindies, either by fraud or by force, enabled them to contend with success
against Spanish gold, and two of the most powerful monarchs in Europe.

THE Seven Provinces, which compose this formidable republic, the wonder and
admiration of the world -- are Holland, Zealand, Friesland, Guelderland,
Overyssel, Groningen and Utrecht. -- They extend about one hundred and fifty
miles each way, including the Zuyder Zee and Haerlem lake; which, taken with
their rivers, and numerous canals, leaves a doubt which of the elements, land
or water, occupies the greatest space within this area, which embraces, by a
late calculation, nine thousand one hundred and forty square miles. The Maes
and the Rhine are the principal rivers.

TRAVELING is cheaper in Holland than in any other country, as it does not
exceed one penny sterling per mile in the trukschutes, exclusive of baggage.

THE face of the earth lying level, and often lower than the surface of the
sea, naturally leads a stranger to imagine that the whole country has escaped
by accident the dominion of the ocean, which will apparently sooner or later
reassume its prerogative, of which their history furnishes many frightful
examples; in particular the fatal inundation, already mentioned, in 1421.

THE heaviness of this foggy and moist atmosphere is undoubtedly unhealthy: And
it is from this circumstance that their slovenly neighbors wish to rob them of
the merit of their excessive neatness, as they say (and perhaps with some
reason) that it is a merit of necessity to have their houses painted, and every
thing around them clean and bright.

THEIR winters begin in October and end in March. The summers are often very
hot, short, and subject to frequent changes. The number of inhabitants varies
extremely in the popular estimation; but from the best information they do not
exceed two millions and an half, which are evidently on the decline, owing to a
variety of concurrent circumstances. The two principal causes, it is supposed,
arise from the insensible decline of manufactures, and consequently of commerce
-- with the increase of luxury, and a great degeneracy from their virtuous
ancestors, who procured them their independence, and left the government
established upon the broad basis of justice, industry, enterprise, and
frugality.

THOSE who pretend to pry deep into futurity, predict their total annihilation
as an independent power. It is at least evident that their vast and rich
possessions in the Eastindies, will eventually produce the same effect upon
Holland, as the gold mines of Southamerica have upon Spain -- I mean national
debility, corruption, loss of manufactures, and consequently poverty SEVERAL
nations of Europe now manufacture the articles they formerly received from the
Dutch, particularly the English.
.

SHOULD the Emperor persevere in his wise and ambitious plan of opening the
Scheld, and reviving the commerce of Antwerp (once the emporium and glory of
Europe) it will most certainly tend to accelerate their rapid decline. The
Scheld is a noble river, and will admit ships of any burden quite up to the
city, which is very easy of access from the North Sea, and has a communication
with the Rhine, Maes, and Lis. In this case a doubt cannot be entertained but
Antwerp would rapidly rise to its former splendor, and soon be crowded with
commercial adventurers from all quarters of Europe, and even from Holland
itself, as Germany will open a wide field for enterprise. As Amsterdam rose on
the ruins of Antwerp, so it is probable that Antwerp would on those of
Amsterdam, and perhaps almost resume its former rank among the cities of
Europe, were once the Scheld opened.

THE main springs of the Dutch wealth in the Eastindies, is the monopoly of the
spice trade, in which they are in some danger of meeting rivals,
notwithstanding all their art and industry to prevent it.

IT is said that in the garden of the king of France, in the Isle of France,
they have raised 10,000 weight of cinnamon, and 30,000 weight of cloves,
besides other spices. This secret was stolen from Ceylon, Amboyna, and Banda,
by some French merchants.

THE canals in Holland are so much frequented that the roads are neglected, and
in general very bad, but mostly lined with trees, barriers, and turnpikes at
short distances.

THERE are no regular post coaches -- consequently every one is subject to the
imposition of the waggoners.

THIS country is curious because it resembles no other; but a continued
uniformity soon cloys a traveller, though the objects are pleasing, and keep
his mind continually alive. In general, after seeing one town you have seen the
rest. -- The country without their walls holds to the same general symmetry; a
continued marshy plain covered with cattle. The principal lands are devoted to
gardens and pastures.

THE Dutch in high life are a type of the French. Their merchants, and those
who rank in this standing, are certainly more graceful and easy in their
address than the English of the same class; but as a nation, they may be
considered as a dull, cold, distant and inhospitable people, especially to
foreigners, unless recommended in warm terms.

PROVINCE of HOLLAND.
THIS is the principal state, both in riches and extent, being one hundred
miles in length, and thirty wide. It is divided into North and Southholland, by
the river Wye, which does not keep them separate a great distance; but their
customs and style of life are very opposite.

HOLLAND is entirely flat, except the Downs along the sea coast, and the soil
is rather light.

IN November, particularly in Northholland, the country is totally buried in
water; so that no other objects present to view but dikes, steeples and houses,
rising out of the sea. In this season the inhabitants are, to all intents, in
the situation of amphibious animals emerging out of water. These inundations
fatten the fields, and are drawn off again in February in a most curious
manner, by mills invented for the purpose. The country is protected from the
common rake of the sea, by dikes and the Downs.

THEY have no arable lands, but plenty of fruit. The meadows afford fine
grazing for vast flocks of cattle which cover them. Holland is indeed a
continued meadow, intersected with canals, lakes and rivers, which are well
stored with fish.

THEIR foreign trade knows no bounds upon the globe. They have no grain of
their own culture, but are the granary of Europe; no vineyards, but they supply
Europe with the best of wines; no staple, but they have every thing in their
ports, cheaper, often, than any other nation. Such are the happy effects of
industry and enterprise. -- But, alas! poor Holland, thy sun has passed its
meridian, and, as in a long summer's day, it edges slowly to the horizon. -- In
point of strength and riches, they equal the other six provinces -- and as
manufactures decline, and land continues high, the principal part of the specie
within the union will probably find its way to Amsterdam.

ZEALAND.
THIS province is divided into eleven islands, and separated by the Scheld.

IT is situated south from Holland, and east of Brabant, and is thirty miles
long and twenty wide. It is entirely protected from the sea by dikes, which
cost fifty seven millions of florins at first, and takes the whole produce of
their land to keep them in repair. Middleburg is the capital. The land lies
low, and is subject to frequent inundations: It is more fertile than Holland,
but less healthy. It is fruitful, and they raise some grain. The natives are
rather lively, and very brave. They carry on the herring fishery mostly on the
coast of Scotland, which affords a great nursery of seamen, and a mine of
wealth. It is astonishing that so enterprising a nation as the English, should
suffer their great rivals in wealth and commerce to wrest from them this vast
source of riches, on their own coasts, and under their very noses. They carry
on no manufactures, resting their main dependence on the herring fishery.
Zealand contains eleven walled cities, and one hundred and ten villages.

FRIESLAND.
THIS is the most northern province, bounded by the German Ocean on the north,
Overyssel on the east, and by the Zuyder Zee on the south and west. It is forty
miles long, and thirty wide. It contains eleven cities, and three hundred and
thirty six villages.

THE inhabitants have always exhibited the strongest enthusiasm for liberty.

IN some parts of the province the soil is barren and thinly inhabited, but in
general very fertile. The air is colder, and of course more healthy than in the
other provinces. The country, in winter, is all afloat like Holland. They raise
considerable grain, have excellent pastures, and a good breed of horses, cows,
and sheep. The sheep's wool is long and soft, and they shear twice a year.

THIS province abounds in wild fowl and provisions; and in many places there
are woods to be seen. Their linens are much esteemed, and their commerce is
very extensive. The inhabitants are very arrogant and brave; and they preserve
their ancient customs in all their purity.

THE women have remarkably handsome faces, but are clumsy and have bad shapes.

GRONINGEN.
THIS province joins Overyssel on the south, and is thirty miles long and
twenty wide.

IT resembles Friesland, and is very populous, containing three walled cities,
and one hundred and sixty five villages. They support a vast breed of cattle.
The air is in general esteemed healthy, though the country is full of canals.
It abounds with rich pastures.

OVERYSSEL.
THIS is the poorest province in the union. It contains nineteen cities and
seventy nine villages. It is situated north from the Zuyder Zee, joining to
Friesland. It is sixty miles long, and forty wide; low and marshy. They raise
plenty of cattle, but it is badly peopled.

GELDERLAND.
THIS province is bounded by the Zuyder Zee on the north, and Groningen on the
south. It is sixty miles long, and fifty wide. The air is better than in the
maritime provinces; and the soil is gravelly, rising into young hills. They
make vast quantities of paper by the assistance of two hundred mills. They
raise also considerable quantities of tobacco of an inferior quality.

UTRECHT.
THIS province is bounded by Holland and the Zuyder Zee on the north, and by
Gelderland on the east. It is twenty five miles long, and as many wide. Utrecht
is the capital. The land is high, and healthy of course -- and instead of
meadows, terra firma. It contains five cities, and sixty five villages. They
raise also some tobacco.

GOVERNMENT.
EACH province is independent of the rest, and many cities independent of the
province they are in; which of course produces a very complicated system of
government.

THEIR High Mightinesses can neither make war or peace, nor form alliances,
without the consent of every state which sends deputies to the grand assembly,
in which the people are unequally represented. For example, Overyssel holds the
same voice as Holland, which last pays half the expense of the union; and the
small city of Purmeren the same as Amsterdam, which again pays half the charges
of Holland. The nobility are not numerous -- the states assemble at the Hague
four times a year; but in cases of emergency they are called together by the
council of state, which resides at the Hague.

ONE negative voice frustrates a decision upon any important point, which often
occasions a most tedious procrastination, and eternally clogs the wheels of
public operations. Hence arose their slow and feeble efforts in the last war
with England.

THE chamber of accounts conducts the revenue of Holland, which is generally
entrusted in the hands of old persons, who have stood the test of fidelity by
their long services. The states general is composed of thirty four members, of
which Gelderland sends six, Holland four, Zealand four, Utrecht four, Friesland
five, Overyssel five, and Groningen six. No stadtholder, governor, or officer
can vote in the national assembly. -- They change their president every week,
each province supplying him in its turn. In common cases the majority of votes
decide; but in extraordinary cases they must be unanimous.

THERE are five courts of admiralty, or colleges, in the different ports, which
direct the naval operations subject to the instructions of the assembly.

THE power of the stadtholder is nothing more than generalissimo and high
admiral, subservient to their high mightinesses' direction.

THE legislative authority of every city is lodged in a senate of twenty or
thirty persons, who hold it for life, and the survivors at the death of one
member, choose another in his place. The representatives of the several
provinces are chosen out of this body; so, in fact, the people (with all their
boastings of liberty) have no hand in electing the persons by whom they are
governed so despotically.

I AM afraid we shall realize under our confederated system in America, all the
inconveniences the Dutch experience under their ill modelled government, which
seems to partake of the most scrupulous jealousy in its origin, as well as
clear despotism in its operation. While we were under the incumbent pressure of
a common enemy, our temporary government answered all the purposes for which it
was created; but now that weight is removed, every state will draw into itself,
and, like the sensitive plant, shrink from the representative body of the
union. Our confederation possesses many of the defects, without any of the
coercion or energy of the Dutch government. God only knows what will be the
event; but I dread to look forward, from a full conviction that we cannot long
be bound together by such feeble ties. State will contend against state --
hatred will ensue -- and perhaps the whole continent will be again deluged with
the blood of -- Americans -- while it is yet smoking with the blood of
Englishmen and Americans; and finally we shall become an easy prey to some
power of Europe -- or some bold Cromwell will step forward to give us despotick
law and protection. But I will not, I cannot indulge such a gloomy
anticipation; but rather will hope that the fond expectation of the admiring
world may not be so soon blasted, and that that Providence which has carried us
so gloriously through the revolution, will unite the wisdom of the continent to
devise a form of government which will bless this and future generations. THE
reader will remember that this was written before the federal constitution, by
which the United States are now governed, was thought of.


THE ardent glow of affection I feel for America has led me into a digression:
Indeed I find the amor patria is always the most powerful when at the greatest
distance from our native soil.

TO return -- The revenue of Holland amounts to about twenty one millions of
florins per annum, which arises principally on the excise, customs, and what is
levied upon the conquered towns in Flanders. The excise duties are so extended
as to reach every article. Upon any close emergency they have recourse to the
hundredth penny.

THEIR forces consist of upwards of seventy sail of men of war of all sizes,
and thirty thousand troops. Their greatest security, however, lies in their
peculiar situation. Their forces are composed chiefly of foreigners.

APPENDIX.
I AM indebted to a very prying and sensible English gentleman for the
following remarks on the Dutch East India affairs. This gentleman resided some
time in that country, and was at the source of the best information. He says,

THE original stock of the Dutch East India company consisted of 2,100 shares,
at 3,000 florins EACH florin of Holland, according to the par of silver, is
worth 1s. 10d. sterling nearly -- but the course of exchange varies according
to the fluctuation of trade, etc.
each, amounting in the whole to 6,300,000 florins: They afterward increased
the number of shares to 2,130, of the same value -- which advanced their
capital to 6,390,000 florins.

THEIR singular good fortune in stepping, without loss or expense, into all the
Portuguese settlements and fortifications in Asia, except Goa and Daman; the
rich prizes made of Portuguese ships; the justice rendered by their agents
abroad to their constitutents at home; and the enormous advantages arising from
their unconscionable oppressive treaties with the princes of Java and Ceylon,
together with the superior influence which the entire property of cinnamon,
cloves, mace, nutmegs, and two third parts of the pepper trade in India, have
indispensably yielded to them in Asia, at one time raised the value of their
stock to 650 per cent. thus increasing their capital of 6,300,000, to
40,950,000 florins. From this magnitude, avarice, and an ill judged severity
exercised over their allies or dependents, and a false parade of dignity in
Batavia, etc. exceeding that of any crowned head in Europe, have reduced their
stock, which is now only from 340 to 355 per cent. A still delusive and
pernicious estimation, which by dividing the principal instead of the profits,
together with various other concurring circumstances, must at length lay them
prostrate as bankrupts and delinquents, at the feet of the states general, who
will then be as little capable of sustaining them as of upholding their own
credit.

THE 23,000,000 florins expended in the establishment of the Cape of Good Hope,
of which 10,000,000 florins may moderately be stated as an irretrievable loss;
the 15,250,000 florins added to the real commercial and moveable capital
13,500,000 florins, fully accounts for the former rise of their original
capital to 650 per cent. and at the same instant avows that in proportions
considerably less offensive than those which have either enhanced their
expenses or reduced their profits, their destruction is inevitable if they do
not wisely and speedily adopt the only rational means of evading it.

THE benefit arising from the sale of cloves, cinnamon, mace, nutmeg, and
pepper, will appear from the following distinct calculation, viz. They sell lb.
with. flor. st. Sale in In. Cloves in India, 150,030 at 5 0 750,000 Nutmegs do.
100,000 at 2 16 280,000 Mace do. 10,000 at 6 8 64,000 Cinnamon do. 200,000 at 5
5 1,050,000 Pepper do. 3,500,000 at 30 cwt. 1,050,000 Current Guilders in
Holland, f. 3,194,000 In Europe, lb. with. flor. st. Sale in Europe. Genesis Sale.
350,000 at 5 0 1,750,000 2,500,000 250,000 at 3 15 937,500 1,217,500 100,000 at
6 8 640,000 704,000 400,000 at 5 6 2,100,000 3,150,000 5,000,000 at 50 cwt.
2,500,000 3,550,000 f. 7,927,500 f. 11,121,500 Equal in British money to
299,437 l. 10 s. -- in India and in Europe, to 743,223 l. 19 s. 2 d. making the
general sale to amount to 1,042,661 l. 9 s. 2 d. sterling.

FROM bad cinnamon they extract a rich oil, which they either sell to great
account, or by presents answer all the purposes of money in their political
engagements with native princes.

IT is supposed that Ceylon yields annually a million pounds of cinnamon; a as
one half only is sold, the rest is destroyed, in order to keep up the price.

IT is computed that as the following are the average costs of these spiceries,
the profits annexed to each species arise to the company from the sale, viz.

Quantity. Cost and Charges. Gross Cost. Profit. lb. with. flor. st. Florins.
Florins. Cloves, 500,000 at 2 3 pr. lb. 1,075,000 1,425,000 Amboyna. Nutmegs,
350,000 at 1 5 do. 437,500 780,000 Banda Isles. Mace, 110,000 at 2 14 do.
297,000 407,000 Cinnamon, 600,000 at 6 do. 180,000 2,970,000 Ceylon. Pepper,
8,500,000 at 0 18 pr. cwt. 1,530,000 2,020,000 Java, chiefly. f. 3,519,500 f.
7,602,000 Sterling. Florins. l. s. d. BY this calculation it appears, that the
gross sale of spiceries amounts annually to 11,121,500 or 1,042,661 9 2 That of
those they sell or barter in India, by reason of which they have the exclusive
power of influencing markets, 3,194,000 or 299,437 10 That the rest is sold in
Europe, and becomes almost a clear remittance, and nearly a balance against the
European nations who consume it, 7,927,500 or 743,223 19 2 That the first cost
and charges, paid generally in merchandise, are 3,519,500 or 329,577 18 2 That
consequently there is a gain, exclusive of the gain on the merchandise bartered
for them, of 7,602,000 or 713,083 11 THE Seven United Provinces pay the
following proportions annually on a 100l. viz.
l. s. d. q. Holland, 58 6 3 0 Friesland, 11 13 1 2 Zealand, 9 3 7 2 Groningen,
5 16 6 0 Utrecht, 5 16 6 3 Gelderland, 5 12 8 3 Overyssel, 3 11 2 2 100 0 0 0
CURRENCY OF HOLLAND.
l. s. d. THE stiver is worth about 0 0 1 sterling. Double stiver, 0 0 2 Skilling,
or 6 do. 0 0 6 Guilder, or 20 do. (or florin) 0 1 9 Dalder, or 30 stivers, 0 2
8 Rix dalder, or 50 do. 0 4 7 Zealand do. or 52 do. 0 4 9 Ducat, gold coin, 5
flor. 5 st. 0 9 6 Half ryder, 7 florins, 0 12 9 Ryder, 14 florins, 1 5 6

FINIS.
PRINTED AT WORCESTER, BY ISAIAH THOMAS, MDCCXC.


