A GRATULATORY ADDRESS, DELIVERED JULY 5th, 1790, BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF THE
CINCINNATI, OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.

PUBLISHED BY THEIR ORDER.

PRINTED IN BOSTON, BY BENJAMIN RUSSELL, NEAR THE STATE-HOUSE. M, DCC, XC.

THIS Address was calculated only for the minute. The idea of publication was
not admitted by the author at the time of composing it. But an injunction which
was not to be resisted, controuled a different resolution. A vivid expression
was sought for to conceal its defects, and to agree with the festivity of the
Season. As great candor as was discovered at the delivery will be
indispensable to make it sufferable in the closet.

W. TUDOR.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
IN the complete possession of PEACE, LIBERTY and SAFETY, we are now assembled,
my beloved Countrymen, to celebrate the Birthday of our Nation. -- A Day
sacred to Freedom and triumphant Patriotism! A Day, which sixteen years since,
the boldest heart and most illumined mind had not anticipated.

AMERICANS! YE are now convened, not, in adulatory strains, to hail the
nativity of a victorious master, but to commemorate the glorious Epoch that
gave ye a Government of Laws and not of Men; and while your souls dilate at the
joyful festival, ye will recollect those ties which bind ye to your Country;
and, with sincerity, reiterate those virtuous resolutions, that strengthen,
while they brighten the chain of union that has now ranked us with the Nations
of the earth.

TO ascertain the precise time, under the administration of a CECIL or a
CHATHAM, when Britain and her Colonies must have separated, might afford
amusement to a speculative inquirer, but can be of no utility now. -- That the
crisis was precipitated is conceded -- But it was not the despotic statutes of
England -- It was not the haughty and fastidious manners of her officers, civil
or military, which compelled the mighty Revolution which severed her Empire.
These did rouse, but they could not create that unconquerable spirit which
stimulated America to vindicate, and irrevocably to fix those rights, which
distance, and other causes, might, for ages, have kept indefinite, dependent
and precarious. -- No -- it was that native servid sense of Freedom which our
enlightened ancestors brought with them and fostered in the forests of America;
and which, with pious care, they taught their offspring never to forego.
Although the present age cannot forget, and posterity shall learn to remember
those violences which impelled their country to war, yet it must be admitted
that the period of parting had arrived. British influence, and foreign arts,
might have corrupted, silenced, or destroyed that spirit, which, thus early
outraged, became invincible, gave birth to the immortal Edict, and all those
glorious circumstances in which we this day rejoice.

WHOLE Oceans rolled between, yet the Colonies retained a strong attachment to
their parent state. The numerous memorials transmitted from every Province to
that infatuated Country, remain the evidence of their patience and affection:
-- But deaf to the voice of supplication, and aloof to entreaty, she added
indignity to wrong, until "humility was tort^red into rage." -- Oppression
crowded upon oppression, until submission was criminal and resistance became an
obligation. On this auspicious day, and through every revolving year, the
magnanimity exhibited by our country at that all-interesting and momentous
crisis, shall cheer the patriot mind, and raise a glow of honest pride. She
neither hesitated nor halted, but sacrificing her attachments at the shrine of
duty -- appealed GOD and to her sword, for justice and success; -- Heaven
approbated the appeal -- invigorated her councils, and pointed the road to
victory -- That sword which she drew by compulsion, she wore with honor, and,
her enemies have confessed, that she sheathed it without revenge.

IN this eventful struggle, many sacrifices were to be made that came near the
heart; and if, to day, your affections are called out, for the loss of Fathers,
Friends, and Brothers, check not the tear, for it is the tear of virtue. Your
consolation is, that thus falling, they greatly discharged the severest duty of
men and citizens. I mean not here to traverse with you the plains of death, nor
to resuscitate the sorrows of the tomb. The altars of Liberty require many
victims. -- Those patriot soldiers devoted their lives to our safety; their
deaths extended the public fame; and may the gratitude of their country be
immortal.

THE talents and integrity of those Statesmen who conceived and directed the
measures which broke the yoke of foreign sway, cannot be contemplated without
admiration. The thunders of Albion in vain poured forth their terrors: The
collected vengeance of Britain menaced but to inspire. Depravity could find no
lurking place, and venality dared not approach the steeled breasts of men who
sought a hallowed fame in the rescue of millions from distant tyranny.
Posterity must often recall the names of those deliverers, and in copying their
bright examples pursue the surest road to substantial glory. NOTE.

It will not be invidious, perhaps, in this illustrious Group, to distinguish
the two characters whom the people have delighted to honor. It certainly
augured well to the new, united Government, that in their first setting out
they bestowed the first posts of honor and trust upon their two most
meritorious and efficient citizens. The successful negotiation with Holland,
and the definitive treaty of Paris will forever endear the name of JOHN ADAMS
to the People of America. And his invaluable services at home, and in Europe,
continue to be remembered as long as gratitude shall be thought a virtue.




IT is not enough, my Countrymen, that the decisive fiat we this day
consecrate, became a record in Heaven; It is not enough, that victory and peace
secured and confirmed our rights: It is not enough, that the United States
embrace a territory equal in extent to the Roman World: It is not enough, that
in our Federal and State Constitutions, we boast the freest Governments on
earth: -- It yet remains to perfect and establish the true principles of social
Life, Laws, Agriculture, Science, with all the Arts that ameliorate and
multiply the human species.

DURING the arduous contest, the arms of America were borne by men who had a
country to love, a property to defend, and a share in enacting laws which it
was their interest as well as duty to maintain. Tranquillity restored, with joy
her soldiers became retired citizens. War is the disgrace and calamity of human
nature: And forever distant be the day in this country, when it shall be
encouraged as an art, and be debased into a trade.

AND here, My dear Associates! Permit an Address which may be construed as an
apology that your Institution most assuredly does not want. -- The society has
been faulted by those who never saw its rules, or knowing have misconstrued
them. Canons which inculcate "the duty of laying down in Peace arms assumed for
the public defense." But

"Perish the narrow Thought, the sland'rous Tongue,
"Where the Heart's right, the Action cannot be wrong."
TO the generous sense of a grateful Country, your APPEAL has been made: And do
I mistake? Or do I hear that Country exclaim -- By the Toils which cemented
your Friendships -- by the dangers encountered in the fair Fields of Fight --
by the Blood of our slaughtered, faithful Sons, who so greatly thought, and
nobly dared -- by the merits of our WASHINGTON -- we swear! that ye have not
offended.

MOST honorable would be the retrospect, and pleasant the employment, to
retrace our infant Country through the scenes of warfare, and to mark her
conduct under alternate Victory and Retreat, did not such a task more properly
become the Historian, than comport with this occasion. It is enough to say, she
sustained misfortune with constancy -- collected, she met Independence and
Sovereignty -- She triumphed, but she did not insult.

THE five succeeding years of Peace, important as they were, passed neglected;
and, flying, left an unfortunate blank in her annals. National wisdom in most
countries has been slow, in all progressive. America, springing from the
cradle of Empire, had much to learn; and every thing, in national legislative
politics, to experiment. Those jealousies which had been so long encouraged as
political wisdom; -- the recent escape from the abuses of monarchical
establishments; and a too fond adherence to local rule; all combined to retard
that efficient and united policy, which alone could have exalted our nation,
while it would have equally disseminated all the blessings of the social
compact. The humiliating situation was at length surmounted, and we now enjoy a
system of confederated, or rather CONSOLIDATED NOTE.

"In all our deliberations on this subject, we kept steadily in our view, that
which appears to us, the greatest interest of every true American, the
Consolidation of our Union, in which is involved our prosperity, felicity,
safety, perhaps, our national existence. This important consideration,
seriously and deeply impressed on our minds, led each State in the Convention,
to be less rigid on points of inferior magnitude, than might have been
otherwise expected; and thus the Constitution, which we now present, is the
result of a spirit of amity, and of that mutual deference and concession which
the peculiarity of our political situation rendered indispensable." (Letter
from the Federal Convention, to the President of Congress.)

Whoever has read and considered the Constitution of the United States, can be
at no loss to know where lies the Sovereignty of our Nation. With Congress is
deposited the exclusive Power of making Peace and War, forming Treaties,
coining Money, raising and supporting Armies and a Navy, calling forth the
Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel
Invasions, to establish Rules of Naturalization, Laws of Bankruptcies, etc.

Our National Government has sometimes, but most improperly, been called a
Federal Republic; for a Federal Republic is an association of a number of
independent sovereign States. Unanimity is essential to a Federal Republic,
because each State possesses sovereign powers. But unanimity is not necessary
according to our National Constitution; and it would be ruinous to have made it
so. The greatest Civilians have all agreed that the summa Imperii is
indivisible. That the Imperium in Imperio is a solecism. And history and
experience have made that opinion oracular. Although there exists in some
instances a militation between the National and State Governments, yet it is
presumed, for the reasons offered, that the expression is true, and that we
must be considered as a CONSOLIDATED, and not a confederated Republic.


government, which honestly conducted, must command respect abroad, and ought
to produce contentment at home.

OUR public officers are the accountable ministers of the laws -- our
legislative servants return and mingle, at short periods, with their
fellow-citizens. With caution elect, but the delegation once committed, let us
not withold a generous confidence in our Rulers. With candor pass upon their
deliberations, and with manly patience await the beneficial consequences,
presumed to flow from their public acts. Many discordant interests, are to be
accommodated. -- Character, attachment, the desire of securing future honors,
all the views that stimulate the human heart, press upon the public servants to
a faithful discharge of their national duties. The present ought, therefore, to
be the period of trust, not of suspicion, still less of aspersion. AMERICANS!
Ye have fought the battles of mankind -- ye have here enkindled that sacred
flame of Freedom, which is now expanding its warmth, and dispersing its beams,
throughout a great part of Europe: -- Do not then suffer precipitation and
intemperance to defeat the just expectations of the wise and the good, who have
so often, although so vainly, in most countries, dared to advocate the rights
of man. But may your conduct and your history demonstrate, that a government,
free as your own, may be maintained without turbulence, administered with
energy and dignity, and while it advances the happiness of all its subjects,
can extend the glory of their Empire.

OUR great transmarine distance from EUROPE, and all her ambitious, jarring,
and rival interests, justifies the expectation of long Peace. The valuable and
various natural riches of the Southern -- the climate, population, and
manufactures of the Central -- joined to the hardihood and enterprise of the
Eastern States, form a mass of resource and strength unexampled in the history
of any country, equally young.

WHAT shore have your Ships not coasted? NOTE.

Any person that will trace the circumnavigatory route of the Columbia and
Washington, the two ships fitted out at Boston, by Messi'rs BARREL, BROWN,
BULLFINCH, HATCH, etc. after being informed that one of those vessels was
burdened ninety tons only, with a single deck, and one mast, and that they
traversed a great portion of the South and North Pacific Ocean; -- attends to
the voyage of the ship Alliance, in 1787; and remember that there were
seventeen sail of American ships, lying in the road of Canton, the last season,
besides those in different ports of the East Indies, will not pronounce this
paragraph to be a mere flight of fancy.


-- And where swells the wave, on which your Flag has not been displayed? From
the wilds of California, to the extreme domains of Asia -- in Arctic Seas, and
Solstitical Climes -- your seamen have dared the tempest, and provoked the
storm. The islands of either India, and of every ocean, have been but stages to
refresh the dauntless navigators of your country.

LOOK throughout your NOW united Dominions, Count the variety of her important
and capital staples -- See labor daily becoming more productive --
Manufactures multiplying NOTE.

From accurate inquiry it has been found, that within the last year, there was
manufactured in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, upwards of two thousand tons
of goods, more than was made therein in 1773.


-- the Mechanic Arts improving: -- What then remains but to assume a national
tone. -- To feel ouerselves AMERICANS, and to continue, as brethren of the same
mighty family, to love each other, to reverence the laws, and to be the
happiest nation below the stars.


