A TREATISE ON THE NATURE AND SUBJECTS OF CHRISTIAN BAPTISM. EXTRACTED FROM A
LATE AUTHOR.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK. SOLD BY JOHN DICKINS, NO. 43,
FOURTH-STREET, NEAR THE CORNER OF RACE-STREET. MDCCXC.

AN EXTRACT ON THE NATURE AND SUBJECTS OF CHRISTIAN BAPTISM.
MATTHEW xxviii. 19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach (or disciple) all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you:
And, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Amen.


THE FIRST PART. On the NATURE of CHRISTIAN BAPTISM.
THE subject of our present inquiry, may be reduced to these two points, viz.
What is Christian Baptism? And, Who are the proper subjects of it? These I
shall endeavor to resolve by the light of divine revelation. -- And, as I
claim no dominion over the faith of any, so I would speak as unto wise men:
judge ye what I say.

The first thing to be considered, is, "What is Christian Baptism?"

In our text, Christ commissions his ministers to baptize the nations. We
borrow the word Baptism from the Greeks; among whom it was commonly used to
signify a wetting or washing in some mode, as I shall show more particularly in
the sequel. Among christians, baptism is that Religious and Sacramental washing
with Water, which Christ has appointed as the token and sign of our admission
into the visible church, and of our having an interest in the privileges, and
coming under the obligations of the gospel covenant.

But there are some, who are not content to enjoy all the liberty in our
churches that they can reasonably desire for themselves. With them there is no
true baptism without dipping: nor will they have christian communion with any
but those who have gone into the water. According to them, there are no gospel
churches in the world, except of those who have been dipped. None are regularly
called or sent of God to preach the word, and administer gospel ordinances,
till they have been dipped. None may presume to come, or be admitted to the
table of the Lord, till they have been dipped. And thus, as much as in them
lies, they unchurch all the churches in the world, except those who agree with
them in the mode of baptizing. -- They deny the call and mission of their
ministers; invalidate and nullify their ordinances, and excommunicate
thousands, whom they cannot deny to be eminent for faith and holiness; and, in
a word, make the door of the visible church so much narrower than Christ has
made the gate of Heaven, that they reject far the greater part of those whom
Christ receives.

Now, however willing we are to have Christian communion with all who, in a
judgment of charity, are disciples of Christ; yet if we cannot have it, unless
we will discard the greater part of our christian brethren; deny the missions
and call of those, whose ministry has been the means of our own conversion and
edification, deny the validity of those ordinances, which have so often been
breasts of nourishment and consolation to us, and renounce our baptism, which
we are conscientiously persuaded is both valid and regular; this we cannot
consent to. -- And if any make this a ground of separation from us, let all who
have imbibed the spirit of christianity judge, whether it be our fault; and
whether such rigidness in a matter so circumstantial, is agreeable to the meek
and charitable spirit of the Gospel, or whether it does not rather look too
much like Pharisaical superstition, to say no worse.

Methinks they have more reason to question the validity of their own
administration, than to deny ours, upon the account of such irregularities as
they charge upon us. For they cannot deny that the baptism which is
administered in their communions was received at first by their predecessors,
from the hands of such as, according to their principles, were unbaptized, and
consequently could not be regularly authorized to administer the ordinance. If
they think sprinkling to be no true baptism, much more have they reason to
doubt the validity of immersion, when performed by an unbaptized and
unauthorized administrator. And, if the first baptisms of that sect, when they
first sprung up, were invalid, how can those administrations be thought valid
and regular, which depend upon them.

We must therefore conclude, that dipping cannot be essential to baptism and
christian communion. The consequences are not to be endured. -- The
difficulties this principle will lead to, are inextricable. -- We never can be
satisfied that there is any true church, or valid baptism and ordinances in the
world, upon these narrow principles.

These considerations are certainly of so much weight, that the necessity of
dipping ought not to be insisted on, unless there be clear and cogent reasons
for it. The substance of what is pleaded in favor of this mode, is reducible
to these four heads:

"That the proper meaning of the word Baptize, always implies dipping.

"That the scriptural examples of baptism were administered in this way.

"That this mode of administration is plainly pointed out, when the Apostle
says, We are buried with Christ in baptism.

"That dipping only answers to, and fitly represents the thing signified in
baptism."

On the contrary, we think, that the necessity of dipping cannot be argued from
any of these topics; but that they will furnish us with a good warrant in
favor of the mode of affusion or sprinkling. Let us examine the matter
distinctly.

And our first inquiry is, what is the true and proper meaning of the word
Baptize, and whether it always implies dipping? We grant that the institution
of Christ requires whatever is essential to a true Baptism; but more than this
cannot be held necessary. Now, we have no sort of evidence, that the word
Baptize always implies dipping; but it plainly appears to be of a larger and
more general signification. It properly imports a wetting, washing, bathing, in
any mode, either by dipping or sprinkling, or bleeding, or weeping, or
otherwise. In proof of this we appeal,

In the first place, to those who are acknowledged to have been best skilled in
the Greek language. All the Lexicons and critics, so far as I have found,
agree, that the word signifies to wet, or wash, as well as to dip.

But, perhaps, it may be said, That critics are not infallible, and it may be
suspected that they are wrong, in saying, That washing or wetting in general,
in whatever mode, is expressed and meant by the word Baptism.

I answer; in questions concerning the true meaning of words, the judgment of
the learned, though not infallible, is doubtless of very considerable weight;
and especially when we find a general consent among them. And that there
certainly is upon this point, that washing or wetting, without respect to the
mode, is Baptism, according to the usage of the word by Greek writers. But if
any are yet unsatisfied, we must examine the matter further; whether it can
certainly be made to appear that the word bears the sense which has been said.

They who have been at the pains to examine the Greek classics (Dr. Wall in
particular) have proved by clear and manifold examples, that those ancient
writers were wont to use the word Baptize to express a washing or wetting, even
where there was no dipping at all, but only a sprinkling. But I think it will
be needless to inquire, how the word was commonly understood by heathen
writers: it is the scriptural sense alone that we are searching after. If this
can be ascertained, we need no more.

The word baptize is used in scripture to express such washings as did not
require, and were not effected by dipping. In Luke xi. 38, we read, that a
Pharisee who had invited Jesus to dine with him, "marvelled that he had not
first Washed." The Greek word is Baptized. Here observe, that Jesus omitted to
wash before dinner according to the Jewish custom, which was the reason why the
Pharisee wondered; and that this Washing was properly called a Baptism. But how
were the Jews wont ordinarily to wash before their meals? Did they dip
themselves under water? If not, here is a plain proof and example of a washing
that is called a baptism, without such a dipping. Now, if we turn to Mark vii.
we shall see what that washing was that was customary among the Jews before
eating. When the Pharisees and some of the Scribes saw some of his disciples
eat bread with defiled (that is to say, with unwashen) hands, they found fault.
For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat not.
And when they come from the market, except they wash (the Greek is, except they
are baptized) they eat not. This shows, that in the language of the New
Testament a person is said to be baptized, when a small part of his body is
washed.

Again, in Heb. ix. 10, the Apostle speaks of the Jewish ritual as standing in
diverse Washings; the Greek is, different Baptisms. And it appears that
purifications by sprinkling are especially intended. For he adds, with a plain
reference to, and as an illustration of, what he had just said: If the blood of
bulls and goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Christ, etc. which shows that these purifications by sprinkling are instances
of those washings or baptisms he had mentioned, and indeed some of the chief
instances: otherwise it would not have been pertinent to his purpose to have
noticed them on this occasion. A plain proof that sprinkling is a true baptism.

Further, the Apostle says of the Israelites who came out of Egypt, that they
were baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, 1 Cor. x. 2. How were
they baptized? Certainly they were not dipped. For they went on dry ground
through the sea, which stood as a wall on each hand. It was the Egyptians only
that were baptized by immersion. According to the account Moses gives, the
Israelites could no otherwise be baptized in the cloud and sea, than by being
sprinkled with rain from the one, and a spray from the other, as they passed
along: to which Psalm. lxviii. 7, 8, 9, is thought to refer. Here is then
another instance of baptism by sprinkling; which was a token of the separation
or sanctification of the people to God. This gives a natural and easy account
of the matter. But how unnatural and strained is our opponents' way of
explaining it: That the people having the sea on each hand, and the cloud over
their heads, seemed to be as it were dipped or enclosed in water. On which I
would observe, that the Apostle says not that they seemed to be as it were
baptized, but in plain terms that they were Baptized. But whatever resemblances
of dipping, people may imagine, immersion without wetting is certainly no real
baptism. For whether the mode of washing be essential or not, yet the washing
or wetting itself is indeed essential to a true and proper baptism. If people
may be baptized by having the water round them, though they were not wet by it
at all, the dry hold of a ship upon the water would serve as well as Jordan:
and, by going down into it, we shall be dipped in the sea in like manner as the
Israelites were. -- The fathers were baptized in the cloud and sea. -- A true
baptism necessarily implies wetting. They were not wet by immersion -- they
could not therefore be baptized by immersion -- whatever washing they received
could be only by sprinkling. -- It was therefore in this made undoubtedly that
they were baptized. Which is another proof that sprinkling is a mode of baptism.

Let us now consider the words of Christ, Luke xii. 50, I have a bap^^^^ to be
baptized with, and how am I straitened till it be accomplished. Christ here
calls his sufferings a baptism. The sacred body of the blessed Jesus was truly
and literally baptized. -- He was wet and bathed in his own tears, and sweat,
and blood, in his agony in the garden, and when he was scourged, and nailed to
the cross. He was baptized and sanctified by the blood of the covenant, Heb. x.
29, that is, by his own blood; even as the Jewish high priests were baptized,
sanctified, and consecrated with water and the blood of beasts, as types of
Christ. And accordingly it was a common expression of the ancient fathers,
concerning the martyrs, who had shed their blood in bearing witness to the
Christian faith, that they were baptized with their own blood. -- Here is then,
I think, another very good proof, that dipping is no ways essential to baptism.
-- For, Christ was not dipped, and his martyrs are not dipped in their bloody
baptism, but he was wet, and tinged, and bathed in his sweat, and blood issuing
from his pores and veins.

Let us now make some remarks on the baptism with the Holy Ghost, which is
often spoken of. This is indeed a spiritual baptism, by which the subjects of
it were sanctified, consecrated, and separated to God, in a higher and more
eminent sense, than those were who had only been consecrated by water baptism.
But how is this spiritual baptism explained? There are several expressions
which are plainly of the same import; such as the "pouring out of the spirit"
upon the subject. When the Apostles were baptized with the Holy Ghost,
according to Christ's p^^^^se, Acts i. 5, Peter observes, that this was the
fulfillment of the prophecy of Joel, It shall come to pass in the last days,
says God, I will pour out of my spirit, Acts ii. 17, and again, verse 33, That
Christ being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed or poured forth those things
which ye now see and hear. Here we see "that pouring upon," and baptizing, are
synonimous expressions. The one explain the other. Now, if the pouring out of
the Spirit be the baptism of the Spirit, the pouring of water must also be^^
baptism of water. -- It is to be well observed, that as the Holy Spirit is in
scripture often signified by water, as a fit emblem of his sanctifying and
comforting influences; so the conferring of the spirit upon us, which is
undoubtedly the true intendment of the baptism of the Holy Ghost, is not
represented by the similitude of dipping into water, but as a pouring or
sprinkling of water upon us. -- Isa. xliv. 3, I will pour waters on the
thirsty, and floods on the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit on thy seed, and
my blessing on thine offspring. See also Ezekiel. xxxvi. 27, I will sprinkle clean
water on you, and ye shall be clean. A new heart will I give you, etc. All
which I think proves plainly, that sprinkling is in scripture considered as a
mode of baptism. -- I will add one remark more. The baptism with the Holy Ghost
is termed, an unction or anointing, 1 John ii. 20, 27. The holy oil, with which
persons were anointed in their consecration, was a sign or emblem of the Holy
Spirit given to them, to fit them for the offices to which they were called.
The same is also signified by Christian baptism. Now, it is by pouring on of
oil that persons are anointed; and it is by pouring out of the Spirit upon us,
that our anointing or baptism with the Holy Ghost is expressed. As therefore
baptism answers in signification to anointing, we may well conclude, that it
may properly be administered in the same way, that is, by affusion. Can we
doubt whether affusion be a true baptism, when we find that in scripture,
Baptizing, Pouring, Sprinkling, and Anointing, are parallel, and signify the
same thing?

One remark more I will add. In all the different translations of the New
Testament that I have seen, I have not found that the word baptize in the
original is ever rendered by a word signifying or implying immersion. But they
either retain the original word, or render i^ washing or ablution; which we
cannot think they would have done, if the authors had not been satisfied that
this is the true scriptural sense.

To find and ascertain the signification of the word, will, I think, determine
the dispute concerning the mode of Baptism. For which reason, I have examined
the matter more carefully. And the conclusion in which this inquiry has issued,
will not be at all weakened, but rather much confirmed by the account we have
in the scriptures of the administration of this ordinance. And this leads us to
consider,

Secondly, Whether the necessity of dipping can be argued from these scriptural
precedents. Some suppose, that John Baptist and the Apostles baptized by
immersion only: And that we are bound herein strictly to follow their example.
On the contrary, we can find no certainty that immersion was ever practiced in
the apostolic age. It is morally certain that this was not the constant mode of
administration.

It is true, we read that Jesus was baptized by John in Jordan; and then came
up out of the water, Mark i. 9, 10. That the Jews were also baptized of John in
Jordan," Mat. iii. 6. "That John baptized in Enon, because there was much
water," John iii. 23. That the Eunuch went down into the water with Philip, and
when he was baptized they came up out of the water, Acts viii. 38, 39. But
whether any of these were dipped is uncertain. It is not even certain whether
in any of these instances they went into and were baptized, in the water;
though the texts are so rendered in our English Bible. But the Greek, which is
the authentic standard, will fairly admit of this sense, as critics have often
observed, viz. That they went down to, were baptized at, and went up from the
water. The Greek text does not determine whether Jesus and the Jews were
baptized in Jordan or only at Jordan, for the particles (en and eis) h^^e used,
signify, in, at, or to. See Romans viii. 34 (^n), At the right hand of God. Nor
is it certain that the Eunuch went into the water. The particle (eis) is often
rendered to, John xx. 4. The other disciple came first (eis) to the sepulcher,
yet went he not in. Philip and the Eunuch went up (ok) from the water: so the
particle is elsewhere rendered. See Matthew. xii. 42, The queen of the south came
(ok) from the uttermost ends of the earth. Jesus when he was baptized went up
(apo) from the water; as the phrase most properly signifies. I do not mention
these things as ^^^lting our English translation. All that I aim at is, that
the original may fairly be rendered either way; and that this circumstances, as
it is imm^^^rial, so it is lest undetermined.
But, waving this remark, supposing they did go into the water, and were there
baptized; it does not follow that they were plunged. It is nothing strange or
improbable if they stepped into the water, that they might be baptized by
affusion. Though there was much water, or many waters (as the phrase properly
signifies) at Enon, where John was baptizing. This is no proof that he dipped,
or made use of much water in baptism, or that there was even a convenient depth
of water for such a purpose. Travelers have reported that there are only
springs and small rivulets to be found in this place. As multitudes resorted to
John, a place that was well supplied with water, for their use and refreshment,
would be most convenient, suppose none of them were dipped, as I find no
certainty that they were. And if any should think that the administration of
baptism at rivers, and in places where there was plenty of water, is a
circumstance that favors immersion, though it is needless to contest this
point, yet we might easily mention several things as probable arguments that
immersion was not practiced in these instances. It seems unlikely that mixed
multitudes of both sexes should be dipped naked. And it was contrary to the
Jewish custom to bathe with any of their clothes on; in which respect they were
so strict, that they held a person to be unclean, if but the top of one of his
fingers were covered, when he bathed himself for his cleansing. -- Or if
immersion were received with the clothes on, this would require a shifting of
apparel, which we have no hint of. Nor can we easily conceive how strangers,
who came from home without any design of being baptized, as was the case with
some, should be furnished with necessary change of raiment for this purpose. Or
how John should be able, without a miracle, to bear the hardship of standing in
the water up to his waist, a great part of his time, to dip the multitudes that
came to him. These circumstances must surely weaken, if not overbalance, all
probabilities or presumptions that can be pleaded in favor of immersion, in
these instances.

But be this as it may, we have accounts of several instances, so
circumstanced, that the supposition of their being dipped is most incredible.
Particularly the 3000 baptized on the day of Pentecost. For it was at least
nine o'clock when Peter began his sermon. After this he had a long conference,
and with many words counseled, testified, and exhorted them. Then the Apostles
had to receive a confession of faith from each of them distinctly: and then
baptize them severally: which, though done in the quickest manner, would
require the whole remainder of the day. But in the slower way of immersion, we
cannot conceive how it could be done by the Apostles without a miracle. Nor may
we suppose that the Apostles were assisted in this work by the seventy
disciples, who appear not to have been authorized to administer the ordinances.
Besides, how incredible is it, that they should on a sudden find conveniences
for dipping so many, in the midst of a city, among zealous opposers: or that so
many strangers should either be baptized naked, or have change of raiment. We
cannot rationally think, that they could be baptized otherwise than by
affusion. Nor is it probable that Paul was baptized by immersion: for, upon
Ananias coming in to him, putting his hands upon him, etc. we read, that he
immediately received his sight, arose and was baptized; that is, in the house
where he was: there being no hint of his going out to any water, weak as he was
with long fasting and agitation of mind. Acts ix. 17, 18. Note, Paul was
baptized without a profession of faith, upon Christ's testimony concerning him,
that he was a chosen vessel. The testimony of Christ, that infants are of the
kingdom of heaven, are holy, are interested in the promise, is as good a
warrant for baptizing them without a profession of their faith.
It is not probable that those were dipped who were baptized at the house of
Cornelius, Acts x. 47. Peter seeing them filled with the Holy Ghost, said, Can
any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized. The natural sense is,
Can any forbid water, to be brought or provided to baptize these: not, whether
any could forbid their going to the water. And, in the account of their
baptism, there is no hint of their going from the house. It is highly
improbable, that the jailer and his house were baptized by immersion; for, this
was done in the night, and in the prison, where there was no river nor pool to
be imagined. Can it be thought, that the jailer, with his whole family, and his
prisoners, whom he was charged to keep at his peril, should at such an hour,
grope away in the dark, or go with a lanthorn or torch to a river or pool, no
one knows where, and that through a city, just waked up with a great
earthquake, and the streets, it is probable, filled with the frighted citizens?
They might all well expect to be taken up and punished for helping the
prisoners to make their escape. Nor is it credible that the Apostles would have
done such a thing, who would not leave the prison till the magistrates took
them out. The administration of baptism would, doubtless, have been deferred,
if it could not then have been attended to without all this difficulty and
danger. Besides, there is no account of their going out to the water or leaving
the prison. The house of the jailer, into which he brought the Apostles, seems
to have been a separate apartment of the building, where the keeper dwelt, that
he might conveniently attend his charge. And we may here make this general
remark; that among all the instances of baptism mentioned in the New Testament,
it is never said or intimated, that they went from the place where they
happened to be, to any river or stream, that they might be baptized in or at
it. But all who are said to have been baptized in any stream, were by it, (...)
themselves to baptism.

Thirdly, The necessity of immersion is argued (...) the Apostle's word^, Romans
vi. 4. We are buried (...) Christ in baptism. Which words have been supposed to
refer to this ^ode of burying the subject is ^^ter. But it does not appear that
any such reference or allusion is here intended. The Apostle is here showing,
that Christians may not live any longer in sin, inasmuch as they are dead to
it. To prove and illustrate this, he reminds us of our being "baptized into
Christ." By baptism, we are not only dedicated to Christ, and brought into a
special relation to him as his disciples; but, our baptism is the outward sign
of our ingrafting into Christ, and so of our spiritual union to him, and
communion with him, in the benefits obtained for the members of his body, by
his crucifixion, death, burial, and resurrection; and also of our obligation to
a spiritual conformity to his crucifixion, death, burial, and resurrection, as
is noted and illustrated in what follows. Being th^^ baptized into Christ, we
are baptized into his death. We not only participate of the benefits obtained
by his death, but are bound to a spiritual conformity to him in his crucifixion
and death; by the crucifixion and death of our old man, with its affections and
lusts. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death. Baptism
signifies our union and communion with Christ; and our profession and
obligation to a conformity to him, "in his burial," as well as his crucifixion
and death. The old man, with his deeds, must be put off, utterly rejected and
buried. We must, in respect of our former lusts and conversation, be as if we
were "dead and buried." We, by our baptism, are obliged to have done with these
things; to endeavor, that the body of sin may be quite mortified and
dest^^^ed. But this work of mortification, in which "we are made conformable to
Christ's death," is in order to a spiritual resurrection; in conformity to the
exa^p^^, and by the quickening virtue of Christ's resur^^^^ion: That like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of (...) we also should walk in
newness of (...). (...) ^^cording to the Apostle, baptism imp^^^s our union and
conformity to Christ in his crucifixion, death, and resurrection, as well as in
his burial. And why baptism should be supposed to b^^r an outward resemblance
of his burial, rather than of his crucifixion and death, or why any should
fancy ^n allusion to the mode of immersion, I can see no reason.

I might further observe, that dipping a person in water does not resemble the
burial of Christ, who was not laid in a common grave, but in a tomb hewn out of
the side of a rock, into which they entered by a door. Nor does it resemble a
common burial, which is not so properly the letting down the body into the
grave, as the casting in the earth upon it; of which the sprinkling or pouring
of water on a person is no unfit representation; but dipping bears no
resemblance to it. It is not an outward, but a spiritual conformity to Christ's
death and burial that is intended by our being buried with him in baptism.

Let us now inquire, Fourthly, Whether dipping answers to, and represents the
thing signified in Baptism better than sprinkling. It has just been observed,
that Baptism is the outward sign and taken of the application of the benefits
of redemption to believers, in their justification and sanctification. Christ
washes us from our sins in his own blood. And Baptism, as the outward sign of
the application of Christ's blood, is, "for the washing away of sins." But how
is the application of Christ's blood for our cleansing represented? It is
called, "the blood of sprinkling." And the Apostle speaks of the sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ. But we are never said to be cleansed from sin by
being dipped into the blood of Christ. -- Again, Baptism is the instituted sign
of our having the gift of the Holy Ghost bestowed upon us. "Be baptized," says
Peter, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Now, the donation of
the Holy Ghost is never expressed by our being dipped into the Holy Ghost; but
by his being poured out, and our being sprinkled thereby; which ^lled our being
baptized with the Spirit. Sprink^ing (...) a (...) not representation of the
application of the blo^^^^ (...) Christ, and the influences of the Spirit, for
the cli^^^ng of our souls from sin. The argument, therefore, from the ^^^logy
of the sign with the thing signified, is plainly (...) favor of sprinkling
rather than dipping. It is true, our spiritual conformity to Christ in his
death and resurrection is not unfitly signified by immersion. But sprinkling
more aptly represents the application of the benefits of redemption to us;
which is the main thing signified by baptism.

THE SECOND PART. On the SUBJECTS of BAPTISM.
THE second part of the argument in hand, was to consider who are the proper
subjects of baptism, or to whom this ordinance is to be administered.

Our present inquiry, concerning the subjects of baptism, is, Who they are
that, according to the gospel rule, are to be admitted by the church? In answer
to which, we say, that all who make a credible profession of faith, are proper
subjects, together with infants, or children in minority. It is agreed, that
professed believers are subjects of baptism. And that this ordinance is not to
be administered to one of adult age, unless he has in some manner made a
credible profession of (at least, penitential) faith. But that the infants of
members of the visible church are to be received as members also, and as the
proper subjects of baptism, has ^^^n denied by some; and the administering the
ordinance to infants, has been censured as irregular, unwarrantable, of no
validity or advantage.

I shall ^^^^^fore (...) to prove and vindicate the "di^ (...) baptism," as
briefly and plainly as I (...)

(...) ^^^^^^ce of this design, I shall, first, represent the (...) and
plainest reason, upon which I believe in^^^^ (...) to be a divine ordinance. --
Then I will consider ^^e principal objections that are made to it.

But before I enter on the proof of the point be^^^^ us, let it be observed and
remembered -- That there i^ nothing positive in the New Testament against
infant baptism. It is no where said or hinted, that the Apostles forbid or
refused, or declined to baptize infants; or that any child of a believer was,
after he was grown up, baptized upon a profession of faith. It must also be
acknowledged, that infants are capable not only of the outward sign of baptism,
but also of having an interest in the blessings and Grace of the New Covenant,
and coming under its bonds, which is the thing signified in the ordinance, and
that they need those New Covenant blessings. Further, it is no where declared
in scripture, either in express, or equivalent terms, that "adult persons
only," or that "none but those who believe," or profess faith, are to be
baptized. In short, there is absolutely and perfectly nothing that stands in
the way of our embracing the doctrine of infant baptism, if we can find any
kind of evidence in favor of it, either express or consequential. -- This then
is what we have now to inquire into, viz. Whether any such evidence appears?
And I think enough may be collected from the scriptures to put the matter
beyond all reasonable doubt.

And my first argument is taken from the church membership of infants:

All those who are to be received as members of the visible church are the
subjects of baptism. -- But infants are to be received as members of the
visible church. They are therefore subjects of Baptism.

First, I say that all who (...) members of the visible church, are (...) ^ism.
This is granted by our opponents, particularly (...) Dr. Gill, most expressly.
"Let it be proved," (...) he, "that in^^nts are or ought to be members of
^^^pel churches -- and we shall readily admit them," i. e. to ^^^^^sm. --
Answer to Dickins^^, p. 89.

Some have pretended "that it is inconsistent to say, that a right to baptism
is grounded upon church membership, and yet that we are admitted into the
church by baptism." But this is a mere cavil. The right of church membership is
one thing; and admission into the visible church is another. They who are
qualified for admission into the church, according to the rule of the gospel,
are members by right, before they are members by admission. And they are
accordingly to be received as rightful members by baptism, an so admitted in an
orderly way to those subsequent privileges of christian communion, to which
baptism is a regular and solemn introduction. For the right of church
membership, though it give^^^ immediate claim to admission into the church by
baptism, yet it does not give an immediate and or^^^ly claim to any, while
(...) all the privileges of admitted and baptized mem^^^^ But be this as it
will, whether the right of church membership be (...) to baptism, or baptism be
antecedent to church membership, it cannot be denied that all those are the
proper subjects of baptism, who are, (...) ought to be ad^ members of the
gospel church.

N^^ (...) be made to appear, that infants are, or ought to (...) acknowledged
and admitted as members of the visible church, we must una^^^dably conclude
that they are subjects of baptism. And this is what I undertake to prove. And
there is a remarkable passage rec^^^ed by three of the Evangelists which seems
to be sufficient to determine the point. I will recite it at (...), collecting
all the particulars mentioned in the several accounts. Mat. xix. 13, 15, Mark
x. 13, 16, Luke xviii. 15, 16, -- And they brought unto him little children,
infants, that he should touch them, put his (...) the ^d pray: and his
Disciples reb^^^^ th^^, i. e. those who brought them. But when Jesus saw it he
was much displeased, and called them to him, and said unto them, suffer the
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, f^r of such is the
kingdom of Heaven. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. And he took them
up in his arms, put or laid his hands upon them, and blessed them.

These were young "infant" children which were brought to Christ, whom he took
up in his arms, as we are expressly told. They who brought them gave evidence
of their faith in him; for they brought them that he might put his hands on
them and pray. We may also observe, that it was agreeable to the mind of Christ
that they should be brought to him; for when the disciples rebuked those that
brought them, Jesus seeing it, was much displeased. The disposition they
manifested on this occasion to despise little ones, and set themselves above
them, as if young children were not fit to be introduced into their company,
Christ did much dislike. And he was also displeased, as it seems, to find they
were so dull of understanding, and so mistaken in their apprehensions. They
might reasonably have concluded, that as little children always had been
received as members of the church of God, as Christ had not intimated any
de^^^^^^ cut them off from this their right, as they needed his blessing, and
were capable of (...)* on these grounds they ought to have concluded, that it
was fit and proper that they should be presented to the Messiah, the king of
Israel, as his disciples and subjects, that they might receive his blessing. --
But the disciples seem to have reasoned in a quite different manner, as some
others have done since. To what purpose is it to bring these little children
hither? They are not capable of being taught. They do not understand what is
in^^aded to be done with them. It will be of no advantage to them. We cannot
look upon them to be believers, o^ (...) to belong to our soci^^^ ^uch (...) as
the^^ they seem to have had. (...) are as plain and pointed as po^ ^st (...) --
Their mistake at this time gave our (...) a (...) to declare his mind fully and
expressly upon the ^^se of infants; that they are of the kingdom of (...); and
therefore none should forbid, or discourage (...) bringing and presenting them
to him. Suf^^^^^ little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
such is the kingdom of heaven.

From these words it appears, in the first place, that (...) are the children
of the covenant, belong to the ^^urch of God: for this is what we are here to
understand by the kingdom of heaven, as I shall show presently. Such as these,
properly and naturally signifies, persons of this sort or class, and that come
under this denomination. -- They were included among that sort of persons; even
as the woman taken in adultery was one of those condemned by that law, which
commanded that such should be ^^^^ed.

(...) would fain have the meaning of this expression (...) That those who
resemble little children in hu^^^^ty belong to the kingdom of heaven. But how
(...) and unnatural is this? Christians are to resemsemble lambs and doves for
meekness, as well as infants. But what should we think of a man that should say
to his servant: Suffer the sheep and lambs to come to me, and hinder them not,
for of such is the kingdom of heaven? -- Would not this be highly improper, and
worse than ridiculous? And yet this would be just as proper as the words of
Christ are, according to the meaning that these would force upon them. -- The
reason Christ gives why the little children should be brought to him, is,
because of such is the kingdom of God. And a very plain and pertinent reason it
is, as we understand it. For if children belong to the kingdom of Christ, we
can see a manifest fitness that they should be presented to him as his subjects
and people, that he might own them, and give them his blessing. But what weight
(...) there in such a reason as our adver^^ (...) for bringing these children
to (...) ^uffer little children to come to me, for ^^^gh it is true they belong
not to my kingdom, yet (...) subjects of my kingdom are somewhat like them.
There is that in little children which looks like meekness and humility, and is
a fit emblem of it. Must every thing then that any ways resembles true
christians, be brought to Christ, for him to lay his hand upon it, and pray
over it? What an uncouth, unintelligible reason is this for bringing children
to Christ? Which will serve as well for a reason why lambs and doves should be
brought and presented to him, as Mr. Henry well observes. Because the kingdom
of God consists of grown persons, meek and harmless like children, is it a just
and plain consequence, that children should be brought and presented to Christ;
though they belong not to his kingdom? Surely no one has any cause to be
displeased with another (as Christ was with his disciples) for not apprehending
weight in such a reason as this. Indeed there is no weight in it.

Again, the reception which Christ gave those children, and his actions toward
them, may put it out of all doubt that he acknowledged them as the subjects of
his kingdom. For he took them in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed
them. Christ never pronounced a solemn blessing upon any but those whom he
owned as the subjects of his kingdom. By laying his hands on these children and
blessing them, he recognized them as his own people, and put upon them the ^^me
token of acknowledgment which he gave his disciples immediately before his
ascension. The blessing was always looked upon as a sacred thing, which
belonged only to the professed worshippers and people of God; especially that
solemn religious blessing in the name of God, with imposition of hands, which
had been practiced in the church in all ages. None were the subjects of this,
upon any occasion that we read of, but they that belonged to the church. When
we read that God blessed Noah, and Abraham, and the other (...) no doubt but
that hereby he owned them, in (...) solemn manner, as his people. And shall any
be (...) reasonable as to deny or call in question the church ^^^bership of
infants, after Christ himself has not only declared that of such is the kingdom
of heaven, but has given this further token and testimony of the same, even
laying on his hands, and pronouncing a blessing upon them: which is as
distinguishing a token of church membership as baptism itself, or any other
ordinance whatever.

Infants then must be allowed to belong to the kingdom of heaven. Christ has
declared them so by words and actions as significant as possible. But, it may
be inquired, What are we to understand by the kingdom of heaven? I answer, it
is plainly the church that is here meant. -- It will be needless to confirm
this by particular quotations; they are so many, and so well known to all who
have read the New Testament with any attention. Nor is it denied by any that I
know of: and, I think, it is the Visible Church that is to be understood.

Christ declares, that these children were then members of the kingdom of
heaven. Of such is the kingdom of heaven. But, will any say, that the kingdom
of glory consists of those who are have upon earth? They were upon earth, and
were in the kingdom of heaven upon earth, if they were in it at all; that is,
in the kingdom of grace or visible church.

But, if it were supposed, that these words are to be understood as affirming,
that children belong to the invisible church, and as such, are heirs of the
kingdom of glory; yet this will prove that they ought to be acknowledged and
received as members of the visible church. For, can they be reasonably refused
a place in the church on earth, whom Christ affirms to be heirs of heaven? If
we have evidence that they belong to Christ, as his peculiar people, there
needs no more to ^ime any one a clear and undoubted ^^^ht, in the account ^f
the church, to be received as belonging to him, or as (...) of the church on
earth. And what better evi^^^^^ (...) there be that any are subjects of the
kingdom of ^^^ven, than the testimony of the king himself? Is (...) any
profession of faith that ought to have more (...) in the church? Though infants
are not able to sp^^k for themselves, yet Christ has spoken for them,
declaring, that "of such is the kingdom of heaven." And, is not the testimony
of Christ a sufficient credential to warrant our receiving them? Our Lord
subjoins the following memorable words, in which he strikes at the very root of
his disciples' error, which their conduct discovered. Whosoever shall not
receive the kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter therein. The
disciples were much disposed to stand upon their distinctions. They seemed to
think that they had a clearer and better title to the privileges of the
Messiah's kingdom than infants. They were actual believers and followers of
Christ; which could not be said of babes. If these are admitted to have a part
in this kingdom, it must be considered as a special indulgence and favor to
them, who have done nothing to give them any claim to such a privilege.
Whereas, thought they, we have left all for the kingdom of heaven's sake. And,
shall these be allowed to have as good a title as we? "Yea says Christ, their
title is as good as yours in all respects." It is, indeed, an act of mere grace
and favor, that infants are admitted. They have done nothing to merit it. And,
do you imagine, that any thin^ that you have done gives you any peculiar claim
to the^^ privileges? Do you consider the kingdom of heaven as the due reward
for any doings of yours? No, be (...) known to you, that your title arises
entirely from the free grace and gift of God, as well as theirs. If y^^ will
not receive the kingdom of God, and hold it (...) the same title that little
children do (viz. as the free g^^^ of God made over to them by his covenant and
promi^^ as his adopted children) you shall not enter therein. "Receiving the
kingdom of God as a little child," is ^monly explained to mean, receiving the
privileges of the king^ of heaven with humility, or a child-like temper. I
think, it gives a sense more apposite to the occasion, if we understand the
(...) ^as imparting, that we must receive and hold the kingdom of heaven by the
same right and title with children.


The common exception, "That those (...) not baptized by Christ, nor were
brought to (...) any such purpose," is altogether impertinent. (...) not argue,
that infants are the subjects of baptism, (...) cause we suppose that these
infants were bap^^^^ by Christ; but that infants belong to the church, is here
plainly asserted; and that all such as belong to the church, are the subjects
of baptism, cannot be de^^^^, ^t is further asked, "Why Christ did not th^^
bapti^^ them, if they were proper subjects? Before men urge such questions,
they should make it appear, that those infants had not been baptized before.
However, whether they were baptized or not, is of no importance to us. If they
were not baptized, it is not incumbent on us to give the reason. But it is
incumbent on those who ask such questions, to show, Why it should be thought
necessary, that all members of the gospel church should then be baptized before
baptism was fully settled as the ordinary right of admission, which was not
till after Christ's resurrection. But, if Christ did not baptize these
children, yet he gave them as sure a token of church membership as baptism
itself, when he laid his hands upon them and blessed them. It is further
objected, "Christ's entire silence about instant baptism at this time, has no
favorable aspect on such a practice." Answer, Christ having asserted the
church membership of infants, and solemnly blessed them with imposition of
hands, and having said nothing against the baptism of them, more than of a^^^^,
these things have a very favorable aspect on the practice of infant baptism,
and imply a good warrant for it. After having thus owned them as his people,
both by words and actions, if it had been his will that the sacrament of
ind^ction should not henceforth be administered to infants, as heretofore, but
only to adults, he would not have failed to have given (...) intimation on this
occasion, that notwithstanding (...) ^e had said and done, infants were not to
be bap^^^^ Christ's saying nothing against infant baptism o^ (...) occasion,
when it appears so necessary to prevent ^^^^kes, had infant baptism been
contrary to his will, has no favorable aspect on the practice of those who
refuse to admit them.

I have enlarged the more upon this proof of the church membership of infants,
because I take it to b^ very decisive and unanswerable. And, I shall lay before
you another passage, which will fairly lead us to the same conclusion. Mark ix.
36, 37, Jesus took a child, and set him in the midst of them, and when he had
taken him in his arms, he said unto them; whosoever shall receive one of such
children in my name, receives me.

Now observe, Christ says, "Whosoever shall receive one of such children" (or,
"this child," as it is in Luke ix. 48) "in my name, receives me." To receive
one in the name of Christ, is to receive him as belonging to him. So the words
are clearly explained i^ the 41st verse of this chapter, Whosoever shall giv^
you to drink a cup of water in my name, because y^ belong to Christ, verily I
say unto you, he shall no^ lose his reward. Since then Christ would have (...)
receive little children in his name, as belonging to him and declares, that in
so doing we receive him; we may assuredly conclude, that they are to be reputed
as belonging to him, as the members of his church. When therefore, a believer
offers his child to the church, to b^ received by baptism, as belonging to
Christ, and admitted as a member of the same body; shall they refuse to receive
it in his name? Shall they thus despise Christ's little ones, as to shut the
doors of his house upon them and, as much as in them lies, cast them out of the
inheritance of the Lord, and declare that they have n^ part in the Lord, and
lay such a stumbling block before our children, to make them cease from fearing
the Lord? Josh. xxii. 25. God forbid! Take he^^ that ye despise not, and offend
not one of these little ones.

Let us now consider more particularly the words of our text, containing the
Apostolic commission. Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. It has been observed, that the words
properly signify, Go make or admit all nations Disciples, baptizing them --
teaching them, etc. This, our opposers do not deny. But, they say, that no one
can be made a disciple but by teaching; which is true, only with respect to
adults: because no "such persons," are to be admitted into the school of
Christ, but by their own consent, and a previous profession of their faith in
him, and obedience to him; and this necessarily pre-requires teaching. But to
argue from hence, that infants are not to be admitted as disciples, because not
in a present capacity of being taught, and professing their faith, is no better
than begging the question, talking at random, and without proof. Though adults
are not made disciples, till they are first taught, and are not admitted but
upon a profession of faith, yet with infants the case is otherwise. They are to
be admitted by the order of Jesus Christ, without a personal profession and
consent, of which they are not capable. But this may be further considered
afterward.

Let us now see whether any thing can be argued from the words, in favor of
infant discipleship and baptism. -- When the Apostles received an order to
disciple all nations, they would naturally understand, that they had it in
charge to make all nations proselytes, to introduce and admit them into the
church of Christ, as a school, in which they were to be taught and trained up
in the knowledge and observance of christianity, in order to their being meet
for heaven. It is true neither infants nor adults are expressly named. But the
Apostles were sent to disciple and baptize "the nations," which none can deny,
include persons of every age. And the Apostles must needs have understood that
it was their business to make Disciples of the infants, and baptize^ them as
well as others. For, let it be remembered that the Apostles had been educated
in the Jewish church, of which infants had all along been undoubted members*
They understood that the membership of such had never been called in question,
since there had been a church in the world. They knew that the infants of
proselyte^ from among the Gentiles were constantly admitted and circumcised,
together with their parents. Not only so, but such infants were baptized; as
the ancient Jews report. They knew that Christ had taught them that little
children belonged to the kingdom of Heaven; that he had accordingly laid his
hands, and pronounced a solemn blessing upon them; and signified his will that
they be received in his name, as belonging to him; and that themselves had been
reproved by him for forbidding infants to be brought to receive his blessing.
They knew, that the admission of the children into the church, with the
parents, was always reckoned a great privilege; that Christ never said or
intimated that it was his will that infants should be cut off, or not admitted
still as members of the gospel church. They understood that the privileges of
the church were to be enlarged, and not abridged in any respect. -- Now, the
Apostles, whose views and apprehensions may have been such as has been
represented, would, without doubt, have understood that they were instructed by
their commission, to admit the children with the parents into the number of
proselytes by the initiating rite, as had been the constant practice of the
church. -- They must have understood the matter as a minister who had never
heard that infant baptism was ever objected to, would understand his charge, if
he was ordained and sent out to preach to the heathen, and gather churches
among them, baptizing them. It would be unnatural, and highly unreasonable for
them to understand the matter otherwise. This then must be received as the just
interpretation of the commission. It is the natural and true meaning: which is
so far from cutting off infants from the gospel church, that it furnishes us
with a good warrant for admitting them.

We have another unanswerable proof, that the children of believers are fit to
be members of the visible church, and subjects of baptism, in 1 Cor. vii. 14,
The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the husband: else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy. The Apostle had just said, that a believer ought not to separate from an
unbelieving wife, who was willing to continue in the marriage relation. And in
these words he removes a doubt which might be apt to arise in their minds, viz.
Whether the children born in such a marriage were to be reckoned as fit to be
of the church, with the believing parents; or were to be ranked with the
unbelieving parent, and so reckoned among heathens that were without? -- Though
infants had always been received as members of the Old Testament church, yet
when the Jews had, in the time of Ezia married strange wives which had born
them children, these children were not received; but it was ordered that they
be put away, together with their heathen parents, as unclean. It might
therefore be a scruple, whether a believer, and member of the Christian church,
were obliged or allowed to live in the state of marriage with an unbeliever;
and whether their children were not to be excluded from the church, as the
unclean offspring of a heathen parent; as had been determined among the Jews in
the case just mentioned. This point, the Apostle plainly resolves, declaring,
that a believer is not defiled by having conjugal society with an unbeliever.
On the contrary, says he, "The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,"
or rather is sanctified in or to the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified in or to the husband. That is, the believer, has a lawful and
sanctified enjoyment of an unbelieving yoke fellow. For, as the Apostle
elsewhere teaches us, All things are pure to him that is pure. And every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused. For, it is sanctified by
the word of God and prayer. Thus the unbelieving husband or wife is sanctified
to the believer, as every creature of God is, which we may have occasion to
use. Formerly, all that were out of the pale of the church were accounted
unclean; and a Jew would have been defiled by living with a heathen wife. But
now there is no defilement in the lawful use of any of God's creatures. They
are all sanctified to a believer. Or we may take the meaning of these words
thus: a believer and unbeliever being married together, are one flesh; they are
one principle or source of offspring. But though an unbeliever, considered in
himself personally, is unholy, and has no claim to church privileges; yet the
children are entitled to these privileges, as fully and perfectly in all
respects, as if both the parents were believers. For the unbelieving husband
being one flesh with the believing wife, is sanctified in or by her, so far as
respects the church privileges of children. The husband, though an unbeliever,
is, in consequence of his union in marriage with a believer, in some sort
sanctified. The unbeliever, in this relation is capable of transmitting church
privileges to his offspring, to as good advantage as any believer.

The Apostle goes on -- Else were your children unclean, as the heathen were
termed and accounted. All those who were aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers to the covenant of the promise, and not members of the
church of God, were commonly reputed uncircumcised and unclean. They were not
admitted into the holy place, or to attend on holy ordinances. Now, if the
unbelieving wife were not sanctified to and by the believer, as has been said,
the children must have been unclean, and so not be received as members of the
church, and subjects of holy ordinances. -- But now they are holy -- and are to
be admitted into the visible church, into the society and fellowship of those
who are visibly separated from the rest of the world, and devoted to God as his
holy people. The word, Holy, as it is used in scripture, is applied to persons
and things that are devoted and d^^^cated to God. Men are termed holy either as
being separated from the rest of mankind, and standing in a peculiar relation
to God, as his visible professing people; or as being conformed to the will and
moral image of God in temper and practice. The one is called a relative, the
other an inherent holiness. The first is attributed to all those who belong to
the visible church. Thus the people of Israel are all spoken of as an holy
people. And, upon the same account, gospel churches are considered as
consisting of faints, or holy persons. For, though it is not supposed that they
are all really and inherently holy, or partakers of a divine nature, yet they
are visibly the people of God, separated and devoted to him. But let it be
particularly noted, that no person is ever styled holy, from the beginning to
the end of the bible, except he be of the church of God. And in the New
Testament, a Saint, or Holy Person, a Disciple of Christ, a Member of the
Church, and a Subject of the Kingdom of Heaven, are of the same signification.
Now, since we find that the title or appellation of Holy is never given to any
person in the world, except he be of the church; and since the Apostle
declares, that the children of believers are holy; it is a plain and undeniable
consequence, that such children are of the church, and are the proper subjects
of baptism, as was to be proved.

The Antipedobaptists have endeavored, in vain, to wring and wrest these words
of the Apostle to a compliance with their tenets. -- But, in the first place
they would persuade us, That the Holiness which the Apostle here intends,
cannot be that which is implied in, and connected with church membership. --
For, they say, the same Holiness which is ascribed to the children, is also
attributed to the unbelieving parent. -- If the children are Holy, the
unbelieving husband and wife are also said to be sanctified. But, I answer, the
Apostle's words plainly show, that the unbelieving yoke fellow is only
sanctified to the believer, as all the creatures of God are said to be
sanctified to the Saints, so as that they may have a holy use and enjoyment of
them. He is not sanctified in respect to God, but only in respect to his wife
and offspring, who derive no more defilement either by conjugal cohabitation
with or by natural generation from him, than if he were a believer. -- In a
word, the unbelieving husband is only sanctified in that particular respect,
and unto the particular purpose there pointed at, as has been said. -- But the
Children are declared to be not unclean, but "holy." A title which is never
given to any but those that are of the church. Unbelievers who belong not to
the church may be sanctified, or prepared as instruments to answer the purposes
of divine goodness to the saints. But this respective sanctification does never
give them the denomination of "Holy ones." The words of the text, and the
reason of the thing therefore plainly show, that the sanctification of the
unbelieving husband or wife is a different thing from the holiness of the
children. -- This gives a good, pertinent, and instructive sense to the
Apostle's words, which are taken and explained in the scriptural sense, as no
doubt they ought to be.

And hence we see, there is no just foundation for that objection, That the
unbelieving parent being sanctified by a believing yoke fellow, may as well be
concluded to be a member of the church and subject of baptism, as the children
whose holiness depends upon this sanctification of the parents. For a person's
being sanctified in some certain respect, does not give him the denomination of
a holy one, in the language of the scriptures; which is a peculiar and
appropriate title of those who belong to the church, and is never given to any
others of the children of men. And, since the children are Holy, which is not
said of the unbelieving parent, though in some respect sanctified, the children
are to be acknowledged as of the church, but not the unbelieving parent.

Let us now consider how this passage is expounded by those on the other side.
And here they would persuade us, that the Apostle means, what they call, a
matrimonial holiness. And that the meaning of the text is, The unbelieving
husband is married or espoused to the wife, and the unbelieving wife married to
the husband: else were your children bastards, but now are they legitimate. I
do not think it will be needful to say much to expose the unreasonableness of
this interpretation. It is so strained and unnatural, it so sinks and spoils
the sense, and is so utterly without foundation, that I think it may pass for
one of the most improbable, unhandsome, and incredible glosses, that we shall
readily meet with upon any text whatever. Neither the Corinthians, nor any one
else doubted, or had need to be told, that the unbelieving husband had been and
was married to the wife, and the unbelieving wife to the husband. For, how
could they be husband and wife, if they had not been married together? And, can
any one believe in sober earnest, that the inspired Apostle filled up his
epistle with such a trifling ridiculous business, as telling his converts, that
if they had children without being married, the children would be bastards, but
now as they had been married, they were legitimate? Far be it from any
christian to burlesque the sacred scriptures, at this rate. -- A profane
infidel, who would ridicule the Apostle, could scarce give his words a meaner,
and more ludicrous turn.

THAT the infant seed of believers are members of the church, and subjects of
baptism, further appears from their interest in that gracious covenant, by
which the church is constituted. To state and clear up this argument at full
length, would require a large discourse. I must only give a brief sketch.

I think it is granted, that all who are visibly interested in the new
covenant, are to be received as members of the visible church; and that the
outward token of an interest in the covenant, and of admission into the visible
church belongs to them. After the fall of man, by the breach of the first
covenant, God was pleased to reveal a new and gracious covenant, of which
Christ was the Mediator; which was to be the rule of intercourse and communion
between God and his people, and the great charter by which the church was
formed. All who were taken into this covenant were thereby separated from the
rest of mankind, and brought into a peculiar relation to God, as his people and
subjects, to be ruled by the special laws, and observe the special ordinances,
and enjoy the special privileges of his kingdom. This kingdom of grace was to
make an outward appearance upon earth, and have an outward administration in
the visible church, according to the rules which God ordained. And according to
these rules, all who were visibly in the covenant, were to be admitted as
members of the visible church. They were to have the appointed token of the
covenant put upon them, and were visible subjects of the outward ordinances and
privileges of the church. For, a visible interest in the covenant, a right of
membership in the visible church, a right to the token of the covenant and of
church membership, and to the outward ordinances and privileges, which,
according to the covenant, belong to the church; these things are inseparably
connected together, and mutually infer each other. Many, it is true, who are in
the covenant visibly, and in the acceptance of the church, have not a real and
saving interest in new covenant blessings. They will not at last be owned by
God as his peculiar people; nor is there a spiritual, effectual, and saving
application of the grace of the new covenant to them. Hence arises the common
distinction between the visible, and the invisible church.

Now, if this covenant, by which the church is formed and constituted, includes
the children with the parents, then the token of the covenant, and of admission
into the church, belongs regularly and visibly to them. This then is the point
we have to prove.

Let it be remembered, in the first place, that the supposition of infants
being comprehended in the covenant, and being the subjects of its outward
administration in the visible church, is no ways incredible, on account of any
incapacity in them. For, they are certainly capable of coming under its bonds,
and having the grace of it secured and applied to them; and they greatly need
new covenant blessings. It is an important privilege to them to belong to the
visible church, that they may, under its watch, instructions, and discipline,
be trained up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. They are also capable
of having the outward token of the covenant put upon them; which may afterward
be improved by them for their excitement and encouragement in the service of
God. In short, infants are, for ought that appears, as capable subjects as any,
of the obligations, the privileges, and token of the covenant; and they stand
in like need thereof with others. The presumption, therefore, is not at all
against, but rather in favor of their being comprehended in the covenant, as
well as others.

We may further observe, that it has always been customary for children to be
included in covenants with the parents; to come under the bonds, and receive
the privileges therein stipulated. That this is common in covenants which take
place among mankind, is known to all; and no one imagines there is any thing
unreasonable and improper in it, if the covenant be in itself good and
reasonable. It is also certain, that when God has been pleased to covenant with
mankind, the children as well as the parents have been comprehended. This
appears to have been the case in the covenant with Adam, with Noah, with
Abraham, and with the Israelites at Horeb. Indeed, this seems to have been the
case in all God's federal transactions with the children of men. It is,
therefore, altogether agreeable to the common sense of mankind, and the method
of God's government of his people, that his covenant with them should respect
and take in both them and their seed. And this consideration may, I think,
render it quite credible and probable that the new covenant, by which the
church is constituted, may be, in this respect, similar to God's covenant
transactions with mankind, which, so far as appears, have constantly
comprehended the children with the parents.

But, having premised these observations, I shall proceed to the direct and
positive proof, that the children of God's covenant people, have also an
interest in the covenant. The new covenant, which, I have said, is the great
charter by which the church is formed, do^ most plainly and expressly take them
in. It was, indeed, this new covenant I am speaking of, that was revealed to
our first parents the very day that they fell, and by the proposal of it to
them, they were constituted the visible church and people of God, before they
were expelled from paradise. -- It was again revealed to Noah after the flood,
whereby he, with his children, were again recognized by God as his church and
people. The same covenant was afterward more clearly and distinctly revealed
to Abraham, and the ordinance of circumcision was annexed, as an outward sign
and token. And though there are sufficient intimations, that the seed of God's
visible and professed people, had always, from the beginning, been considered
as in the covenant, and church of God; yet as this is most expressly declared
in the revelation which God made of his gracious covenant to Abraham, I shall
take this more especially as the ground of the present argument.

The Abrahamic covenant, I say, was but a plainer exhibition of that same new
and gracious covenant, which had been all along the foundation and charter of
the church. The addition of a new ordinance, and the grant of a particular
country to him and his natural posterity, made no alteration in its substantial
duties, or privileges, but only pointed out a different external
administration, which was to take place in the church. Hitherto the external
administration of the church seems to have been domestic; the ordinances of
worship being distinctly and separately administered in the several families of
the Patriarchs: nor do we read of solemn assemblies, for the purpose of
attending public worship. But, as God had a design of forming a national
church, of the posterity of Abraham, all the members of which were to join and
have an external communion with each other in the same ordinances, and acts of
worship; this different mode of administration was provided for in the grant of
the land of Canaan to the posterity of Abraham; that so they might be formed
into a political body, and live together, for their convenient attendance on
holy ordinances. But this provision, which was made for a different external
administration in the church, is no argument but that the covenant which was
revealed to Abraham was, for substance, the very same with that by which the
church had at first been formed, and had all along subsisted.

This may show how unreasonably some would insinuate, that we would make
several covenants of grace. As if the same covenant could not be revealed at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, and, as if there might not be a different
external administration of ordinances in the church at different times, and yet
the covenant by which the church is constituted remain substantially the same.

Now, that we may distinctly state this argument, grounded on the covenant with
Abraham, let us take a view of it as we have it recorded in Genesis xvii. I am the
Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my covenant
between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. As for me, my covenant
is with thee, and thou shall be a father of many nations. Neither shall thy
name any more be Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many
nations have I made thee. And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will
make nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of thee. -- And I will establish
my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations,
for an everlasting covenant; to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land in which thou
art a stranger; all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and I
will be their God. Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, thou and thy seed
after thee in their generations. This is my covenant which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every man child among you shall be
circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall
be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. And he that is eight days old
shall be circumcised among you, every man child i^ your generations; he that is
born in the (...) bought with money of any stranger (...) thy seed. He that is
born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be
circumcised; and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting
covenant. And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people: he has broken my
covenant.

From this memorable passage, which I have recited at large, we see that the
Abrahamic covenant comprehended the children with the parents, in their
successive generations; and that the outward token of an interest in the
covenant was to be applied to infants. We may further observe, that all who
were included in this covenant were by it constituted a visible church,
separated from the rest of the world to be the people of God. That grand
article of the covenant, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, implies, that
they were to stand in a peculiar relation to God, as his church; who were to be
subject to peculiar laws and ordinances, by observing which, they declared on
their part, That they were his People. This promise contains also the sum of
new covenant blessings. The promises and ordinances did appertain only to the
church; of which all who had an interest in the covenant were members. Infants,
therefore, being expressly included in the covenant, were always looked upon as
of the people of God; and were to receive the distinguishing token of a
covenant dedication to him.

Nor was this covenant, with its ordinances and privieges, ever limited to
Abraham, and his natural posterity, and particularly that article which takes
the infant seed into the church with the parents, was not any peculiar
privilege of the native Hebrews: nor was circumcision appointed as the token of
a peculiar interest in those temporal blessings, which were granted exclusively
to the natural seed of Abraham, as some would pretend. For it appears that by
the express direction of God some were to have the token of the covenant and of
church membership for themselves and their children, who were neither the
natural descendants of Abraham, nor were with them to inherit the land of
Canaan. When circumcision was first instituted, not only Abraham, with his son
Ishmael, but all the males of his family were ordered to have this token of
admission into the visible church. And it was a standing rule, that bought
servants, and children born in the house, should be circumcised. And the Old
Testament church did receive proselytes from the Gentiles; and this token of
their interest in the covenant of Abraham was accordingly administered to them
and their children; who were thereupon subjects of Church ordinances and
privileges. But this their interest in the covenant of Abraham gave them no
right of inheritance with the native Israelites in the land of Canaan. Which I
think is a clear proof, that the covenant with Abraham, to which circumcision
was annexed, was not any mere national covenant, conveying peculiar temporal
privileges to him and his posterity, but it could be no other than God's new
and gracious covenant; by the revelation of which, those who professedly
consented to it, with their children, were constituted his visible church and
people, and were the regular subjects of the ordinances appertaining to its
outward administration.

The Abrahamic covenant, we see, did comprehend both parents and their infant
children, constituting them members of the visible church. And not only the
natural children of Abraham, but many among the Gentiles, upon their becoming
proselytes, professing the faith and religion of the church, they and their
infant children had an interest in the covenant of Abraham, and were to be
received into the visible church by the initiating rite. They were adopted into
the family of Abraham, and, the blessing of Abraham came upon the Gentiles,"
and he was "made the father of many nations, long before the gospel
dispensation took place, and before the dissolution of the national hierarchy
of the Jews, which was a middle wall of partition between them and the
Gentiles. Even before this wall was taken away, there was a door left open in
it, to receive all of every nation, who would join themselves to the God of
Abraham, and take hold of his covenant.

The church having been constituted, according to the covenant with Abraham, it
must be allowed, that during its continuance, the children are as evidently in
covenant, and of the church, and subjects of the initiating ordinance, as any
others. If then it shall appear, that this covenant stands now in force, and
that the gospel church is in and under it, and enjoys all its privileges
without any abridgement; the right of infants to church membership will stand
upon the same firm basis that it did under the Old T^stament.

But our opponents deny, that baptism comes in the room of circumcision. And if
we should suppose with them, that it does not, it would be no proof but that
the covenant itself may remain, though the outward token be laid aside, as it
is certain that the same covenant for substance had been revealed to, and
administered in the church, long before circumcision was instituted. And if the
covenant remain, infants are still fit to be church members, and consequently
are the subjects of baptism. But, indeed, it is no better than wrangling, to
deny that baptism comes in the room of circumcision: what we mean by the
assertion is, that circumcision being abrogated under the gospel dispensation,
baptism was instituted to be an outward token of an interest in the new
covenant, the sacramental rite of admission into the visible church, the sign
and badge of membership, even as circumcision had been to the fathers; and in a
word, that it answers the like purposes in the gospel church, and is of like
mystical and spiritual significancy, as circumcision was under the former
dispensation. And this I should think our adversaries can scarcely deny.

Indeed, as circumcision was afterward annexed to the Horeb covenant, and so
became an ordinance of the national church, and worldly sanctuary of the Jews,
binding the subjects to the observance of the whole of the Mosaic law, in this
relation and respect, it must of course have ceased with the other Jewish
ordinances, when that old covenant was abrogated. -- And if our opponents only
mean to deny, that baptism comes in the room of circumcision, considered as a
Mosaic ordinance, we shall not contend with them. But it should be remembered,
that circumcision had been appointed as a token of the Abrahamic covenant, long
before the Horeb covenant and national constitution of the church had a being.
And I shall show, that the Abrahamic covenant was the very same that the gospel
church is now under; and that it never was annulled.

It is objected, That the Apostle has declared, that the covenant, which was
the foundation of the Jewish church, of which infants were members, is waxed
old, and vanished away, Heb. viii. 8, 9. I answer, The covenant which the
Apostle says was ready to vanish, was that which God made with the Fathers, in
the day that he took them by the hand, to lead them out of Egypt; that is, the
covenant at Horeb. But that covenant, which is the foundation of infant church
membership, had been revealed to Abraham hundreds of years before; and the
Apostle does not say, that this had waxed old, or was annulled; but the
contrary. Infants were indeed members of the national hierarchy of the Jews,
which is abolished. But they had been church members long before this national
church was formed; nor was the foundation of their membership shaken, when that
dispensation was taken away.

Let it then be considered, that the covenant of Abraham, containing a charter
of privileges for the church, and the right of membership for infant children,
being an undoubted privilege granted in this covenant; it must be presumptuous
and injurious for any to deny that this covenant stands in force, or to pretend
that infants are now cut off from this right and privilege, unless they can
prove, that God has taken away this covenant, or at least has cancelled that
article, which is the foundation of infant church membership. But there is no
intimation in the scriptures that this covenant is annulled, or that infants
are cut off from their interest in it. The old covenant which the Apostle says
was vanishing, was the covenant made with the Israelites, when God led them out
of Egypt. But of the abolishing that covenant which constitutes infants, church
members, there is nothing to be found in the whole Bible. And, till it can be
proved to be abolished, it must be considered and held as valid as ever.

The Apostles are so far from teaching, that Christ has annulled God's gracious
covenant with the fathers, or taken away any of the privileges therein granted
to them or their children, that Paul asserts the contrary, in Romans xv. 8, Jesus
Christ was a minister of the circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises made to the fathers. These promises are summarily contained in the
covenant with Abraham, that the Lord would be a God to him and his seed; that
he should be a father of many nations; and that all the nations of the earth
should be blessed in him. These promises are all confirmed by Christ. Abraham
is the patriarch of the church. He is constitated the father of all them that
believe; of all the people of God, of every nation; who are adopted into his
family. Even the Gentiles, who were not his natural descendants, are received
into the number, and entitled to the privileges of his children. He is made the
father of more nations, than are derived from his blood. All the nations of the
earth derive blessings from him, and hold their church privileges under him, as
his children and heirs. The covenant with Abraham has, indeed, been
accomplished more eminently since Christ confirmed it, than ever before. His
family has been larger, and he has been made a father of more nations than
ever. This article of the covenant, which receives the children with the
parents into the church, is confirmed, as well as the rest. It would be most
unreasonable to think otherwise, when the scriptures never hint that this
article is rescinded. -- And we have, besides, good evidence, that the
christian church has not lost this privilege, but their children are still
children of the covenant, to greater advantage than ever.

The Apostle tells us again, That the covenant with Abraham was confirmed of
God in Christ, and that the law which was four hundred and thirty years after,
could not disannul it, Gal. iii. 17. And will any yet insinuate, that Christ
has annulled this covenant, which God confirmed in him? This would overthrow
the Apostle's argument; who confutes the error of the Judaizing teachers about
justification, by the stability of the Abrahamic covenant; which would be
inconclusive, if that covenant was not in force.

Indeed, the third chapter to the Galatians, and fourth to the Romans are a
proof, that the covenant with Abraham abides in force, under the gospel
dispensation, and that the Gentile believers, with their children, have an
interest in it which can never be evaded. The Apostle says, that They who are
of faith, are the children of Abraham, and are blessed with faithful Abraham.
Gal. iii. 7.9.
And being his adopted children, they are heirs. They inherit the blessings of
his covenant; and all those privileges of church membership, which were granted
to Abraham and his seed, belong to believers. And as it was one covenant
privilege of the children of Abraham, to have their infant children taken into
the covenant and church with them: this privilege is transmitted by the
covenant, to all who are adopted into the family of Abraham; otherwise they are
cut off from a part of that inheritance of church privileges which was entailed
upon the children of Abraham. The Apostle adds, The blessing of Abraham is come
upon the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ. Verse 14.
Which is, ^s if he had said, the blessings and privileges granted in the
covenant with Abraham belong and are conveyed to the Gentile church. The very
same privileges without any diminution, both for them and their children. If ye
are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.
Gal. iii. 29.
Whatever privileges were by the covenant and promise of God granted to the
children and heirs of Abraham, whether for themselves and their seed, the
christian Gentiles are entitled to. For they are also declared to be the
children and heirs of Abraham. To the same purpose the Apostle writes in the
fourth chapter to the Romans, quoting those words of the covenant, I have made
thee a father of many nations, Romans iv. 16, 17.
as a proof, that Gentile believers are the children of Abraham; and
consequently are comprehended in the covenant and church, together with their
offspring.

Again, in Ephesians. iii. 6, we read, That the Gentiles are fellow-heirs, and of the
same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ, by the gospel. That is, they
are fellow-heirs with the Jews of the blessing and covenant of Abraham, they
are admitted to that inheritance of spiritual privileges, which God's covenant
and promise conveyed to his descendants; they are of the same body the church,
which was formed by this covenant; and partakers of the promise; that same
promise of the covenant which had been the great privilege of the church all
along, and was expressly to them and their children.

But, let us once more hear what the scripture says. -- When those, who were
pricked in their hearts, on the day of Pentecost, said to Peter and the rest of
the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter said unto them, Repent
and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the
promise is to you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts ii. 37, 38, 39. That it was the
covenant with Abraham, that is here called the promise, will appear from the
following considerations. -- 1. This covenant is commonly in the New Testament
called the Promise, by way of distinction and eminency. See Romans iv. 13, 14,
For the promise, that he should be heir of the world, was not to Abraham or to
his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. For, if they
which are of the law, be heirs, faith is made void, and the Promise of none
effect. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end that
the Promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the
law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us
all." Gal. iii. 17, etc. "The covenant which was before confirmed of God in
Christ, the law which was 430 years after cannot disannul, that it should make
the promise of none effect. For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more
of promise, but God gave it to Abraham by Promise. If ye are Christ's then are
ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise." Once more. Gal. iv. 28,
We, as Isaac, are children of the Promise.

In all these places, and in diverse others, the covenant with Abraham is called
the Promise; which shows that it was commonly so styled. 2. If we compare this
text with Acts iii. 25, we shall find the promise there explained, to mean the
covenant with Abraham. For the Apostle, there addressing the Jews, to persuade
them to repent and be converted, in like manner as he had done on the day of
Pentecost, proposes the very same encouragement to them in these words: Ye are
the children of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto
Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. His
telling them that they were the children of Abraham's covenant, is to the same
purpose exactly, as if he had told them, that the Promise was to them and their
children. For this covenant was undoubtedly to the parents and their infant
children. And their being declared children of the covenant, signified that
they were heirs to the privileges of the covenant. So that these texts are
exactly parallel, and explain each other. The same Apostle, preaching to the
same sort of hearers (that is, the Jews) proposes the same argument in
different words, even their interest in the promise, or covenant with Abraham,
in order to enforce the same exhortation, viz. Repentance and conversion for
the remission of sins. So that we cannot reasonably doubt, whether the promise
here spoken of, be not the covenant with Abraham, if we will allow the Apostle
to explain his own words. 3. What the Apostle here says of the promise, agrees
exactly in every particular, with the Abrahamic covenant, which had all along
included the posterity of Abraham and their infant children, together with the
Gentiles that were afar off, even as many of them, as the Lord did from time to
time call into his church, and who, in obedience to his call, became
proselytes, or Comers, as the word properly signifies. -- All who, upon the
divine call, came from afar to join themselves to the Lord, and his people,
were received, together with their children, into the church and covenant by
circumcision; and the promise was to them and their children also, as has been
observed. The covenant of Abraham did belong to all those who were in, and of
the church. Peter's hearers, with their children, being actual members in the
church, did not need a new call into the church, in order to their being the
children of the covenant and promise. But, with the Gentiles who were afar off,
and out of the church, the case was otherwise. They must first be called in,
and become proselytes, before the promise would be to them and theirs. But so
many as were thus called, and admitted into the family of Abraham, had an
interest in the covenant and promise, as well as the Jews. Thus the case had
stood all along according to the Abrahamic covenant; and thus the case stood
upon the day of Pentecost, as Peter says. Which shows that it was this covenant
that Peter had in his eye, when he said, The promise is to you and your
children: that his words are therefore to be explained according to the tenor
of the Abrahamic covenant. That this covenant, which is the foundation of
infant church membership, was not then abolished: but stood in force: and I
presume no one will say it has been abolished since.

In this manner Peter's hearers must have understood his words. They had been
born and bred in that church and covenant, which included both parents and
children. They knew that infants had always been acknowledged as church
members, ever since a church had been formed in the world. The idea of a church
which should not admit the children with the parents, would have been as new
and strange to them, as a church that would not admit females, would be to us.
A promise, or covenant, conveying privileges to them and their children, would
be naturally understood by them in the same manner as those promises in the Old
Testament, which so often occur in the same form of expression, had constantly
been taken; and particularly the promise to Abraham, which was the most eminent
and fundamental. They would as naturally conclude that their young children are
immediately respected, as we should conclude ours to be in an instrument,
conveying privileges to us and our heirs; and they would have no doubt, that a
grant of privileges was here asserted to the children of those who were in the
covenant and church, more than to the children of heathens. Now as the words of
the Apostle would carry this meaning most naturally and obviously to the
understanding of his hearers, and as the same form of expression elsewhere is
constantly to be thus understood, and no reason appears why it may not be taken
here in the same sense: this must in all reason be received as the true
intrepretation. And if this promise belonged to the infant children of the
inchurched and covenanted Jews, at the day of Pentecost, none will deny that it
still belongs to the children of the Gentiles, who were afar off; even as many
as it pleases the Lord to call into his gospel church.

This promise Peter holds up to the Jews, as a warrant or reason why they
should be baptized in the name of Christ. Repent and be baptized; for the
promise is to you, etc. Now if their interest in the promise was a good reason
why they should be baptized, as the Apostle asserts; then their children's
having an interest in the promise with them (as is also asserted) is as good a
reason for their being baptized; even as an interest in the covenant was a
reason for circumcision to Abraham and his children.

This text is then a substantial proof that the covenant of Abraham stood in
force, after the gospel dispensation took place: since this appears to be that
very promise which Peter addresses to his hearers. And we see that that
particular clause, which contains a grant of the privilege of church membership
to the children of God's people was not taken out, when Christ the minister of
the circumcision confirmed by his death the promises made to the fathers. We
then, and all others, whom God shall call into his church, together with our
children, as the adopted children and heirs of Abraham, have an interest in
this promise; are members of the gospel church; and the proper subjects of
christian baptism.

Some say, that the Promise here spoken of, was not the covenant with Abraham,
but the promise of the pouring out of the Spirit, in Joel. But how can this be,
when the Apostle says that the prophecy of Joel foretold those miraculous gifts
of the Spirit, speaking with tongues, and prophesying, which appeared on the
day of Pentecost? Are these gifts promised to, and conferred upon all, whom the
Lord shall call? Besides, I have proved, that the promise here mentioned, was
the covenant with Abraham; and till the reasons adduced are shown to be without
weight, it is folly to set up an unproved assertion in opposition to them. But
whatever the promise may be supposed to be, it belonged to Peter's hearers, and
their children, as he says; and he holds it up to them as a reason for their
being baptized. It must therefore be a reason for the baptism of their children
also. If the gift of the Holy Ghost was promised to them, it was to their
children. And they were to be considered as subjects of baptism on account of
the promise; not because the gifts of the spirit were manifest in them, but in
order to their receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost. For it is to be observed,
that the gift of the Holy Ghost is proposed as the consequence, and not the
pre-requisite of baptism. Be baptized, and ye shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost.

But to give this plea the greatest advantage, let us suppose that the pouring
out of the Spirit in his ordinary sanctifying influences is the matter of that
promise in Joel, though Peter explains it otherwise: and that this is the
promise, which he, in this text proposes to his hearers, as respecting them and
their children, though we have seen him explain himself otherwise. -- Our
argument from these words, would yet stand good. For the promise of the
sanctifying Spirit being included in the blessing, we may hence infer, that
they to whom this promise belongs, are interested in the covenant and blessing
of Abraham, and may properly be recognized as of the church and people of God.

It is further said, That the children to whom the promise belongs, are not
infants, but adults -- the posterity of the Jews. But though adults are the
children of their parents, yet infants too are doubtless children. What warrant
then have any to deny that they have an interest in that promise, which is to
the children indefinitely, without any exception of infants?

But the evasion which is most insisted on, is, That the promise is restrained
to those only whom the Lord shall call: and infants give no evidence of their
being called. But this will not bear examination. I have already shown, that
this promise was the covenant with Abraham, and is therefore to be explained
according to the tenor of that covenant, which included him and his children,
and so many of the Gentiles as God should from time to time call into his
church. The calling of Abraham was a sufficient call to all his posterity, to
give them a visible interest in the covenant, and standing in the church, till
they forfeited and were cut off from this privilege. The restraining clause,
therefore, only respected those who were not yet called into the church of God,
and not those Jews and their children who were then actual members and children
of the covenant. Repentance and baptism in the name of Christ, were required to
prevent their being cut off from the covenant and family of Abraham; but the
promise was th^^ to them and their children. There is a plain reason why the
promise should respect only so many of those who are without, as the Lord
should call into his church. But how absurdly would the Apostle speak,
according to the interpretation which the Antipedobaptists put upon his words.
-- The promise is to you and your children. But neither you nor your children,
appear at present to have any interest in it; and no one knows, that they ever
will have. You are not to imagine that either you or your children are entitled
to any privilege by it, more than belongs to every man and child in the world.
All that I mean is, that the promise will belong to those who shall be called.
If this should prove to be the case with any of you, or of your children, or
any other person, then, and not till then, the promise will be to you and them.
If this be all that is intended, it had been much more plainly expressed by
only saying, The promise will be to those whom the Lord shall call. To what
purpose is all this flourish of words, without meaning? What end can this
particular mention of them, and their children, as interested in the promise,
serve, unless to persuade them, that some special privilege belonged to them,
while there was nothing at all in it? It is either insignificant or fallacious;
and would convey to the understanding of the hearers either no meaning, or a
false one.

Suppose it were declared, that all the privileges contained in our frame of
government belonged to the native subjects and their children, and also to
foreigners, even as many as the government should naturalize: and some one
pretending to give the sense of this declaration should contend, that according
to it, neither the native subjects, nor their children, had a right to any of
these privileges, unless they should be first naturalized by an act of the
government; would he not be thought ridicuously absurd? The adversaries of
infant church membership are equally absurd and unreasonable, in their way of
explaining the Apostle's words.

The argument from this text we have so long been considering, cannot be
evaded. And we may further add, that since it is on all hands allowed to have
been a great privilege of the Jewish infants, that they were in the covenant
and church of God; if the infants of christians are left out of the church, as
some teach, then the gospel church is deprived of an important privilege, which
the Jewish church enjoyed: and its constitution is less favorable to infants.
But can we believe, that the gospel dispensation has diminished the privileges
of the church in any instance; or that it has put any class of mankind, whether
infants or adults, in a more disadvantageous state than before; depriving them,
without any fault of theirs, of their standing in the church of God, which is
acknowledged to have been an important privilege? This ought not to be
supposed, unless clear and positive proof of it could be produced. But no such
proof has been or can be found. Wherefore, to bring this argument to a point:
the privilege of church membership has certainly been granted to the infant
children of God's professing people; which grant stands in force till it be
revoked. Our opponents have often been called upon to produce an authentic act
of revocation, and the demand is reasonable. This they cannot do. On the
contrary, we demonstrate, that this grant has not been revoked, but is renewed,
confirmed, and ratified in the gospel.

As a proper appendix to what has thus far been discoursed of the interest of
infants in the visible church covenant, I shall just mention that common
argument from baptism succeeding in the room of circumcision; but shall not
enlarge upon it. As infants were the subjects of circumcision, and were
recognized and marked as the people of God by this rite, the conclusion is very
natural and reasonable, that if baptism comes in the place of circumcision, as
the token of admission into the church, infants are the proper subjects of this
ordinance; unless God has declared to the contrary, which can never be made to
appear. It is indeed denied by our opponents, that baptism does come in the
place of circumcision. But I cannot find that they have explained themselves
distinctly, how far, and in what respect, they mean to deny it. I own that
baptism does not answer all the same purposes under the gospel dispensation,
that circumcision did under the Mosaic. It does not introduce the subjects into
a national church, and worldly sanctuary. It has not a typical respect to the
Savior to come. It is not a yoke of bondage, obliging to the observance of the
carnal ordinances of the law of Moses. And our opponents, if they will be
ingenuous and reasonable, must allow that baptism does, in many respects, come
in the place of circumcision. It answers similar ends in the gospel church; and
is of the same general signification; and is to be applied to the same
subjects; and has even the same name given to it; and upon the institution of
baptism, as an ordinance, of standing and universal obligation, circumcision
was no longer the token of admission into the visible church, as it had been
before. And this is all we mean, when we assert, that baptism succeeds to
circumcision.

As circumcision was the outward token of the covenant, and of admission into
the church; so baptism is the outward token of church membership, and of an
interest in the new covenant; which I have proved, is substantially the same
with that of Abraham, to which circumcision was annexed. They are both the
appointed outward sign and badge of the people of God. As circumcision was a
seal of the righteousness of faith to Abraham, so is baptism to christians.

Again, circumcision and baptism though different in external rites, are alike
in their spiritual signification. They both pointed out our native corruption,
and need of purification, by an inward and spiritual renovation. They both
signified cleansing from the guilt and defilement of sin by the blood of
Christ, an admission into the church, a dedication to God, an obligation to
walk in his commandments and ordinances, and a right to covenant privileges.

It is further to be observed, that the Apostle calls christians the
Circumcision, under the gospel; which was the common appellation of those who
had, under the former dispensation, received the token of induction into the
church. A sufficient intimation that the one takes the place of the other.

Accordingly, circumcision ceased to be longer the token of church membership,
after Christ sent out his Apostles to preach and baptize in his name, when
baptism was made the standing rite of admission into the gospel church.

For these reasons, we cannot but consider baptism as taking that place in the
gospel economy, in which circumcision stood under the old dispensation; though
we readily allow that each of these ordinances had some peculiar ends and
significations, suited to the different states of the church, in which they
were respectively in force; in respect of which peculiarities, they may not
properly be parallel. And hence we argue, that since circumcision and baptism
are manifestly similar in their main ends, uses, and significancies; infants
are as proper subjects of baptism, as they were of circumcision; and that the
divine order for administering the one ordinance to them, warrants our
administering that other ordinance that comes in its room. And the argument is
not only popular, but of real weight; though I do not lay the greatest stress
upon it.

It is objected, That the outward rites are very unlike. But I can see no
weight in this. The different states of the church under the Old and New
Testament might require this difference of outward administration respecting
the initiating rite.

It is further objected, That the subjects of baptism and circumcision were
different. Circumcision was to be administered only to males, baptism to both
sexes. I answer, The circumcision of the males was the appointed token of
church membership to the people of God of both sexes. The females were
accounted of the circumcision; and were admitted to the holy ordinances which
were interdicted to the uncircumcised and unclean.

It is objected again, That baptism was in use and force before circumcision
was abolished. I answer, Though baptism was administered by John, and the
disciples of Christ, a short time before circumcision was abolished, yet this
no more proves that the former succeeds not in the room of the latter, than
Solomon's reigning with his father a short time, is a proof that he did not
succeed and reign in his stead. But though baptism was in use before, it was
not fully established as the rite of induction into the church, till the
mission of the Apostles; after which, circumcision was no longer required for
that purpose, as it had been before; though for other reasons it continued in
use among the believing Jews some years longer.

It is further inquired, What need there was that those who had been
circumcised should be baptized, if they are both ordinances of the same use and
significancy? I answer, It was the will of Christ, that all his disciples
should receive the new token and badge of church membership, although they had
been admitted members of the Old Testament church. And such as would not
recognize themselves as his disciples, were to be rejected, and unchurched, and
be as branches broken off by their unbelief. Their circumcision became
uncircumcision, and the token of their being the people of God became null and
void.

To these scriptural arguments in favor of infant church membership, I shall
add another consideration, which seems to me to have great weight.

The Jews certainly knew that their infants had an interest in the covenant of
Abraham, and had always been acknowledged, received, and recognized by
circumcision, as being of the church and people of God. If the Apostles had
taught that infants were no longer to have an interest in God's covenant, or be
members of the church, or receive any token of their being the people of God;
the doctrine must have been new, strange, very shocking and offensive to the
Jews. They must certainly have taken notice of it, and been greatly displeased
at it. They opposed the Apostles with all their might, and did all in their
power to render them odious, and set the people against them and their new
doctrine. They were ready to take offense, and wanted neither wit nor will to
lay hold of and exaggerate a plausible and popular objection. Such an objection
they would have had, if the Apostles had denied that their children were to be
church members any longer. They would not have borne such a doctrine, which
declared all their children excommunicated and cut off from the church and
people of the Lord, and to have no part in him; but would certainly have urged
the objection with a vehemence. And the Apostles must have seen, that it highly
concerned them to answer the objection, and take up so dangerous a stumbling
block, if their doctrine had given so obvious and fair a handle to their
enemies against them. But we have no hint in the New Testament, or any author,
Jewish, Christian, or Heathen, that ever I could find or learn, that the Jews
ever made any such objection to the Apostles, or their doctrine; or that the
Apostles ever attempted either to obviate or silence it, or said one word about
it: which is certainly a most violent presumption, and may almost pass for
plenary evidence, that the Apostles did not, by denying the right of church
membership of infants, furnish an obvious occasion and ground for any such
objection.

I shall mention but one argument more, grounded upon the History of Infant
Baptism, and the practice of the church from the apostolic age, according to
the testimony of the earliest writers. The fact, in short, is found to stand
thus: 1. That the validity and lawfulness of infant baptism appears not to have
ever been denied by any christians till about the year 1130; and then only by
one Peter de Bruis in France, with his followers, a small sect, which held
withal, that no infants were saved, and diverse other gross errors, as
historians report. It soon dwindled to nothing. After which, there cannot be
found a single instance, well vouched, of a person opposing infant baptism
(except such as denied water baptism) till the Anabaptists sprang up in Germany
about 250 years ago. To this purpose we have the testimony of Doctor Wall, a
learned, diligent and faithful writer on the subject, in his History of Infant
Baptism. These are his words, For the first 400 years there appears only one
man, Tertullian, that advised the delay of infant baptism in some cases, and
one Gregory that did perhaps practice such delay in the case of his children;
but no society so thinking, or so practicing, nor any one man saying that it
was unlawful to baptize infants. In the next 700 years, there in not so much as
one man to be found, that either spoke for, or practiced such delay, but all
the contrary. And when about the year 1130, one sect among the Waldenses
declared against the baptizing of infants, as being incapable of salvation, the
main body of that people rejected their opinion; and they of them that held
that opinion, quickly dwindled away, and disappeared; there being no more heard
of holding that tenet, till the rising of the German Antipedobaptists, in the
year 1522. Thus far Dr. Wall. To this our opponents have hitherto found nothing
to oppose, worthy of credit, except some testimonies to the practice of
baptizing adults; which are nothing to the purpose; since no one doubts that
unbaptized adults, as well as infants, are the subjects of baptism. Or if any
have been found speaking against the baptism of infants, they have appeared to
be such as were against all water baptism.

2. On the other hand, we have the express testimony of the learned Christian
writers, who lived within one, two, and three hundred years of the Apostles,
that infant baptism was not only then commonly practiced in the church, but had
been received and practiced from the Apostles; and that none were known of,
among all the numerous sects of Christians, pretending to deny it.

The testimonies of the fathers to this purpose, are commonly known by those
who are moderately versed in this controversy. Justin Martyr, who wrote about
40 years after the Apostles, mentions expressly some aged Christians, who were
made disciples in, or from their infancy. And though he mentions not their
infant baptism, his words fairly imply it. For if they were made disciples in
infancy, they were doubtless the subjects of baptism. Irenaeus, who is said to
have been born in the apostolic age, mentions the baptism of infants. He calls
it, indeed, their regeneration; -- but so baptism was commonly termed by the
ancient fathers, as all who are versed in their writings know and acknowledge.
Tertullian, who lived within 100 years of the Apostles, speaks of the baptizing
of infants as a practice of the church; but advises to the delay of it, except
in cases of necessity; though he has nothing to say against the validity and
lawfulness of it. He advises also the delay of baptism to adults, till they
were married, or confirmed in continency. Though he was singular and whimfical
in his opinion, yet he may well be admitted as a credible witness that infant
baptism was a common practice in the church at that time. And this is all the
use we mean to make of any of the testimonies we shall produce.

Origin, who also lived within 100 years after the Apostles, and was one of the
most learned and knowing men of the age, declares, that infants are, by the
usage of the church, baptized. And that an order for the baptizing infants, had
been delivered to the church, from the Apostles, who knew that the pollution of
sin is in all.

Cyprian, who lived but little more than 100 years after the Apostles, gives as
full a testimony as possible to the practice of infant baptism at the time he
lived. At a council of 66 ministers, held about 150 years after the Apostles,
it was debated, whether it would not be proper to delay the baptizing of
infants, till the eighth day, according to the law of circumcision. [Note, it
appears they considered baptism as coming in the room of circumcision.] They
were unanimously of opinion* that there was no reason for any such delay.

WE are now to consider the objections.

And the first is, that there is no command in scripture for baptizing infants,
nor can it be proved, that the Apostles baptized any such. We have express
accounts of the baptism of men and women; but that infants were, or ought to be
admitted as subjects of this ordinance, the scripture says not. How can this
be a divine ordinance, when there is neither precept nor precedent for it?

I answer, If it any way appears from the scripture, that infants are subjects
of baptism, it matters not whether this doctrine be grounded on an express
precept or example, or whether it be taught in some other way. Is it not
presumption for us to say, that we will not believe this to be the mind of
Christ, unless he has revealed it in the particular way that we may pitch upon?
The question should be, whether we can find, or gather from the scriptures any
Sufficient evidence, that infants are to be baptized. If the reasons on which
our doctrine and practice is grounded, be good and conclusive, we ought to
acquiesce in them. It never can be proved, either by scripture or reason, that
consequential evidence is insufficient to determine our judgment and practice,
in matters of religion; or that every part of God's revealed will is delivered
in express propositions.

Since the scriptures plainly acknowledge and assert the right of membership of
infants in the gospel church, that they are of the number of Christ's
disciples, that they are holy, and have an interest in God's gracious covenant;
and since it is owned by all, that, according to the order and rule of the
gospel, all those who are disciples, holy, and in the covenant, are the proper
subjects of baptism: the consequence is clear, that infants are to be baptized.
And this is equivalent to an express order for it. It is as plain and valid a
warrant, though it be consequential, as an express order would be.

We have also such precedents in favor of our practice, as, though they may be
cavilled at, must, I think, be of great weight w^^^ every unbiassed man;
precedents which seem to render it morally certain, that infant baptism was
practiced by the Apostles. Three whole families we read of, who were baptized.
If there were any children under the age of discretion, in any of these
families, they were certainly admitted. Now, though it be not said whether
there were any such children, yet is can scarce be doubted that there were,
when the following circumstances are well considered. 1. If we should take
three families among us, promiscuously, I suppose the probability would be, at
least, fifty to one, that there would be young children in some of them. 2. It
is not said, or intimated, that there were no such children in these families.
But if it had been the case that there were no children in these houses, and if
children ought not to be baptized, there was great reason and necessity that so
important and uncommon a circumstance should be mentioned, to prevent a
dangerous mistake, which these accounts, left as they stand, would naturally
lead men into. For the baptism of these families would naturally be considered
as precedents for baptizing other families, in which there were infants. And as
the constant and known practice of the church for thousands of years, and the
declarations of Christ and his Apostles, were in favor of infant church
membership; how reasonable must it needs appear to practice household baptism,
unless it were plainly testified and guarded against? In short, we have express
precedents, or examples, if not of infant baptism, yet of household baptism,
infants not excepted; and that too upon the faith or profession of the head of
the family. For it is to be carefully noted, that in these accounts it is not
said, or intimated, that all in these families were baptized on a personal
profession of faith; but only, that the head of the family believed, and
thereupon was baptized with all the house. And upon the authority of these
precedents of family baptism, in conjunction with the other grounds which have
been mentioned, we assert and claim the right of household baptism, on behalf
of the families of believers, infants not excepted. And we challenge those who
will not admit them, to produce an authentic order or precedent for this their
refusal.

As the gospel, though it has changed the initiating sacrament, continues
infants in the same standing in the church, which it was well known they had
had all along; it is nothing strange that we have not more express orders and
precedents touching infant baptism. What need of new precepts and examples to
ascertain a point, which had in effect been long since settled; which all
understood, and all agreed in? But how infinitely strange would it be, if
infants, who had from the beginning been of the church, by the appointment of
God, and the subjects of the initiating ordinance, should be cast out of the
church, and cut off from the people of God, without any order or precedent for
it in scripture? And yet this we must believe, if we deny their right to church
membership and baptism. For certainly there is neither order no^ precedent for
excluding them from the church, or from the initiating rite.

If the Apostles had refused to admit infants into the gospel church by
baptism, we should, without all peradventure, have had a plain order not to
receive them. The case was such as must, in all reason, have required it. Such
a great and important change in the constitution of the church, as would cut
off a great part of those who had always been acknowledged to be in the church
and covenant of God, must have seemed strange to the Jewish converts; who would
naturally have expected that their children were still to be received with
them, as heretofore; and would, accordingly, have moved to have them baptized;
as the ancient Jewish writers attest was commonly practiced at the admission of
proselytes. At least, they would have inquired, whether the gospel church
admitted infants as well as adult believers; which must have given occasion for
a plain and express determination of the point, if so great and striking an
innovation was to be established. And it would be of great necessity that such
a decree should be promulgated and recorded, as a standing rule or canon, to be
observed by all the churches. But nothing like this appears in any writings,
sacred or profane. We may therefore retort the argument upon our adversaries
thus: since infants had always been received as church members, by the
initiating rite, they who refuse still to receive them, ought to be able to
produce plain orders or precedents for this their refusal: which since they
cannot do, we conclude that the right of church membership still belongs to
them, and that they are subjects of baptism.

There was not that occasion for an express mention of the baptism of infants,
as of women; for as women had hitherto been admitted to the privileges of
church membership, without being circumcised, it might well be doubted, whether
baptism, the sacrament of admission into the gospel church, was to be
administered to females. To remove this scruple, we have express precedents of
female baptism; showing that persons of either sex are alike proper subjects of
this ordinance. But there was no room to doubt, whether the token of church
membership were to be applied to infants; nor had it ever been called in
question. -- And yet the New Testament furnishes clear proofs that they are
members of the gospel church; and express precedents of household baptism,
without exception of infants; as has been shown; nor is there any thing of
weight to be urged against it.

If, after all that has been said, the want of more express orders or
precedents for infant baptism stick as a scruple in the minds of any, let the
following considerations be added to what has been said. 1. Is it not as
strange, and more so, that we have but one express example of infant
circumcision, in all the Old Testament, and not one among the Israelites? And
yet, no doubt, it was practiced every day. Is it not strange, that there is
neither express precept nor example, in the New Testament of women's coming to
the Lord's supper? And yet, no doubt, they did so commonly. Jesus, it seems,
baptized more disciples than John, John iv. 1. Is it not strange that none of
the writers of the New Testament, except John, give the least hint that he
baptized at all, though John's baptizing is often mentioned by almost all of
them? These instances may show, how little such a negative argument is to be
depended on in the present case. 2. Is it not a manifest sign of prejudice, and
an unfair mind, to think there is no sufficient warrant for infant baptism,
unless there be express orders or precedents for it; and yet refuse to receive
infants into the church, though there be neither precept nor precedent to
warrant or justify our refusing them that privilege, with which they were
invested by God, and held it without dispute thousands of years? Is not this to
strain at a g^at, and swallow a camel? 3. Does it become us to disregard, and
refuse to admit such evidence as must be acknowledged to be of weight, and
stand cavilling, that the case might have been made plainer? I grant it might,
if God had pleased. And so might many other truths, which yet we have
sufficient reason to believe. Our opponents must own, that if infant baptism be
contrary to the mind of Christ, this would have been much plainer, had there
been an express order against it; and much dispute and trouble would have been
prevented. The case is left just as plain as Christ has thought fit it should
be. And it belongs not to us to object, that the evidence is not such as we
should like best; but to inquire seriously, humbly, and prayerfully, what is
truth; and thankfully to close with it, upon any good evidence of it that we
can find. 4. Let me ask the objector, What he would have? What proof would
satisfy him? Would it give satisfaction, if the order had run thus: Go teach
all nations, baptizing them, and their children? You could as easily and fairly
evade this, as you do the express proofs we bring of infant church membership.
Christ says expressly, that the kingdom of heaven is, or consists of little
children; and it is not denied, that the kingdom of heaven is the church; yet
we are told, that these little children, which are of the church, are not
infants, but adults, resembling little children in humility. The Apostle says
expressly, that the children of believers are Holy. A character never once
given in scripture to any but church members: yet this avails nothing. A new
sense, unknown in the scriptures, is invented, and put upon the word, though it
makes nonsense of the text. We bring express scripture to prove, that the
promise is to the children, as well as the parents; that believers are
accounted the children and heirs of Abraham, according to the promise; and that
his blessing is come upon the Gentiles: and the right of church membership for
his natural posterity, was certainly one article of this blessing. Yet our
opponents go on against all this evidence, upon no better foundation than their
own arbitrary conjectures and hypothesis. While men are in this humor, what
confidence can we have, that, if there had been an express order for infant
baptism, they would not set their inventions to work to explain it away? And we
might be told, that the children to be baptized are such as are capable of
professing faith; or that they are such as resemble infants in humility; or
that they are spiritual children, who imitate the faith of the first converts;
or that they are to be baptized after they have been first taught, and have
given evidence of their effectual calling, etc. In short, a fair and honest
mind will embrace the truth upon any sufficient proof, whether direct or
consequential. But when the integrity of the mind is corrupted and distorted,
by prejudices, and fondness for particular schemes, the light that is in men
becomes darkness; and ways will be found to ward off conviction, for the most
part, by any arguments whatever. I have considered this objection the more
largely, because, though it has really no weight in it, yet it is apt enough to
amuse and puzzle weak and simple minds, and to breed scruples, which sometimes
prove very troublesome and hurtful.

It is said by some, That it is not being in the covenant, or church, that
gives a right to baptism; but a divine order to that purpose.

But to what purpose is this said, except to raise a dust, and keep up a
fruitless altercation? You acknowledge that it is according to the order and
rule of the gospel, that all those be received as the subjects of baptism, who
have visibly an interest in the covenant and appear to be such as are to be
received into the gospel church. Whether, therefore, their being visibly in
covenant or of the church gives them the right to baptism or not; yet, by your
own acknowledgment it proves, or evidences an unquestionable right thereto. The
allegation in the objection is, indeed, most unreasonable: but if we should
admit it, for argument sake, the right of church membership of infants being
proved, their right to baptism is undeniable, as long as it is allowed that all
such are the proper subjects of baptism.

Another principal objection is, that according to the gospel order, faith and
repentance, or at least a credible profession thereof, are required of all
previously or in order to their being baptized. The Apostles were first to
teach those whom they baptized, Matt. xxviii. 19. Christ puts believing before
baptism, when he says, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved,"
Mark xvi. 16. And Peter says to the Jews, who being pricked in their hearts,
asked, what they should do; "Repent and be baptized," Acts ii. 38. And when the
eunuch moved, that he might be baptized, Philip said to him, "If thou believe
with all thy heart, thou may," Acts viii. 37. We read also of several, who,
agreeably to this rule, were baptized, professing their faith and repentance.
If repentance and faith are the necessary conditions of baptism, infants cannot
be admitted: for they make no profession, and give no evidence of these
qualifications.

Answer. To show that this objection is without any weight, we need only open
our Bibles, and read the several texts that are brought to support it. Let us
take them in their order.

The first is Matt. xxviii. 19. I have before observed, that the proper
signification of the Greek is, Go make all nations disciples (or proselytes)
baptizing them -- teaching them, etc. as our opponents grant: and this is a
good warrant for the baptism of infants, as well as the parents; and they are
therefore to be admitted by the same outward rite. And to say that infants can
no otherwise become disciples than by being taught, is no better than a mean
begging of the very point to be proved. Whenever the Apostles made a disciple
of the parent, the right and privilege of disciples was given to the children;
who were as such to be baptized, together with the parents, according to the
Apostles' orders, to disciple and baptize all nations.

And if we should understand the word here used as signifying to instruct or
indoctrinate, there would be no reason for any one to conclude, that infants
may not be baptized till they are first taught. -- No such thing is said, or in
the least implied. Christ's disciples are indeed to be taught, as well as
baptized; children as well as adults; as far, and as soon as they are capable
of it. But that they may not be baptized till after they have been first
taught, there is not one word, not iota in the whole paragraph. And to argue
from the bare order of the words, that indoctrination is a necessary
pre-requisite to baptism in all cases, is to build upon quick-sand indeed. For
it is well known, that things are often mentioned in scripture, in a
promiscuous or inverted order. -- Nay, if the order of the words were any solid
foundation to argue upon, we might, in this way, prove that it was the will of
Christ, that the Apostles should make disciples, by first baptizing them, and
then teaching them. For the instructions Christ gave them when he sent them
forth, stand in this order; Go disciple all nations, baptizing them -- teaching
them, etc. But we lay no stress at all upon such precarious arguments. The
truth is, some are to be taught before, and in order to their being baptized.
Others are by baptism to be introduced into the school of Christ, and put under
the discipline of the church before, and in order to their being taught. Adults
we grant, are to be first taught, and to make a profession of faith, in order
to their being baptized; and that for two reasons. 1. They are immediately
capable of it. 2. They have no visible right or meetness to be received as
members of the church of Christ, till they profess their faith in him. And we
may add, that it is not the will of Christ that any such should be taken into
his school, without their free consent. On the contrary, there are two reasons
why infants should by baptism be received into the church, without their being
first taught, and professing their faith. 1. They are not at present capable of
it. 2. Their church membership and right to baptism is manifest without it from
the scriptures; as has been shown. And it is the will of Christ, that they be
entered into his school immediately, previous to their actual consent. A
profession of faith, does not more evidence the right of a believer to baptism,
than his infant child's right to the same is evidenced by the scriptures, which
declare that, of such is the kingdom of heaven, that the promise is to them,
and that they are holy.

This text then contains nothing against infant baptism, and I have elsewhere
shown, that it furnishes a good argument in favor of it. The next passage we
have to consider is Mark xvi. 15, 16, Preach the gospel to every creature. He
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall
be damned. If this text does not contain so much in favor of infant baptism as
the other, yet certainly there is nothing against it. It is true faith and
baptism are here required in order to salvation. But whether in order to
salvation, faith be required before baptism in all cases, or in any case, is
not said; nor can it be proved from this text; which only contains a promise of
salvation to those who believe and are baptized. And I presume it will be
allowed, that if any one should first be baptized, and afterward should
believe; this promise would belong to him, as really as if he had first
believed, and then was baptized. -- If any one should be baptized upon a
hypocritical profession of faith, and afterward should become a true believer,
he would no doubt be saved; nor would it be required of him that he be again
baptized. And though we grant that a profession of faith is required of an
unbaptized adult, in order to his being baptized; yet it is an abuse of
scripture, to argue that infants are not to be baptized till they believe,
because believing is mentioned before baptism in this place, which, by the
acknowledgment of our opponents, "Speaks only of those who are capable of
attending to the preaching of the gospel, and of actual believing." They do not
apply to infants the damnatory sentence against unbelievers; and it is equally
unreasonable, to urge their want of faith, as an objection to their being
admitted to baptism. -- In short, I can find nothing in these words, that makes
the least difficulty in the matter; unless we will be so ridiculously absurd as
to imagine, that infants and adult believers cannot both be the subjects of
baptism; or that the mention of the one alone, implies the denial of the other.

In Acts ii. 38, Peter exhorts his hearers to repent and be baptized for the
remission of sins. Those whom he thus exhorts were all adults. For no one
preaches to young infants. It is also observable in these words that they were
only required to repent in order to be baptized; which is contrary to the
opinion of those who renounce infant baptism. They say we must believe as well
as repent. We grant that repentance is required of unbaptized adults, in order
to their being baptized. But does he so much as hint, that infants are not to
be admitted? No. But in the next words asserts, that the same promise which
belonged to them, and which he holds up as a warrant and encouragement to them,
to repent and be baptized, did also belong to their children. But these words
have been before considered.

The same remark is to be made on the words of Philip to the Eunuch, If thou
believe with all thine heart, thou may be baptized. Any Pedobaptist, must,
upon his own principles, have said the same, upon the like occasion.

The examples of those who were baptized upon a profession of faith, are
sometimes brought as an objection against infant baptism. These, we grant, are
a proof that believers are the subjects of baptism. We grant further, that they
are no proof that infants are subjects. But it is strange it should ever be
thought that these examples make any thing against the baptism of infants.
Cannot adult believers be admitted, unless infants be rejected? Is there not
room enough in the church for both? A thousand instances of one sort, are no
argument against the admission of the other. The truth is, we have not many
certain instances of adult baptism mentioned particularly in the New Testament.
Several of these were persons of note, who had no children. Of others, it
appears, that if there were children in their families, as is highly probable,
they were baptized with them. And some that are confidently supposed to have
been adults, might a great part of them have been infants, for any thing that
appears to the contrary; particularly the three thousand added to the church on
the day of Pentecost. But among all those, who are said to have been baptized
upon a profession of faith, it is remarkable that we find not one that was born
of Christian parents, or was, on our principles, a fit subject of baptism in
infancy. We have, in the New Testament, the history of the church for thirty
years after Christ's ascension, in all which there is not one instance that in
the least countenances their practice, who are against the baptism of the
children of believers, till they are of age to profess their faith. Wherein
they differ from us, they have most certainly neither precept nor example in
scripture to support them.

Upon the whole, this objection, which has often been held up with so much
parade, is like a vapor; which, beheld at a distance, may look as if there
might be something in it; but upon a nearer view, is found to be as light and
unsubstantial as the air, while we endeavor to handle it, we can find nothing
in it.

It is objected by some, that Christ was baptized in adult age; and we ought
herein to follow his example.

Answer. John's baptism, with which Christ was baptized, was not instituted
till Christ was of adult age. How could it be expected that he should have the
ordinance administered to him, before it was a divine ordinance? We might as
well argue against infant circumcision, because Abraham was circumcised in
adult age. But Christ in his infancy was dedicated to God, and received into
the number of his people, according to the ordinances then in use: which may
serve as a precedent and pattern to christians to dedicate their children to
God in baptism, the rite of induction to the Christian Church. Christ's baptism
was the token of his solemn consecration to his public ministry; signifying his
anointing with the Holy Ghost to the offices of prophet, priest, and king (and
especially as the high priest of his church) which he was to execute, and was
accordingly inaugurated at his entering on the public discharge of these his
offices, when he was about thirty years of age. There were many peculiar
circumstances attending Christ's baptism, which are not imitable by us.

As many people have mistaken the nature and end of Christ's baptism, and have
therefore thought it their duty to follow him by being baptized in adult age.
For their sake, I shall also make the following remarks.

1. The baptism with which Christ was baptized was not the christian baptism,
as it plainly appears from Acts xix. 3, 4, 5. There we find the Apostles
baptized some persons over again, who had been before baptized by John; which
they never would have done, if John's baptism had been that of the christian
dispensation.

2. We must observe, when Christ was baptized, he was just then about to enter
into his priestly and ministerial office, as the great high priest of his
church; and as such he was typified by Aaron and his successors. Now God had
positively commanded that Aaron should be admitted into his office by washing
or baptism, see Exodus xxix 4. etc. We also find that this was accordingly done,
see Levit. vii. 6. Therefore when our blessed Lord was about to take this
office upon him, he went to John to be baptized; and though John was sensible
that he had more need to be baptized of Christ, and therefore seemed to draw
back from the duty; yet Christ said (in allusion, no doubt, to the command for
initiating the high priest by washing or baptism) Suffer it to be so now, for
thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, all that was typical of me as
the high priest of the church. And "then he suffered him," Matt. iii. 13, 14,
15. It is also very remarkable that Jesus Christ at that time, was about thirty
years of age, under which the priests were not to enter on their office.
Compare Levit. iv. 3 and Matt. iii. 23.

It is objected, That infant baptism is a part of popery, the basis of national
churches, and worldly establishments; that it unites the church and world, and
keeps them together.

Answer. Infant baptism is grounded on the scriptures; and is commonly
practiced in those churches that are not, nor ever were subject to the Pope;
therefore, it is not a part of Popery though practiced, as diverse other
ordinances are, in the Roman church.

Infant baptism is not the basis of national churches, and worldly
establishments. Infants were church members long before there was a national
church in the world; which was not till the Horeb covenant. That particular
constitution of a church, and form of administration, whereby it becomes
national, has no connection with, or dependence upon infant baptism. A national
church may as well be formed upon the principle of Antipedobaptism as any
other. If the church of England should renounce infant baptism, and yet retain
its present constitution in other respects, it would still be, and might as
well continue, a national church as ever. There may be a national church,
though not one half of the nation are of it. And there would be no national
church, though all the individuals of the nation were members of congregational
churches. And as for worldly establishments of religion, it is too plain to
need insisting on, that infant baptism no way affects them. Infant baptism
stands as well without, as with human establishments; and human establishments
can stand as well without, as with infant baptism.

Infant baptism does not unite the church and the world, and keep them
together. If by the world we mean those that are not of the visible church; how
can the baptizing the infants of church members unite the church with those
that do not belong to it? If by the world be meant professed christians, who
are manifestly unmeet and unworthy of christian communion, infant baptism
neither u^^tes the church, nor keeps it united with any such. It is owing to
the neglect or abuse of discipline, when such remain united with the church. Or
if any should mean by the world, visible Christians, who are secretly
hypocritical; it is not the will of Christ that the church should be separated
from these, till their hypocrisy becomes manifest. Nor would the abolishing of
infant baptism make such a separation.

It is objected, That the answer of a good conscience is required in baptism,
in order to its being of saving advantage, 1 Pet. iii. 21. And as infants are
incapable of this, they are not subjects of baptism. I answer, Though the
answer or engagement of a good conscience must be joined with the outward
washing with water, when the subject is capable of it, yet this makes nothing
against infant baptism. For if the answer of a good conscience be afterward
annexed to the sacramental washing received in infancy, such a baptism is as
valid, and as available to salvation, as if the washing with water, and the
answer of a good conscience, had been at the same time. And infants are by
their baptism bound to the answer of a good conscience; which they are to
recognize and perform, when they are capable of it. Indeed this passage speaks
plainly in our favor. For the Apostle compares baptism to the ark of Noah, as
being the figure or antitype of it, bearing a resemblance to it. Noah by faith
prepared the ark, for the saving of himself and his house. As his children were
received with him into the ark, so the children of believers have a right to
the church, and are the subjects of baptism, together with their parents; which
bears in this respect, the figure and resemblance of the ark.

It is also objected, that, if infants are to be members of the church, and
subjects of baptism, they ought also to be admitted to partake of the Lord's
supper, which is an ordinance to which all the members of the Christian church
have a right. And accordingly it was customary with the ancient christians, who
practiced infant baptism, to administer the Lord's supper also to them. And
they who disapprove the communicating of infants, should, if they would be
consistent, disallow the baptizing of them.

Answer. We grant that infants, as church members, have an external right to
all the ordinances of the visible church, as far, and soon as they are actually
capable of, and meet for them. As they are immediately capable and meet
subjects of baptism, they are to be admitted thereto without delay. As soon as
they are capable of receiving instruction from the word, they should be brought
to give their attendance to it; and when they can so far understand the nature
and design of the Lord's supper, and have such a measure of knowledge and
faith, that they can discern the Lord's body, and examine themselves, and so
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup; it is not only their right, but their
duty, to do so, without delay. Though an infant may have a right to an estate,
of which he is an heir, yet he is not admitted to possess, occupy, and improve
it, till he is of capacity for it. And such is the nature and design of the
Lord's supper, that a right attendance on it, requires an actual capacity and
present meetness for it; which infants have not. And it is this want of
capacity and meetness, and not a want of right to church privileges, that is
the reason why we do not admit them. But this reason does not exclude them from
baptism; of which they are as capable and meet subjects now, as they were of
circumcision formerly. They are capable of the sign, and the thing signified;
of coming under the obligations, and having the grace and privileges of the
covenant secured and conveyed to them; of being solemnly dedicated to God;
recognized and admitted, as his visible church and people. These things they
are capable of in infancy. And to signify and effect these, is the design and
use of baptism, as has been observed.

It appears, I trust, that our opponents have no reason to say, as they are
wont to do with great confidence, that there is nothing in the scriptures in
favor of infant baptism, but they plainly declare against it. We have searched
the scriptures, and find nothing at all contrary to infant baptism; and plain
proofs that infants are the subjects of baptism. Whether this does not amount
to a fair and full proof, let every one who has the reason of a man consider
and judge.

We learn also, the error of rebaptizing those, who have been baptized in their
infancy. This practice cannot be justified either by precept or example, or any
good reasons. Infant baptism administered by sprinkling, we have examined by
the scriptures, and find it to be well warranted. To renounce it therefore, and
be baptized over again, is utterly wrong. And though we charitably believe that
those who have gone into this practice, have done it conscientiously, yet their
consciences were therein misguided, and they have entangled themselves by the
wrong step they have taken, and given Satan an advantage against them. Having
openly renounced communion with all christians, but those of their own party,
they too often appear to be exceedingly hardened against all means that can be
used for convincing them of their error; and take it with great scorn and
impatience, to have it suggested to them that perhaps they are in a mistake.
And if any such suspicions should ever arise in their minds, yet what a strong
temptation will they have to wink hard against the light, when it begins to
enter into their minds, and to discover to them, what they cannot bear the
thoughts of, that in the height of their confidence they have been wrong. It is
very unhappy when christians run themselves into such sad entanglements, and
get their scruples and prejudices fixed and rivetted.

FINIS.

