ON THE PRINCIPLE OF VITALITY. A DISCOURSE DELIVERED IN THE FIRST CHURCH IN
BOSTON, TUESDAY, JUNE 8th, 1790. BEFORE THE HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE COMMONWEALTH
OF MASSACHUSETTS.

BY B. WATERHOUSE, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, AND
LECTURER ON NATURAL HISTORY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

Of all the Powers in Nature, HEAT is the CHIEF. Bacon BOSTON: PRINTED BY
THOMAS AND JOHN FLEET, 1790.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.
AT a Semiannual Meeting of the Humane Society, held in BOSTON, June 8, 1790.
VOTED, That the Honorable the President, the Vice President, and Monsieur De
Letombe, Consul of France, William Tudor and Loammi Baldwin, Esq'rs, be a
Committee to wait on Benjamin Waterhouse, Esquire M. D. and return him the Thanks
of this Society for his ingenious discourse delivered this day, and to request
of him a copy for the press.

Attest. JOHN AVERY, jun. Sec'ry.

TO THE HONORABLE JAMES BOWDOIN, ESQUIRE LL.D. F.R.S. etc. etc. etc. PRESIDENT,
THE HONORABLE THOMAS RUSSELL, ESQUIRE VICE PRESIDENT, AND THE OTHER TRUSTEES of
the HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.

THIS DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT THEIR REQUEST, IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED, BY
THEIR HUMBLE SERVANT,

BENJAMIN WATERHOUSE.

O ART! thou distinguishing attribute and honor of human kind! Wide and
extensive is the reach of thy dominion. No ELEMENT is there either so violent,
or so subtle, so yielding or so sluggish, as by the powers of it is nature to be
superior to thy direction. Thou dreadest not the fierce impetuosity of FIRE,
but compellest it is violence to be both obedient and useful. Nor is the subtle
AIR less obedient to thy power, whether thou willest it to be a minister to our
pleasure or utility. Even WATER itself is by thee taught to bear us; the vast
ocean to promote that Intercourse of nations, which ignorance would imagine it
was destined to intercept.

Harris's Dialogue concerning ART. A DISCOURSE ON THE PRINCIPLE OF VITALITY.
WERE the European Philosopher to turn his eyes on this new Empire, to see in
what order and degree those dispositions and arts, which characterize polished
humanity, arise among us, he would undoubtedly perceive that the extension of
benevolence has kept exact pace with the diffusion of knowledge.

Our venerable ancestors early sowed the seeds of science in this land, and
watched their growth with pious care; and it is not difficult to discover the
diffusive spirit of benevolence following every where the increasing light of
science.

Without being particular on this head, one instance of it honorable to
humanity, is the cordial adoption, and generous support given to this Humane
Society, which is formed on a very extensive scale of benevolence.

I decline giving a history of this or similar institutions; nor shall I
descant on the beneficial influence of those numerous humane associations,
which mark and dignify the age in which we live. Suffice it to say, that the
success attending the Societies established for restoring drowned persons at
Amsterdam, Hamburgh, London, Padua, Vienna, Paris and elsewhere, induced some
respectable characters to form one in Boston. But they have gone beyond the
European Societies, and have extended their plan not only to the restoration of
life, when apparently lost, but to the preservation of it when in imminent
danger.

It is scarcely necessary to say that the plan of this Society is totally void
of all private interested views. None of its members receive any other
recompense than the sublime joy of doing good.

I shall avoid speaking of any particular mode of treating persons apparently
dead, and shall confine myself to the great principle of VITALITY, ANIMATION,
or LIFE. I feel the difficulty of doing justice to so copious a subject in the
short space allotted to a discourse.

The subject of animation is not merely curious, but leads to usefulness. It
has arrested the attention of Philosophers in almost every age of the world.
Some of the ancients reasoned thus on it, matter of itself cannot move, yet it
is evident all things change, and that nothing is truly lost; that the sum
total of matter in the Universe remains perfectly the same; and as it was the
work of OMNIPOTENCE to create something out of nothing, the same Omnipotence is
required to reduce any thing back to nothing. See Bacon's account of ancient
opinions.
It is apparent that there is an universal change, or mutation of all things
into all, then must there be some one primary matter, common to all things out
of which they were made -- They went still further, and enquired into the
moving principle, the efficient cause, that is to say, that cause, which
associates the elements of natural substances, and which employs them when
associated, according to their various and peculiar characters See Harris
philos. arrang.
This moving principle they called the Anima Mundi, the Soul of the World.

THALES, one of the seven wise men of Greece, maintained, that Water was the
subtle principle that moved all things. He concluded so, from observing that
matter was chiefly dealt out in moisture; that the seeds of plants so long as
they are in a growing state, are moist; and that a vegetable will grow to a
considerable size from water alone; that the Earth is refreshed, recruited and
made fruitful by water: -- that the Air itself is but an expansion, or
expiration of water. He reminds us of the immense quantities in the
subterraneous regions, whence fountains, and rivers, like so many veins in the
body, convey water over the surface, and through the bowels of our Globe, to
vivify and sustain the whole.

HERACLITUS maintained a very different doctrine. He taught that Fire was the
vivifying principle of all things. He allowed the truth of Thales' doctrine,
but observed that fire had such an universal sway in nature, that water itself
was not without a mixture of it; for that water grows hard and congeals into
Ice when fire leaves it, and is only restored to its fluidity by entering it
again. He remarked that the whole mass of waters in the sea, was actually an
ocean of fire, seeing there were not two distinct drops of water, which do not
owe their fluidity to some portion of fire enclosed within them. So deeply
rooted was the doctrine that fire was the first or animating principle, that
there were, and still are whole nations who worship it as a Deity. That
venerable sect of Philosophers, the Stoics, taught that there was one infinite
eternal, almighty mind, which being diffused through the whole universe of well
ordered and regularly disposed matter, actuates every part of it, and is as it
were the soul of this vast body. The parts of this body they say, are of two
sorts, viz. the Celestial, as the Planets and fixed stars: and the Terrestrial.
as the Earth, and all the other elements about it. The celestial continue
without change, or variation. But the whole sublunary world, is not only liable
to dissolution, but often has been, and shall again be dissolved by fire and
that the reciprocal deaths, dissolutions and digestions, which support by turns
all the substances which we see, are the effects of fire.

See CREECH' s preface to the translation of C. MANILIUS.


ANAXIMENES contradicted both these philosophers; and contended that Air was
the vivifying principle and first mover of all things. He observed that
although the water of Thales could not subsist without the fire of Heraclitus,
yet fire itself could not exist without Air, which was the very spirit of flame
and the breath of life. That no seed of vegetables, eggs of animals, be they
ever so ripe, or pregnant, and cherished with ever so kindly a warmth, will
ever bring forth the embryos contained in them, if they be totally deprived of
air. We shall see hereafter the necessity of attending to these powerful
agents, fire and air, in the resuscitation of those apparently dead by
suspension, submersion, or frost.

Let us now examine the subject of animation with the light afforded us by more
modern Philosophers.

From them we learn that matter is inert, that any one particle of matter left
to itself will continue always in the same state, with regard to its motion or
rest. There are, however, certain powers. which two particles of matter have of
acting on one another, as in gravitation and cohesion. We learn also that there
is an attraction of chrystallization, by which bodies when fluid become in time
solid, and assume a particular figure; that there is an attraction of
magnetism, by which a piece of iron in certain circumstances, attracts another
piece of iron: that there is an attraction of electricity, by which a substance
charged with more electric matter flies to another charged with less. There is,
moreover, chemical attraction, by which two particles of different bodies rush
together, and form one. If we add that most of these have their opposite
repulsions, we can say that they are all the known properties of mere matter;
and there is nothing in them that can merit the name of vitality

But there is in a growing vegetable a power beyond all this, viz. a power
which first moves, and then conducts that latent process by which a seed
becomes a plant.

Now, every body capable of growing, has a certain internal adjustment,
disposition, or arrangement of its matter, which is called organization; and
being capable of increasing in bulk has a certain degree of vitality. There is
a scale of life, stretching in uniform gradation from human excellence
downwards, till it disappears in a shade of ambiguity, in the living state of
vegetables. Brown.
Life, says the Bishop of Landaff, belongs alike to both the animal and
vegetable kingdom, and seems to depend on the same principle in both. Stop the
motion of a fluid in an animal limb, by a strong ligature, the limb mortifies
beyond the ligature and drops off; a branch of a tree, under like
circumstances, grows dry and rots away. -- Both animals and vegetables are
subject to be frost-bitten and to consequent mortifications; both languish in
excessive heats; both experience extravasation of juices from repletion, and
pinings from inanition; both can suffer amputation of limbs without being
deprived of life, and in a similar manner both form a callus; both are liable
to contract disease by infection; both are strengthened by air and motion.

Every seed of a plant is an organized body endowed with vessels, and contains
under several membranes the plant in miniature. Look at the engravings in
Grew's anatomy of plants.
If this seed be put into the moist earth, and a certain degree of heat
applied, with a free access of air, (the three principles of the ancient
Philosophers) the juice in these vessels will expand by the warmth; and being
thus once put in motion, gradually increase, and grow up into a plant; which
plant produces a similar seed, capable of propagating it is kind forever.

In like manner an Egg is an organized body, which contains under several
envelopements the chicken in miniature, and may be considered as a womb,
detached from the body of the parent animal, in which the embryo is just
beginning to be formed; if warmed to a certain degree, whether by the parent
animal, or by art, the fluids which surround that speck in the egg called the
punctum vitae, expand, and the little vessels swell and extend themselves; and
the motion, or oscillation once began, it develops, by degrees, until it
becomes a perfect animal, capable of all the functions common to its kind.

The seed of the vegetable, and the egg of the animal would remain, or rather
become effete and inanimate, unless some stimulus, some agent from without,
excited or began a motion in them. But what is this agent, or stimulus? For
that is the question. --

This stimulus, or animating principle in a natural body, does not depend on
its organization, nor its figure, nor any of those inferior forms, which make
up the system of its visible qualities; but it is the power, which not being
that organization, nor that figure, nor those qualities, is yet able to
produce, to preserve, and to employ them. It is therefore the power, which
departing, the body ceases to live, and the members soon pass into putrefaction
and decay. Harris Phil. Arrang.


From an attentive observation of animated nature, we discover that life is
caused, and continued by something which acts from without; and this something
is (as far as we can discover) heat, acting on the seed or egg. I say heat,
according to the common acceptance of the term: but to speak more
philosophically, it is that subtle electric fluid, which fills the immense
space of the whole Universe, pervades all bodies, and actuates every particle
of matter. Heat is only one effect of its motion.

In whatever manner a susceptible or irritable body is operated upon by this
exciting power, a certain quantity of it, or a certain energy, is assigned and
belongs to every individual system upon the commencement of its living state.
Brown.

Anatomical Description of a Hen's-egg; with the history of the growth of the
animal contained in it.

IMmediately under the shell, lies that common membrane, or skin, which lines
it on the inside, adhering closely to it every where, except at the broad end,
where a little cavity is left, that is filled with air; which increases as the
animal within grows larger. Under this membrane are contained two whites, though
seeming to us to be only one: each wrapped up in a membrane of it is own, one
white within the other. In the midst of all is the yolk, wrapped round likewise
with it is own membrane* At each end of this are two ligaments, called chalazae,
which are white dense substances, made from the membranes, and serving to keep
the white and the yolk in their places.

The cicatricula is the part where the animal first begins to show signs of
life; it resembles a vetch or small pea, lying on one side of the yolk and
within its membranes. The outer membranes and ligaments preserve the fluids in
their proper places, the white serves as nourishment; and the yolk with its
membranes, after a time, becomes a part of the chicken's body. This is the
description of the hen's egg, and answers to all others, how large or how small
soever.

Previously to putting the eggs to the hen, Malpighi and Haller first examined
this cicatricula, which they consider as the most important part of the egg.
This (which some call the punctum saliens, or punctum vitae,) was found in
those that were impregnated by the male to be large, but in others small. Upon
examination with the microscope it was found to be a kind of bag, containing a
transparent liquor, in the midst of which the embryo was seen. The embryo
resembled a composition of little threads, which the warmth of future
incubation tended to enlarge.

Upon placing the egg in a proper warmth, after six hours the vital speck
begins to dilate like the pupil of he eye. The head of the chicken is
distinctly seen, with the backbone something resembling a tadpole floating in
its ambient fluid, but as yet seeming to assume none of the functions of animal
life. About six hours more the little animal is seen more distinctly; the head
becomes more plainly visible, and the vertebrae of the back more easily
perceivable. All these signs of preparation for life are increased in six hours
more; and, at the end of 24, the ribs begin to take their places, the neck
begins to lengthen, and the head to turn to one side.

At this time, the fluids in the egg seem to have changed place; the yolk which
was before in the center of the shell, approaches nearer the broad end. The
watery part of the white is diminished the grosser part sinks to the small end;
and the little animal appears to turn toward the part of the broad end in
which a cavity has been described, and with its yolk seems to adhere to the
membrane there*

At the end of 40 hours the great work of life seems fairly begun, and the
animal plainly appears to move; the back bone thickens; the first rudiments of
the eyes begin to appear; the eart beats, and the blood begins already to
circulate. The parts, however, as yet are fluid; but, by degrees, become more
and more tenacious. At the end of two days, the liquor in which the chicken
swims. seems to increase; the head appears with two little bladders in place of
eyes; the heart beats in the manner of every embryo where the blood does not
circulate through the lungs. In about 14 hours after this, the chicken is grown
more strong; the veins and the arteries begin to branch, in order to form the
brain* and the spinal marrow is seen stretching along the backbone. In three
days, the whole body of the chicken appears bent; the head with it is two
eye balls, with their different humors, now distinctly appear; and five other
vesicles are seen, which soon unite to form the rudiments of the brain. The
out-lines also of the thighs, and wings, begin to be seen, and the body begins
to gather flesh. At the end of the fourth day, the vesicles that go to form the
brain approach each other the wings and things appear more solid; the whole
body is covered with a jelly like flesh; the heart, that was hitherto exposed
is now covered up within the body, by a very thin transparent membrane; and at
the same time the umbilical vessels, that unite the animal to the yolk, now
appear to come forth from the abdomen. After the 5th and 6th days the vessels
of the brain begin to be covered over; the wings and thighs lengthen; the belly
is closed up, and turned; the liver is seen within it, very distinctly, not yet
grown red, but of a dusky white: both the ventricles of the heart are
discerned, as if they were two separate hearts* beating distinctly; the whole
body of the animal is covered over, and the traces of the incipient feathers
are already to be seen. The 7th day, the head appears very large; the brain is
covered entirely over the bill begins to appear betwixt the eyes, and the
wings, the thighs, and the legs, have acquired their perfect figure. Hitherto,
however, the animal appears as if it had two bodies; the yolk is joined to it
by the umbilical vessels that come from the belly and is furnished with its
vessels, through which the blood circulates, as through the rest of the body of
the chicken, making a bulk greater than that of the animal itself. But toward
the end of incubation, the umbilical vessels shorten the yolk, and with it the
intestines are thrust up into the body of the chicken by the action of the
muscles of the belly, and the two bodies are thus formed into one During this
state, all the organs are found to perform their secretions; the bile is found
to be separated, as in grown animals; but it is transparent, and without
bitterness; the chicken then also appears to have lungs. On the 10th* the
muscles of the wings appear, and the feathers begin to push out. On the 11th,
the heart which hitherto had appeared divided, begins to unite, the arteries
which belong to it, join into it, like the fingers into the palm of the hand.
All these appearances, come more into view, because the fluids the vessels had
hitherto' secreted, were more transparent; but as the color of the fluids
deepen, their operations and circulations are more distinctly seen. As the
animal thus, by the 11th day, completely formed, begins to gather strength, it
becomes more uneasy in its situation, and exerts its animal powers with
increasing force. For some time before it is able to break the shell in which
it is imprisoned, it is heard to chirrup, receiving a sufficient quantity of
air for this purpose, from that cavity which lies between the membrane and the
shell, and which must contain air to resist the external pressure. At length
upon the 20th day, in some birds sooner, and later in others, the enclosed
animal breaks the shell within which it has been confined, with its beak; and
by repeated efforts, at last procures its enlargement.

From this history we perceive that those parts which are most conducive to
life, are the first that are begun: the head and the back bone, which no doubt
enclose the brain, and the spinal marrow, though both are too limpid to be
discerned, are the first that are seen to exist; the beating of the heart is
seen soon after; the less noble parts seem to spring from these, the wings, the
thighs, the feet, and lastly the bill. The resemblance between the beginning
animal in the egg, and the embryo in the womb, is very striking -- An egg may
be considered as a womb, detached from the body of the parent animal, in which
the embryo is but just beginning to be formed. It may be regarded as a kind of
incomplete delivery. The similitude between the egg and the embryo in the womb
has induced many to assert (and with great probability) that all animals are
produced from eggs.

Goldsmith's History of Earth and animated Nature, vol. 2d. See also Malpighi,
Haller, Grass and Buffon.


Now, a living animal has, besides those attributes common to all bodies, as
solidity, extention and gravity, a peculiar something, which distinguishes it
from a dead one; for a muscular fiber will contract, and that not by the power
of gravitation, cohesion, chrystallization, magnetism, or chemical attraction.

That state of an animal fiber in which a contraction, or oscillation, is
produced by the influx, or contact of a stimulus, is called irritability, or
susceptibility.

That principle in animals, on which sensation, motion, and all the animal
powers depend, is called the Vis Vitalis.

By the action of stimuli on the (...), particularly heat, the vis vitalis is
excited and preserved when diminished it may be increased, and when suspended
it may be restored.

Within every one of us, there is an innate and active power, which ceases not
its work, when sense and appetite are asleep; which without any conscious
cooperation of the man himself, carries him from a seed, or embryo, to his
destined magnitude. This is strictly speaking the Animal Economy, and is as
perfect in the brutal Hottentot, as in the brightest genius of human kind.

All this depends on a principle which some call the Vis Actuosa, others the
Impetum Faciens. This power is innate, and is that by which man lives; it forms
him, it nourishes him, refreshes him, moves him, animates him. By it he feels,
he desires, refuses, sleeps and wakes; nevertheless, it is totally different
from the Mind: For,

In our bodies is found something of quite a different nature from what has
been mentioned; a power of thinking, reflecting, comparing, choosing, and
representing to itself past, present, and to come. This power, in relation to
its several operations, is termed comprehension, understanding, reason, mind,
will, freedom, or collectively, by the single word SOUL. See Herpert.
But to return to the innate principle of animation in man.

Every body knows that although the child is formed, and lives, and grows, and
moves in the womb of its mother, it never breathes there. It receives its
animating principle, its heat, motion and life from the mother, by a nerve and
artery, which enters at its navel and conveys the blood to the heart of the
infant, without ever passing through the lungs. The blood in this case goes
directly on through the body of the heart, by an opening called the Foramen
Ovale, and from thence to the Aorta, or great Artery, by which it is driven to
every part of its body; so that the circulation, nutrition and life, are kept
up with the mother, as if they were not two bodies but one. It is remarkable
that the fruit of vegetables is, in like manner, nourished, and supported by a
slender stalk issuing from the parent stock.

When the child is born it becomes dependent on a new principle for the
continuance of its existence. When it passes from its watery habitation into
the atmosphere, a new determination takes place; and instead of the umbilical
cord from the mother, the common air becomes the main-spring of all its actions
and functions. When the child opens it is mouth to cry, down rushes the air and
expands the lungs. The blood, which had hitherto passed through the heart, now
takes a wider circuit, and the foramen ovale closes forever. The lungs which
had till this time been inactive, now first begin their functions, and they
cease not their motion as long as life continues.

Hence then, it appears, that next to the expanding power of heat, Respiration,
or breathing is the primum mobile in the human machine.

Atmospheric-air contains a certain vivifying spirit, which is necessary to
continue the lives of animals, and this, in a gallon of air, is said to be
sufficient for one man during the space of a minute, and not much longer. Air
that has lost this vivifying spirit, deadens fire, extinguishes flame, and
destroys life. Furguson.


It is well known that there is a set of vessels in the lungs, which contain
air, and another which contain blood.

The air in the lungs is in constant motion, for either that which is at
present contained in the cells, is passing through the windpipe into the
atmosphere, or a fresh parcel is passing from the external atmosphere through
the windpipe into those cells. The whole of this compound motion is called
Respiration. Fordyce.


If the air continue at rest in the lungs for many minutes, or if a man
continue to respire the same air, or if the breathes air that has served for
the inflammation of fuel, or pure fixable air, or any other vapor, excepting
respirable air, he dies Fordyce.


From the organs of respiration, or rather from what may be called the systema
spirituale pneumonicum, all the actions of the body, and all the power which it
exerts are ultimately derived.

It appears from a train of experiments, that the common air communicates a
vivifying something to the blood, when drawn into the lungs, and gives to it a
stimulating quality, by which it is fitted to excite the heart to action; and
that the chemical quality, which the blood acquires in passing through the
lungs, is necessary to keep up the action of the heart, and consequently the
health of the animal. For no sooner are the lungs quiescent than the heart
ceases to contract, the blood stops, all the intellectual operations cease,
sensation and voluntary motion are suspended, and all external signs of life
disappear. All which are admirably explained by Dr. Edmund Goodwin. See his
experimental Enquiry, etc.


When the fluids in the human machine are thus at rest, what do we see? -- a
mere carcass -- We see the person dead! But after what manner? Here are all the
solids, and all the fluids too. What then is lacking? A gentle oscillation, or
motion of the fluids, a circumgyration of the liquors; for let there be by what
means soever an oscillation, a concussion, or excitement of the nervous energy,
which may impel the fluids to move the lungs and heart, life immediately
returns, with the usual circulation of the blood and other fluids, heat,
color, agility, cogitation, and every vital, natural and human action. There
are several instances of people buried alive, even in this country. Oh reader!
-- But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of the prisonhouse, The GRAVE.

I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres. --





If it be asked, what is that vivifying something which through the medium of
the atmosphere, gives this oscillation or concussion, and continues life?

I answer; it is a portion of that subtle electric fluid, which fills the
immense space of the whole universe, pervades all bodies, and actuates every
particle of matter. By it the phenomenon of magnetism, fire, and light are
produced; and on it the various and astonishing phenomenon of VEGETATION and
ANIMATION depend. If it be asked further, what and where is the source of this
all powerful agent? I answer, the SUN is the efficient cause of the motions of
this fluid, and the various phenomenon of our system are the effects of these
motions.

Soul of surrounding worlds!
Without whose quickening glance, this cumbrous earth
Would be a lifeless mass, inert and dead,
And not as now, the green abode of life. See Thompsons summer.

I am aware that analogical arguments are probable, but not conclusive; and
that plausible inferences from well known facts in brutes, have occasioned many
errors respecting man. Yet I cannot but believe from what we observe in the
resuscitation of swallows, after lying four months in the bottom of a pond; of
snakes frozen stiff as a stick, of flies corked up in a bottle of Madeira in
Virginia, and brought to life again in Great Britain; See Dr. Franklin's letter
to Mons. Dubourg.
I say, I cannot help believing from these and similar facts, that it is
possible to restore to life a human being who has been frozen many days. We
have well authenticated accounts of not only birds frozen to death (as it is
called) but of the human species too, who were even for days, without pulse,
breathing, or the least natural heat, and yet resuscitated. See the writings of
Redi and Whytte. The Flora Siberica. Also Peyer anatom.


In this case, the application of heat should be conducted, says Dr. Goodwin,
on the same plan, which nature points out for the hybernating, or torpid
animal; that is to say; it should be applied gradually and uniformly. It may be
raised to 98 degrees of Farenheit, but not above 100. To blow one's own breath
into the lungs of another, is an absurd and pernicious practice.

The consideration of the facts just related, have led some to conceptions of
the Soul which have puzzled them, and created doubts rather unfavourable to the
opinions entertained by the majority of christians. "What is the condition (say
they) of the soul all this time. -- In animal bodies there are only two general
conditions life and death; and if by death we understand the privation of life,
there can be no intermediate state between them, say Dr. Goodwin; for no human
art can communicate life to dead matter. Dr. Whytte thinks it is not only
probable, but even demonstrable, that the soul does not immediately leave the
body upon a total stoppage of the heart's motion, and of the circulation of the
blood, i. e. upon what we usually call death, but that it continues for some
time at least present with it, and ready to actuate it. He thinks with
Gassendi, Dr. H. More, Sir Isaac Newton, Dr. S. Clarke, and some other of the
greatest philosophers of the last and present age, that the soul is extended.

The apparently dead carcass, therefore, which has lain three, or four hours
under water, is as much alive as a sound hen's-egg; See page ^
they would both putrify and dissolve if let alone; but apply a due and uniform
degree of heat to either, and you change the seemingly dead body into a live
and active animal.

The union of soul with body, is the most abstruse contemplation that can
exercise the mind of man! How is it that one painful idea alters the course of
the blood! Who can explain how the blood in return, carries its irregularities
to the mind! What incomprehensible mechanism has subjected the organs to
sentiment and thought! What (says Voltaire, is that unknown fluid, which is
quicker and more active than light, and flies in the twinkling of an eye,
through all the channels of life; produces memory, sorrow or joy, reason or
frenzy, recalls with horror what one would wish to forget, and makes of a
thinking being, an object of admiration, or a subject of pity and tears!

The intellectual scheme, (says the author of Hermes,) which never forgets
DEITY, postpones every thing corporeal to the PRIMARY MENTAL CAUSE. It is here
it looks for the origin of intelligible ideas, even of those, which exist in
human capacities. For though sensible objects may be the destined medium, to
awaken the dormant energies of man's understanding, yet are those energies
themselves; no more contained in sense, than the explosion of a cannon in the
spark which gave it fire.

This then, like all other sound philosophy, leads us at last, up to the GREAT
FIRST CAUSE, the ENS ENTIUM, the SUPREME AUTHOR OF ALL, who is ever to be
adored with the most profound reverence by the reasonable part of his creation.
Dr. Whytte.


Thus much toward investigating the important subject of Vitality or
Animation. The narrow limits of a discourse prevent my pursuing the matter
further at this time. I pass on to a more general and pleasant theme, the
Progress of Humanity. Perhaps we may discover the causes which have produced
that spirit of benevolence, which gave birth to this society.

It is very common to praise ancient times and condemn our own; yet, if we cast
our eyes back on the history of mankind, the view will shock us. Of six and
twenty centuries, wherein the memory and learning of mankind have been
exercised, scarcely six can be culled out as fertile in the sciences, or
favorable to humanity! See Nov. organ. Bacon.
On a modest computation, the destruction of the human race in building up
tyranny by Sesostris, by Semiramis, by Xerxes, by Alexander, the Romans, the
Sicilians, by Mithradates, the Goths and Vandals, Crusaders, and by the
Spaniards in Mexico and Peru, amount to forty times the number of mankind now
on the face of the earth.

The Roman name strikes us with such veneration, that we are apt to include
humanity among their virtues. But the most celebrated virtue of the most
renowned Roman would pass without much eulogium in this day. The truth is,
their natural roughness of temper, their adoration of Victoria, that Deity so
dear to the Romans, made them neglect and trample upon their fellow men, whom
they scarcely distinguished from brutes. And, when the glory, greatness,
strength and learning of that famous people were extinguished, and when their
Empire was finally overturned, the cause of humanity was still less regarded.

It was worse, when a northern swarm of Barbarians, the Goths, quitting their
inhospitable regions, spread through the more fertile parts of the world, and
extinguished the small light of learning which remained. See Boe^haave's
academ. Lectures.


And when Mahomed and his successors carried their victories, with the rapidity
of a torrent over most parts of Asia, Africa, through Persia, Arabia, Egypt,
and Palestine, they completed the destruction the Goths began.

When the Barbarians embraced christanity, they made it bend to their
prejudices, rather than subject their prejudices to it is principles; and from
the mixture of christianity with the ancient customs of barbarians sprang a
discord in manners. From a mixture of the rights of sovereigns with those of
the nobility, and of the priesthood, sprang a discord in politics and
government. And from a mixture of the Pagans and Mahometans with the
Christians, sprang a discord in Religion. Anarchy and confusion were the
consequences of so many contrasts: -- Europe was one large field of battle, and
ignorance and brutal force quenched almost every ray of knowledge, while the
noble faculties of the soul were absorbed by fear. See Robertson, Chapter v. and
Millot Element. of genesis Hist.


The extension of benevolence, keeps exact pace with the extension of
knowledge, and the exertions of the one are circumscribed by the limits of the
other.

Whenever the PARENT of UNIVERSAL NATURE chooses to make a mighty change in the
affairs of men, he seems to effect it by, what we call, mean and humble
instruments.

Two seemingly inglorious mechanical discoveries, changed the face of the world
more than any conqueror, Sect or Empire ever did. I mean the Mariners Compass,
and the Art of Printing. See Novum Organ.
These inventions gradually banished barbarism, and humanized the world. The
ancients were acquainted with but a very small part of the globe. They called
all the northern nations, Scythians, and all the western, Celtae,
indiscriminately. They had no knowledge of Africa beyond the nearest part of
AEthiopia; nor of Asia beyond the Ganges, and as for our quarter of the world,
America, they had not even a tradition about it. Montesq.


Commerce is a cure for the most destructive prejudices. It has every where
diffused a knowledge of the manners of all nations. Montesq.
The multiplication of books by the are of printing, and of drawings and
pictures by the art of engraving, produced a radiance of knowledge that made
tyranny tremble, and will effectually secure the human race from those horrid
shocks of barbarism and tyrranny, that once nearly laid waste the old world.
The Mariners Compass then opened the Universe, and Printing displayed it.

At this time, superstition, and an odious ecclesiastical despotism, received a
fatal wound. Astronomical improvements, by discovering worlds besides our own,
expanded the human mind. So that when the christian religion began, again, to
be taught in its purity, the Universe seemed to extend itself to do it homage.
Then did KNOWLEDGE raise weeping HUMANITY from the dust, and pointed with her
blazing torch the way to happiness and peace! Then did RELIGION, instead of
daggers, wrecks and fetters, wear upon her graceful brow this everlasting
motto, My ways, are ways of pleasantness, and all my paths are peace.

Need I say a word to prove to such an audience as this, that the present
prevailing spirit of benevolence is principally owing to the diffusion of a
Religion, as much above all others, as Heaven is above the Earth? Let him who
doubts, compare it with the next best system the world ever possessed. Did not
Moses bring famine and other plagues on the Egyptians? Elijah deprived the
earth of rain, and destroyed with fire those who opposed him; as did Elisha
those who mocked him. Did not David kill and curse those he hated or envied?
But the Founder of the Religon of humanity came without judgment, anger, or
revenge. All his transactions were for the benefit of man. He allayed the winds
which threatened destruction to the mariners; he restored limbs to the lame,
sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, clean flesh to the leprous, a sound
mind to the insane, and life to the dead. See Bacon's Essays.
All his, were works of beneficence, diffusing charity and goodwill to men,
accompanied too, with a spirit so sublime and friendly, that the human heart,
with unbidden veneration, bows down before it.

While we consider this HUMANE SOCIETY as a Stream deriving it is source from
that inexhaustible River of Joy, the Ministers of Religion may be considered
it is principal guardians. They have been it is chief supporters; and so long as
they continue to inculcate the precepts of the Religion of Humanity, with that
benevolent, gentle, pious, charitable, tolerating spirit, which so eminently
distinguishes those before whom I now speak, they will be regarded among it is
brightest ornaments. The author rejoices in this public opportunity of
rendering a just tribute to the Clergy of Boston. He hopes it will not be less
grateful, in coming from a person who was educated in that religious
persuasion, which teaches every man to be his own priest.


Then will CHARITY, that bright constellation of christian virtues, always be
present with us; under whose fostering influence, we hope, this yet infant
Society, this standing committee of humanity, will extend, so far and wide,
it is salutiferous effects, that future generations will have reason to
commemorate it is exertions with grateful admiration!

APPENDIX.
AT a Semiannual Meeting of the HUMANE SOCIETY held at the County Courthouse
in BOSTON, June 8, 1790.
VOTED, That the Honorable Judge LOWELL, Judge SULLIVAN, and JOSEPH BARREL,
Esquire be a Committee to examine the Treasurer's accounts, and that the said
Committee, after examining said accounts, report to the Trustees; who are
hereby authorized to publish such parts of the receipts and expenditures as
they shall judge proper.

Attest. JOHN AVERY,
jun. Sec'ry.
The Subscriber, one of the Committee appointed to examine the Treasurer's
accounts, has examined the same and seen the vouchers, and found them right;
and that there was a balance in the Treasurer's hands, June 7, 1790, of L. 122
0. 6.

JOSEPH BARREL.
Boston, July 9. 1790.
Pursuant to the above Vote, the Trustees present to the Public the following
state of the receipts and payments, from the Institution of the Society to June
7, 1790.

RECEIPTS.
L. s. d. 1786. By subscription of the members in the years 1786 and 1787, 80
12 4 1787. Collection in June 1787, 13 1 4 1788. Subscription of members, 52 12
8 Collection in June 1788. 11 4 0 Donation from Capt. John Calef, of the island
of St. Christophers, 1 16 0 Interest on money loaned. 1 15 1 1789. Subscription
of members, 68 6 0 Collection in June 1789. 9 1 5 Donation from George Cabot,
Esquire of Beverly, 1 8 0 Interest on money loaned. 3 12 0 1790. Subscription of
members to June 7, 1790, 43 8 0 L. 286 16 11 PAYMENTS.
L. s. d. 1786. To cash paid for record books, 0 7 6 Premium for a signal
exertion is preserving life, 1 8 0 Printing the rules of the institution, etc.
5 16 8 Messenger, notifying several meetings, and other expenses, 5 14 0 L. 13
6 2 1787. Tobacco machines. 7 16 9 Advertising, and expense of semi-annual
meetings, 2 15 2 Printing 600 Dr. Lathrop's discourses with the appendix, 22 10
0 Building house on Lovell's Island, 8 0 0 Ditto on Situate Beach, 8 9 0 Ditto
on Nantasket Beach, 8 19 10 Premiums for preserving life, 2 8 0 Account for
printing, 14 10 0 Messenger, 6 0 0 81 8 19 1788. Premiums for preserving life,
3 6 0 Tobacco machines, 8 11 0 Printing advertisements, 1 16 0 Expenses on
houses in Boston harbor, 1 16 8 Ditto of semi-annual meetings, 0 12 8
Messenger, 6 0 0 22 2 4 1789. Building three houses in Boston harbor, 28 10 0
Premiums and a gold medal for preserving life, 6 0 6 Printing circular letter,
1 18 4 Expenses of semi-annual meetings, 0 12 0 57 0 10 1790. Repairs on houses
in the harbor, 2 7 4 Tobacco machine, 2 5 0 Messenger, 6 6 0 10 18 4 L. 164 16
5 Money at interest and in the hands of the Treasurer, 122 0 6 L. 286 16 11

The Society are also possessed of one share in Malden Bridge, being a donation
from the honorable Thomas* Russell, Esquire

Members of the HUMANE SOCIETY of the Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS.
MR. Thomas Amory, John Andrews, Esquire Mr. Azor G. Archbald, Mr. Jonathan Loring
Austin, Hon. Benja. Austin, jun. Esquire John Avery jun. Esquire James Avery Esquire
Machia^, Mr. Nathaniel Balch, Leammi Baldwin. Esquire Doct. Joshua Barker, Hingham,
Joseph Barrel, Esquire 10 s. Samuel Barrett, Esquire Doct. Josiah Bartlett,
Charlestown, Doct. William Baylies, Dighton, Maj. William Bell, Mr. Nathaniel
Bethune, Mr. William Billings, Samuel Blodget, Esquire Hon. James Bowdoin, Esquire L.
3. James Bowdoin jun. Esquire Dorchester. John Boil, Esquire Samuel Bradford, Esquire
Samuel Breck, Esquire 20 s. Rev. Josiah Bridge, East Sudbury, Mr. Henry Bromfield,
jun. Mrs. Martha Brown, Hon. George Cabot, Esquire Beverly, Benjamin Clark, Esquire
Rev. John Clarke, Hon. David Cobb, Esquire Taunton. John Codman, jun. Esquire Hon.
Richard Cranch, Esquire Braintree, Capt. Nathaniel Curtis, Thomas Cushing, jun. Esquire
Mr. Benjamin Clark Cutler, Mr. James Cutler, Mr. William Dall, Mr. Peter Roe
Dalton, Hon. Francis Dana, Esquire Cambridge, Hon. Caleb Davis. Esquire Amasa Davis,
Esquire Robert Davis, Esquire Mr. Thomas Davis, Plymouth, Hon. Thomas Dawes, jun. Esquire
Mr. Gilbert Deblois, jun. Richard Devens, Esquire Mr. John Deverell, Sam'l Dexter,
Esquire Westown, 13 s. 4 d, Aaron Dexter, M. D. William Donaldson, Esquire Mr. Ebenezer
Dorr, Rev Joseph Eckley, Rev. John Eliot, Samuel Eliot, Esquire 20 s. Mr. Simon
Elliot, Mr. Thomas English, William Erving, Esquire Mr. John Erving, jun. Sieur de
l' Etombe, L 1. 4 s. Mr. Jacob Eustis, Rev. Oliver Everett, Mr. Nathaniel
Fellows, Mr. Bossenger Foster, Mr. William Foster, Mr. Ebenezer Foster, Rev.
James Freeman, Mr. Jonathan Freeman, Capt. Lemuel Gardner, Hon. Elbridge Gerry,
Esquire Cambridge, Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire John Gore, Esquire Mr. Samuel Gore, Mr. Joseph
Green, Joseph Greenleaf, Esquire Mr. John Greenleaf, Daniel Greenleaf, Esquire Enoch
Greenleaf, Esquire Westown, David Greenough, Esquire Capt, Ebenezer Hall, Medford, Mr.
Joseph Hall, Joseph Hall, jun. Esquire His Excellency Gov. Hancock, L 1. 10 s. Mr
John Harbach, Doct. Lemuel Hayward, Samuel Henshaw, Esquire Northampton, Hon.
Stephen Higginson, Esquire Henry Hill, Esquire Benjamin Hitchborn, Esquire Mr. Thomas
Hitchborn, Alexander Hodgdon, Esquire Rev. Simeon Howard, D.D. Mr. Samuel Hunt,
Hon. Jonathan Jackson, Esquire Henry Jackson, Esquire Leonard Jarvis, Esquire Patrick
Jeffery, Esquire L. 3. John Coffin Jones, Esquire Stephen Jones, Esquire Machias, Doct.
John Joy, Mr. John Kneeland, Mr. Bartholomew Kneeland, Mr. Thomas Knox, Mr.
William Lambert, Rev. John Lathrop, D.D. Thomas Lee, Esquire Cambridge, Hon.
Benjamin Lincoln, Esquire Hingham, Doct. James Lloyd, Hon. John Lowell, Esquire L. 1.
Mr. John Lowell, John Lucas, Esquire Samuel Lyman, Esquire Springfield, Jonathan Mason,
Esquire Jonathan Mason, jun. Esquire Mr. John May, Mr. Joseph May, George Richards
Minot, Esquire Rev. John Murray, Gloucester, Mr. Henry Newman, Rev. Thomas Fitch
Oliver, Marblehead, Mr. Andrew Oliver, Hon. Robert Treat Pain, Esquire Mr. William
Pain, Rev. Samuel Parker, D.D. Hon. William Phillips, Esquire William Phillips,
jun. Esquire Mr. William Perkins, jun. Mr. Thomas Perkins, Mr. Thomas Perkins, jun.
Mr. Joseph Pierce, Mr. Robert Pope, Mr. Joseph Pope, William Powell, Esquire Mr.
Henry Prentiss, Doct. Cephas Prentice East-Sudbury, Ezekiel Price, Esquire Edward
Proctor. Esquire Mr. Sampson Read, Col. Paul Revere, John Rice. Esquire Mr. Thomas
Robinson, Portland. Hon. Thomas Russel, Esquire L. 2. 8 s. Mr. Joseph Russel, Mr.
Ezekiel Russell, Mr. Samuel Salisbury, Daniel Sargeant Esquire Mr. Daniel Sargeant,
jun. William Scoll^y, Esquire Mr. William Selby, Hon. David Sewall, Esquire York,
Samuel Sewall, Esquire Marblehead, Mr. William Shattuck, Mr. Elisha Sigourney,
Doct. Oliver Smith, Mr. William Smith, Capt. Isaac Smith, Malden, Capt. Stephen
Smith, Machias, Capt. Nehemiah Somes, Mr. David Spear, Doct. William Spooner,
Hon. John Sprague, Esquire Lancaster, Rev. Samuel Stillman, D.D. Doct. Charles
Stockbridge, Situate, Mr. Russell Sturgis, Hon. James Sullivan, Esquire 12 s John
Sweetser Esquire Mr. John Templeman, Rev. Peter Thacher, Doct. Thomas Thaxter,
Hingham, Doct. David Townsend, Mr. Edward Tuckerman, William Tudor, Esquire Hon.
Cotton Tutts, Esquire Weymouth, Ebenezer Wales, Esquire Dorchester, Mr. Ephraim Wales,
A^^^mas Wa^^, jun. Esquire Westown, Col Joseph Ward, John Warren. M.D. Benjamin
Waterhouse, M.D. Josiah waters, Esquire Arnold Wells, Esquire Doct. Thomas Welsh, Hon
Oliver Wendell, Esquire Rev. Samuel West, Mr. Joshua Wetherly, Mr James White, Rev.
Joseph Willard, S T D. Doct. Moses Willard, Worcester, Doct. ^^os Windship
Doct. Isaac Winslow, Marshfield.
OFFICERS of the HUMANE SOCIETY for the Year 1790.
Hon. JAMES BOWDOIN. Esquire President, Hon. THOMAS RUSSELL, Esquire First
Vice President, JOHN WARREN M.D. Second Vice President, Rev. SIMEON OWARD, D D.
Treasurer, Rev. SAMUEL PARKER D.D. Corresponding Secretary, JOHN AVERY jun. Esquire
Recording Secretary,
Trustees. Rev. JOHN LATHROP, D.D. Rev. PETER (...), Rev. JOHN CLARKE, Doct.
THOMAS WELSH, AARON DEXTER, M.D. Mr. NATHANIEL BALCH,


