LETTERS TO A YOUNG LADY, ON USEFUL AND INTERESTING SUBJECTS.

VOL. I.

LETTERS TO A YOUNG LADY, ON A VARIETY OF USEFUL AND INTERESTING SUBJECTS:
CALCULATED TO IMPROVE the HEART, to FORM the MANNERS, and ENLIGHTEN the
UNDERSTANDING.

"That our Daughters may be as polished Corners of the Temple." BY THE REV.
JOHN BENNETT, Author of Strictures on Female Education.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. M,DCC,XCI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Letters have long lain by the author in a state of neglect;
indeed of uncertainty whether the publication of them would do any credit to
himself, or service to the world. Nor does he think, that he should ever have
presumed to expose them before the formidable tribunal of the public, unless
animated by the name of the very exalted and amiable personage, to whom they
are addressed.

If they deserve no fame, they ought, however, in his opinion, to be branded
with no malignant or invidious censure, as their intention is really to serve
the fairest and most amiable part of the creation; to rouse young ladies from a
vacant or insipid life, into one of usefulness, and laudable exertion -- to
recall them from visionary novels and romances into solid reading and
reflection -- and from the criminal absurdities of fashion, to the simplicity
of nature and the dignity of virtue. He has attempted a method of uniting, in
their character, the graces with the virt^es; an amiable heart with elegant
manners and an enlightened understanding; and if he should not have succeeded,
is, by no means the first person, who has misjudged his powers, "qui magnis
excidit ausis," and can reflect for his comfort, that laudable projects are
perhaps the whole, that lies within the narrow circle, or the talents of the
bulk of mortals.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.
This Work recommends, in the following Order,

I. RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE with a List of proper Writers. II. Polite Knowledge, as
it relates to the Belles Lettres in general; Epist^^ary writing, History, the
Lives of particular Persons, Geography, Natural History, Astronomy, Poetry,
Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, Heraldry, Voyages, Travels, etc. with a
Catalogue of, and Criticisms upon, the most approved Authors under each
Article. III. Accomplishments, as displayed in Needlework, Embroidery, Drawing,
Music, Dancing, Dress, Politeness, etc. IV. Prudential Conduct and Maxims, with
respect to Amusements, Love, Courtship, Marriage, etc.
TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
THE encouragement of every thing virtuous and laudable has been a
distinguishing characteristic of your reign; and if licentiousness and vice
have infested the kingdom, it is not because they have received any countenance
from your sovereign authority, or even wanted its most salutary restraints and
pointed opposition.

To your own sex, in particular, you have exhibited a most instructive and
animating example. -- You have taught them by a silent, but impressive
language, to depend more for real influence and esteem, on the mild, the soft,
and the attractive graces, than on all the perishable appendages of greatness,
illustrious birth, political interference, or even the dazzling splendours of a
throne.

In an age, when artificial gaieties have almost banished the sweeter pleasures
of simplicity and nature you have displayed as great a fondness, as the
necessary avocations of royalty would permit, for domestic ^^^rement.
Fashionable mothers might have derived a lesson from your conduct. Your royal
breast has appeared to vibrate with a more exquisite delight, to the caresses
of a tender offspring, in the shades of Windsor, than it ever received from
crowded levees, or the superbest brilliance of a court.

In a period of false refinement, when conjugal fidelity has not appeared a
favorite virtue, your Majesty has been a model of as delicate an attachment,
as ever graced the purest ages of antiquity, or occurs in the voluminous annals
of the world. And in an era of fastidious affluence, when Cristianity has been
undermined by the subtilty of scepties, and still more disgraced by the
lukewarmness and irregularities of its professors; when its grand bulwark, the
christian sabbath, has been daringly attacked, particularly amongst the higher
ranks of people, by many kinds of licentious amusement, you have done every
thing in cooperation with our beloved Monarch, to stop the progress of the
evil, that could result from virtuous precepts, or the unsullied luster of
example.

Amidst this general assemblage of virtues, there is one point, however, in
which your Majesty's character shines forth with peculiar luster, and will
command the grateful veneration of the most distant posterity. It is that,
which is particularly enforced in this work, and so closely interwoven with the
most essential interest of society -- female education. This, your Majesty is
allowed to have studied with greater earnestness than any woman throughout your
domi^ions; I may add, with better success. Your royal daughters are a daily
living comment on the excellence of your instructions, and are infinitely more
celebrated for the graces of their hearts, the elegance of their manners, and
the improvement of their understanding, than the magnificence of their family,
or the splendor of their birth.

I cannot, therefore, but be deeply sensible of the high honor, that was
conferred on me, when your Majesty condescended to look into this work in
manuscript, and give me the unreserved privilege of inscribing it to your
protection; and I would take a respectful leave of your Majesty with uttering
an earnest wish, which, elevated as you are, must come near the heart -- that
the daughters you have cultivated with such a tender assiduity, may long
continue (what they are,) the ornament of their sex -- of their kingdom -- of
Europe -- the prop, when she wants it, of their declining parent; your
consolers in that awful moment, when even Majesty must be dust, and your
companions in that heaven, where the virtues will remain, though titles and
greatness and distinctions are forgotten!

I have the honor to be, with the most profound gratitude and respect, MADAM,
Your MAJESTY'S most devoted Subject and Servant, THE AUTHOR.

LETTERS, etc.
LETTER I. To MISS LUCY --
MY DEAR LUCY,
THOUGH I myself have sustained an heavy loss by the death of your excellent
mother, who lived so much in my friendship and esteem, and by her letters and
society had conferred upon me some of the sweetest pleasures in human life, yet
you alas! are the principal sufferer by this afflicting dispensation. It would
give me the sincerest pleasure, if I knew how to alleviate your grief, or
afford you a single moment's consolation.

I need not press on you the doctrines of religion. You have, doubtless,
considered who it is, that has deprived you of this invaluable parent; a God of
infinite wisdom, who never strikes, but at the sit moment; a God of equal
goodness, who without the strongest reasons, would not afflict, and a being of
unbounded power, who is abundantly able to make up your loss, and open to you a
thousand sources of comfort.

Christianity should exclude all unreasonable sorrow. If we believe that our
friends are dead in God; we know that this life is only a vapor; that our
separation is but for a moment, and that we shall soon be restored to them in a
world, where life is without pain, and where friendship is immortal.

Though you are, in the literal sense, an orphan, yet the number of friends, to
whom you are so justly dear, will render your situation neither solitary, nor
defenseless. The sensible, the elegant and the good will think themselves
honored by your acquaintance. They will give you credit for inheriting all the
amiable qualities of a mother, who was revered, as far as known, whilst nature
has so strongly imprinted, on your face, the resemblance of her features.

The scene is still fresh upon my memory, when, in her last moments, she so
strongly recommended you to my protection. And though she paid a compliment to
my abilities, which only a partial friendship could have excited, she did
nothing more than strict justice to the warmth of my affection. I shall really
think myself complimented by your correspondence. If you will call me father or
brother, you will give an unusual luster to my name. This fond heart shall
vibrate to your wishes and your happiness: and, if you will occasionally visit
my little cot, it shall put on all its loveliest charms, and smile in all its
gayest attire, to receive so dear and so amiable a stranger. The roses of my
humble garden shall, if possible, be doubly sweet; my Jessamines shall emit an
unusual fragrance; and if nature will but obey, I will order the general
scenery to be delightful.

We shall reap, I am assured, mutual benefits by this acquaintance. If I am
able to communicate to you any little knowledge, you will more than repay it by
that ease, delicacy, refinement, confidence and expansion, which the mind never
effectually feels, but in the friendship of a sensible and an interesting
woman. Such a friendship is the richest cordial of life. Either of the sexes
without it, are never what they should be. Like the best figures, mutilated,
they appear to disadvantage. Unnatural expedients may be tried to supply its
place. Business, ambition, an over-strained prudence, or peculiar situations
may lead us to deny ourselves so sweet a pleasure; but, in fact, all human
projects and successes are insipid without it. They are roseless thorns, a
winter without a spring. Pleasures have not their relish, and sorrow wants a
bosom to recline on. Our manners have not their proper softness; our morals
their purity, and our souls feel an uncomfortable void.

They, who talk degradingly of women, do not know the value of the treasure
they despise. They have not sufficient taste to relish their excellencies, or
purity enough to court their acquaintance. They have taken the portrait of
abandoned women, and they think the features applicable to all.

The softer sex, it is certain, are exceedingly injured by their education. If
they were, what they should be, they are those lights in the picture of human
life, that are intended to cheer all its darkness and its shades.

LETTER II.
THE education of women is unfortunately directed rather to such
accomplishments, as will enable them to make a noise and sparkle in the world,
than to those qualities, which might ensure their comfort here, and happiness
hereafter. Boarding schools consult but little those domestic qualifications,
which are confessedly the highest point of usefulness in your sex, and still
less that solid piety and virtue, which alone, to an intelligent creature, can
be the source of any real, heartfelt enjoyment.

Though religion is indispensably necessary to both sexes, and in every
possible character and station, yet a woman seems, more puculiarly, to need its
enlivening supports, whilst her frame must be confessed to be admirably
calculated for the exercise of all the tender and devout affections.

The timidity, arising from the natural weakness and delicacy of your frame;
the numerous diseases, to which you are liable; that exquisite sensibility,
which in many of you, vibrate to the slightest touch of joy or sorrow; the
tremulous anxiety you have for friends, children, a family, which nothing can
relieve, but a sense of their being under the protection of God; the
sedentariness of your life, naturally followed with low spirits or ennui,
whilst we are seeking health and pleasure in the field; and the many, lonely
hours, which in almost every situation, are likely to be your lot, will expose
you to a number of peculiar sorrows, which you cannot, like the men, either
drown in wine, or divert by dissipation.

From the ^^a, that you become marriageable, the sphere of your anxieties and
afflictions will be enlarged. The generality of men are far from acting on such
strict principles of honor and integrity, in their connexions with you, as
they would rigidly observe, in matters of a much more trivial importance. Some
delight in sporting with your nicest sensibilities, and afterward exposing
with an illiberal triumph, the fondness of a credulous and unsuspecting heart;
others, from fashion merely, and to be called men of gallantry, will say a
thousand civil things, and show as many preferences, with no other view, than
to amuse the moment, or acquire a fantastic, visionary honor. A third sort of
men (yes it is possible that there should be male coquettes!) will do and say
every thing to inspire you with fondness, and get possession of your heart,
whithout proceeding to that explanation, which nature has intended to come from
us, and which the delicacy of your sex, whatever you may suffer, will not
permit you to demand. Others, without any particular designs upon you, or
improper attentions, (for attachments spring up insensibly, and are as possible
in one sex. as the other,) may be too agreeable for your safety and repose, and
leave you to a silent, heartfelt concern, which will prey doubly in proportion
to its concealment -- or even when the indissoluble knot of marriage is tied,
and you have resigned every thing, till it comes to your name and person, it
may be to a man of mere integrity, who knows nothing of those many, little,
tender attentions, which involve so great a share of a woman's happiness -- it
may be to a person of great ambition, who has neither leisure nor inclination
for soft domestic scenes -- it may be to a fashionable Insipid, who, for the
sake of flirting with some elegant fair, and giving your jealousy the wildest
range, leaves your charms and the endearments of his children to perish in
neglect -- nay stakes, perhaps, his very last thousand on the uncertainty of
game, when the unhappy throw may consign both you and your helpless babes to
poverty and ruin -- or it may be to a person of a peevish, ill-natured,
saturnine cast, artfully concealed, till he had you in possession, which no
attentions can alter, no charms can sweeten, and no vivacity can cheer. Under
these, or indeed any other distresses, religion is the only true and unfailing
resource, and its hopes and prospects, the only solid basis of consolation. In
your many, solitary moments, what can afford the mind so sovereign a relief, as
the exercise of devotion to an all-present God? and, when domestic sorrows
cluster upon you, which you cannot reveal to any friend on earth, what method
have you left, but to pour them into the bosom of your father in heaven, who is
confessedly the friend of the friendless, always willing to hear their cries,
and always able to protect.

The period, my dear girl, I trust, is distant, when such afflictions shall
attack your glowing sensibility. They may come, however, when I am no more;
when this tongue cannot give a word of comfort, nor these eyes drop a
sympathizing tear. If they should, remember my advice, and let your friendship
strew a few, purple flowers over the grave of

Your very faithful and affectionate

LETTER III.
I CONSIDERED devotion, in my last letter, only as an advantage for relieving
solitude, or as the best resource under any afflictions. But it is, indeed, in
itself one of the highest and most exquisite pleas^^^; opening the mind to the
sublimest contemplations, expanding it with the most delightful hopes, and
soothing all its powers with feelings and consolations, that are infinitely
beyond the reach, the nature and the littleness of all human things.

There must be a thousand moments in the life of every person, that is not
elevated by this devotion, when all earthly blessings will be cold and insipid,
and the soul must feel an inexpressible languor, though possessed of all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glories of them.

Though some fanatics have made the love of God ridiculous by couching it in
too sensual, rapturous, or extravagant language, yet such a passion there is,
gro^nded on the most rational principles, and springing from the purest source;
without which our lives would frequently be miserable, and our duties, the
formal, unanimated service of a body without a soul.

If we admire what is great, sublime and magnificent, on other occasions; if we
love what is amiable, disinterested, benevolent and merciful in many of our
fellow creatures, whom we have never seen, what principle either of reason or
philosophy forbids us to admire and love the same in God, who is the primary
author of all amiableness, and at once the source and fullness of all possible
perfection; and, if we acknowledge him as the parent of all real happiness,
where is the absurdity of cultivating an incercourse and friendship with him,
in order to obtain that happiness, by prayer, reflection, and pious aspirations?

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul:
This is the first and great commandment.

If a virtuous attachment to an imperfect creature here is attended with such
^ransports; if friendship, pure and disinterested, has such exquisite
enjoyments, the pleasure, resulting from an intimacy with God must far surpass
all human comprehension, and be infinitely mo^^ exalted and sublime. It is
heaven, compared with earth, or the immensity of space, with the little, narrow
boundaries of a prison, or a convent.

LETTER IV.
NEVER fancy, that religion will render you gloomy, or unpleasing. If indeed
you take it from the coarse daubings of superstition or of enthusiasm, it is a
frightful monster, or a melancholy s^ectre, that will discourage people from
appreaching you. If you deduce it from the scriptures, and ground it upon
reason, solid argument and truth, it will become a source of pertual
cheerfulness to yourself, that will be reflected on every person and object
about y^

Never fair to treat, with the greatest reverence, every thing, that relates to
the house of God, to his ministers, to his sacraments, and to his word. To
mention any thing, that is sacred, with levity, is a certain mark of a depraved
heart, and a weak understanding. A witty sheer or sarcasm, on such subjects, is
not to be ^^given. It shocks all the sensible and better part of mankind, and,
is a species of blasphemy or sacrilege.

You remember who has said, that every woman is at heart a rake. This sentence
is severe, and not to be admitted without restrictions. Pope was a rancorous
satirist of women. Whatever be his merit in the world of letters, they, at
least, owe no extraordinary gratitude to his memory or talents. Tread lightly
upon the ashes of the dead, is a maxim I revere. I would, otherwise, retaliate
his insults on the sex, and become the champion of their injured honor. I
would insinuate, that the poet was little and deformed, and had experienced few
of their caresses or attentions. Other writers, however, have charged you with
a strong preference for dissipated men. But this, surely is the ungenerous
aspersion of your enemies, or of those, who have not known the most deserving
amongst you, and have formed an unjust and unfavorable conclusion, from the
unamiableness of a few.

Your example, I trust, will always contradict such indiscriminate censure. The
idea, if we could admit it in its full extent, would be unfriendly to the
social happiness of life. It would destroy that esteem and confidence in your
virtues, which the best and wisest men have uniformly thought no inadequate
counterpoise to their sorrows, and their cares. A bad man is terrible in
society; but an unprincipled woman is a monster. The peace, happiness and honor
of our sex are so very much in the power of yours after marriage, that the most
abandoned libertine shudders at the thought of an union with a woman, who has
not piety and virtue. His intimacy with some females, of a certain description,
has given him such a disgusting picture, as will never be forgotten. In his
moments of reflection, he execrates his folly, and, when he deliberates, whom he
should choose for the companion of his life, appeals from the treacherous,
ruffled bosom of an harlot, to one, that will be always faithful, and always
serene. Without piety, indeed, a woman can never fully possess the true powers
of pleasing. She will want that meek benevolence, sympathy and softness, which
give an inexpressible luster to her features, and such a wonderful ascendancy
over our affections. We shall not otherwise approach her with confidence, or
dare to repose any of our secrets, our concerns or our sorrows, in her
sympathizing breast.

LETTER V.
MY DEAR GIRL,
IF your mind is in a proper frame, every thing in you and about you will
inculcate the necessity, and prompt you to the continual exercise of, devotion.
You will find yourself encompassed with innumerable fears, weaknesses, wants,
sorrows, diseases, wishes, hopes, under which all human creatures will be
unable to assist, or give you any adequate relief; but wherever you cast your
eyes, you will, at the same time, be environed with the immensity of a Being,
who is possessed of all possible perfections, and who holds the issues of
life and death, of happiness and misery, solely in his hands.

The power, majesty, grandeur and wisdom of this Being are discernable in every
part of your frame, in every function of your body, and operation of your mind,
nay in the curious and exquisite formation of every animal and insect. They are
seen, on a still sublimer scale, in the size, the distances, grandeur, and
wonderful revolution of the heavenly bodies; in the beautifully variegated
canopy of heaven, in all the delicious landskips of nature, in the pleasing
succession of day and night, spring and autumn, summer and winter. In short,
winds and storms, thunder and lightning, earthquakes and volcanos, the grand,
magnificent ocean, waves and comets, fulfilling his word, appearing and
receding, at his sovereign command; flowers, blossoms, fruits, fossils,
minerals, petrefactions, precipices, hills, caverns, valleys, all tell you,
that their former is immensely magnificent, that he does what he will in the
armies of heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, and that none can
withstand the thunder of his power.

This God then is able to gratify your wishes, and support you under all your
sufferings; he has wisdom enough to protect and guide you; the question then
is; is he willing? On this head, hearken to all nature, for it speaks aloud.
Look through the numberless orders and gradations of animals, insects, nay the
meanest reptiles, and you will be astonished with the attention, that has been
lavished on them, in the contrivance of their frame, the allotment of their
situation, and the provision, made for their continual support. They are happy.
Shift your eye to all the inanimate creation, and you will find it a scene of
harmony, of order, and beauty, and seemingly constructed for our gratification.
Lovely picturesque views delight our imagination; shrubs and plants and flowers
regale us with aromatic smells. But a poet, of very descriptive talents, shall
speak on this occasion.

Wherefore nature's form
So exquisitely fair? her breath perfumed
With such ethereal sweetness? whence ^er voice,
Informed at will, to raise or to depress
The impassioned soul, and whence the robes of light,
Which thus invest her with more lovely pomp,
Than fancy can describe? whence but from Thee,
O source divine of never falling love,
And thy unmeasured goodness? not content
With every food of life to nourish man,
Thou make all nature, beauty to his eye,
Or music to his ear; well pleased he scans
The goodly prospect, and with inward smiles,
Treads the gay verdure of the painted plain,
Beholds the azure canopy of heaven,
And living lamps, that overarch his head
With more than regal splendor, lends his ears
To the full choir of water, air, and earth.
In every part
We trace the bright impressions of his hand,
In earth, or air, the meadow's purple stores,
The moon's mild radiance, or the virgin form,
Blooming with rosy smiles, we see portrayed
That uncreated beauty, which delights
The mind supreme --
Indeed, if you reason for a moment why could the Almighty create at all, but
to diffuse and variegate enjoyment? Inexhaustible source of happiness, from all
eternity, he needed not, and, in fact, could not receive, an addition to his
own. In himself supremely blessed, fountain of eternal majesty and splendor,
adored by seraphs, surrounded by miriads of angels and archangels, what dignity
could he derive from the existence, or services of man, who is but a worm, or
the production of ten thousand worlds? It was infinite wisdom, therefore, that
sketched out the plan of universal nature, and all-communicative goodness, that
bade so many worlds exist, and bade them to be happy. The supreme and gracious
former wished to communicate some scattered rays of his glory and his
blessedness to this extended world of matter and of life, and has therefore
replenished every leaf, every drop of water, and every possibility of space
with shoals of inhabitants; for

Scarce buds a leaf, or springs the lowest weed,
But little flocks upon its bosom feed;
No fruit our palate courts, or taste our smell,
But on its fragant bosom, nations dwell.
Is it not then a certain conclusion, that he created you, as well as all
inferior animals for happiness? On this you may depend, as much as you can upon
the certainty of your existence, and that he is always more willing to be your
protector, than you are ready to request it.

Open the sacred book, and, from beginning to end, it will confirm this
opinion, and exalt your ideas of the divine perfections. I delight in
exercising loving kindness, says the Lord. -- The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over, all his works. If he clothes the grass of the field,
which, today, is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more shall he
clothe you, O ye of little faith? That religion is built on wrong notions, or a
melancholy temper, that fills us with imaginary terrors. All nature breathes a
language of hope and mercy. And nature is the messenger of God.

It is true there is evil in the world, as well as good; there are marks of
judgment, as well as mercy. There are hurricanes, as well as fanning breezes;
noxious are intermixed with useful animals; poisonous and salutary herbs grow
beside each other, and roses have their thorns. There are wars and rumors of
wars; there are earthquakes, that desolate whole countries; a thousand forms of
disease; a thousand modifications of sorrow, anxiety, death. If he, who sits at
the helm, be so gracious, whence all this disorder? If his infinite power be
combined with equal wisdom and goodness, why did he not prevent it?

If men were not to be free agents, the total prevention of sin and evil seems
an impossibility. Moral liberty could not consist with a mechanical, forced
obedience; and if we had not been free, the idea of punishments or rewards, of
an heaven or an hell, would be the greatest of all possible absurdities. So
that the question ultimately amounts to this, whether it was proper for the
Almighty to create such a world at all? Had we not better reserve the propriety
of this conduct to be disputed with him, at his great tribunal? There, I doubt
not, we shall be amply convinced, that the creation was a work of infinite
mercy, as well as power, and that a greater degree of happiness, than misery
has arisen from it. There too, when we are able to discern with glorified eyes,
the whole chain of causes and effects, from the beginning, to the end, of time;
the dependence of one link of being on another, and of worlds, on worlds; this
evil we now complain of, may become a means of exalting our ideas of the
attributes of the Almighty; and we shall blush at ourselves for even having
questioned his goodness for a moment, or encouraged a reasoning pride, so ill
becoming creatures, whose days are few, whose strength is weakness, whose
wisdom folly; and who, in the present immurement of their understanding,
scarcely know the nature of a blade of grass, or of the very pebbles, on which
they tread.

This question concerning the origin of evil has puzzled the whole tribe of
reasoners and philosophers, from the creation, to the present moment. The
scripture alone has solved the enigma to our satisfaction. This deranged state
of things is the providential punishment of guilt, but at the same time,
contrived in mercy, as a salutary regimen, and as a mode of purifying fallen
creatures for the innocence and happiness of a better world. It is a chao;,
fitted to our present constitution, and will refine, as we do, into its
primitive beauty and splendor. There shall then be new heavens and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and
the leopard lie down with the kid, when the earth is full of the knowledge of
the Lord, as the waters cover the seas. Resignation, in the mean time, has a
balm for suffering, and the faith of a christian looks to a better country,
with foundations, whose builder and maker is God.

But speculations apart, if you draw nigh to the Almighty, he will draw nigh to
you; if you seek his favor and friendship, all things shall work together for
your good. Tribulation, anguish, nakedness, or famine, or peril, or the sword
will all be so many instruments, in his hands, of procuring your eternal
happiness and glory.

Remember the gift of his only Son to be a sacrifice for your sins, and it is
more than a thousand lessons of a mercy beyond a parallel, and that far exceeds
all human comprehension.

On so delightful a subject, it is difficult to sto^ one's pen, or restrain the
sallies of imagination. This idea of the supreme being casts a delicious
fragrance over all the real enjoyments of life. It gives an inexpressible
poignancy to friendship, and to the affection, with which I shall ever feel
myself inviolably yours.

LETTER VI.
MY DEAR GIRL,
DEVOTION, considered simply in itself, is an intercourse betwixt us and God;
betwixt the supreme, self-existent, inconceivable spirit, which formed and
preserves the universe, and that particular spirit, with which, for awful
reasons, he has animated a portion of matter upon earth, that we call man. It
is a silent act, in which the soul divests itself of outward things, flies into
heaven, and pours forth all its wants, wishes, hopes, fears, guilt or
pleasures, into the bosom of an almighty friend.

Though this devotion, in its first stages, may be a wearisome or insipid
exercise, yet this arises merely from the depravity of nature, and of our
passions. A little habit will overcome this reluctance. When you have fairly
entered on your journey, the ways of this wisdom will be ways of pleasantness,
and all its paths, peace.

True devotion, doubtless, requires a considerable degree of abstraction from
the world. Hence modern christians treat it, as a vision. Hence many modern
writers have little of its unction. But it glows in the scriptures. It warms us
in the fathers. It burned in an Austin, and in many other of those persecuted
martyrs, who now are with God.

That we hear little of it, is not wonderful. It makes no noise in the circles
of the learned or of the elegant. Under an heap of worldly cares, we smother
the lovely infant, and will not let it breathe. Vanity, ambition, pleasure,
avarice, quench the celestial fire. And these alas! are too much the god of
mortals! Ever since the world began, writers have been amusing us only with
shadows of this piety, instead of giving us its soul and substance.
Superstition has placed it in opinions, ceremonies, austerities, pilgrimages,
persecution, an august temple, or splendid imagery, which had little connection
with sentiment or spirit. Enthusiasm has swelled with unnatural conceptions,
and obtruded a spurious offspring on the world, instead of this engaging child
of reason and truth; whilst the lukewarm have rested in a few outward duties,
which have had no vigor, and, as they sprung not from the heart, never entered
the temple of the most High.

Real piety is of a very different, and of a much more animated, nature. It
looks up to God, sees, hears, feels him, in every event, in every vicissitude,
in all places, in all seasons, and upon all occasions. It is theory, vivified
by experience. It is faith, substantiated by mental enjoyment. It is heaven,
transplanted into the human bosom. It is the radiance of the Divinity, warming
and incircling man. It is spiritual sense, gratified by spiritual sensations.
Without this, all ceremonies are inefficacious. Books, prayers, sacraments and
meditations are but a body, without a soul, or a statue, without animation.

That man is capable of such an intercourse with his maker, there are many
living witnesses to prove. Without having recourse to the visions of fanatics,
or the dreams of enthusiasts, it may be proved to spring from natural and
philosophical causes. God is a spirit; so is the mind. Bodies can have
intercourse; so can souls. When minds are in an assimilating state of purity,
they have union with their Maker. This was the bliss of paradise; sin
interrupted, and holiness must restore it. To a soul, thus disposed, the
creator communicates himself, in a manner, which is as insensible to the
natural eye, as the falling of dews, but not less refreshing to its secret
powers, than that is to vegetation.

The primitive saints are describing this, when they speak of their transports.
David felt it, when he longed for God, as the heart pants after the water
brooks. St. Paul knew it, when he gloried in his tribulations. It was embodied
in him, when he was carried up into the third heavens, and heard things,
impossible to be uttered. St. Stephen was filled with it, when he saw the
heavens open, and prayed for his murderers. By it, martyrs were supported, when
they were stoned, and sawn asunder. And till we feel it in ourselves, we shall
never fully know, how gracious the Lord is.

If you can acquire this spiritual abstraction, you will, at once, have made
your fortune for eternity. It will be of little moment, what is your lot on
earth, or what the distinguishing vicissitudes of your life. Prosperity or
adversity, health or sickness, honor or disgrace, a cottage or a crown, will
all be so many instruments of glory. The whole creation will become a temple.
Every event and every object will lead your mind to God, and in his greatness
and perfections, you will insensibly lose the littleness, the glare and tinsel
of all human things.

If I wished only to set off your person to the greatest advantage, I would
recommend this true sublime of religion. It gives a pleasing serenity to the
countenance, and a cheerfulness to the spirits beyond the reach of art, or the
power of affectation. It communicates a real transport to the mind, which
dissipation mimics only for a moment; a sweetness to the disposition, and a
luster to the manners, which all the airs of modern politeness study but in
vain. Easy in yourself, it will make you in perfect good humor with the world,
and when you are diffusing happiness around you, you will only be dealing out
the broken fragments, that remain after you have eaten.

LETTER VII.
THIS devotion, however, though essentially a silent intercourse betwixt the
soul and God, yet, to creatures, consisting of matter, as well as spirit, must
be nourished by external forma. It must strike the senses, in order to awaken
the imagination.

The bulk of people, indeed, are so far materialized, (if I may thus express
it,) and sunk in sense, that nothing but outward ceremonies would give them any
adequate perception either of the necessity or pleasures, of devotion; and even
the most spiritual, in a state of frailty, will need these powerful calls and
lessons to retrace the vanishing impressions of their duty.

Public worship and the sacraments are the grand outwork of piety. They are the
doors, by which we enter the sanctuary of God. They are the channels for
conveying heavenly grace and vigor to the soul. It is here the Redeemer gives
us food, that nourishes to eternal life. It is here he rains down fountain of
living water.

Whoever pretends to be above these forms, is the fanatic, who might as well
tell us, that his animal life can be supported without food; whoever despises
them, is the Infidel, that does every thing in his power, to root out the
remembrance of God from the earth, and violate the dearest interests of
mankind. Whoever, conscientiously attends, yet considers them, only as
introductory to good, is a true, rational christian, that unites the separate
links of matter and spirit, and lets his light shine before men, that they may
see his good works, and glorify his father, who is in heaven.

Lukewarmness, an insensibility to all sacred things, skepticism, profligacy,
and licentious pleasures are the discriminating traits of those, who neglect,
from whatever vain pretenses, these means of grace. The best disposed are
gradually hardened, and the poor are plunged into such disorders, as bring them
to the fata^ tree.

LETTER VIII.
ANOTHER excellent method of inkindling piety, is reading the scriptures. A
christian, indeed, should have this sacred book, ever folded in his breast.
There is a richness and a comfort in it, that nothing else can equal. Every
word is big with instruction; every sentence is divine. It is a mine,
perpetually opening; the deeper we dig, the richer is the ore. It is a feast,
adapted to every taste; the most exalted understanding must admire, and the
lowest cannot fail to comprehend, its instructions.

If people only read for the sake of entertainment, where can they find a book
equal to the Bible? What other production, either ancient or modern, has such
striking passages of the pathetic and sublime, the vehement and impassioned?
Where are there such lofty images, such grand conceptions, or such picturesque
and animated descriptions, as in the psalms? There is scarcely a person in the
world, to whose case some of them are not adapted, nor a sorrow which they
cannot sooth. In one part, plaintive, affecting, penitential; in another full
of triumph and exultation, ennobling elevating; here describing the immensity,
majesty, omnipotence and omnipresence of God; there the littleness of the
world, and the vanity of man; whoever can read them without emotion, must be
pronounced void both of piety and taste.

The prophets are the true sublime of holy reading. The bold images, metaphors,
allusions and descriptions, with which they abound, have been the admiration of
the most accomplished scholars, orators and critics in the world. The proverbs
of Solomon and the book of Ecclesiasticus are an excellent system for the
government of private life, as well as a fund of spiritual instruction! They
have all the marrow of our modern systems of good breeding, without any of
their poison. The sacred stories of the scripture are related with amazing
simplicity and pathos; the parables are beautifully pointed and instructive;
and the epistles of St. Paul are a model of the sublimest and most energetic
eloquence, that can be found in any age, or in any language.

When the immortal Lock and Newton had dived into every other kind of
knowledge, they sat down to contemplate the vanity and poverty of all, in the
richness of the scriptures. The famous Bacon, an oracle of learning, in his
day, and the wonder of all succeeding ages, confessed them to be the source of
all real wisdom. The illustrious Seldom, on his deathbed, assured archbishop
Usher, that the whole of his immense library could not give him half the
comfort, which he derived from one single sentence of the inspired writings;
and Addison, whose name must be ever dear to every friend of religion and
virtue, spent no little time in collecting together, and arranging into one
common point of view, the united evidences of the christian religion.

The primitive christians used to read this book, on their knees. Their preface
was, Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy law.
Imitate them on earth, and in time you shall join that illustrious choir of
saints, that are continually worshipping before the throne in heaven.

LETTER IX.
THE old Scriptures may appear, in themselves, dry and insipid; but when you
consider them, as typical of the new, and affording a strong, collateral
testimony to the truth of revelation; as describing the circumstances, manners,
and anecdotes of a peculiar, chosen people, whose history, rebellion, captivity
and dispersion are interwoven with the whole system of christianity, you will
read them with a greater relish, and more godly edification.

Jesus Christ is the foundation of the apostles and prophets; all the incidents
you read, point to him, as their origin, and as their end; the great corner
stone in Zion; the lamb slain from the foundation of the world.

The bondage of the children of Israel in Egypt, is an image of our captivity
to sin and their deliverance, of our redemption through the blood of Christ;
their journeying through the wilderness, is a strong picture of our wearisome
passage through this vale of tears. Moses is the Savior, making waters of
comfort gush from the stony rock; the manna is the food of his word, and the
waters are the graces of his holy spirit; the beautiful and affecting history
of Joseph is an emblem of that better personage, who was envied, hated,
persecuted and murdered by his brethren, for the general salvation: Abraham is
a striking image of the Almighty, offering up his only son, and all the
ceremonies of the law point to that true blood of sprinkling, which alone can
take away the sins of the world. Thus is every page holy; thus do you tread,
every moment, on consecrated ground, and thus every word, when properly
understood, is spirit and is life.

But of all the scriptures, the gospels are certainly the most edifying and
instructive. They are plain, forcible, spiritual; they come from the very mouth
of holiness and wisdom, and do not admit of any wrong constructions or doubtful
interpretations. If there was only the fifth chapter of St. Matthew's gospel
extant, we should have an incomparable abridgement of christianity, sufficient
to direct our faith, to animate our practice, and flash confusion on that host
of writers, who have built so many strong and dangerous opinions on the
pretended basis of revelation.

Commentators may serve to explain an eastern custom, ceremony, allusion or
mode of expression, but I cannot in general, recommend them, at least to young
people. They embarrass more frequently, than they direct; they have often
perplexed, what, in itself, was clear, and darkened, where they affected to
illuminate. The sayings of our Lord are so very obvious, as to need little or
no explanation. They are a precious wine, which the profane wisdom of scholars
and philosophers has mixed with water. If men had only studied them with
earnestness, instead of their own interests, prejudices and passions, we should
never have been distracted with so many systems of error and superstition.

Do not read much, at a time. Meditation is the stomach, which digests this
food; you should reflect many hours, for reading one. And there is such a
condensed richness in the scriptures, that one single verse will often suggest
an ample fund for serious contemplation.

Every moment, that you peruse this book, consider yourself as in the immediate
presence of your Maker. Fancy that you heard him, delivering the commandments,
in all the thunder and lightning of the mount. Remember that, though heaven and
earth fail, one jot or one tittle shall, in no wise, pass from the law, till
all be fulfilled. Consider what a number of holy men have sealed the truth of
this testimony with their blood. Examine yourself by the promises and
threatenings, as you go along, and do not forget to bless God, upon your knees,
that he has given you such a lamp for your feet, and such a light to your paths.

Without this sacred volume, the world would have been, at this very moment,
considerably unenlightened; worshipping stocks or stones, perhaps offering
human blood, and tormenting themselves with burdensome ceremonies, that had no
manner of connection with the heart; immersed in sorrows, which they could not
have eased, and perplexed with a thousand, gloomy enigmas, which they never
could have solved. The light, which superficial skeptics vaunt, as that of
nature or philosophy, or, in a great degree, derived from the scriptures. The
arguments, which they level against christianity, have been suggested by the
light of christianity itself.

LETTER X.
THOUGH I have reprobated prolix commentators, there are, however, several
little books, which will illustrate and enliven the sacred writings, and enable
you to read them with greater pleasure and advantage. Melmoth, on the beautiful
and sublime of scripture, falls under this description. He will suggest some
striking passages, which before may have escaped your observation.

The Comtesse le Genlis is entitled to the gratitude of all young people. She
is possessed of an elegant taste, a splendid style, and a very enlightened
understanding. She has thrown into a dramatic form, several of the historical
parts of the Bible; and though the chastity of an English taste is not easily
reconciled to seriousness "in so questionable a shape," her ingenuity sparkles
through the whole performance, and has given it a pathos, an interest and a
brilliancy, that will both improve your heart, and delight your imagination.

I scarcely know a woman, that deserves so much from the community at large, as
Mrs. Trimmer. Her sacred History is a well known, useful performance: her
unwearied labors for the service of the poor, in her Family Magazine, and her
active patronage of Sunday Schools, bespeak an heart, that is warm with
benevolence, and an understanding of no ordinary size. The pride of philosophy
and profound learning may, perhaps look down on such attempts, as beneath their
ambition. But how can talents be so usefully, or so amiably employed, as when
stripped of their gaudy plumage, they condescend to instruct, to bless and
reform the meanest of mankind. Metaphysical reasonings are for the learned few,
and often mislead them; these practical labors consult the good of millions,
and will continue to edify, when all such cobweb systems are totally
demolished, and their authors consigned to the oblivion, they deserve.

There is not, perhaps, a better method of turning scripture to advantage, than
that used by the good bishop Wilson, in his Sacra Privata. He selects a few,
detached verses, and, in his natural and easy style, raises upon each, a train
of reflections, which must inkindle and animate the devotion of every reader.

Doddridges paraphrase on the new testament may be justly recommended for its
zeal, piety, earnestness and animation. Nor does it want the embellishments of
a lively fancy, or of an easy and unadorned language. But, like most dissenters
of his time, he was a pupil of the Calvinistic school; and though I shall never
be a convert to his system, I cannot but approve the general air and spirit of
his writings. There are few things or characters in life, any more than
authors, that are formed to command an unreserved admiration. The most
delightful landscape has its shades. The most animated countenance has
frequently some feature imperfect, or distorted. There will be accidental heats
and flushes on the most delicate complexion.

LETTER XI.
THERE are several, excellent manuals of private devotion. But I have no great
opinion of these forms. Look into the history of your private life and the
dispensations of Providence; to what is daily happening within you, and about
you, and your own heart will be the best prayer book in the world. If you
attend to its wishes, its breathings and its wants; you can never want
language; or if you should, God is ever present and will accept the naked
wishes of your ^o^l. A beggar, in great distress, is always clo^^ent. His fighs
and tears speak; he feels what he wants, and he needs no artificial arrange^^^^
of words. Still babes must be nourished with (...). There is a period in the
christian, as well as the ^^^^ral, life, when leading strings are accessory to
the infant.

I have know people (...) into a total disuse of private devotion, so^^^ (...)
^^^ed poverty of words. This is a very da^^ (...) error. Prayers, drawn from
books, are surely, pre^erable to no ^^^ers at all. Arti^^al exemise is better
than to^^^ inaction. But pray not the heart is that superior glow, which arise
them motion in the open air, and ex^ilar^e^^^^ with a view of all the charming
pictures and ^^^ductions of nature.

As a public system of devocion, that of our church is excellent. How simple
and energetic is the language! How rich and beautifully varied, are the
collects! How unconfined and universal the prayers, extending to all conditions
of men, s^^^ations of life, and comprizing every wish and sorrow of the heart.
If other forms do not please your taste, you may contrive to adapt some portion
of this to your private occasions.

Two capital traits will strike you in our liturgy; the great stress, laid upon
Jesus Christ and the continual intercession for the blessings of the body
spirit. These are, indeed, the grand losson to be learned from it, as well as
from the scriptures. They are the pillars of the church; the life and blood of
the christian system.

Without the atonement of Christ, criminals as we are, there never could have
been any hope of mercy; without the assistance and graces of the spirit, we
could not have been purified for the mansions of glory. If Christ has been
called the fun of righteousness, the holy spirit is the air, which purifies and
invigorates the whole moral world, and preserves it from stagnation and
putrefaction.

Meditate frequently on these sufferings of Christ, till you abhor every sin,
that produced them; and in order to be enriched with all graces and blessings,
pray daily and fervently for this holy spirit. The good Bishop Kenn has a few
words, in one of his hymns, which wonderfully epitomize out petitions and our
wants:

Direct, control, suggest this day,
All I design, or do, or say,
That all my powers, with all their might,
In thy sole glory may unite.
LETTER XII.
MY DEAR LUCY,
YOUR sacred reading needs not to be wholly confined to the scriptures. A few,
other serious books will assist your piety, as well as serve to illustrate and
confirm the scriptures themselves.

I cannot, in this respect, so much recommend modern sermons, as some little
practical treatises of piety. English discourses in general, by a ftrange,
scholastic mismanagement, are not sufficiently addressed to the heart. Either
they are learned disquisitions, on some speculative, controverted subject, more
calculated to display abilities, than to edify; or they are spruce, moral
essays with little more of christianity in them, than might be gleaned from the
works of Plato or Epictetus. They want that simplicity, fire, energy,
animation, that boldness of images, appeal to the conscience, and that
picturesque display of heaven and hell, which give such an unction to the
writings of St. Paul, and of the fathers. They do not thunder and lighten at
the sinner: they do not carry us by a whirlwind, into heaven, and show us
thrones and sceptres; they convince, but they do not animate; they glitter, but
they do not warm.

Ancient divines have more fire and matter. They studied the scriptures, more
than human systems. "They were filled with the spirit;" they were men of
watchfulness and prayers. A profane spirit of criticism or of philosophy,
falsely so called, makes us cold and languid. In pervading many learned or
splendid pages, the heart is often left devoid of one, pious emotion.

Many sermons, no doubt, are to be excepted from this censure. Those of
Archbishop Secker contain a fund of solid matter, piety and instruction; but
the style is rather singular and uncouth. The marble is rich, but it is
unpolished, There is such a thing, as an elegant simplicity. Seeker had a
simplicity without this elegance.

Few prelates, however, have deserved so well from the church, or posterity.
The metropolitan, though placed in the bosom of a court, had neither pride,
indolence, nor adulation. His vigilance was extraordinary; his labors
unremitting, and his crofier but an imperfect emblem of the real pastoral zeal,
"which eat up his soul." The present bishop of London has all the simplicity of
his illustrious patron, tissued with that elegance, which the archbishop
wanted. His sermous have been universally read; they are written on a truly
evangelical plan; and their object is not merely to amuse, but to instruct and
edify.

LETTER XIII.
EVERY person should read the discourses of Sherlock, who wishes to see the
grand doctrines of christianity properly illustrated, and enforced with equal
energy of argument and language. Sherlock is one of the few, original writers
of sermons. He is the Lock of divinity, who anatomizes the whole system, and
displays its component parts.

Many authors glean all their matter from other books. He borrowed his from the
scriptures and reflection. He thought many hours, for writing one, If all men
did the same, the press would not groan with such continual abortions.

Ogden's Sermons have very great, original merit. Perhaps I miscalled them;
they are, more properly, sketches on sacred subjects; on the fundamental
articles of the christian faith. There is more vigor, and energy and
conviction in one page of this writer, than in whole volumes of some others,
who have received a much more general applause.

The doctor seems particularly to have studied conciseness, and his miniature
plan sometimes leaves the features of his pieces indistinct. There is a
singular abruptness in his transitions, and the mind is frequently obliged to
pause, in order to discover the invisible connection, and unite the, seemingly,
broken chain of ideas. These discourses were, probably, in their original
state, much more diffuse. He retrenched by degrees, and, as an ingenious,
French writer once said, "had leisure to be concise."

LETTER XIV.
THERE is more popular eloquence, argument and pathos in Archbishop Tillorson,
than in almost any ancient writer of sermons, that I recollect. But his works
are much incumbered with the scholastic divinity of his age, and strangely
perplexed with divisions and subdivisions. Unity of design is the beauty of all
writings. A religious discourse should tend only to the enforcing of one grand
point. This should, always, be kept in fight, and the way to it should be as
direct, concise and simple, as possible. Divines of the last century spent more
time in proving what was self-evident, and illustrating it by learned
quotations, than would have sufficed for inculcating some lesson of piety, that
would never have been forgotten. Modern writers have judiciously corrected this
mistake. They come more immediately to the point, and would think it as
downright pedantry to amuse their hearers with a long list of writers, as to
retail little scraps of Greek or Latin in conversation.

Atter^nry was the pulpit Cicero of his day, and, for the beauty, sweetness and
harmony of his style, has still an admirer in every person of elegance and
taste. But to me he has always appeared rather graceful, than forcible, and
more splendid, than impassioned. He is always dressed for court; and studied
ornaments, however rich, cannot but have an uninteresting uniformity. He is
invariably a fine, flowing, pellucid stream, never that impetuous torrent,
which overflows its b^^ks, carries all before it, and gives us the idea of
sublimity and grandeur. Nature would have tired, if she had presented us with
nothing but fine, level extended lawns. She has wisely intermixed wild heaths,
barren rocks, and craggy precipices in her infinitely beautiful and variegated
landskips.

LETTER XV.
THE late, unfortunate Dr. Dodd owed, I should conceive, his great popularity
to the advantage of his voice, person, manner, gesture and address. For indeed
his compositions have not intrinsic merit enough to have challenged any
extraordinary applause.

Weak, flimsy, superficial in his arguments, and rather plausible, than
energetic in his language, it must have been only the popularity of his
subjects, the new vein of pathetic, which he attempted, and his fortunate
congenial situation at the Magdalen, and in a metropolis, which, under the
management of such advantages, procured him his extensive, temporary reputation.

But alas! his popularity was very dearly purchased! It was built on the ruins
of his innocence and virtue. Happy, if he had lived and died in obscurity, or
been an humble curate in some sequestered village, where jessamines had clasped
round his unenvied mansion, with unenlightened rustics only for his associates!
Admiration would not then have dazzled his eyes. His vanity could not have
sought those unequal connexions, which he afterward found himself unable to
support, nor expensive pleasures led him to an action, which wounded religion
in its very vitals, and brought so much disgrace on his sacred profession.

He might, then, like many other excellent men, have "fallen asleep," amidst
the tender offices of bewailing friends; and grateful villagers, would have
wetted his monument with tears of heartfelt gratitude and esteem. He is now a
beacon, rising high in the bosom of the ocean, which says to the wary mariner,
beware of rocks and quicksands. It has been said, that Dodd, in the beginning
of his sacred office, was remarkably pious. What is the conclusion? Hear it
from compassion. Bathed in tears. she lifts up her voice, and cries aloud, Let
him who thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Faringdon's Sermons have very singular merit. It is but seldom that so much
vivacity finds its way into this species of writing. They will improve your
heart; they will please your taste, and inchant your imagination. It is many
years since I read them; but the impression they made upon my mind, will never
be erased.

If I durst invidiously, amidst their many excellencies, mention a defect, it
is, that they are not sufficiently full of scriptural allusions. It is amazing
what force and energy the judicious introduction of scriptural passages,
authorities and images gives to discourses of this nature. The rest may be the
ingenious conjectures of the author. These strike the reader with all the
certainty and irresistible evidence of mathematical demonstration.

Though genius and taste may be permitted to embellish, the sacred writings
should be the groundwork of all pulpit productions. They should check our
flights into the regions of fancy, and they should guide us through the
bewildering mazes of metaphysics.

Faringdon is long since dead, but the real R^^. Mr. O -- n, Rector of W -- n.
author of these Discourses is yet alive. I have long had the honor of knowing
him, and as long have admired his talents. And of his virtues and great
benevolence, he exhibited, I think, no ordinary proof, when, to serve the
family of a deceased brother clergyman, he gave his time, his labor, his
abilities, and (what is more,) denied himself the dazzling prospect of
reputation.

LETTER XVI.
YOUNG people are in raptures with (what they choose to call) Sterne's Sermons.
But true criticism will not give them so dignified a name. They are the sacred
stories of scripture, embellished with his original talent at the descriptive
and pathetic. They are his sentimental journey to Zion; but have little more of
true divinity in them, than they might have had, if such an heavenly personage,
as Jesus Christ, had never lived in the world, nor published his gospel.

Sermons, that aim only to amuse or entertain, are beneath the pulpit. They are
the moral beanism of divines; an attempt to mix all the colors of the rainbow,
with the dark solemnity of a most serious garb. They are music playing in the
ears of a man, whose house is on fire, and can only beguile the moment, which
should be spent in saving all the valuables of his furniture, and escaping for
his life. Discourses of this nature should alarm the conscience; should display
at once our misery and the mode of cure; should probe all the rankling (...) of
the heart, and pour in the precious oil of divine consolation.

Stern was a very great, eccentric, original genius, but he was never formed
for a clergy man. He had a levity of mind, that ill befitted so serious a
character. What painter, in fancying an altar-pi^ce, would have grouped a beau
d'esprit, or a facetious bon vi^ant, with our Savior and his apostles at the
last supper?

LETTER XVII.
THE Christian Pattern with abundantly recommend itself by the name. The
translation of it by Stanhope, is too diffuse. Wesley has, more faithfully,
preserved the spirit and concise energy of the excellent original.

The fingular merit of this little book is obvious from its translation into
almost all languages. Ganganelli ascribes it, with pride, to an Italian author.
But, whatever country gave it birth, it is filled with a sacred unction, and
"the wisdom which comes from above." Read a chapter of it every day, and you
will never want a fund of christian meditations.

There is more true piety and information, couched in reflections on the seven
Days of the Week, by Mrs. Talbot, than you will sometimes meet with in large
and splendid volumes. You cannot have a better train of reflections for the
beginning of your every day. This good lady lived in the family of Archbishop
Secker, and seems to have imbibed that spirit of piety, which so eminently
distinguished this illustrious prelate. She is long since dead; but her little
book will live in the hearts of the pious, when time has tarnished all the
luster of more sounding names.

I have always thought, that little, short treatises of this kind have done the
most extensive good. We can carry them about us, and the size does not deter us
from looking within. People will not read large treatises of religion, and
writers, in this respect, should accommodate themselves to the weakness of
mankind. Tender stomachs cannot digest rich, substantial food, nor much, at a
time.

Addison's Saturday's papers are all of them inimitable. They contain a rich
fund of knowledge and entertainment, raise the imagination, and improve the
heart. The good man very judiciously appointed them for Saturdays. They are the
best preparatives for being truly in the spirit, on the Lord's day.

Scott is not, perhaps, a lively or entertaining writer; but his Christian Life
is a most excellent and rational system of divinity. ^ndeed subjects of this
nature do not admit of so much coloring, as some others. Imagination may
better lend its charms to painters, poets, orators, than to systematic divines.
I think, however, that, even on sacred topics, genius might more frequently,
embellish, than it does. Young people will have language, pathos and
picturesque images, or they will not read. Some little condescension is due to
their weakness. Children must be cheated into the taking of useful medicines.
The pill should be gilded, and the bitter mixed with a swa^^^.

LETTER XVIII.
THE immortal Lock analyzed the powers of the human understanding. Mason on
Self knowledge is the anatomist of the heart. If you would see yourself in your
true colors, you must be daily conversant with this book. You should take it
to your pillow, when you go to sleep. You should read it, when you rise. It
has, however, in my idea, one capital defect. It is too much ramified into
heads, divisions and subdivisions. The size of the house is too small for the
numerous apartments.

Though I am, by no means, partial to the latter, fanciful writings of Mr. Law,
I will venture to recommend the two, first books he ever produced, his Serious
Call, and Christian Perfection. They are very awakening, animated treatises,
written with great simplicity of style, strength of argument, and originality
of manner. His Miranda is a very amiable character; and, though her piety has
something of the monastic, in its air, there are traits in the portrait that
deserve your emulation.

One cannot recollect the beginning of this good man's life, when his
conceptions were so clear, and his manner so impassioned, without shuddering at
the danger of giving way to fanciful theories, or visionary writers. It is
wonderful, that so very discriminating a genius should have been, afterward,
shackled with the spiritual chemistry, and the unintelligible rhapsodies of
Behmen. But even the great and amiable Fenelon was the disciple of a visionary.
He who wrote Telemachus, fell into reveries. "We have this treasure in earthen
vessels, and it will be tinged with our particular complexions."

LETTER XIX.
YOUNG's Night-Thoughts have considerable merit, and may occasionally, be read
with advantage. But they are much discolored with melancholy, and give
christiany, which is naturally cheerful, too dark a complexion.

Born with no slender share of ambition, Young had anxiously and unsuccessfully
courted promotion. The bubble always burst, as he attempted to grasp it; the
ignis fatuus deluded him, as it has done thousands besides. Disappointment is
generally followed with disgust, and disgust will always dictate to the pen.

With all that sensibility, which is the inseparable concomitant of genius, the
author of the Night Thoughts had likewise the misfortune to be deprived, by an
early death, of several of those relatives, from whose tender offices and
soothing attentions, he might naturally have expected, in the evening of a
gloomy life, to have received some consolation. His poems, therefore, have much
the strain of elegy, and his piety is breathed in sighs. But his Night Thoughts
have awakened many into seriousness, and you must take them, as you do all
other, human things, with their good and their bad. The brightest pearl is
surrounded with a mud. It is the business of taste and judgment to make the
separation.

The works of Wilson (the once bishop of Sodor and Man,) are a treasure of
plain, practical devotion. His Indian instructed, his Parochialia, his Sacra
Privata, and his treatise on the sacrament, are all serious and interesting.

This good prelate has not displayed much genius or learning. But his writings
are useful, in proportion to their plainness, and will edify thousands, who
could never have comprehended the depths of learning, or the subtilties of
metaphysics.

Thrown into an ignorant and superstitions diocese, he stooped to the level of
the meanest understanding. He considered himself as the father of his people,
and they paid him a filial duty and respect. The islander still visits his
grave, and weeps at the recollection of his deceased virtues. Such bishops will
live in the memory of the faithful, when splendor is forgotten. His labors
were unremitting, his zeal, primitive; and if he gave no brilliance to the
mitre, he added to its solid weight.

LETTER XX.
THE meditations of St. Austin are admirable, but have suffered not a little
from the translation. It is, I still repeat it, in these old books, that we
chiefly find the true spirit of piety. Has it evaporated, like some mineral
waters, by a long preservation? Or is it that we would be men of philosophy and
criticism, rather than divines? A modern theologian plays about the head, but
scarcely warms the heart; an ancient writer carries us, by an irresistible
impulse, into heaven, and fills us with all the raptures of devotion.

The difference will be very forcibly illustrated by the different construction
of ancient and modern churches. The wide magnificence, the luminous darkness,
the mouldering wells and long drawn aile of gothic structures inspire us with a
pleasing melancholy, thoughtfulness and devotion; whilst the glaring light,
artificial ornaments, primness and convenience of our modern synagogues fill us
only with little, worldly ideas of elegance and taste.

Beveridge's private thoughts and resolutions richly deserve a place in your
collection. They are not animated or elegant, but they are pious and useful. He
is one of those hospitable friends, that gives us a very comfortable and rich
repast without ceremony or ostentation.

Tailor is the Shakespeare of divinity. The fertility of his invention, the
force of his arguments, the richness of his images and the copiousness of his
style are not often to be paralleled in the works of ancient or modern writers.
His holy living and dying is a chef d'oeuvre.

I do not remember to have received more pleasure and improvement from any
book, that I have read for some time past, than from the two first volumes of
Ganganelli's Letters. Besides being surprised to see such a generous mode of
thinking in the sovereign pontiff, so much vivacity in a monk, tempered with so
great a share of unaffected piety, I was quite charmed with the simplicity of
his style, the beauty of his metaphors, and that spirit of philanthropy, which
pervades the whole, and does, all along, more honor to his heart, than his
easy periods, to his understanding.

There is something in the climate of Italy, which wonderfully heats and
sublimes the imagination. It is the garden of Europe, and its writers breathe
that agreeable perfume with which it is scented. Ganganelli's description of
this country is particularly splendid. His statues breathe. His torrents
absolutely murmur on the ear. His cliffs have an impending horror on the fancy,
and his gardens waft upon us aromatic smells. I would still gladly hope,
notwithstanding all that has been advanced to the contrary, that these letters
really came from this distinguished person. I am not willing to give up the
idea, that liberality of sentiment has extended itself even to the papal throne.

LETTER XXI.
MY DEAR LUCY,
YOU would observe from the complexion of my last letter, that I have
recommended writers of very different sects, and from various denominations of
christians. The truth is, I have considered their spirit and tendency, and not
their name or party. I do not want to make you a methodist, a dissenter, a
mystic, a papist, a fanatic, an enthusiast, or any thing but a real christian.
I should wish to divest your mind of every species of bigotry, and convince
you, that real piety has existed under every communion.

When your judgment is more matured, you should examine authors of all
different persuasions, as the Grecian artist did women, when he wished to paint
his Venus of Medici. He selected from every one he saw, that particular limb or
feature, in which they, separately, excelled. From one, he borrowed the most
beautiful eye; from another, an hand; from a third, a bosom, etc. These, by a
wonderful effort of genius, he combined into a perfect whole.

All systems, like all human figures, have their defects; but they have,
likewise, their excellencies. Collect these, distinct charms, and work them up
in the crucible of your heart, till they produce "the very beauty of holiness"
in your life and conversation.

Above all, look through all books and forms and ordinances, up to your God.
Cherish, by every method, a spirit of devotion. Set the Lord always before you.
Consider him, as the soul of the world, the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end. Think, act, live, as in his presence, and do every thing to his glory.
Begin, continue and end every day, as in his sight, and every action, as under
his direction. Remember that all things on earth are but a shadow; that time is
tumbling down the system of the universe, and that religion only can rise upon
the ruins, by the labors it has inscribed to Eternity and God.

LETTER XXII.
MY DEAR GIRL,
THOUGH it may appear to be dealing with you in dry, abstracted subjects above
your age, yet I do think it necessary, that you should understand the grounds,
on which your faith is built, or the testimony, which confirms the truth of
christianity, and of the scriptures. You will thus be preserved from an
uncomfortable fluctuation of opinions, and guarded from the false insinuations
of those, that lie in wait to deceive.

I believe, indeed, we very falsely estimate the period, at which the talents
of women begin to open, as well as the degree of their extent and
comprehension, and superciliously withhold from you, that solid information
which, alone in either sex, can be the true foundation of a rational, a steady
and consistent conduct.

This restimony in favor of revelation, is divided, for the sake of order,
into two kinds, internal and external. The internal is that, which arises from
the nature and excellency of the precepts themselves, and from the writers
having had no private or sinister views to answer, but consulting only the
general good and edification of mankind.

This first mark of authenticity is fixed on every page of the scriptures. The
laws of Christ are of such a nature, as no man would have framed, who wished to
avail himself of the passions, prejudices and interests of mankind; for they
prescribe, on the other hand, an universal humility, mortification and
self-denial; exhibit, in the strongest colors, the emptiness of riches, and
the vanity of ambition, and have no other view, but to elevate the affections,
regenerate the heart, and put all men on looking beyond the transient concerns
of this life, to the happiness of another. What else could happen to the
original promulgers of these laws, but that, which actually did, violence and
persecution?

Our blessed Lord positively declared, that his kingdom was not of this world.
He sought none of its distinctions, and he feceived none, unless, by a strange
perversion of ideas, we place them in the poverty of a manger, or the tortures
of his cross. His apostles were inflamed with the very same, disinterested
zeal. They willingly resigned lucrative employments at the call of their
master; they cheerfully abandoned weeping friends; undertook the most hazardous
voyages and travels; had no rest day or night, were carried before kings and
governors of the earth, "and even hated by all men for his name's sake."

Read the account of their labors, persecution, banishment, death; peruse the
history of all the martyrs, written with their blood, and tell me, whether
their zeal must not have come from heaven, or what could ever have inspired it,
but a sincere conviction of duty, "a faith, which looked to a city with
foundations, whose builder and maker was God."

LETTER XXIII.
THINK, my dear girl, for yourself. Are there any marks of secular wisdom or
policy or imposture, in the conduct of the primitive apostles and christians?
Examine the history of the whole world, as it relates to religion, and where
else will you discover any portion of the same, disinterested spirit, which
actuated these original publishers of the gospel?

The Roman Emperor instituted a sacred code to work upon the consciences, and
to keep the minds of a savage and a barbarous people in subjection to
government. Zoroaster, Lycurgus, Solon, all celebrated in their day, and
certainly men of extraordinary talents, had more a view to policy, than any
moral interests, in their respective systems of legislation. Mahomet availed
himself of the narrow, sensual views, and passions of his followers, and of the
particular complexion and dissensions of his times, merely to be the sole,
exclusive monarch of an extensive empire, and procure a little fading honor and
distinction.

The kingdom of all these men was certainly of this world, and their laws, in
many instances, were repugnant to right reason, and the best and dearest
interests of their fellow creatures. Of Christ, his very enemies said, "never
man spoke, like this man;" his injunctions had but one aspect -- to universul
happiness, and one, simple method to it -- universal reformation. The angels
that announced him, at his first appearance, proclaimed "peace on earth, and
good will toward men."

Nor is the wonderful progress of this religion, in so short a space of time,
over all Asia, and a great part of Europe, indeed over almost the whole of the,
then, known world, the least convincing proof of its divine original. Consider
the missionaries -- illiterate fishermen and mechanics, and you must conclude,
either that they were endowed with supernatural gifts and assistance, or that
their wonderful success was even a greater miracle, than the endowment, you
dispute.

On this subject, permit me to recommend to your serious perusal, Soame Jenyn's
Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion. He is, on the whole, a fanciful
writer; but this is an excellent, little book, that has done much good, and
comes with greater force, to every bosom, as he was once, according to his own
candid confession, in the number of those, who disputed the sacred truths of
revelation. You will receive great pleasure and improvement, likewise, from
Addison's Evidences of Christianity, arranged and collected into one volume,
and from a late, similar production of the celebrated Dr. Beattie.

Every word of the scriptures, indeed, must convince any candid or thoughtful
person, that they come from God. The passions, pride vices and interests of
mankind have induced not a few to set up for skeptics. "Much learning has made
them mad," or a little has rendered them frivolous and conceited. They have
sought only to distinguish themselves by uncommon opinions; they have been
dupes to their own fancied penetration; they have attempted to grasp the
immensity of the Deity, in arms of flesh, or have shrunk into skepticism, as a
refuge from their vices.

Hear what the scripture says, Every one, that does evil, hates the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. Except ye
become as little children, (humble, docile, tractable,) ye cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another,
and seck not the honor, which comes of God only!

LETTER XXIV.
THE external testimony, in favor of the christian religion, arises from
prophecy, miracles, and the corresponding evidence of history. And these seem
to include all the probable methods, which heaven could employ for the
conversion of mankind.

The whole sacred book of the Old Testament is, from beginning to end, a clear
prediction of the Messiah. One of the prophets has foretold the precise year,
in which this "righteous branch" should make his appearance. And this event,
you know, has taken place to the comfort of the christian world.

Others have predicted the destruction of Jerusalem, Babylon, Tire, the
dispersion and calamities of the Jews, etc. long before they happened; -- and
all prosane history, which has been written since their time, will inform you,
that these awsul judgments were wonderfully accomplished, in their proper
season.

The Revelation contains darker hints of some events, that are visibly, though
gradually fulfilling, at this moment. But as I can only glance at the subject,
you will see it treated in such a manner, as to confirm your faith and exait
your devotion, in the late Bishop of Bristol (Dr. Newton's) discourses on the
Prophecies.

The miracles of our Savior and of his immediate apostles meet you in every
page of the inspired book; and in profane history, you will learn from those,
who were avowed enemies to the cause, that, at a particular period of time,
there did exist such a sacred personage, as Jesus Christ, who wrought miracles,
healed the sick, and raised the dead; such a sect, as that of Christians, who
met to receive the sacrament, who bound themselves by this oath, to commit no
iniquity, practiced a wonderful innocence and austerity of manners, and, beyond
all example, loved one another. You will see likewise, in the same pages, a
full description of their manners, morals, ceremonies and religious
institutions.

The lapse of time, moreover, to us, who live in these later times, has given
an additional force to the evidences, in favor of revelation. The ingenious
author of the Spectator, in his day, considered the particular case of the
Jews, their calamities, dispersion, vagabond, unsettled state, etc. as a
standing and incontestable miracle, in support of the sacred writings. They
still continue (what is there so circumstantially foretold,) unable to
incorporate with any people, and loaded with the hatred and abhorrence of all.
The testimony, therefore, from their history is proportionably more illustrated
and confirmed.

The destruction of the Romish church, likewise, is palpably predicted in the
scriptures. And, if we may judge from strong appearances, is daily approaching.
The great and general diffusion of knowledge; the consequent progress of
religious toleration, and that dispersion of the mists of prejudice from all
eyes, produced by the genial rays of a meridian sun, must, in time, effect the
downfall of all tyranny and superstition: whilst the emperor, employed in
destroying monasteries, and encouraging population, appears an instrument in
the hand of Providence, for accelerating the approach of this auspicious
moment. The late dismemberment, moreover, of territory from the Holy See; the
contentions, in which the sovereign pontiff has been involved by those
monarchs, who once trembled at his frown; and the mere external deference only,
which is paid to his authority, prove that his throne is tottering from its
base, and, like all other human things, approaching to its dissolution. Thus is
our holy religion founded on a rock, against which the winds and waves of
infidelity beat in vain. Proud men may reason, and wicked men pretend to doubt,
but the very gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

LETTER XXV.
MY DEAR LUCY.
WONDER not at the diversity of opinions in religion. It has been from the
beginning, and will continue to be the case, to the end, of the world. -- Men
will never have the same religious sentiments, till you can give them the very
same natural dispositions of humility, candor, teachableness; the same
capacity, education, acquaintance, or even the same set of feat^^es or the same
complexion.

The history of the church, from the first moment, to the present, is an
history of these diffensions. So soon as Christ and his apostles disappeaned,
men mixed tares of human opinion with this good seed of the word. Even two of
these apostles had a sharp contention, and the spirit has never vanished from
their successors.

There has been the same fashion in religions opinions, as in common things.
Particular notions have been abetted, laid aside, resumed and dismissed again,
under different names and leaders, exactly like the varying modes of dress,
furniture or entertainments.

Nor is this the least impeachment of our holy religion. The truth of that,
like the God, whence it comes, is the "same yesterday, today and for ever." It
is reserved, as the privilege of a more glorious era, that all men shall be of
one heart and of one soul and keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

In all human systems of faith, there must be error. Where error is
involuntary, and springs from no criminal passions, but only from a weakness or
misdirection of judgment, the Almighty, who looks chiefly at the heart,
doubtless will forgive. Charity, in the mean time, is the great bond of union,
amongst all parties. They shall come from the east, and from the west, and sit
down in the kingdom of God. If we hope to be companions in glory, we should not
surely fall out by the way.

The christian blood, which has stained so many ages of the church, has flowed
from the most malignant and selfish passions. The gospel breathes nothing but
universal love, and candor and forbearance. Ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of, is the mild rebuke to every perse^^tor, that would slay with the
sword.

LETTER XXVI.
THOUGH it is really invidious, yet for the sake of directing your judgment,
and gratifying a very natural and laudable curiosity, I will give you a brief,
comprehensive sketch of the opinions of the more celebrated, religious sects,
that have prevailed in this kingdom. You will thus be able to form some
comparative idea of their merits or defects; you will not be so likely to be
"tossed about with every blast of vain doctrine," and you will never feel
yourself at a loss, in company, when they become the subject of conversation.

Pagan are those who are wholly unenlightened with revelation, and worship
idols, instead of the true God. These idols have been various, as the caprices
or imaginations of the people amongst whom they are found; sometimes fictitious
beings, such as Jupiter, Apollo, Mercury, Mars, Juno, Venus, Minerva, etc.
sometimes, good qualities personified; Faith, Hope, Victory, Concord; sometimes
animals, as Serpents, Crocodiles, etc. or even vegetables; as Leek, Onion,
Garlic. These last were objects of adoration amongst the Egyptians.

Before the appearance of Christ, almost the whole world was covered with
paganism. All the learning and politeness of Athens and of Rome could not
dispel this ignorance. It has only vanished where the sun of righteousness has
appeared with healing in his wings.

An ingenious writer has said, that, if we divide (...) known countries of the
globe into thirty equal parts, five will be Christians; six, Mahometans, and
nineteen, Pagans. How dreadful the reflection, that the greatest of all
possible blessings should have penetrated but so small a way! When we consider
the privileges of the gospel, how gladly would one carry it, if it were
possible, into every country of the known world! How ardently should we pray to
our father in heaven, that his kingdom of grace may daily come on earth, and
how thankful should we be to that gracious Providence, that has fixed our lot
in a christian land, and under the enlivening beams of revelation!

LETTER XXVII.
MY DEAR GIRL,
MAHOMETANS are so called from being followers of the great impostor, Mahomet.
This extraordinary man was born at Mecca, in Arabia, about the middle of the
sixth century; and, in his fortieth year, after some time previously spent in
the silence, retirement and austerity of a cave, presumed to style himself, the
Apostle of God; pretended to have received from heaven, a new and a last
revelation, which was to illustrate and enforce, what had been mistaken or
perverted, in the christian, by the lapse of time or the sophistry of men. He
affected, likewise, a commission from above, if gentler methods should prove
ineffectual, to propagate his particular religion by the sword.

His tenets are contained in the Koran, which, for its singularity, is worth
your reading. To give them plausibility, they are interpersed with some
christian doctrines, but, at the same time, carry a most artful address to the
passions; allowing polygamy, and describing the future paradise, as consisting
principally, of sensual pleasures; splendid, silken garments; rivers of water,
wine, milk, honey; music, feasting and most beautiful women.

Mahomet was a man of great talents and ambition. He had no view, but to render
himself the sole and formidable monarch of an extensive empire. Religion was
made the instrument for executing his wicked and tyrannical designs. Hence all
his austerities, disguises, deceptions. Hence he pretended such a familiar
intercourse with heaven, and, by his singular address, founded a religion,
which has continued since his time, with little variation, to overspread a
considerable part of the world. It is professed by the Turks and Persians, by
several nations amongst the Africans, and by many amongst the East-Indians.

The outline of it was sketched by the hands of a great master. It was suited
to the climate; it took advantage of the disorders and differ ^^ons, then
prevailing amongst Christians, and i^^oromised a species of gratifications, to
which our nature will always feel the strongest propensity.

The bulk of people, in any country, do not, indeed cannot, think or judge for
themselves; it will therefore, always be in the power of those, who have any
popular talents to make the multitude, their proselytes and slaves; and thus,
if we turn over the history of the world, shall we find the ambition, lust, and
avarice of a few, trampling on the dearest interests of the many.

LETTER. XXVIII.
MY DEAR LUCY,
UNDER the name of Christians, however differing from each other in private
opinions, or divided and subdivided amongst themselves, are included all those,
who embrace the sacred revelation and doctrines of Jesus Christ. Amongst these,
the Roman Catholics, both in point of numbers, and the figure they have made in
the history of Europe, may seem to claim some degree of precedence. The Roman
Catholic religion is at this day the established religion of the following
Countries, viz. Portugal, Spain, France, Italy, Bohemla, Hungary, Poland, and
likewise part of Germany and Swisserland.


This religion, which has subsisted for such a length of time, and covered so
considerable a part of the world, is little else but a system of political
tyranny established by the clergy, over the consciences and fortunes of men,
merely to enrich and aggrandize themselves. They who should have aspired to no
other greatness, but to become the servants of all for their eternal good, have
undertaken "to lord it over God's heritage, and rule it with a rod of iron."

Can any thing in the world be more inconsistent? The Pope in all the plenitude
of temporal power, presumptuously styles himself the vicar general of Jesus
Christ! that Jesus, who appeared in a manger, emptied himself of all his glory,
and disclaimed all temporal greatness and distinction!

The public worship of the papists is overloaden with ceremony. It is performed
in a learned language, unknown to the vulgar, and intermixed with such a
continual change of dress, attitude and ceremonies, as are only calculated to
excite the ridicule of a rational and enlightened mind. The great, Supreme
incomprehensible Spirit is only to be served with the heart and affections, and
the most unlearned person in a congregration should surely understand every
prayer, that is uttered.

The Roman Catholics acknowledge the Pope for their head. They think the church
infallible in its councils and decisions, and brand all, who differ from them,
with the odious name of heretics, as people, who are not within the pale of
salvation. They keep the minds of poor people in ignorance; they do not permit
them to read the scriptures, but refer them for instruction solely to their
priests; they maintain the nec^^sity of confessing their sins and frailties to
their pastor, and the validity of human absolution; they believe the absurd and
incomprehensible doctrine of transubstantiation, or that the elements of bread
and wine, in the sacrament, are changed into the real body and blood of Christ;
they have been accused of worshipping images; saints, they certainly invoke, to
be mediators for them; they have swelled the number of sacraments to- seven;
these are baptism, confirmation, the eucharist, penance, extreme unction, holy
orders, and marriage; they admit the doctrine of a purgatory after death, in
which souls are refined from their former pollutions; they forbid their priests
to marry, preach up the n^cessity, or superior sanctity of a single life, and
induce as many people of fortune, as possible, to bury themselves in convents
and monasteries, and pour their fortunes into the bosom of the church; in some
of the more corrupt ages, indulgencies for the greated crimes might be
purchased with money, The selling of these indulgencies by John Tezel, a
Dominican friar, roused the spirit of Dr. Martin Luther, professor of Divinity
in the University of Wittenberg, in the electorate of Saxony. He caused 95
theses, opposing this abuse and other errors, to be printed and nailed to the
door of the Electoral Church, October 31, 1517; and this was the beginning of
the Reformation.
and every degree of guilt has had its stated sum of acquittance; persecution
for conscience sake, has been deemed meritorious, and their annals are stained
with the blood of thousands.

There are, doubtless, multitudes of papists, who, in an enlightened age,
shudder at many of these dreadf^^ opinions, and laugh at others; the gay and
volatile people of France, in general ridicule them all; and make a natural
transition from the extreme of superstition to that of unbelief. -- Whether
these be, or be not, the principles of the present members, they are
indisputably, the established doctrines of the church, however varnished over
by art, or evaned by affectation; and though this people at present, are loyal,
inoffensive subjects, and seemingly attached to the sovereign on the throne,
yet there is reason to fear, that a renewal of their power would be attended
with a repetition of their violence, and blow up the seemingly extinguished
embers of hatred and persecution. Such a many-headed monster should be
carefully guarded. Deluges of human blood are not to be forgotten.

For their sake, and for the honor of Christianity, I do most ardently wish
their conversion. I long to embrace, as brethren, a thousand excellent men, who
now live, as I cherish the memories of many, who have died, within their
communion. Nor do I think the period is very distant. Bigotry cannot much
longer be a weed in the present highly cultivated state of Great Britain. I
have before mentioned the emperor, as a probable instrument of this good work.
His ambition, I trust, will thus be consecrated to the glory of God, and the
welfare of mankind. The happiest events we celebrate, have sometimes, sprung
from the impurest passions. Our own reformation from this church was singularly
effected. In the reign of Henry VIII.
The Almighty can bend the counsels of men, in such a manner, as to answer his
sovereign designs. He does what he will, in the armies of heaven, and amongst
all the inhabitants of the earth.

LETTER XXIX.
THE Greek church is much less known amongst us, as to its doctrine or
discipline, than the Roman. Indeed there are, comparatively, but few members of
it in England. It was first established in Greece, from whence it derived its
name, and extends to some other parts of Turkey. It is likewise the established
Church throughout the vast empire of Russia in Europe.
It is often called the eastern, in contradistinction to the Romish, which is
the western, church.

Though the professors of this religion disavow the supremacy of the Pope, and
many other opinions of the Holy See, yet they are considerably tinctured with
superstition. Their worship is overloaden with ceremony, show, splendid
dresses, fastings, austerities, etc. as well as the former. -- They are
governed by bishops and patriarchs. -- Their head is the patriarch of
Constantinople.

LETTER XXX.
MY DEAR LUCY,
DISSENTER is a vague word, which, in its full latitude, may be applied to all,
who differ from the established religion. Originally, however, it meant only
one kind of people, then distinguished by the name of presbyterians, who rather
dissented from the discipline and polity, than the opinions, of the church.
These, in general, embraced the sentiments of Calvin, relating to
foreknowledge, divine decrees, irresistible grace, predestination, reprobation,
etc. They disclaimed episcopacy, and their government was vested in presbyters
and synods. The word presbyter, means an elder, and synod, an ecclesiastical
council or assembly.

The present race of dissenters may be strictly subdivided into two classes;
those who still retain the doctrines of Calvin, and his mode of discipline, and
call themselves, from their form of government, Independants; and such as
assume the more specious title of protestant dissenters. The first are
extremely rigid and puritanical in their outward deportment; but they do not
breathe all the sweetness of piety, not are their annals unstained with
instances of intolerance and persecution. -- Their leader was a furious and
unrelenting bigot. His murder of the poor honest Servetus will be an eternal
stigma on his memory, and throw a dark shade over his pretended virtues.

Indeed how can people, with such sentiments, act otherwise? If their God be
only merciful to a few, elect, how should they think of a general benevolence?
If he can be cruel to so many millions of creatures, where is the harm of
imitating his example, or exterminating thousands?

I do not know that the latter kind of dissenters have any settled code of
faith. Every minister has a psalm of his own, has a doctrine, has an
interpretation, so that very opposite sentiments may be consistently delivered
by different persons, in the same pulpit. They value themselves highly, with
whatever justice, on their learning, candor and liberality. Far from being
actuated with any blind or enthusiastic zeal, they seem to worship reason, as
their guide, and sacrilegiously exalt it, almost on the ruins of revelation.
Their danger is of falling into skepticism, the most alarming and incurable of
all spiritual disorders. They are said, in general, to disbelieve the doctrine
of the Trinity, of the atonement, and divinity of Christ, and unite with the
Calvinists, in one sentiment, at least -- that of abhorring episcopacy, and of
considering the established church, as a system, raised by priestcraft, and
supported by superstition.

LETTER XXXI.
THE methodists are comparatively a new sect, and sprung up about sixty years
ago, under the auspices of John Wesley, and George Whitfield, then students at
Oxford. They received their name, from affecting to live by a stricter regimen
and method, than other people.

They have been long divided into two classes according to the different
principles, espoused by their leaders. The first follow the opinions of
Arminius, under the guidance of Wesley, who is still a very venerable looking
patriarch, at their head; and the other, believing divine decrees,
foreknowledge, reprobation and election, are more strictly members of the kirk,
(only that they do not admit its discipline) having long since lost their
original director. George Whitfield. Both before and since his death, the
Countess of Huntingdon has been a person of great influence among this latter
class of Methodists.


I do not know, that the methodists, (particularly they, who follow Wesley,)
are dissenters from the establishment, further than in having separate meetings
to inkindle and inspirit the zeal of their followers; a circumstance, which
they conceive to be much neglected by the regular clergy. They are baptized
with us; attend our services and sacrament; admire our liturgy; and only blame
us for our lukewarmness and want of energy and animation. This censure, it is
true, comes but with a very ill grace from such a people; but, I fear, we
cannot easily refute it.

They had originally a great share of enthusiasm. -- But it is greatly softened
by the indulgence they have received, and mellowed down by time. They are no
longer, a new; they are no longer a persecuted sect.

The journals of Wesley, written in the infancy of his career, are a strange
medley of goodness and enthusiasm. The old man has lived long enough to have
seen his error. That glow of imagination is considerably abated, which mistook
shadows for substance, and made fiction pass for truth.

The great error amongst this people, is their employing such low, illiterate
men as their instructors, and fancying them under the immediate guidance of
divine inspiration -- preaching up the necessity of instantaneous conversion
and justification by a sort of miracle -- making faith to consist in a full
assurance of salvation, and denouncing damnation against those, who have it not
in this supereminent degree -- and lastly, in supposing this assurance to
depend on certain, inward extraordinary impulses, rather than the scriptures.

These sentiments lead many artful people into a wicked pretense of feelings
and assurances, which they have not; others of warm imagination (...) the
belief of what is only chimerical, and plunge still more of honest, timid minds
or an hyponchondriacal temperament into melancholy and despair.

The Savior, doubtless, can forgive sins to whom, and at whatever moment, he
pleases. A thief, upon the cross, was a miracle of his mercy; but this is not
the ordinary method of his providence; there are, undoubtedly, thousands of
excellent people, who pass through the world without such a full assurance of
faith; and the spiritual life, like that of animals or vegetables, is generally
progressive. We grow imperceptibly "from strength to strength," and, though the
peace of God may be diffused through our consciences, we dare not say, "that we
have already attained."

The methodists were, once, extremely lavish in their censures of others; but
justice obliges me to confess, that they are now in general, an harmless,
inoffensive and pious people. If they be gloomy, it is their own misfortune; if
they go mourning all their days, theirs is the sorrow; the world in general, is
too dissipated and unreflecting.

As to their leader, he is doubtless a prodigy. -- Whatever be the merit or
demerit of his opinions, his indefatigable labors, activity, pilgrimages,
zeal, and resolution challenge our amazement. An old man of nearly ninety
rising constantly at four o'clock in the depth of winter, preaching frequently,
on the same day, journeying from place to place, and from one people to another
kindom; himself the bishop, secretary, judge, governor of his people, the main
spring of such a vast, and complicated machine, is a phenomenon, that will
vanish from our earthly horizon, when he ceases to exist. His opinions, it is
said, do not injure his cheerfulness. Time has planted few wrinkles on his
forehead, though it has covered his head with snow.

Notwithstanding the religious zeal, which works wonders in his favor, and the
deference naturally paid to the first founder of a sect, particularly when
possessed of any genius or learning, yet his peaceful government of so numerous
a people, for such a length of time, is a proof of extraordinary talents and
address. Whenever he dies, his disciples will dwindle. They will not easily
agree about a successor. No successor can have so undisputed a sovereignty, or
possess so unmolested a throne. They will separate from the church; and the
separation will be fatal. It will be the loss of union, consequence and power.
The republic will probably be divided in its councils, and have less dispatch
and energy in the execution.

LETTER XXXII.
THE Baptists or Anabaptists are a species of the independent dissenters, who
differ from their brethren, chiefly in the mode of administering baptism, which
they conceive, should all ways be by immersion. They likewise reject the
baptism of infants.
There were many of this persuasion, amongst the reformed abroad. In Holland,
German^, and the North, they were called Anabaptists, or Mennonites; in
Piedmont and the south, they were found amongst the Albigenses. In England,
they are few, and, and at present, little mentioned.

The Quakers arose about the middle of the seventeenth century, George Fox
seems to have been their founder about the year 1649.
and had their name affixed upon them in derision, from the violent emotions,
with which they affected to be agitated, when they conceived themselves under
the more immediate impulse of the spirit. They explain the whole letter of
scripture into a kind of inward, and spiritual allusion. They never speak,
preach or exhort in public, but when they fancy themselves to be moved by the
spirit; they set aside the necessity of the external sacraments, baptism and
the Lord's supper, and would certainly be right, if men had no matter in their
composition, and if the imagination was not to be awakened through the medium
of the senses.

They acknowledge no head, but Christ, no master but God; refuse to pay tithes,
and think the common civilities of life profane and unchristian. They even
appear covered in the presence of their sovereign, and address him with the
familiar appellation of thou. They are a religious community within themselves,
and their government is wholly internal. You may see their principles ably
delineated by their ingenious apologist, Barclay.

There are however, many excellent traits in the character of the quakers. They
are, on the whole, a peaceable, inoffensive people; support their own poor,
have manifested, for a long time, from a spirit of humanity, a strong and
pointed opposition to the very infamous practice of the slave trade; they never
disturb the peace of the church, or shackle the wheels of government, and are
tolerated in all their innocent peculiarities by a liberal and an enlightened
kingdom.

LETTER XXXIII.
THE Moravians, or the brethren, are a species of protestants, who, in the
fifteenth century, threw off the despotic yoke of Rome, animated by the zealous
exhortations and heroic example of John Muss John Muss and Jerome of Prague,
suffered martyrdom at Prague, in the year 1414.
Count Zinzendorff was a very eminent leader of this sect, and, for his signal
services amongst them, has been distinguished by the name of Papa This was
rather an appellation, which very naturally was used in the familiar circle of
his family. In the writings published by the United Brethren, they generally
style him, the Ordinary of the Brethren.
or spiritual father; and a Monsieur la Trobe, who lived in the metropolis, and
made continual circuits amongst them, has, more lately, acquired great
celebrity in their annals.

They have more than once passed through the fiery ordeal of persecution. Their
religious principles, however, are sound and orthodox. At a period, when great
clamours were raised against them, Potter, the then learned Archbishop of
Canterbury, pronounced them a protestant, episcopal community, as they retained
no doctrines that were repugnant to the articles of the church of England; and
the pious bishop of Sodor and Man (Wilson) was created an honorary president of
(what is called) the reformed Tropus, in the Unitas fratrum, (the unity of the
brethren.)

Their discipline and mode of government are very singular. They form within
themselves a religious community, independent of every other, and extending to
all their brethren throughout the wor^^. They are not suffered to intermarry
with people, of a different persuasion; they have groups of religious houses,
scattered through the kingdom; they have choirs of single sisters and brethren;
the first are occupied in every kind of ingenious needle work, in which they
have made an amazing proficiency, and the latter in all sorts of mechanical
employments; and their earnings, after a maintenance for themselves, which they
receive in the house, go into one common fund for the support of the general
society There is no such general fund among the United Brethren. Each member of
their Community gives, without constraint what he pleases for supporting any of
their institutions, or their Missions among the Heathen.
, and particularly of the children, belonging to the married brethren and
sisters, which are fed, educated and clothed in these religious seminaries.

The morals and chastity of their women are guarded with a very peculiar
vigilance; they are not permitted to step without the walls of their asylum,
unaccompanied by a superintendent of their own sex The author's assertion is to
be understood only of the growing youth of the sex, who are not of age.
: when any of them, or the brethren is married, it is transacted by the casting
of lots, and supposed to be ordained by a particular providence, and the union
is generally formed with some members of their society abroad Not generally,
but sometimes it has been the case as with other inhabitants of these kingdoms.
. They much resemble the methodists in having private conferences, classes,
leaders, and examinations concerning the state and progress of grace in the
soul, and none are permitted to receive the sacrament, without having
previously passed through a very severe process of religious examination.

Their worship consists principally in singing, and hence, perhaps, their
societies are called choirs. Their residences have much the air of religious
houses; and their single brethren and sisters are often in the mortified state
of involuntary friars or nuns. Their devotions, like those of a convent, are
almost perpetual Their stated social devotions are limited to morning and
evening prayers, and a weekly exhortation by the Minister.
; and they seem to have forgotten, that they were born for society, as well as
for themselves They carry on trades and manufactures like other useful
citizens; and though they never urge any member of the different denominations in
Christendom to become members of their Church, being averse to
proselyte-making; yet from a full conviction that they were not born for
themselves only, they have made uncommon exertions for the Conversion of the
Heathen; for example; of the Greenlanders, Eskimos North American Indians, of
the Negroes in the West-Indian islands, of the Negroes, Indians and free
Negroes in Surinam, likewise of the natives of the East Indies and of the
Calmucks in Asiatic Russia. See Crans's History of the Brethren, and History of
Greenland.
.

Such restraints on nature are not tolerable, and nature will, sometimes,
assert her rights, and stain their history with indiscretions. We were sent
here to be tried. Innocence, that subsists only by the absence of temptation,
scarcely deserves the name; perpetual devotion is an impossibility; it is as
impracticable, as that the eye should be ever looking at the same object; and,
if I do not much mistake, that piety is most ardent, which knows most of the
world, from dear-bought experience, and finding it a scene of mortification and
vanity, appeals to heaven, for more substantial satisfaction.

There are many scattered societies of Moravians in England, but they appear to
be a declining sect. It is immured ignorance or prejudice, which has led
Christians to separate from each other for little, frivolous distinctions. The
era, I hope, is coming which will bring us more into one common fold, under one
shepherd, Christ Jesus, the Righteous.

There is certainly a great mixture of good in this people. What a pity, that
they cannot join with us in offering a rational service, and lifting up one
common hallelujah, to the great God and Father of all.

LETTER XXXIV.
I KNOW not why the mystics are so called, unless it be for discovering
mystical passages in the scripture, or making religion at large wear the
appearance of mystery. They are a very ancient sect, and sprung up so early, as
about the close of the third century.

This people, by a very singular kind of ingenuity, discover a spiritual or
hidden sense in the most literal passages of scripture, and indeed convert the
whole, rather into an amusing allegory, than a plain and simple narrative of
facts.

The hold all divine truth to come, by an immediate influx, from the spiritual
world, and pretend to a knowledge of God, and heavenly things, that can only be
attained in this extraordinary manner. Sometimes they are called quietists,
because they maintain, that the soul should be in a still, quiet, passive
state, undistracted with noise and cares, and almost superior to sense or
matter, in order to receive this divine illumination. -- Their station, in the
thermometer of different, religious orders, in that of lighter elements,
carried by superior subtilty into the air, whilst others, composed of grosser
matter, adhere, by an invincible necessity, to the earth, till death dissolves
the union betwixt soul and body.

The mystic theology seems to be the philosophy of Plato, refined and grafted
upon a Christian stock; the quixotism of religion, which affects to attain in
life, what the scriptures have taught us to expect only after death; an
intimate knowledge of the Almighty, visions, revelations, almost intuition!

If the mystics would reason for a moment, (but people, under the guidance of
immediate illumination are far above the vulgar shackles of reason,) they would
see that such a subtle, metaphysical system is poorly fitted for the reception
of mankind at large, who can scarcely be brought to understand, relish, or
practice the most obvious truths; they would acknowledge that divinity to be
the best, which does not, with the lightness of some matter, ascend into the
air, but contents itself on earth, with inculcating and enforcing the most
obvious duties of common life; the reciprocal obligations of parents and
children, masters and servants, kings and subjects; the subjection of the
passions, the discipline of reason, and the duty of all to one common God. They
would know, that their opinions must create an indifference, or a fancied
superiority to those established ordinances, which are the very basis of all
religion, and that if all men were governed by their passive quietude, there
would be none to encounter with the vices and disorders of a mixed,
heterogenous state. -- Christians would "cease to be the light of the world, or
the salt of the earth;" there would be none to stem, by powerful, turbid
eloquence the ragings of iniquity, or let the luster of their example shine
before men."

Our Lord's piety was not of this kind. It sought not the indulgence of recluse
contemplation. It was not passive, but active; every where, with the sinner and
the saint, to reprove the one, and encourage the other; in the wilderness to
pray, and in the world, to reform; at a marriage, "to rejoice with them, that
did rejoice, and at the grave of Lazarus, to weep with his afflicted friends.

LETTER XXXV.
THE mystic theology boasts some great names. Madame de Guion was a warm
espouser of it in France; a woman of great fashion and consequence, remarkable
for the goodness of her heart, and the regularity of her conduct, but of a
capricious unsettled temper, and liable to the seductions of a warm imagination.

The opinions of this lady made a great noise in that country, about the year
1687. They were confuted, some time afterward, by the celebrated Bossuet. The
great and good Fenelon undertook her vindication; but his book was condemned by
Pope Innocent the twelfth.

The Teutonic philosopher (Jacob Behemen,) was a kind of father to this sect,
and published a book, which contains a system of the most absurd and incoherent
reveries, that perhaps ever gained an admission into the world. It is a species
of moral chemistry, and occult philosophy, a bewildering explanation, and a
cloudy light, which I will venture to say, that neither Sir Isaac Newton, nor
Mr. Lock, with all their clearness of conception, could have been able to
understand.

Law, who wrote the Serious Call (a nonjuror of Northamptonshire), was an
abettor of these doctrines; a man of very exemplary life, and discriminating
talents; but it was an honor, reserved for the late Baron Swedenborg to carry
them to their very height of perfection Those who embrace the tenets of Baron
Swedenborg, have very lately begun to form themselves into a separate
connection, under the name of the New Jerusalem Church.
. Compared with his, all other writings, on the subject, are but the morning
contrasted with the perfect day. He tells us confidently of his unrestrained
communications with the spiritual world, visions, revelations; he gives to
every portion of scripture, a natural, a spiritual, and a celestial sense; he
describes to us the very form, and furniture, and apparatus of heaven; he
retails to the reader his conversations with angels; he describes the condition
of Jews, Mahometans, Christians, of the English, French, Dutch, of clergymen of
every denomination, laity, etc. in another world; he has a key to unlock all
the hitherto impenetrable secrets of futurity, and already, whilst in the body,
"knows even as he is known."

What is the inference? When imagination is permitted to usurp the place of
reason, fanaticism becomes a christian duty, and enthusiasm the more credible,
in proportion as it exceeds all bounds of credibility.

What can induce men of sense to hearken to these dreams? Early prejudices,
confined reading, singular acquaintance, a recluse life, a gloomy. speculative,
abstracted turn of mind, and associating together, for a long time, particular,
however incongruous, ideas.

This will account for any reveries. It accounts for insanity. And men, from
this cause, may, in a particular instance (suppose religion), be insane, though
in all other respects, their minds are ever so enlightened, or ever so
expansive.

It must, however, be said in favor of the mystics, that their principles
inculcate in the strongest manner, the necessity of spiritual holiness and
regeneration; that their lives in general, are unblemished and exemplary. They
are a quiet, retired people, who let the world go as it will, as to riches or
promotions; who enjoy indeed, in a passive superiority, those tumults of the
crowd, as higher spirits may condescend to look down, with a pitying smile, on
the toils of mortals; and who deny themselves all the gayer pleasures, in order
to relish, in a sublimer degree, all the raptures of devotion.

If the opinions of the quietists spring from spiritual pride, it is more than
they suspect; for they preach up the deepest self-abasement, annihilation, and
poverty of spirit; they almost starve the animal part of their nature, to nurse
the angelic, and half live on meditation.

If such people have errors, they should be touched with a gentle hand. If they
are misled, it is in amiable company. There is not a much more lovely name than
that of Fenelon. Few men have possessed such a sweetness of piety.

I have but one wish for them, myself, or any other sect, and it is a wish of
charity; that what is wrong in any of us, may be done away, because I long to
meet them all in the kingdom of heaven.

LETTER XXXVI.
THEOLOGY, like arts and sciences, has its scholastic, technical terms, and I
will endeavor to explain them.

The Arians are so called from Arius, a presbyter of the church of Alexandria,
in the year 315. He believed Christ to be God, but conceived him inferior to
the Father, as to his deity and essence. The term, at present, is
indiscriminately applied to all, who, in any degree, embrace this opinion.

This heresy was first revived by Mr. Whiston, in the beginning of the
eighteenth century. The wo^^^ of Dr. Clarke afterward entailed upon him the
name of Semi-Arian (Half-Arian.)

Socinians derive their name from the illustrious family of Sozzini, which
flourished, a long time, at Sienna in Tuscany, and produced several great, and
eminent men. Faustus Socinus, the great author of this sect, was born at Sienna
in 1539. denied the divinity of Christ, the personality of the Holy Ghost, and
the perpetuity of baptism, as a divine ordinance.

The most distinguished men, who have favored this opinion, are Le Clear,
Biddle, Lardner, Lowman, Fleming, Lindsey, etc.

LETTER XXXVII.
THE Deists are so called, perhaps, from the Latin word, Deus, a God; because
they acknowledge only the existence of a God, profess no particular form or
system of religion, and only follow the law and light of nature. Of these,
however, there are many degrees, from the moderate ones, who believe revelation
in a certain, qualified sense, to those, who absolutely disavow it in all. The
first who figured or wrote, in this country, was Baron Herbert of Cherbury.

Deism is generally embraced, either by men of a cold, phlegmatic,
philosophical cast, who are indisposed to believe any thing, for which they
have not absolute demonstration, or by those, who, having never thought or
reasoned, consider it as a mark of wit and talents, to set up for unbelievers.

The first deserve an answer, and it is easy. All nature is full of mysteries,
as well as revelation; the union of soul and body is a miracle; the infinite
divisibility of matter, and the idea of an eternal duration are absolutely
incomprehensible; nothing can be more so, than the necessary self-existence of
God. The latter are better answered with irony. Their infidelity is a
fashionable livery. When deism is not in vogue amongst the gay cireles, they
will soon put it off, and disavow their ever having worn so absolete a garb.

A third class of deists may be said to spring up from the superstitions of
Rome. Great men, who live in catholic countries, are disgusted with their
bigotry, and are apt to think religion in general only an imposition on the
credulity of mankind. Was not this the case with all that splendid group,
Rousseau, Voltaire, the Abbe de Raynal, and Helvetius, who wrote a famous
treatise de l' Esprit? Genius hates shackles, and shackles are the peculiar
manufacture of Rome.

A fourth class of deists are continually produced by the love of fame, venting
itself in paradoxes, and singular opinions to make a noise; by an aversion to
the strictness of gospel morality, and by criminal passions, which endeavor to
hide their guilt in the shades of unbelief. Some of these have commenced
authors, and endeavored to immortalize their errors by the press. But their
books, on a near view, have been found only gist and lettered with vanity, and
have quickly been consigned to the oblivion, they deserved. Whilst we are in
this world, enemies will mix these tares with the good seed of the gospel. We
must wait till harvest, to see the final separation.

The deists are the greatest enemies, of all others, to true religion. Their
pride and skepticism stop up every avenue, by which divine grace and conviction
should be conveyed to the soul. Nature, with them, is only a necessary system
of causes and effects. Creation rose into its present splendor, by a kind of
fatality. Thunders roar, lightnings flash, volcanos vomit, tempests rage, seas
overflow, millions perish, and kingdoms are desolated, only by a train of
stated, inevitable causes. They exclude a first efficient mover, and think not
of the providence, which, at a certain moment, and for the wisest, moral
causes, predestined such events.

Few of these men have died in peace. Their fortitude has deserted them, when
they wanted its support. Their philosophy has vanished, as their strength has
abated. The blast of death has demolished their splendid fabric, and their
hopes and peace have perished in the ruins Atheist is the name, and Atheism the
doctrine of such a person who entirely denies the existence of God. Whether any
man ever did in his heart believe this absurd notion, is doubtful. But whoever
pretends to it, may read his character in Psalm xiv. 5.1. 'The fool has said
in his heart, There is no God.'


LETTER XXXVIII.
MY DEAR GIRL,
TRAVELERS, that have made (what is called) the grand tour, felicitate
themselves on their return to England, and pronounce it the happiest country in
the world. And such it certainly is, if not in beauty and deliciousness of
climate, yet in that absolute security of property it enjoys above all other
nations, and that liberty, which endears every possession.

If you have made proper observations on the different, religious sects, that
have passed in review before us, you will feel much the same sentiment, when
you compare them with your own church. -- You will be the moral traveller
returned from more unpleasant scenes, to taste the blessings of true repose and
dignity at home. Nor is this idea, I hope, the effect of prejudice, but springs
from solid reason and conviction.

The Church of England The Church of England, together with the established
Church of Ireland, forms only one of the three leading divisions of the
Protestants. Lutheranism is the established religion in Sweden, Denmark,
Norway, Livonia, and a considerable part of Germany; and Calvinism or
Presbyter^a^^sm is the established religion in Scotland, Holland, and in
several parts of Germany and Swisserland.
(...) enough of ceremony and external deconcy to strike the senses, and to
support the dignity of religion, in the eyes of the vulgar, and yet nothing,
that can justly offend the delicacy of the sublimest understanding. It aims not
at the total abstraction of dissenters, nor affects the superstitious forms and
ceremonies of the Church of Rome. Its piety has a rational, sedate, composed
air, and is uniformly grave and decent without pretending to the flights, the
fervours, and the visions of some, modern fanatics.

The sacraments are not ridiculously multiplied, nor has human policy inveated
them. They are but two in number, baptism and the Lord's supper; both
positively enjoined by Christ, and neither of them supposed to have any further
merit, than as they lead to purity of heart and conduct. The liturgy has been
admired by the greatest men; the ministers of this church are, in general, an
ornament to their sacred profession, and perhaps, on the whole, men of as great
learning, candor, piety and moderation, as are to be found under any
communion. That there were no exceptions, would be a miracle. There was a Judas
amongst twelve apostles.

After all the fine-spun theories of liberty, every society must have a mode of
government; and that government supposes power to be lodged some where for the
general good. That of the Church of England is vested in bishops; no one will
dispute the antiquity, or perhaps usefulness of the order, whatever he may
object to its temporal distinctions. St. Paul appointed bishops in the
primitive church.

Much abuse is often levelled against the sacred bench. But the shafts come
from envy, and are pointed by religious prejudice and resentment. It is, in
fact, their temporal emoluments, that provoke this ungenerous kind of
persecution. But if they must attend parliament, they have indeed no
super-abundant provision. Whilst it is thought expedient to have a national
church, the interests of it, as connected with the state, must frequently be a
subject of parliamentary discussion; and it would be very extraordinary indeed,
if they, who are most immediately concerned should not have the liberty of
giving their opinion and votes on the occasion. Whatever equal right, from
education or abilities, the bishops may possess, along with the temporal peers
of the realm, to deliver their sentiments on any other subject, they exercise
it very rarely, and with great discretion. Their honors too, it should be
observed, usually come late in life, and the hope of attaining them, at some
distant period, is doubtless, amongst the younger clergy, a strong incentive to
emulation.

But prejudice apart, the bishops, in general, perform their sacred duties with
great decorum, and the present bench can boast the names of several who,
without the aid of purple, would be an ornament to human nature.

To suppose the Church of England without defects, would be supposing it not an
human establishment. But innovation in religious systems, is a dangerous
experiment Projects of a reformation in our liturgy and articles have come from
very suspicious quarters, and worn no very promising appearance. The little
errors of this church are better trusted to the enlightened prudence and
moderation of its governors, than the rash and daring spirit of adventurers,
who, under the pretense of only attempting to remove its rubbish, might art^^^^
undermine the very foundation, on which it rests. They who have talked most
loudly on the subject of an alteration, have certainly displayed no very great
attachment to the essentials of our holy faith.

We might, perhaps, borrow from sectaries, without any inconvenience, a little
more zeal, fervor and animation. If our internal discipline, like theirs, was
more rigidly enforced, and if, like them, we had a few more conferences with
our people, and an opportunity of keeping the unworthy from the altar, we
should be so much nearer the model of perfection.

But alas! the great evil amongst us, is a want of encouragement. The church,
at any rate, has but a small pittance. A learned prelate The B -- p of L -- d
-- ff.
has observed, that, if all its dignities, (bishoprics included,) were
annulled, and their produce thrown into one common, equalizing fund, for the
general support, the amount of annual salary, to every individual would not
exceed L. 120, or at most, L. 150.

Under such circumstances, who can be very animated? Or what energy can attend
the exercise of our profession in the eyes of a world, that superciliously
appreciates the characters of men infinitely more by their temporal
possessions, than by the graces of their heart, or the sublimity of their
understanding. To a person of any refinement or sensibility, houses without
conveniences, and children, without provision, are but a melancholy portion! If
merchants or lawyers had no better prospects, what would be their exertions?
And yet under all this heavy load of embarrassment, what great and good men do
our annals boast?

Fanatics, indeed, allege, that pastors should be superior to all hopes of
reward, except in heaven. Plato has likewise said that we should be raised
above the sense of pain. But neither those visionaries nor this philosopher
have been able to change the nature of things; to take from nerves, their
sensibility; from the world, its insolence, from education, its delicacy, or
from poverty, its stings.

And we have learned from an higher authority, that either of theirs, that the
christian labourer is worthy of his hire, and that he who serves at the altar,
should live of the altar.

LETTER XXXIX.
BOOKS and rules of all kinds are the theory of religion, and can have no
further use, than as they lead to practice. We have then profited by systems
and opinions, when our life is a continual comment on what we have read, and we
make the light of our example shine before men.

Christianity has but two, capital features; love to God, evidenced in acts of
piety; and good will toward man, exemplified in all the possibilities of doing
good. As devotion, however necessary, can bring no profit to our Maker, any
more than a little taper can add to the splendors of the sun, the scriptures
have laid the greatest stress on charity to our fellow creatures. This is
called the end of the commandment; it is the embodying of our piety; and the
world could not subsist without it. Human life is full of woe. Charity is the
angel, that binds up the sores of our fellow creatures, heals the broken in
heart, clothes the naked, and feeds the hungry. The poor are made the
representatives of Christ; whatever we give to them is, in scripture language,
bestowed on the Savior. Moth and rust corrupt the treasures we hoard up, but
this is placed in those funds of heaven, which never fail.

The Savior has said, that it is more blessed to give than to receive. And the
pleasures, which spring from charity, prove its origin to be divine. What value
has an heap of money, or what conscious dignity do we derive from it, if it is
not employed in giving comfort to the miserable, and protection to the
distressed?

The very poor are provided for by the laws of the kingdom. And common beggars
are far from being the most deserving objects. Charity should rather seek out
the modest and uncomplaining who have seen better days, and have all the pains
of a delicate sensibility, annexed to their distress.

True charity does not so much consist in multiplying little alms to a number
of poor people, as in making some grand and well directed efforts in favor of
a few. Educating one child of an overburthened family is a greater act of
beneficence, than retailing to them, occasionally, a thousand, petty
benefactions. It is not a few, scattered drops of rain, but it is a generous
shower, coming all at once, which revives the parched earth, and quickens
vegetation.

It is amazing what charities even a small fortune will enable people to
perform, if under the influence of a christian economy. A few re^^enchments
from dress, vanity or pleasure, poured into the christian stock, will make it
rich indeed.

I do not know a better practice, than that of the primitive christians --
laying by, on the first day of the week, a little pittance for this purpose. --
These drops will not be missed from the general reservoir, and yet,
collectively, will rain a shower of blessings on many indigent and distressed.

LETTER XL.
YOUNG ladies have many methods of charity besides the mere act of giving
money. That time, which sometimes hangs heavy on their hands, might be usefully
employed in making garments for the naked, or providing cordials for the sick.
Such an active benevolence would likewise be an excellent recipe for their
health and spirits; it would dignify their character, and when the last moment
came, gratitude would show the garments which a Dorcas had made, and the good
name they had acquired, would be infinitely richer, and more precious than
ointment.

If I wished a woman to be universally charming, I would recommend this
expedient. Compassion is the highest excellence of your sex, and charity is the
sacred root from which it springs. The soft bosom of a woman, throbbing with
sympathy, or her eye glistening with crystal drops of pity, are some of the
finest touches in nature's pencil. The whole train of accomplishments, the
whole group of graces do not exalt her half so much in the estimation of the
worthy, the amiable and the discerning. Alas! when death comes, what will be
all the accomplishments and graces? But charity shall never fail; its pleasures
then are gaining their meridian of perfection. Remember what the scripture has
said, alms giving delivers from death, and will not suffer us to come into
darkness. The young lady you have so frequently ^^ard me mention, as standing
high in my esteem, is very eminently distinguished by this grace. Nature has
been sufficiently kind to her person; but it is not her sweet complexion, it is
not her flowing, unartificial ringlets, it is not the softness of her voice and
manner, or the mild luster of her eyes, that would have called forth a
penegyric from my pen, or touched a breast, that is considerably petrified with
philosophy and reflection. It is a conviction that she lives in the constant
exercise of piety; that her excellencies are chiefly those of the mind, and
that her benevolence is bounded only by creation.

When others are at plays or assemblies, her fair hands are making garments for
the naked, or restoratives for the sick. The ingenuity, which some of her
sister females employ to adorn themselves, is consecrated by her, to the
service of the poor.

This is laying up in store against the day of necessity. This is weaving for
herself a chaplet of laurels, that shall be green in age. Her countenance shall
smile even in dissolution. A beauteous ruin even in death she shall have power
to charm; and the gratitude of some admiting bard shall collect her scattered
merits into an urn that shall long secure the precious relics from the ravages
of time.

But I will not add another touch to the portrait, for fear of discovering the
excellent original. I should would that soft and delicate timidity, which is,
in my idea, the enamel of her graces. Her true merit wishes to be unknown. It
is satisfied with its own, and the approbation of its God.

LETTER XLI.
ALMS, however, to the body, which must very soon perish, are but, if I may so
say, the threshold, of charity. The true sublime of it is compassion to the
soul; because that is immortal, and can never die.

Every effort to save this, is exalted in its nature, and the nearest approach
we can make, in these houses of clay, to the ministry of angels, to the
attributes of Jehovah, and to the unbounded compassion of him, who died for the
sins of all.

A few, timely advices, instructions or reproofs to those, over whom our
fortune or station give us any influence, may have more lasting and beneficial
consequences, than all the food or raiment, or money we can possibly bestow; at
least when we give our temporal things, they should be perfumed with spiritual,
wi^h words, thus spoken in due season.

The institution of Sunday Schools promises the happiest consequences to the
poor, and the community at large. It has, indeed, already produced a surprising
reformation. The present age beholds the dawn of a blessed morning, which in
another, may brighten into a more perfect day.

If it fails, it will be from careless and indolence in the parents themselves,
or for want of attention from the higher orders of people. Many, who will give
their money, are not equally liberal of their exertion. This grand scheme,
however, requires an unremitting labor and vigilance. It is the watchful eye
of superiors, which alone will produce exemplariness in the teachers, or, in
the scholars, emulation. And I do not know a greater charity within the sphere
of a young lady, than to visit the girls in these useful seminaries, in order
to correct their foibles, encourage their dawning virtues, and stimulate them
to improvement. Close, uncomfortable rooms, it is true, in cellars or garrets,
poisoned with unpleasant smells, and but filled with poor children, are no very
inviting objects to those, who live in houses, cieled with cedar, and painted
with vermillion. But the merit of the action is, doubtless, in proportion to
its unpleasantness; and it is done for him, who on our account, refused neither
hardship nor distress. These poor children, he has vouchsafed to call "his
lambs," and it is a most christian effort to "feed them."

Such advice will, doubtless, sound very strange in the ears of some young
ladies, who dare scarcely set their feet upon the ground for delicateness and
tenderness. But this, alas! is a false and over-acted refinement. They were not
born merely to vegetate, like tulips, for ostentation. The world, their
friends, the poor, religion, have claims upon them. All nature, sun, moon,
stars, tides, preach up the necessity of continual action; and I will venture
to say, that this kind of exertion would be recompensed with such a secret
pleasure, as they never found in the gayest circles of fashion, or the most
crowded haunts of dissipation.

Another excellent mode of charity, is dispersing little, religious tracts
amongst your poor neighbors. These, with the blessing of God, may have a
wonderful effect, and in^eed be doing most extensive good, when you are no
more. Every family of servants should have small christian library; the
benefits, I doubt not, would soon be felt in their orderly deportment.

The Society for promoting christian knowledge abounds with a variety of
little, plain, useful treatises, that are suited to all occasions. You may
easily procure a catalogue of the whole, and select such, as are most adapted
to the state of your particular dependents.

On the whole, my dear girl, that time which tarnisheth the glory of all human
things, will quickly lay both you and me, in the dust of the earth. Let us
endeavor to extend this little span by amiable actions, and, if possible,
render our memories immortal.

LETTER XLII.
MY DEAR LUCY,
THE very first thing I should recommend after religious duties, as absolutely
essential to your private comfort, is self-government in the fullest sense of
the word. This may be supposed to be included under the article of religion.
And so in fact it is. But there are many well disposed people, that seem to
think little things of this kind almost beneath their notice, though in reality
they are interwoven with the repose of every day, and almost every moment.

The discipline of the imagination is the first thing to be attempted. This, in
young people, is naturally warm; and if they are not cautious, will be apt to
mislead them into very dangerous errors.

Thus whatever captivates their fancy, they take, without examination, to be
all over excellence. Tinsel, because it glitters more, will be preferred to
solid gold; a luxuriant, florid style in a writer; to the soundest and best
arranged arguments; the shewy and brilliant in characters, to the truly
valuable, and the gaudy in dress, to that artless simplicity, which is the
offspring of an elegant and well cultivated taste.

Young people, almost universally subject themselves to this kind of illusion.
They enter upon life, as an enchanted country. The world, in their idea, has no
caprice; fortune, no vicissitude; friendship is without sincerity; attachment
without bitters, and marriage is all happiness without allay. What the
scripture has called a wilderness, they make a paradise, whose landskips are
deliciously picturesque, and whose spring is ever green.

Experience, be assured, will not realize such high expectations. You will
find, that every object has its imperfections; that the world at best is but a
mixture of good and ill, and that the lights of the picture will be
interspersed with shades.

You will ask, where is the great harm of indulging, for a little while, these
high colorings of fancy? The inconvenience is obvious. It will expose you to
perpetual disappointments, and disappointments will create disgust. By such a
false sublimation, you will have no relish for the rational pleasures, and no
resolution to perform the solid duties of your condition. At any rate, you will
want a proper share of fortitude and patience to encounter the many unavoidable
ills and calamities of life.

LETTER XLIII.
THE next, most important thing is the government of your temper. I know many
persons, that would not, for the world, be absent from the sacrament, or refuse
to do a generous action, yet indulge themselves, seemingly without remorse, in
such little instances of ill nature, peevishness, tyranny, and caprice toward
their servants and inferiors, as render their houses a perpetual scene of
discord, and hang, on every countenance, an uncomfortable gloom.

Such people should consider, that religion was intended to reg^^ate the most
ordinary actions of our lives; that prayers, sacraments, and opportunities of
doing great good come, comparatively, but seldom; but that it is, every moment,
in our power to diffuse happiness amongst our domestics, and that this, if it
proceeds from proper motives, will be an acceptable service to the God, who has
appointed all the different ranks in society, and is the father of all
compassion. Nor have we much imbibed the true spirit of the gospel, if it has
not taught us to bear patiently the imperfections of our fellow creatures, and
to temper authority with gentleness and good nature.

No Consequence can justify one single act of caprice, sullenness or
ill-humour. It is a direct violation of that universal law of charity, which
requires us, in all our actions, to keep in view, the happiness of others, as
well as our own.

Tyranny is a downright insult to any creature formed in the image of God; it
would be unpardonable, if exercised even to a worm or insect, and generally
proceeds from causes, which reflect no honor on the heart or understanding. It
is often the result of a newborn greatness, that has not yet learned how to
bear superiority; of a spleen, collected from want of employment, or a natural,
ill temper, that never has submitted to the discipline of virtue.

Mildness is necessary to our own comfort. They, who are continually tormenting
others, must be wretched themselves. It is essential to the dignity of our own
character; and it is, I am sure, the highest policy, whether we mean to secure
the affections, or the good services of our dependents.

It is a pitiful condescension in a woman of fortune to aggravate every little
cause of complaint. A ruffled, angry, scolding woman is so far vulgar and
disgusting, and, for the moment, a sort of virage.

Moderation is the great secret of government. To be always dissatisfied is the
way to lose all authority and respect, The consequence of those people is most
cheerfully acknowledged, who seem the least forward to assert it.

And what says the law of all wisdom and of all perfection? Masters, give unto
your servants, that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a moster
in heaven. Put on, as the elect of God, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness
of mind, long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Be pitiful, be courteous.

If the gospel was published to bring peace on earth, and good will toward
men, this kind affection should begin with families, which, collectively,
compose all the nations of the world.

LETTER XLIV.
THE piety, I have recommended, will make you always happy in yourself, and
respected by all the worthy and discerning, though you should happen to have
none of those intellectual endowments, which procure a greater share of fame
and admiration. But you may be sensible, as well as pious; you may be
entertaining, as well as good. Your reason and understanding were given you to
be improved; a proper pursuit of knowledge, at the same time, will aid and
inflame your piety, and render you much more valuable and interesting to all
your acquaintance. When the foundation is laid in virtue, the superstructure
may have every graceful embellishment.

Knowledge will recommend you to many, over whom mere piety would have no
power. It will give a greater energy to your goodness. The picture will be thus
elegantly framed, and placed in the best point of view.

Learned women, however, have been often a proverb of reproach, feared by their
own sex, and disliked by ours. A neglect of their person, and of family
concerns, as of little things beneath a superior understanding; a vain
ostentation of their abilities in company, and upon all occasions, a
supercilious contempt of their sister women in general, and an ungraceful
avidity for the company of men, have been reckoned amongst their distinguished
characteristics.

The truth is, some females have been viragos in their knowledge, not only
injudicious in the kind they have aspired to, but the use they have made of it,
and an indiscriminate stigma has been fixed upon all, who have endeavored
rationally to improve their understandings.

On the other hand, it is said of women, that they are so ignorant, frivolus
and insipid, as to be unfit for friendship, society or conversation; that they
are unable to amuse, entertain or edify a lonely hour, much more to bless or
grace that connection, for which they were principally formed.

What, my dear girl, can a judicious woman do, in such a dilemma? How must she
act to avoid the imputation of pedantry on the one hand, and ignorance on the
other.

There is a narrow, middle path betwixt these extremes. Judgment must point it
out, and good sense direct you in the execution.

The prominent excellencies of your minds are taste and imagination, and your
knowledge should be of a kind, which assimilates with these faculties.
Politics, philosophy, mathematics, or metaphysics are not your province.
Machiavel, Newton, Euclid, Malebranche or Lock would lie with a very ill grace
in your closets. They would render you unwomanly indeed. They would damp that
vivacity and destroy that disengaged ease and softness, which are the very
essence of your graces.

The elegant studies are, more immediately, your department. They do not
require so much time, abstraction or comprehensiveness of mind; they bring no
wrinkles, and they will give a polish to your manners, and such a liberal
expansion to your understanding, as every rational creature should endeavor to
attain.

Whilst men, with solid judgment and a superior vigor are to combine ideas, to
discriminate, and examine a subject to the bottom, you are to give it all its
brillioncy and all its charms. They provide the furniture; you dispose it with
propriety. They baild the house; you are to fancy, and to ornament the cieling.

Cultivate, then, such studies, ^s lie within the region of sentiment and
taste. Let your knowledge be seminine, as well as your person. And let it glow
within you, rather than sparkle upon others about you. A diamond, so polished,
will always be valued. You will charm all, but the ignorant and vulgar. You
will be a rational, entertaining companion, and the symmetry of your features
will derive a double luster from the beauties of your mind.

LETTER XLV.
ENDEAVOR to acquire a taste for the beauties of fine writing, as it is
displayed in our present, numerous list of English classics, the Spectators,
Tatlers, the Guardian, the Rambler, the Adventurer, the World, etc. I have
placed Addison at the head of this catalogue, because he, more frequently than
any of the rest, gives lessons of morality and prudence to your sex, and, for
delicacy of sentiment, is peculiarly adapted to female reading. There is
sometimes perhaps, a languor in his papers. He may not have all that fire and
energy and pathos, which have since characterized some celebrated writers; but
for ease, gracefulness, simplicity and nature, he is absolutely without a
rival, and, perhaps, ever will be without a superior. A critic Dr. Johnson.
of modern times has said, that whoever would write the English language with
ease, should spend his days and nights in reading the works of Addison.

To this frequent perusal of the best writers, add, if possible, an
acquaintance with some living characters of improved education. Conversation
with people of ge^^^s and sentiment is the easiest and quickest way to
improvement. It gives us all its graces, without ^^s an^erities; its depth,
without its wrinkles. We soon grow languid and gloomy with abstracted studies,
weary of ourselves, and sated with our pursuits. Conversation gently agitates
the sedentary frame, and gives a brisker motion to the blood and spirits. The
countenance is flushed with pleasure; the eyes sparkle, and the heart expands
and glows with emulation.

LETTER XLVI.
TO write letters well is a very desirable excellence in a woman. Every
situation, character, connection, devotion, friendship, love, business, all
require the exercise of this talent. It is an office particularly suited to the
liveliness of your fancy, and the sensibility of your heart; and your sex, in
general, much excels our own, in the ease and graces of epistolary
correspondence. Not cramped with the shackles and formality of rules, their
thoughts are expressed spontaneously, as they flow, and become, more
immediately, (what a letter always should be,) a lively, amusing, written
conversation. A man attends to the niceties of grammar, or well turned periods;
a woman gives us the effusions of her soul. The first may please a few, languid
critics; the latter will delight every person of sensibility and discernment.

I had once the honor of corresponding with a lady, whose letters astonished
me. Imagery, taste, pathos, spirit, fire and ease vied with each other, which
should be the most conspicuous feature in the productions of her pen. They came
not from the head; it was the heart, which wrote them. They were not faultless,
but they were impassioned. They had defects, but they had likewise beauties,
which must have warmed the coldest critic, that ever existed. They were
interesting to an high degree, and lest this conviction strongly on my mind,
that we often labor only to be dull, and, in the search of distant ornaments,
chill the natural fervours of the soul.

LETTER XLVII.
WITH the history of your own country you cannot decently be unacquainted. It
would betray an unpardonable ignorance, if you could not tell, on being asked
in company, the general character of all the sovereigns, that have sat upon the
British throne; what were the religion, manners, customs, ceremonies of the
primitive inhabitants of the island; by what means the present state of
civilization has been gradually introduced; what contributed to bring about our
reformation from the Church of Rome; at what period the outline of our happy
constitution first began to be sketched out, and what is the particular
excellence of our government, over all others in the known world.

If indeed you consider history in its proper light, not as a mere detail of
names, facts, epochs, and events, but as a picture of human nature, and of the
wonderful administration of Providence, apportioning rewards and punishments to
nations, and frequently to individuals, according their actions, it will become
not only an entertaining study, but a source of the sublimest, moral
improvement. It will give you the richest knowledge of men and things; from
what has happened, you may deduce what will, in similar situations; and you
will learn to adore the wisdom, justice and perfections of him, who, under all
the changes of time, falls of empire, the conflicts of passion, and the
interests of man, is the same yesterday, today, and for ever; carrying on,
amidst all apparent disorder, one grand and comprehensive scheme of happiness
and probation.

Gold smith has agreeably abridged and condensed the English history, in a
well-known work of two small volumes entitled Letters from a Nobleman to his
Son. If your curiosity is excited to pursue this study on a larger scale, Henry
will give you every thing that delights in genius, language, coloring and
description Dr. Henry's History of Great Britain contains more good matter than
any history we yet have. Analytical Review, Number III.

for July 1788, p. 297.




Hume is by no means, an impartial historian, but he is a very splendid,
captivating writer. If he is not dispassionate, he is always enchanting; and,
if he does not uniformly convince, he never fails to charm.

It had been happy for this writer, if he had never attempted any thing but
history. He might then have gone to his grave with unequivocal applause. But in
his moral and metaphysical works, he is an enemy to the dearest interests of
mankind. He has endeavored to sap the foundations of that religion, which is
the only source of every hope and every comfort. His cold and sullen skepticism
has done infinite mischief. It more than sullies all the luster of his literary
fame.

LETTER XLVIII.
ROBERTSON's history of Charles the fifth, and of Mary Queen of Scots, will
both instruct and entertain you. The historiographer has been esteemed an
excellent writer. But I have always, in private, thought his style too labored
and stately. It has not the ease and simplicity of the ancients. It does not
equal several of the moderns. It has neither the concise energy of Hume, nor
the more flowing and easy graces of Gibbon.

The late Dr. Stewart, in a very elegant work, has controverted almost all the
assertions of his predecessor, concerning Mary, and become the champion of this
unfortunate queen. But you have nothing to do with literary controversy. Leave
them to the tribunal of an impartial public. Time will weight their separate
merits in the balance of truth. Either or both of them will exercise your
taste, and improve your understanding.

Stretch's Beauties of History A new Edition of which has lately been published
in Dublin, in 2 vols. Price 6 s. 6 d.
will furnish you with many short, agreeable anecdotes, both ancient and
modern, at a very small expense of time and trouble. Knowledge thus epitomized,
is what I should recommend. On such subjects, you want short and pithy
sketches, rather than labored and prolix dissertations.

The history of Greece and Rome is so frequently alluded to, so connected with
that of almost all other nations, and so full of curious incidents and
anecdotes, that a little knowledge of it would be very useful and entertaining.
But, in general, the writers on the subject are too voluminous for a female.
They make up no little share of the labor, in a classical education. Goldsmith
has likewise given his assistance to epitomize this branch of history. I know
no other writer so proper for your purpose.

To attain just a glimpse of general history, the most useful work I recollect,
is the Abbe Millot's Elements sur l'Histoire. On his comprehensive and
condensed plan, there is much in a little compass. By traveling over a few
fields, you gain a most immense and extended horizon, and many tracts of
hitherto undiscovered country. History at large is so voluminous and
complicated, that, to a young lady, who should understand, as it were, but the
outline, it very much wants such a mode of abridgment, and simplification.

LETTER XLIX.
MY DEAR LUCY,
ROLLIN's ancient history is a treasure to young people, if the number of
volumes does not alarm you. This man was one of the most excellent preceptors,
that the world ever saw. It was his ambition to unite the scholar, and the
christian. He labors to promote religious improvement by every incident, he
relates. He holds forth Providence, as continually superintending the
government of the universe, and its finger, as directing all the movements of
the system; and, when he has related a number of surprising vicissitudes and
events, he takes his pupil up to an high mountain, from whence he shows him all
the kingdoms of the world, and all the glories of them to be continually under
the control and direction of heaven, and not collectively to possess half the
luster of the excellence of one, pious disposition.

Under the pen of this most christian writer, every baser metal is purified
from its alloy. Every sounding action is divested of its bombast, and traced to
its real source. Splendor has no dignity, if unassociated with virtue.
Ambition is painted as a fury, that destroys. Heroism is represented, as murder
in disguise. The laurels of an Alexander are wrested from his brow. Caesar is
stripped of his fictitious plumage. They are both described, as vultures,
preying on their species, who were born to be only the scourges of humanity,
and a terror to the world.

This man deserves universal veneration. His pupils should have raised a
monument to his memory, and posterity have rendered that monument immortal.
Learning and religion should be grouped over his tomb, mingling their united
tears for the loss of his virtues.

If you have not leisure to peruse his writings, yet be careful to read all
other history with this view, and it will lead you to God. It will teach you,
no longer, to be dazzled with grandeur, because grandeur fades away. It will
show you, that vices have demolished the mightiest empires, and swept the
finest cities "with the besom of destruction." It will convince you, that every
thing on earth is a shadow, and that neither men nor nations "continue in one
stay." It will assure you, that, though clouds and darkness may be about the
throne of God, yet righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his seat.
It will instruct you, that every action is "weighed in its balance;" that,
however, seemingly, disregarded for a time, vice and virtue will have their
just proportion of punishment or reward, and that nothing but religion will be
able to triumph, amidst the crush of elements, of matter, and the world.

LETTER L.
MY DEAR LUCY.
THOUGH I think every woman in the world should execrate the memory of the late
Lord Chesterfield, as having written the most scandalous libels on her sex, yet
his sketches of heathen mythology, of Grecian, Roman, and British history, in
the first volume of his letters, are well worth your attention. If this
ingenious nobleman had given us more specimens of this nature, and fewer
lectures on the graces and intrigue, the gratitude of posterity would have
imbalmed his ashes. He was certainly possessed of an elegant style, and had a
very happy method of conveying his instructions.

But in order to make any real improvement in this, or any other of your
studies, let me advise you to read only one half hour, at a time, and to employ
a double space, in abridging and expressing what you recollect, in your own
language. This will have the double advantage of impressing it very strongly on
your memory, and enabling you to form a style of your own.

Though a good style is, doubtless, a mark of genius, and not attainable by
every person, yet it depends amazingly on mechanical habit, as well as our
gait, countenance or gesture. The pen accustomed to a certain routine of
period, performs it as insensibly, as the memory retraces all the variations of
notes in a song, whilst, perhaps, we are silently, occupied with some other
object.

Be so kind as to indulge me with a sight of these sheets exactly as they are
penned from your first impressions, and I will endeavor to correct them.
Banish the childish fear of betraying any ignorance, where I cannot expect you
to be informed; and, if some, essential alterations should be made, remember it
is the pen of friendship, which erases, guided by that affection, with which I
have the honor to be.

Your ever faithful and affectionate.

LETTER LI.
THAT species of history, which describes the lives and characters of
particular persons, and is included under the name of biography, is by fat the
most useful and interesting to a woman. Instead of wars, sieges, victories or
great achievements, which are not so much within the province of a female, it
presents those domestic anecdotes and events, which come more forcibly home to
her bosom and her curiosity.

I have always thought that one great advantage of boys over girls, is their
having the most illustrious characters of antiquity to form their sentiments,
and fire their emulation. Biography will open to you the same source of
improvement. You will read of persons, elevated with every noble sentiment and
virtue; and your judgment and taste will select some particular favorite from
the group, as a model for your imitation.

Though Johnson has been so very much celebrated in the republic of letters for
all his productions, yet I have always thought his Lives of the Poets by far
his most agreeable performance. It has not that turgid pomposity of style,
which appears in some of his more juvenile labors; it is, all along,
interspersed with judicious sentiments and moral reflections; it abounds with
an original vein of criticism, and anecdotes of so many illustrious men, as
cannot fail to amuse, as well as to instruct. His criticisms, it is true, have
been controverted, and traduced: but what writings of merit are exempt from
such a tax; The enthusiastic admirers of Milton, in particular, have handled
him with severity. But who does not know, that favorites, at any rate, will be
desended?

But indeed all men of sense unite in paying a sincere tribute of respect to
the memory of Johnson. In spite of all his petty and ungenerous biographers,
the sneers of party malice, or the still sha^per arrows of insidious friends,
he stands an hug^ colossus, in the bosom of an ocean, unmoved with the angry
dashing of its waves.

Johnson in all his multipled productions, has not a single period, that can
patronize indecency, (...) unhinge belief. And, though, now, it signifies b^^
little to this extraordinary man, that no was considered as an oracle of
knowledge in his day, as an ornament to his country, and a blessing to the
world, it must transport him to recollect, that he has carefully endeavored to
diffuse happiness, as widely as his writings, and to render piety diffusive as
his fame. The death of the author will exempt me from suspicions of flattery or
design in this little panegyric. Gratitude may be allowed to offer, without any
censure, this little incense to his venerable shade.

If all the private anecdotes of every person's life and temper must be
arraigned before the tribunal of the public, who could escape? If Johnson was
unaccommodating, rough and morose, let it be remembered, that these were but
little pimples on a skin, where the heart glowed with universal benevolence;
let it be considered, that conflicts, disappointments and misfortunes are
unfriendly to sweetness of manners or disposition; that severe application has
a tendency to render any man irritable and peevish; that gaiety and
sprightliness considerably arises from an ease of circumstances; and let us
oppose to these a piety, that was profound and warm, almost, to superstition,
and unwearied labors for the service of mankind, which scarcely knew a
moment's interruption.

LETTER LII.
SULLY's Memoirs, in five volumes, are interspersed with very curious and
interesting adecdotes; and the private life of Louis XV. is a very entertaining
work. Indeed the French particularly shine in biographical writing. It is quite
in their province, and forms a part of the national taste. Their imagination
sparkles, in an especial manner, in painting the complexion of courts, monarchs
or personages of distinction. They feel as great an ardour for extolling the
virtues of their le roi and his attendants, as we do for recording all the
great achievements of the field or ocean.

The Marquis Caraccioli is universally known, as an author of great vivacity
and talents. He has written the life of Pope Clement XIV. and it does honor to
his pen, as well as to the memory of the sovereign pontiff.

If the Marquis really wrote the letters, which go under the name of
Ganganelli, he has hit off, with a wonderful address, the air and features of
the illustrious original. The habits, sentiments, manners and disposition of
the Pope, as couched in this life, all breathe through these letters.

The name of Dr. Johnson, and the intimacy known to have subsisted betwixt the
parties, have given a great currency to Mrs. Piozzi's anecdotes, relating to
this literary hero. But they have not immortalized either her talents, or the
goodness of her heart. They are a most disgusting specimen of treachery in
friendship; a copious effusion of spleen, that had long been collecting. They
remind one forcibly of a number of little insects, nimbling at their ease, on
the carcass of some noble animal, that a single motion of the living creature
would have dispersed in an instant, or crushed into atoms.

LETTER LIII.
WRAXALL is a very agreeable author, and he has chosen a fruitful, happy
subject, in his Memoirs of the Kings of France, of the House of Valois. The
execution is not inferior to the judiciousness of the design. His book has an
admirer in every person of sentiment and taste.

The late Mr. Sheridan is allowed to have possessed considerable abilities. He
has given the world a specimen of them in his life of Swift. It is, however, in
my idea, too flattering a portrait. The painter was a countryman, and an
admirer. No talents can convert deformity into beauty, or make darkness to be
light.

Swift was a very great, original genius; but the indecency of some of his
writings is intolerable; his spleen, excessive, and his behavior to Stella an
eternal stigma on his memory and his virtues. Ever dabbling in the turbid ocean
of politics, what business had he with the quiet and retired haven of the
church? But genius and talents can embellish any side of a subject, and the
biographer has poured, on his favorite author, a deluge of panegyric.

The life of Garrick is so much interspersed with the domestic history, and the
most illustrious persons of his time, that it will highly engage and gratify
your curiosity. It is written by Davies in two volumes.

England has long labored with a disorder, that I cannot call by a better
name, than the theatrical mania. A principal actor is more distinguished,
caressed and enriched by a luxurious nation, than many of the most deserving
persons, in the learned professions. An Abingdon, a Siddons, and a Mara (as
once a Garrick, a Henderson, and a Yates,) inchant the feelings of a British
audience, drain the money which should be sacred to better purposes, acquire,
in a few years, an independent fortune and are admitted to the first circles in
the kingdom, whilst a thousand, amiable and meritorious clergymen are suffered
to live in want, and to die in the most uncomfortable obscurity. This is not a
very favorable trait in the moral history of a nation. It seems rather a
symptom of its approaching dissolution.

Hume was a great champion of infidelity, and as such, a character, that
excites uncommon curiosity. He has written his own life, and, as an unique in
biography, it is worthy your reading.

Bolingbroke was another of the skeptical family. His history is agreeably
recorded by Dr. Goldsmith.

On the subject of biography, you will meet with a great variety of other,
entertaining writers; but I must not close this article, without particularly
recommending a book, that has given me so much pleasure and information, as the
life and writings of Gray, by Mr. Mason.

A particular friendship of the warmest and most disinterested kind, subsisted
betwixt these celebrated authors. It commenced in that early period of life,
when souls are incapable of guile or selfishness and mutally expand; and Mason
has endeavored to immortalize it in a manner, which does equal credit to his
heart and understanding.

The history of a retired, literary person cannot, generally, present much
variety of entertainment. But in the character of Gray, there is somewhat very
interesting; and his friend has displayed it to the greatest advantage. No man,
perhaps, by such slight sketches, as the author of an Elegy in a country
churchyard has left behind him, ever acquired so extensive a reputation. And
there was a dignity, a softness and a delicacy in his whole manner of thinking
and acting, which compensate for the want of more remarkable anecdotes, and of
more sounding connexions.

LETTER LIVE.
MY DEAR LUCY,
THERE is not (says a sensible writer,) a son or daughter of Adam, who has not
some concern in the knowledge of Geography. It is necessary to your
understanding the connection, which this globe has with the other planetary
system, and with all the wonderful works of God. It is indispensible to your
comprehending history, or having a proper idea of the events and transactions
it relates, as well as to divest your mind of little, narrow prejudices by
giving you a view of the customs, manners, ceremonies and institutions of all
the different nations over the world.

A celebrated writer Lord Chesterfield.
has called geography and chronology, the two eyes of history; the first
informs you where events happened, and the latter, at what particular period;
if it was not for these helps your reading would be a confused chaos, without
order, light or perspicuity.

Geography is, indeed, so much attended to at all schools, that there is little
occasion to dwell on its necessity; if you have learned the use of the globes,
and the division of it by names, which are only fancied for the sake of
reducing the immensity of it to the narrow scale of human comprehension, the
best method, I know, is never to read the name of a place in a common news
paper, or any other history, without immediately recurring to authorities for
the situation and division of the country in which it lies, the manners of the
inhabitants, their ceremonies, civil government, and religious institutions. It
is this mode of studying from the urgency of the occasion, which gives energy
to our researches and vigor to improvement.

Guthrie is one of the best authors in geography; and for chronology, the
tables of Dr. Priestley (a name, which I would only mention, where science and
not religion, is concerned,) are so compendious and comprehensive, as to afford
you, on a single glance, considerable information. There is no species of
knowledge, that is so easily attained, as that of geography: nor any of which
the want is more flagrant and awkward.

I lately blushed for a young lady, who was asked in company, the latitude and
situation of a particular place, which happened to be mentioned in the public
papers of the day. She was dressed in the highest taste. The roses and
carnations vied in her countenance. She piques herself on her smartness and
vivacity; but in this instance, could make no reply. Her embarrassment betrayed
her ignorance, and politeness relieved it by a change of conversation.

How much higher would her character have stood in the estimation of all
sentible and discerning men, if she had come down stairs, dressed in an elegant
plainness, and, instead of standing so long before her glass, had devoted some
little share of her time to this species of improvement. Not that I have any
objection to a blush upon a woman's cheek. I think the crimson tint ornamental;
but I would have yours to be the blush of delicacy and reserve, not of
ignorance, shyness or ill-breeding.

LETTER LV.
MY DEAR LUCY,
NATURAL history is another study, which I conceive to be particularly
feminine. It has, of late, been cultivated with uncommon attention. Botany has
been, particularly, fashionable. It has found a place in the amusements of the
elegant, as well as the learned. Nothing is more calculated to amuse the mind,
improve the health and spirits, and to inspire at once cheerfulness and
devotion.

The suprizing history of plants and flowers, the immense variety, the
mechanism, order, government and economy of animals, fowls with their plumage
and fishes with their scales, fossils, minerals, petrefactions, mountains,
valleys, volcanos, all nature full of life, full of happiness and full of
miracles, will crowd your mind with the sublimest images, and teach you to
adore the great, almighty former and preserver of the world. What beauty in
each flower! What traits of divine wisdom and goodness in an insect! Surveyed
with a truly philosophical eye, the whole creation is a temple! Not a shrub,
but is eloquent, not an animalcule, but is a powerful monitor of virtue!

I never spend an afternoon with Miss Louisa -- without being both instructed
and delighted. I never take a walk with her in the garden, but she unfolds a
thousand, natural curiosities, which had hitherto escaped my unscienced or
inattentive eyes. I never ramble with her into the fields, but she gives me
such an history of the most common plants and flowers, as at once surprises my
curiosity, and gratifies my taste. In her closet she has a large collection of
insects, which her microscope clothes with most exquisite beauty, and a museum,
filedd with shells, corals, and petrefactions, the sparkling of which is
exceeded by nothing, but the vivacity of her eyes, or the stronger or more
permanent luster of her virtues.

I would infinitely rather have her taste, than her fortune. And I never quit
her without secretly envying her enjoyments. She is ever sprightly, because she
has never a moment unemployed. She always smiles, because she is always
innocent. Her pleasures are of the rational and refined kind. They never leave
a thorn in the heart, or pluck one, blushing rose from her cheeks. How solid
and how calm, if compared with the midnight revels of fashion, or the giddiness
of admiration!

Be like Louisa, my dear girl, and you will always be happy. Study nature, till
it leads you up to nature's God. Pore on plants and flowers, till they perfume
you with a real devotion; and I will engage you to become, in your turn, one of
the most beautiful flowers in the creation.

LETTER LVI.
NATURAL history is divided into three grand parts, as it respects the animal,
the mineral, and the vegetable kingdoms, and under these different articles,
assumes the name of zoology, or an history of animals; lithology, or a
description of stones, fossils, etc. and botany, or an account of herbs,
plants, flowers. These again have, each their respective subdivisions.

Linnaeus, who was born at Upsal, is the great father of this science, and from
the Swedish school have issued the works of the most eminent masters. But he is
too voluminous and scientific for a female, who wants only a general knowledge
of nature, and not to penetrate the minutiae of her plan.

The Amaenitates Academicae are a number of ingenious essays on a variety of
subjects, selected from the works of the most capital disciples of the Linnaean
school. Some of those have been translated by Stillingfleet, under the name of
Tracts on Natural History, and are very valuable and instructive; 'others by
Brand, in two volumes, which contain a number of very curious and entertaining
descriptions.

Pulteny's View of the Works of Linnaeus you may read, likewise, with great
pleasure and improvement. Next to these I should recommend to a mere English
reader, the works of Ray: him, who wrote "The wisdom of God in the creation."
They are highly useful and valuable, though written before this study had
arrived to its present state of perfection.

Goldsmith's History of the Earth and animated Nature is but a mere
compilation. Still it may have its use, as affording some collateral lights and
instruction.

Buffon is an author of first rate abilities. His style is splendid; his
knowledge is extensive, and his eloquence, in a high degree, brilliant and
seducing. But I cannot recommend him for many reasons. He is too voluminous;
the extensiveness of his plan leads him into a great variety of detail, and of
inddicate descriptions. He is more attached to systems of his own, than the
discovery of trath; and he is a sort of skeptic, who resolves every thing into
a chain of secondary causes, and sacrilegiously excludes the Deity from his
creation. This temper is the bane of modern philosophers. They endeavor to
account for every thing upon natural principles, and wherever they are puzzled,
ridiculously disbelieve. Instead of making their knowledge, a scaffolding to
God, they build on it, a monument to their own vanity and folly, which will not
stand, "when winds and storms arise." Do people of such distinguished abilities
need to be reminded, that a world without design, or an active machine, without
a first, moving principle, involves the greatest and most palpable of
contradictions? Nature, in the hands of a true philosopher, reads a continual
lesson of piety; in those of a false one, it is the parent of skepticism, gloom
and despair. Sir Isaac Newton was the most pious of men; many of his humble
followers have been as impious retailers of infidelity.

You will derive great pleasure and improvement from all the writings of Mr.
Pennant, and they are numerous. Always lively and always authentic, they
entertain the man of taste, the scholar, and the antiquarian, as well as the
naturalist. Few persons have published so much, in any one department of
science, with so great success.

The Flora Londinensis of Curtis is a splendid work, that does credit to the
author. It is embellished with beautiful engravings of all the common plants
and flowers of this country, and is still in continuation.

Volcanoes are amongst the prodigies of nature, which fill the mind with the
grandest and sublimest images. Hamilton's account of them, and Raspe on the
volcanos in Germany, will astonish your imagination. You may add to the list
Swammerdam's History of Insects, translated by Floyd, and revised by Dr. Hill.

But I will desist, for if I was to give you only the names of writers on the
subject, they would fill a volume. No private fortune would be sufficient to
purchase them, and the perusal would require more time, than would consist with
your other, various engagements.

LETTER LVII.
WHEN you have viewed the wonders of nature in miniature, astronomy will show
them in the sublime. Telescopes will present you with a most stupendous view of
the heavens; suns, piled on suns; worlds on worlds; and the great creator,
presiding over all, in the majesty of perfection. You will be lost and absorbed
in the magnificent contemplation. You will feel yourself as nothing before God,
and confess him to be all in all.

A real astronomer must be pious, or insensible. However some have thought
revelation partial, the language of these orbs is certainly universal, Their
sound is gone out into all lands, and their words unto the ends of the world.
The sentiment they proclaim, is majesty to God; to man, humility,
self-abasement, devotion.

Nicholson's Introduction to Natural Philosophy, in two volumes, octavo, is an
excellent book upon this subject, and Derham's Astro-theology must elevate the
mind, and improve the heart of every reader. Gregory's Astronomy, and Huygen's
Celestial Worlds discovered, are very useful and entertaining, and may together
form a sufficient library for this department of science. Perhaps I should have
added Ray's Wisdom of God, in the Creation. They, who declaim against
knowledge, in a woman, have not surely considered how much this, and many,
other branches of it, are connected with all the sublime and pious affections.

LETTER LVIII.
POETRY, I do not with you to cultivate, further than to possess a relish for
its beauties. Verses, if not excellent, are execrable indeed. The muses live
upon a mount, and there is no enjoying any of their favors, unless you can
climb to the heights of Parnassus.

Besides a passion for poetry is dangerous to a woman. It heightens her natural
sensibility to an extravagant degree, and frequently inspires such a romantic
turn of mind, as is utterly inconsistent with all the solid duties and
proprieties of life.

To increase the number of imaginary, when life abounds with such real sorrows,
by nursing a sickly extravagant sensibility, is, in a rational creature, the
very height of imprudence. The ancients endeavored to cherish fortitude, and
resolution, by giving strength to the body and vigor to the mind. From some of
their states. poetry, amongst other things, was absolutely excluded, as tending
to enervate the minds of a people, and unfit them for the struggles and
activities of life; and it is certain that the owners of an exquisite
sensibility, for a few moments of pleasure, have days of vexation. In this
human wilderness, thorns are perennials. Roses are but the perishable ornaments
of summer.

The late Mr. shenstone, amongst many others, is an unhappy instance of the
misfortune, I have mentioned. His works, though not of the first magnitude, are
exceedingly agreeable; but his poetical enthusiasm was a source of perpetual
irritation and misfortune. Having cultivated his taste, more than his prudence,
his feelings, more than his fortitude, and his imagination, more than his
judgment, his life was one, unvaried train of inquietudes. His mind was ruffled
with imaginary injuries; his peace disturbed with fanciful affronts, and his
disordered finances left him every thing, but comfort, dignity, and
independence.

With a fortune, that only justified a neat and homely dwelling, his genius was
not content with less than the superb appendages of a palace. In forming the
Leaseowes, he sacrificed to enthusiasm, what he owed to contentment. He panted
for a paradise, and a paradise he had; but it soon became a wilderness of
thorns. Merciless creditors had no candor for the poet, and made no allowance
for the exquisiteness of his taste.

They saw no charms in shrubs, in blossoms, or in prospects, and they awoke him
with an iron grasp, from his delicious intrancement. Whilst a noble neighbor,
emulating and outvying, on a larger scale, the beauties of his elysium, or
exhibiting it to a stranger, from an unfavourable point of view, inflicted on
his sickly feelings, an heartfelt affliction, which he had neither the
possibility of avoiding, nor the philosophy to support.

LETTER LIX.
THOUGH I do not with you to become a poet, it is, however, necessary, that you
should not be wholly unacquainted with the writings of many, inimitable bards.
They will certainly refine your taste, and spread a very elegant repast for
your private amusement.

Shakespeare is, perhaps, the first genius of the world; and some of his
dramatic works, whilst they astonish, will give you an useful fund of
historical information.

The immortal poem of Paradise Lost should not only be in the hands, but graven
on the heart, of every woman, because Milton, above all other authors,
describes the distinguishing graces of the sex, and in his Eve, has exhibited
an exquisite pattern of female perfection. On this subject, his feelings were
always awakened in an extraordinary manner; his imagination glowed, and he has
given it the finest touches of his pencil.

Milton like all great men, was fully sensible of the blessings we derive from
the society of women, and how cheerless the face of nature would have been
without them. He, therefore, labors to make the mother of his Paradise every
thing, that could charm, and every thing that could alleviate the infelicities
of life. Let the libertine read his description of marriage, and tell me what
he thinks of the prevailing rage for impurity and seduction.

Homer is universally celebrated; and, though you cannot read his poem in the
original language, Pope has given an admirable translation. The same may be
said of Dryden's Virgil, if you wish to taste the exquisite richness of these
ancient authors.

Mason's poems have great merit, and have acquired him a considerable
celebrity. His Caractacus, his Elfrida, and his English Garden have all been
admired. Nothing, however, from his pen, has pleased me more, than the epitaph
upon his lady. His talents seem to be particularly formed for the pensive and
pathetic. But poetry, after all, is but an embellishment, and, in the character
of a divine, a very secondary distinction. How much more important and useful
to mankind, are the labors of that pastor, who, by one judicious, impassioned
and well directed discourse, appalls the sinner, encourages the faint, revives
the drooping, guides the perplexed, or condescends to cheer the bed of sickness
with divine consolations!

This remark, however, is not particularly intended to depreciate the ingenious
author of Caractacus. He is said to excel likewise, as a preacher.

LETTER LX.
IN poetry, the ladies have, of late, asserted their claim to genius, and the
trampled honors of their understanding. Several of them appear, in the walks
of Parnassus, with considerable luster.

Miss Seward, in my idea, is a star of the first magnitude in the hemisphere of
imagination. She has given us chiefly little, fugitive pieces; a monody on the
death of captain Cook, and major Andre; a poem to the memory of lady Miller,
and a few stanzas to Mr. Wright, on taking her father's picture. The last
always gave me the highest pleasure. It required indeed no great effort, but is
a most pleasing specimen of filial affection, and of a rich, fervid, glowing
imagination. Her Louisa, though her largest, is not, in my idea, her happiest
performance. A novel is too much dignified by the charms of poetry. It is a
courtesan, dressed like a queen.

Whenever Miss Hannah More takes up her pen, she never loses sight of piety and
virtue. Her Bleeding rock, Search after Happiness, Sir Eldred of the Bower,
Sacred Dramas, Female Fables, etc. will please and instruct you. The little
tract, lately published, entitled, "Thoughts on the Manners of the Great,"
which has had so very extensive a circulation, is said to have come from her
ingenious pen. The design is excellent, and the execution displays a
considerable knowledge of human life and manners. I wish it may leave some
lasting impressions. But alas! the dissipated have few intervals for reflection.

Miss Williams bids fair for a poetic laurel, that shall long be green. Her
Peru, is awork of considerable merit.

The little sonnets of Miss Charlotte Smith are soft, pensive, sentimental and
pathetic, as a woman's productions should be. The muses, if I mist ache not,
will, in time, raise her to a considerable eminence. She has, as yet, stepped
forth only in little things, with a diffidence that is characteristic of real
genius in its first attempts. Her next, public enter may be more in style, and
more consequential.

The Comtesse le Genlis I have before mentioned, as a woman of a fine taste,
and a cultivated understanding. Her Theater sur l'Education, as founded on a
dramatic plan, may be recommended amongst other poetical productions. There is
not a sweeter rose in the garden of nature, than hers of Salency.

Lord Lyttleton was not, by any means, a capital poet. There is, however, such
a delicacy, softness, piety, and tender pathos in his strains, as do the
highest credit to his own heart, and must improve that of every attentive
reader. His monody upon his Lucy has immortalized his sensibility, his
affection, and his virtue.

Akenside's work on the Pleasures of Imagination, needs no other
recommendation, than what it has received from a generous and a discerning
public. It is highly interesting; it required a very considerable effort, and
his genius has rendered it beautifully picturesque.

Cowper's poems are calculated to do considerable service. He has made the
muses handmaids to religion. He has chosen verses, only as a vehicle for
conveving instructions of so important a nature, as would not, by any means,
have dishonored the pulpit. His style is simple, bold, manly, spirited and
energetic, his judgment, strong and penetrating; his metaphors, forcible and
happily conceived; his observations on life and manners, accurate, and his
satire, just and poignant.

He does not seem so much to have studied the production of a poem, with unity
for its design, and harmony in all its parts, as to serve the cause of piety
and virtue by general, desultory and impassioned reflections. His work on the
whole, is a strong specimen of genius and talents; rigid criticism, perhaps,
would say, that his piety wants a little mildness, and seems to breathe the
spirit of a party.

But the most finished poet of the age is Hayley. His Essay on History and on
Epic Poetry, his Ode to Howard, and his Triumphs of Temper have received very
great and very general applause.

LETTER LXI.
YOUR question is a very proper one, and I will give you the best satisfaction
in my power.

Pronunciation or that part of grammar, called Orthoepy, as to any uncommon or
difficult words, is governed by the quantity, which those words have in the
original language, from which they are derived. As you cannot be supposed to
understand the dead languages, you will of course, frequently, be at a loss how
to pronounce many words with propriety. The only method is recourse to a
dictionary, and the best in my opinion, are those of Sheridan and Johnson.
Pronunciation, however, is a very fluctuating thing; and though there certainly
is a standard of propriety, over which mere fashion ought to have no power, yet
I should always recommend a conformity to the manners of the politest people
you may happen to converse with, rather than a pedantic affectation of
grammatical strictness. The latter would be thought a conceited ostentation of
knowledge, which, in a young lady, would not be forgiven.

The allusions to Jupiter, Pallas, Venus, the Graces, the Muses, Helicon,
Parnassus, which have so much puzzled you in the poets you have lately read,
will be fully explained in Tooke's Pantheon, or History of the Heathen Gods.
The general fact is, that before the knowledge of the true God dawned on their
minds, these poor, ignorant heathens never dreamed of one omnipotent, all
sufficient, all pervading spirit, which the scriptures have revealed, and
described, as possessed of all possible perfections. They, therefore, formed to
themselves a multiplicity of gods, and attributed to one of them in particular,
with a specific name, every great quality or superior excellence, that appeared
beyond the ability of mortals. These deities they arranged into different
classes, according to their supposed degrees of pre-eminence; and fancied some
of them to inhabit the heavens, and others, the woods, groves, rivers, springs,
mountains, etc.

You will be amused with their fanciful opinions; and if you think aright, you
will learn to bless the Almighty, on your knees, for having cast your lot in an
age and country, where the gospel has dispersed these mists and errors,
dignified our views and nature beyond all expression, and given us the clearest
knowledge of our duty. You will feel the force and propriety of that clause in
our liturgy. We bless thee for our creation, preservation, and all the
blessings of this life; but above all, for thine inestimable love in the
redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ, for the means of grace, and
for the hope of glory.

LETTER LXII.
MY DEAR LUCY,
A LITTLE taste for the fine arts of painting, sculpture, architecture, will be
of singular use. It will render every excursion you make, and every curiosity
you behold, exceedingly delightful, and enable you to become entertaining to
all, with whom you converse.

A person thus accomplished, surveys an elegant pile of building, the designs
of a Palladio, the ^^^d-scape of a Claude Lorrain, the portraits of a^^itian,
or the transfiguration of a Raphael (...) common rapture, and can entertain
herse^^ (...) hours, with a ruin or a castle, in which the unskilful can see
nothing but deformity, or the corrosions of time.

Writers on Sculpture and Architecture are not numerous, and I am wading beyond
my depth, when I attempt to recommend them. Winkleman's reflections on the
sculpture of the Greeks, Evelyn's Parallel of ancient and modern Architecture,
and Morris's Lectures may give you some ideas on the subject.

On the art of painting, more has been written; yet without a natural genius
for it, and some previous instructions from a master, I do not know, whether
you will be able to make any great proficiency.

Webb's Inquiry into the Beauties of Painting is a very learned, elegant,
ingenious work, and interesting, in an high degree, even to those, who are, by
no means, to be ranked amongst the cognoscenti. The quotations from Homer,
Virgil, Shakespeare, Milton, Boileau, Moliere, Racine, Tasso, Ariosto and
Metastasio are not only well contrived to illustrate the subject, but to
delight every person of reading and taste; whilst the pictoresque imagery and
splendid language would stamp a value on any production.

I remember to have been charmed, some years ago, with reading a small work,
intided an Essay on Prints and Picturesque Beauty. I do not recollect, whether
it bore the name of any author; but it struck me as a very interesting and
valuable performance. Genius and knowledge were wonderfully united, and
embellished the whole.

Ferguson's Art of Drawing in Perspective, I conceive to be useful, as an
elementary work. An Essay on Landscape may be considered in the same light; and
you will be instructed and delighted, at the same time, with ^lay^^^^^ two
epistles to Romney, and Fresnoy^ Art of Painting, transtated by Mason. This
last mentioned author is said to excel in the three sister arts of painting,
poetry and music. In the two first, he has given the world specimens of his
skill; with the latter he is said frequently to entertain the circle of his
private friends.

But the best place for gratifying your curiosity, and I should think, for
improving your taste in paintings, is the annual exhibition of them, at
Somerset House. The metropolis, amidst all its variety of invention, does not
furnish in my idea, a more elegant, or a more improving amusement. We see, with
pride, some artists of our own country, v^ing with the most celebrated masters
of antiquity. Under the hands of a Reynolds, a Wright, a West, and many others,
the English canvass glows with inimitable beauty. A Raphael, a Titian, a
Dorreggio, a Rubens, a Poussin, or a Salvator Rosa, seem, in some degree,
transplanted to the British isle.

A stranger, indeed is, at first sight, so much dazzled, with the splendor and
elegance of the company about him, that, in the charms of living beauty, he is
tempted to overlook the efforts of the pencil. In no other place, that I ever
saw or recollect, do art and nature so powerfully combine to bewitch the
senses, and captivate the imagination.

If my time and place of residence were at my own command, I should frequently
in the season, devote to this pleasure, one of those languid, afternoon hours,
when the spirits are exhausted with the employments of the morning, and want
renewed vigor, elasticity and animation.

I am much interested, believe me, in the relish I would give you for this
species of improvement. -- I look forward, with a degree of pleasure, to the
time, when I may be the companion of your little tours, and delighted with your
observations; -- when we may hang in curiosity, over fossils and petrefactions;
when we shall pore over paintings, buildings, ruins with all the luxury of
artists and in such rational, innocent pleasures endeavor to forget the
sorrows, that will crowd on this variegated life.

LETTER LXIII.
IT is so very agreeable to peruse voyages and travels into foreign countries
by way of coming easily at a knowledge of their history, customs, ceremonies
and degrees of civilization, that I do not wonder at the number and
multiplicity of these productions. Authors wish to be read, and this is the
sort of work, which, if judiciously executed, suits every taste. It has a
tendency to enlarge the mind, and divest it of illiberal prejudices. Books of
this kind are now become so numerous, that the difficulty only is how to make
the selection.

I will begin with Moore, for he has pleased universally. Your collection will
be graced by his View of Society and Manners in France, Switzerland, and
Germany, in two volumes, and his View of Society in Italy, in two more.

Wraxall is another writer in this way, who has superior merit. He has
published a tour through the northern parts of Europe, and through France.

Pennant has been singularly happy in all his attempts. He interests the
antiquarian, the scholar and the man of genius in his various productions. His
works are numerous. A Tour through Scotland, Voyages to the Hebrides, a Tour in
North Wales; a Journey to Snowdon; and a Journey from Chester to London, etc.

Switzerland is one of those, romantic countries, that delights us in idea.
Coxe has given sketches of it, in a very pleasing and picturesque manner.

Sherlock's English Traveller is a very original and entertaining book. The
author is evidently a man of fanc^ and genius, but rather fulsome in his
panegyries on particular characters, and excentric both in his sentiments and
manner. He will, sometimes, make you smile with egotisms and the appearance of
conceit; but he will likewise enlighten your understanding.

Cordiner's Antiquities and Scenery of the North of Scotland is an entertaining
work. The plates annexed to it, please the eye, and invigorate the imagination.

A tour to the lakes is become very fashionable, and is said abundantly to
repay the travelers curiosity. West's description of them may be useful,
though the language appears too florid and poetical.

The Tour to Ermenonville I have never seen; but it is mentioned as possessing
considerable merit. Gilpin's Description of the River Wye abounds with
beautiful scenery, and is a most lively and entertaining production.

But the catalogue would be endless. A thousand, other books of this kind, are
at hand, whenever you are disposed to travel with them in your closet.

If you have a little knowledge of Heraldry, it will be an embellishment; an
agreeable exercise of your taste and ingenuity, and may, occasionally, suggest
a channel, through which you may serve a valuable friend. The only books I
recollect, are the Elements of it, by Porney; Gwillim, a large folio, and
Edmondson's Complete Body of it; in two volumes.

But after all this recommendation of different studies, do not mistake me. I
do not want to make you a fine writer, an historian, a naturalist, a
geographer, an astronomer, a poet, a painter, a connoisseur, or a virtuoso of
any kind. But I would have you to possess such a general knowledge, as will
usefully and innocently fill up your leisure hours, raise your taste above
fantastic levities, render you an agreeable friend and acquaintance, qualify
you for the solid duties of y^^^ station, whatever they may be, and elevate,
above all, your soul to him, who is the source of all knowledge, greatness and
perfection.

LETTER LXIV.
THE accomplishments of a woman may be comprised under some, or all of the
following articles; needle work, embroidery, etc. drawing, music, dancing,
dress, politeness, etc.

To wield the needle with advantage, so as to unite the useful and beautiful,
is her particular province, and a sort of ingenuity, which shows her in the
most amiable and attracting point of view. -- Solomon describes his excellent
daughter, as employed in the labors of the distaff or the needle. Homer paints
his lovely matrons as engaged in such domestic avocations. Andromache is thus
relieving her solitude, when she is surprised into transport by the unexpected
return of Hector from the war.

The heart glows with pleasure, when we read the accounts of the good Roman
matrons in the purer and unvitiated ages of their republic. The greatest men,
princes, warriors, senators and philosophers were clothed in the labors of
their wives and daughters. Industry in this happy period, was esteemed a
virtue, and it was not beneath a woman of the first quality or understanding to
be an excellent economist, who looked well to the ways of her household.

Employment is the grand preservative of health and innocence. When we have
nothing to do, we immediately become a burden to ourselves; the mind and body
languish for want of exercise, and we fall into a thousand dangerous
temptations.

LETTER LXV.
IF you have any natural taste for drawing, I should wish you to indulge it. I
think it an accomplishment, very well adapted both to the taste and delicacy of
your sex. It will agreeably exercise your ingenuity and invention. It will
teach you to discover a superior finish in all the varied landscapes and
scenery of nature; to survey the works of our distinguished masters, with an
higher relish and a more poignant curiosity; and it will heighten all the
innocent pleasures of your retirement. When nature howls with winds, or is
covered with snow, you will be able in a moment, to call a fancy spring upon
the canvas, of which the blossoms will be ever fragant, and the trees ever
green. You may thus have birds always on the spray, and larks, apparently
thrilling out praise to their bountiful Creator.

LETTER LXVI.
MUSIC, by which I mean playing on an instrument, or occasionally singing, is a
very desirable acquisition in any woman, who has time and money enough to
devote to the purpose, for it requires no inconsiderable portion of both. It
will enable you to entertain your friends; to confer pleasure upon others, must
increase your own happiness, and it will inspire tranquillity, and harmonize
your mind and spirits, in many of those ruffled or lonely hours, which, in
almost every situation, will be your lot.

The passions of mankind, however, have very much debased and profaned this
art, which, like others was originally sacred, and intended to chant the
praises of the Almighty. Many songs are couched in such indelicate language,
and convey such a train of luscious ideas, as are only calculated to soil the
purity of a youthful mind. I should therefore recommend, (if I may so express
myself,) rather the sacred, than the profane, of this study. -- Indeed church
music is, in itself, more delightful than any other. What can be superror to
some passages of Judas Maccabaeus, or the Messiah? -- There is not, perhaps, an
higher amongst the melancholy pleasures than a funeral dirge.

Dancing, in a degree, is professedly an essential part of a good education, as
correcting any awkwardness of gesture, giving an easy and graceful motion to
the body, and if practiced early, perhaps even in directing its growth. Modern
manners, however, have carried the fondness for this accomplishment to an
immoderate extreme. A passion for making the best figure in a minuet, is vastly
beneath the dignity of a woman's understanding. And I am not sure, whether
excelling in this particular does not inspire too great a fondness for
dissipating pleasures, and proportionably abate the ardour for more retired
virtues. A woman, who can sparkle and engage the admiration of every beholder,
at a birth night or a ball, is not aways content with the graver office of
managing a family, or the still and sober innocence of domestic scenes. Besides
dancing is not, at certain moments, without its temptations. An elegant,
illuminated room, brilliant company, the enchanting powers of music, admiring
eyes, obsequious beaus, attitude, etc. are apt to transport the mind a little
beyond the rational medium of gentle agitation.

I would not, however, be a cynical moralist, that would abridge you of any
harmless amusement. I have only my apprehensions for your innocence, for indeed
it is a plant of a very delicate complexion. And you will then have attained
the perfection of your character, when you can mix a passion for these elegant
accomplishments, with a turn for solid and domestic virtue; when you can, one
night be distinguished at a ball, and the next want no other entertainment,
than what the shade, your family, a well chosen book or an agreeable walk are
able to afford. I should wish you to be innocent, and if possible, accomplished
at the same time; but at any rate, I would have you inno^ (...), because
otherwise you cannot be happy.

LETTER LXVII.
MY DEAR LUCY,
WILL you bear with my impertinence, if I attempt to give you my directions on
a subject where your sex are allowed to possess infinitely more taste and
judgment than our own -- that of dress. I offer however, my plain and
undisguised sentiments, only for your advantage; and I am sure you will receive
them with that candor and indulgence, to which my friendship for you has an
indisputable claim.

Neatness, you cannot cultivate with too much attention. I would press it on
every female, as strongly, if possible, as Lord Chesterfield did the graces on
his son. The want of it is unpardonable in a man, but in a woman, it is
shocking. It dis^^^ts all her friends and intimates; has estranged (...)
affections of many an husband, and made him (...) that satisfaction abroad,
which he found not at home.

Some ladies, who were remarkably attentive to their persons before marriage,
neglect them afterward, in an egregious manner. They cannot pay a worse
compliment to their own delicacy, or to their husbands. If they conceived some
efforts necessary to gain the prize, more, I am sure, are required to preserve
it.

It is the opinion of (I believe,) Rochefoucault, that nice observer of life
and manners, that the affection of woman increases after marriage, whilst that
of man is apt to decline. Whatever be the cause, a prudent woman will, at
least, use every method in her power, to guard against so mortifying a charge.
Neatness, however, is easily practiced, and will always have considerable
weight.

In the eyes of servants and domestics, indeed, a woman loses her consequence
and authority by a neglect of her person. She will not be obeyed with
cheerfulness, and she will become an object of ridicule, in all their private
parties and conversations. If inferiors must be subject, they will pay an
unconstrained homage only to a person, who attracts by propriety, the
estimation of the world.

Neatness is the natural garb of a well ordered mind, and has a near alliance
with purity of heart. Law has said of his Miranda, that she was always clean
without, because she was always pure within. And Richardson, whose taste was as
exquisite, as his imagination glowing, has painted his Clarissa, as always
dressed, before she came down stairs, for any company, that might break in upon
her during the whole day.

Finery is seldom graceful. The easy undress of a morning often pleases more,
than the most elaborate and costly ornaments. I need not say of how much time
and money they rob us, which are sacred to virtue and to the poor, nor how soon
this very embellished body will be dust and ashes. The perfection of the art is
conveyed in two words; an elegant simplicity. Ladies are certainly injudicious
in employing so many male friseurs about their persons. The custom is
indelicate; it is contrary to cleaniness, and all their maneuvers cannot equal
the beauty of natural, easy ringlets, untortured and unadorned.

The nearer you approach to the masculine in your apparel, the further you will
recede from the appropriate graces and softness of your sex. Addison, in his
day, lashed, with a delicate vein of irony, this absurd transformation. The
present age wants such an inimitabl^ censor. The riding habits, particularly,
that have been so fashionable, and even made their appearance at all public
places, conceal every thing that is attractive in a woman's person, her figure,
her manner, and her graces. They wholly unsex her, and give her the unpleasing
air of an Amazon, or a virago. Who likes the idea? or if you would be more
struck with the absurdity, tell me what you would think of petite maitres in
muffs? You immediately despise the ridiculousness of the one; we daily feel the
unnaturalness of the other. We forget that you are women in such a garb, and we
forget to love.

Every public paper one opens, is a violation of your delicacy and an insult to
your understanding. Powders, perfumes, pomatums, cosmetics, essence of roses,
Olimpian dew, artificial eyes, teeth, hair advertised for your advantage, would
be an heavy stigma, if some kind and well disposed persons amongst our own sex,
were not willing to share with you a part of the burden. Blush, my dear girl,
at such unseemly practices. Be content to be what God, and nature intended you:
appear in your true colors; abhor any thing, like deceit in your appearance,
as well as your character. -- What must all sensible men think of a woman, who
has a room, filled with a thousand preparations and mixtures to deceive him?
What money, what time must be given to this odious, insufferable vanity! Under
such unnatural management; how different must be the female of the evening and
the morning! What must we think of marriage; dressing rooms and toilets! What
an opening for expostulation, coldnesses, aversions! If an elegant simplicity
be the perfection of dress, this is surely, as far as possible, removed from
perfection. It is not simplicity; it is not elegant.

It would be cruel to add any thing to the punishment of the men, who can have
recourse to such effeminate artifices. They have already the scorn and ridicule
of one sex, and the stern contempt and indignation of the other. They are poor,
amphibious animals, that the best naturalists know not, under what class to
arrange.

Painting is indecent, offensive, criminal. It hastens the approach of
wrinkles; it destroys constitutions, and defaces the image of your maker.

Would you think of giving the last touch to the pieces of a Pouffin, or a
Salvator Rosa? Believe for a moment, that the Almighty is, at least, as great
in his way, as either of these artists.

Let the martyrs of fashion, luxury and dissipation who turn night into day,
have recourse to this filthy and abominable practice. Let them seek a resource
from the rebukes of their conscience in gaiety and noise. But let the fairness
of your complexion be only that of nature, and let your rouge be the crimson
blush of health, arising from temperance, regularity, exercise and air.

That beauty, truly bleat, whose red and white,
Nature's own sweet, and cunning hand laid on.
Such simplicity will recommend you to God; -- and, if you retain any fears of
offending him, how dare you deface his image, in your countenance, by
artificial decorations. Such innocence will charm, when paint is dissolved. It
will call up a bloom, and cast a fragrance even on the latest winter of your
age.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.
LETTERS TO A YOUNG LADY, ON USEFUL AND INTERESTING SUBJECTS.

VOL. II.

LETTERS TO A YOUNG LADY, ON A VARIETY OF USEFUL AND INTERESTING SUBJECTS:
CALCULATED TO IMPROVE the HEART, to FORM the MANNERS, and ENLIGHTEN the
UNDERSTANDING.

"That our Daughters may be as polished Corners of the Temple" BY THE REV. JOHN
BENNETT, Author of Strictures on Female Education.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. M,DCC,XCI.

LETTERS, etc.
LETTER 1. TO MISS LUCY --
MY DEAR LUCY,
A WOMAN may be fairly allowed a little more attention to ornament, than would
be pardonable in the other sex. Nature, through all her works has lavished more
external brilliancy, coloring and plumage on the female. And though dress, in
itself, is no essential quality, we are induced to judge more of your real
character and disposition from it, than you are apt to imagine. We fancy it, in
its different modifications, a mark of good sense, delicacy and discretion, or
of the very opposite defects. Every sensible woman, therefore, will study it so
far, as not to subject herself to unfavorable constructions. She will endeavor
to convince every beholder, that she knows the proper medium betwixt a
ridiculous profusion, and a total want, of ornament; that she can tissue
plainness with elegance; that she does not wish to seduce by her appearance,
but only to please; that she has cultivated her mind, much more than her
person, and placed the highest value, not on the outward, perishable casket,
but the diamond within.

I rejoice that the good sense of my countrywomen has corrected some late
glaring indecencies of dress. Young ladies should not be too liberal in the
display of their charms, Too much exposure does not enhance their value. And it
approaches, too nearly, to the manner of those women, whom they would surely
think it no honor to resemble. Bosoms should throb unseen. The bouffant was an
ornament of too transparent a kind. Wherever delicacy throws its modest
drapery, imagination always lends inexpressible charms. As fine a woman, as the
Venus of Medici, would cease to be admired, if curiosity ceased to be suspended.

There is a great neatness in the dress of quakers, and of some other
sectaries, who have copied their example. It has, however, more primness, than
ease. In this respect, you have too much good sense to affect singularity.
Religion consists in something more substantial, than any particular modes of
appearance. And there is, if I mistake not, some conceit and pride, under this
prodigious, ever-acted plainness. Many, whom these narrow minded persons would
sentence, perhaps to torments, for being elegantly dressed, have hearts that
overflow with universal benevolence and infinitely more piety and goodness,
than themselves.

You know what young lady I mean by Emelia. I do not know a person, that
dresses better. She is singularly happy in her choice of colors. Like her
virtues they are of the soft and shaded kind, not the brilliant or the gaudy. I
never saw her sine; but she never is fantastic. She is seldom splendid; but
neatness is all her own. If she puts on only a ribbon, it is selected with all
the exquisite modesty of her mind, and disposed of by the hands of taste. The
graces always appear to have been in waiting for the few moments, that she ever
suffers dress to take up her attention.

I very much admire the sashes, which, of late, have been so fashionable
amongst young ladies. -- They give me the idea of a childish simplicity,
innocence and ease. These, and ^owing ringlets are on the system of nature. And
nature will always please.

I am sorry, however, to observe that these girlish ornaments should likewise
have encircled the less delicate waists of some married women. -- There cannot
be a more absurd or disgusting affectation. If I was not writing to ladies, I
would be humourous. Or ^^ch a subject, I could be severe. But some improp^^
(...) as might be suggested, and I will only say, that (...) sober, aged
autumn, is never clad in the cheerful Every of spring.

On the whole, my dear girl, as a reasonable creature, and as a christian,
never suffer yourself to be led away by an extravagant fondness for dress. What
is finery, compared with understanding? What is finery, compared with
understanding? What is splendour contrasted with reason? What is your body, but
a temporary receptacle for an immortal mind? It is but the casket; the jewel is
the soul. And how very low and poor in itself is the ambition of apparel? After
all our efforts, we can never make it equal the beauty of lillies, or to vie
with the exquisite tints of the rose. Whatever you can spare, from such
expense, to give to the poor, will be a solid treasure, when beauty is but dust
and ashes, and when gaiety is forgotten.

LETTER II.
POLITENESS, if supposed, like Lord Chesterfield's, to be made up of
dissimulation, or to consist ^n a number of ceremonious attitudes or f^^some
compliments, without any meaning, is ri^^culously frivolous: but on the other
hand, if it springs from principle, from a real desire of pleasing, and is
directed to its proper ends, it is, at least, a most amiable quality, if it
does not rank in the number of the virtues. In the intercourse of life and the
present state of society, this good breeding is necessary to our own peace, and
to that of other. It prevents a thousand inquietudes, irritations, offenses; it
diffuses an innocent pleasure, and it diffuses it every moment. We daily
conve^se with many persons, considerably indifferent to us, and from whom we
expect neither services nor obligations, who, yet, have it in their power, by a
rough, ungracious manner, by unguarded sayings, or speaking (as it is called)
their minds, essentially to hurt our feelings, sour our spirits, give us a bad
head ach, or to break our rest; there are as many, on the other hand, who look
up to us for no essential favors, whom, yet, in our turn, we may, not a
little, irritate and distress, by a want of civility, by any hauteur or
superciliousness in our looks or carriage, or a withholding of those kind
attentions, which, on every principle of reason, humanity and civilization are
reciprocally due from every human creature to another.

This reasoning, still more forcibly, applies to members of the same family; to
wives and husbands; children and parents; brothers and sisters. If this kind of
good breeding be ever violated amongst them, the consequence is coldness,
quarrels, and gradual aversion.

So great, indeed, is the influence of true politeness over the mind, that even
favors conferred in an unpleasing manner, without it, becomes an insupportable
insult; whilst a refusal, softens by it, into an obligation, and is, sometimes,
made the basis of a lasting gratitude, affection or esteem.

This grace may be defined the art of being easy ourselves, in company, and of
making all others easy about us. It is the proper medium betwixt the total want
of, and an officious, over-acted, civility. It consists in a general,
indiscriminate attention; in doing little civil offices, and saying obliging
things to all the parties we converse with in accommodating ourselves, as well
as the conversation to their particular tastes, habits and inclinations; in
keeping every offensive subject and idea out of view; in never glancing at our
own affairs, and always paying the minutest regard to those of others, in
annihilating, as it were, ourselves, and as studiously exalting all that are
about us.

If I have not much mistaken, the best rules for it will be found in that
religion, which requires us to love one another; to be gentle and courteous; to
avoid offenses; to become innocently all things to all men; in honor to prefer
one another, and to esteem others better than ourselves.

The exteriors of good breeding, such as presenting yourself gracefully,
entering or quitting a room with ease, a proper gait, air, gesture, etc. I am
not, at present, considering. These are only acquired by early education,
habits of good company, or by a general intercourse with the world; and though
they may be wanting, I will venture to say, that the person will always please,
and always be respected, who possess only this principle within.

True politeness gives a luster to all our good qualities. It is a sovereign
e^a^^l to all the virtues, and proportionably extends our power of doing good.
Learning, riches, station, talents, genius, without it, are overbearing and
insufferable, or at least may be very awkward and unpleasing. They resemble a
rich, unfinished picture, thrown into a dark and an unpleasant room. Politeness
gives them the last ^^^ch, raises them into a proper light, and clothes them
with the most beautiful drapery.

Religion itself has often suffered for want of this grace. Good people, have
not, always, been gentle, courteous or well bred, and an odium has been fixed
on their profession, which has deterred many from becoming converts.

Many bad men, on the other hand, by a pleasing manner, have so successfully
varnished over their vices, as to have acquired a considerable reputation.
Their crimes have been forgotten in their politeness. Can I mention a stronger
argument to recommend this accomplishment? We should not, surely, for want of a
little care, suffer our good to be evil spoken of.

LETTER III.
IT is a great unhappiness to many ladies of fortune, that they have not
sufficient employment to fill up their time; and in order to prevent that,
langour and ennui, which are the most unpleasant feelings of human life, either
fall into a low state of spirits, or have recourse to play, public pleasures,
or a perpetual round of visits, for their amusement.

The religious exercises, however, and the studies, I have recommended, will
not only occupy your hours in a rational and useful manner, but some of them,
from their very nature, will become an inexhaustible source of the purest
pleasure. -- Still uniformity in any one pursuit, however pleasing, will
exhaust the spirits, and they will frequently want a rolls. The eye could not
constantly behold, without injury, the most beautiful landscape. It may,
perhaps, be the privilege of angels and superior spirits, to serve their Maker
without weariness or distraction; but a mind, united to a body of clay, must
have very frequent intervals of langour, and want as many of intermission.

Innocent relaxation is as much a part of true wisdom, as employment itself.
Indeed it is necessary to fit us for our duties. The earth itself would not be
able to vegetate and shoot forth into all the bloom and verdure of spring, if
it did not regain its exhausted powers during the sombrous leisure of the
winter.

The rule is, we should amuse ourselves, in order to live, in the true sense of
the word, and not live to be amused. Relaxation, conducted on this principle,
will never occupy too great a share of our time or attention. It will be
consistent with the universal principle of "doing all things to the glory of
God."

A woman's amusements should, as much as possible, be domestic; and her own
walls will present many excellent opportunities of such a nature. The exercise
of parental or filial affection is a source of heartfelt and refined pleasure.
Intercourses of tenderness betwixt branches of the same family, and the little
engaging attentions they create, stimulate the finer movements of the body, and
give play to all the refreshing emotions. A mother, in particular, must have
these natural delights in perfection. Her heart must vibrate, with an exquisite
sondness, to the playful graces of a little offspring, and their continually
unfolding charms.

Exercise in the open air, is another great amusement. Fresh breezes, variety
of objects, gentle motion, and all the charming pictures of nature cheer the
mind, and invigorate the spirits. The sedentary life of women is the parent of
many fashionable complaints; weak nerves, low spirits, vapors, hysterics,
languors. No constitution can long withstand the bad effects of luxury and
inaction. Such people may exist but they cannot live.

In a rich entertainment, Mr. Addison saw fevers, dropsies, gouts and
rheumatisms in embryo. Who, that looks at women, emaciated with midnight
pleasures, and pale for want of exercise and air, must not behold the seeds of
infinite disorders, and likewise tremble for the rising generation?

The ancients paid a very nice attention to the constitution of females. To
give them, in particular situations, every degree of firmness, was not thought
beneath the attention of those great men, who by their eloquence and valor,
astonished the world.

Attention to a garden is truly feminine amusement. If you mix it with a taste
for botany and a knowledge of plants and flowers, you will never be in want of
an excellent restorative. Our first parents are described by Milton, as tending
the shrubs and flowers of their paradise, with unceasing assiduity, and as
rising with the dawn to work:

Amongst sweet dews and flowers, where any row
Of fruit trees over woody, reached too far
Their pampered boughs, and needed hands to check
Fruitless embraces, or they lead the vine
To wed her elm. --
There is an inexpressible tranquillity in a garden, which sooths the spirits
into that kind of cheerful pensiveness, which is, perhaps, the right
temperature of the moral constitution. Our Savior often resorted to a garden.
Innocence and piety found it the happiest place for meditation and repose. It
is impossible, indeed, to have a richer blessing, than a taste for the general
beauties of nature. It is an inexhaustible fund of pleasure within every
person's reach; it purifies and resines the mind, and raises it above the
artificial gaieties, which are purchased at so great an expense of time, money,
and often, of constitution.

O bles'd of heaven, whom not the languid songs
Of luxury, the siren, not the bribes
Of sordid wealth, nor all the gaudy sports
Of pageant honors can seduce to leave
These ever blooming sweets, which from the store
Of nature, fair amagination culls
To charm the enlivened soul. --
Thus the men
Whom nature's works can charm, with God himself
Hold converse, grow familiar day by day
With his conceptions, act upon his plan,
And form to his, the relish of their souls.
But friendship, after all, is the great medicine of life. We were horn for
society, and the mind never so effectually unburdens itself, as in the
conversation of a well chosen friend. Happy the woman who finds such a
treasure! "It is more precious, than thousands of gold or silver."

Great care, indeed, judgment, taste and vigilance are absolutely necessary to
direct you in the choice. A strict friendship is adopting, as it were, the
sentiments, the manners, the morals, and, alm^st the happiness or misery of
others. Religion should guide you on this occasion. None but a good person is
capable of true attachment, and, I trust, with you no other would assimilate.
If you can meet with such a character, who, at the same time, has a liberal and
cultivated mind, you are rich indeed!

Sincere friendships are, most generally, formed at an early age. The heart, in
this tender season, is soft and unsuspicious. It is a mazing how the little
tumults of life afterward jostle us against and put us out of humor and
conceit with, one another. Sensibility becomes petrified by age and
observation. Ambition, avarice, and the little paltry competitions, freeze up
the generous current of the soul.

LETTER IV.
PUBLIC pleasures are esteemed and called the amusements of women. But I think
them far from answering the name. In fact they agitate, rather than relieve,
and are more frequently sources of vexation, than repose. Superior rivals
eclipse; fancied friends are inattentive, and the gaiety of the scene has no
connection with quiet of the heart. The time, money, and preparation they
require, are a serious consideration, and their frequency renders them a
business; instead of preserving health, they undermine and destroy it. Late
hours, hot rooms, and an agitated mind are unfavourable to rest; and the God of
sleep will not long be defrauded of his rights, without retaliating the offense.

What we call pleasure, is but a splendid and a voluntary service. If it had
not the name of amusement, we should shrink from it, as an intolerable burden.

Who are so great slaves as the votaries of fashion? What requires more
systematical diligence, than the watching of every, varying mode of dress, and
"catching these living manners, as they rise?

Of all women, they who call themselves fashionable, are the most unhappy; ever
idly busy; ever vainly agitated; their peace depends on a whisper, on a look,
or a thousand, little emulations, too ridiculous to be mentioned! They dread a
private moment more than an assassin, and with very great reason; they cannot
glance into themselves with comfort; they cannot look into eternity with hope!
Reason suggests, that they were born for something higher, and there are
moments, when conscience will be heard.

How unheeded are the cries and prattle of their infants! How unhappy must be
the man, who has received from such women, vows which they will not perform, of
fidelity and of attachment!

After all, it is only in the practice of virtue; it is only in domestic life,
that lies all the solid, because all the untumultuous, joy.

LETTER V.
IT would be uncomfortable to yourself to live wholly alone in the midst of
society; and to others, it would carry the appearance of great pride, or
conceit, or singularity. As we were born to be citizens of the world, we feel
ourselves uncomfortable, when we are not in the exchange of little civilities
with people about us; and they in their turn, contract unpleasant piques and
prejudices against us. Mixing with company has certainly the good effect of
promoting benevolence, and preventing many little shynesses and
misconstructions. Nay, even the lightest and most insignificant conversation
has a tendency to relieve intense thoughtfulness, and keep the mind from
preying too much upon itself.

Tea parties are the general mode of society, amongst ladies. And you must give
into them in some degree, if you will cultivate any acquaintance with people of
fortune. Some of your sex spend their time in a continual rotation of these
visits, and have so many preconcerted engagements on their hands, as require a
very orderly arrangement upon paper. But this is a most useless and insipid
life; and, where there is a family, cannot fail to intersere with many duties
of far higher importance. The time that is taken up in dress alone, and the
money it requires, are a prodigious sacrifice.

Nor in the light of amusement alone, is this continual visiting to be much
recommended. It affords neither air nor exercise, and, frequently, not much
agreeable or useful conversation. The generality of men are so much
undomesticated, so lost to every thing, that is innocent in taste, or natural
in pleasure, that they are but seldom to be met with in these parties. A group
of beautiful females are not, unfrequently seen together, without one single
person of the other sex, to share the enjoyment; and it is, I conceive, in
mixed companies alone, that conversation has its proper interest, flavor or
improvement.

Your visits, therefore, I trust, will be, comparatively, rare, and nicely
selected; and I hope you will always preserve yourself from the reproach, that
is generally thrown on these meetings, as being vehicles of gossiping and
scandal. It has been objected to your sex, that they are prone to satire. At a
certain age, and under some disappointments, perhaps this is true. They have
been collecting, for many years, a quantity of spleen, and imprudently
discharge it on every person, that falls in their way. This renders a woman
unlovely indeed. Nay the attempt at wit, or saying smart things, is, by no
means to be encouraged. True humor is the lot of few, and can never be an
advantage to a woman. From her we expect the qualities, that please, sooth and
enliven. Unfortunately they, who think themselves in possession of this weapon,
are brandishing it indiscriminately on all occasions, so as sometimes to wound
their very nearest friends. If you could really say the smartest things, you
might be feared, but you never would be loved.

The curiosity of women is a proverbial object of satire, and gives birth to
all that little gossiping, which I have reprobated. Never convince the world,
by an attention to mere trifles, that you have so unfurnished a mind, or so
little to engage it. Read Hayley's truly humorous Essays on Old Maids, and
blush at the practice. Remember the fate of the poor, unhappy spinster, who
caught her death by her immoderate curiosity.

You can surely find infinite subjects for the entertainment of an hour,
without descending to these little things. If you cannot, it is high time to
give up (what is only called) an amusement, for that, which is a real one, a
walk, a ride, a book, a garden, or the society of a chosen friend.

It is astonishing into how many difficulties a woman betrays herself, who is
fond of this practice; what quarrels, misconstructions, and explanations, what
secret shynesses, aversions, mischiefs such babblers create; what friends they
separate, and what a badge of infamy they fix upon themselves, in the eyes of
all the sensible and the good!

There was a famous school amongst the ancients, where the pupils spent several
years in learning the very necessary art of being silent. Remember, my dear
girl, that nature has given you two ears, and only one tongue; and that
scripture had said, "be swift to hear, but slow to speak."

LETTER VI.
CARDS, which are the inseparable concomitants of tea visits, and introduced as
soon as persons are well seated in company, are a very equivocal pleasure, and,
by no means, to be much recommended. Little habits insensibly beget a passion
for them; and a passion for cards murders time, money, talents, understanding,
every thing, that is rational in our nature, and every thing, that is divine.

If experience did not convince us of the fact, one should never have imagined,
that a reasonable creature would ever have been able to consume hours, days,
weeks, months, years, in counting over the black and red spots upon paper, and
childishly to quarrel about their success -- a creature, who has an
understanding, that is capable of improvement, to an infinite degree! a
creature, living in a world, where knowledge is immense, and every flower or
shrub a subject of astonishment -- who has a temper, that requires continual
watchfulness; a soul that needs unremitting cultivation; perhaps children, that
call for incessant instruction; amidst objects of distress, for which heaven
begs each superfluous penny, and in a body, that may, any moment, drop into the
grave!

I will advert, no longer, to the moral consequences. A woman, who has a wish
only to please, should not be much addicted to this practice. It is very apt to
ruffle the temper, and discompose the features; and a sour or an angry look is
more destructive to female charms, than an high scorbutic flush, or the
smallpox.

It is said in favor of cards, that they prevent scandal, and are a substitute
to many, for the want of conversation. This conveys a severe stigma both on our
hearts and understanding. It supposes, that we have few stores of entertainment
within ourselves; and that the only way to avoid a greater crime, is to fall
into a less. Our moments, I fear, will not bear the scrutiny of conscience or
reason, much less of the great day, if we cannot contrive to spend them in an
innocent and useful manner, without the low resource of either scandal or play!

LETTER VII.
THE defenders of cards, however, will say nothing in favor of gaming. No
fortune, they know, is equal to its extravagant demands. An unlucky throw loses
thousands in a moment. It has reduced the most opulent families to indigence;
has led some to forgery, and an ignominious death; others, whose pride would
not brook the degradation, to the fatal act of suicide; at best it has plunged
into poverty and distress, many heirs of honorable and illustrious houses, who
were born, in all appearance to happier days.

Your moderate card players (as they call themselves,) have often wondered,
what can tempt people of fortune to such a dreadful and ruinous amusement, as
that of gaming. I will venture to say, that this shocking practice is nothing
more, than the spirit of card playing, carried to its extreme; that equal
temptations would probably have led them to the very same imprudence; that they
both, generally, originate in the same principle, (the want of something
substantial to fill and exercise the mind,) and are only an artificial method
of destroying that ennui and languor, which are the most insupportable feelings
of human life; and that the cure of both must, equally, spring from solid
knowledge, and from solid virtue.

Though gaming, at first, rises from no worse a principle, than a want of
amusemet, or of having something to call the passions into exercise, yet, in
its consequences, it has a tendency to eradicate every religious and moral
disposition, every social duty, every laudable and virtuous affection. It
renders the mind selfish in the extreme, and callous to the touch of woe, in
every shape; whilst it stops up the sluices of charity, it extinguishes the
inclination for it; it is deaf to every call of friendship or of prudence.
There can be no such thing, as an attentive parent, mother, wife, brother,
sister or a sympathizing heart, where this infernal rage has taken possession
of the soul. Every thing else is swallowed up in the all-devouring vortex. A
gamester would stake the last thousand on a throw, though a prison, for her
husband, rags for her children, or a gallows for her nearest friend, were the
melancholy prospect!

If you disbelieve this reasoning, look into life. What effects has this
passion gradually produced on women, who had once hearts full of tenderness and
virtue, and were affected with every appearance of distress; who had from
nature, every refinement of taste, and every elegance of manners to captivate
and charm.

If it were not invidious, I could produce many living characters to support my
assertions. They would make a dismal picture, and the motto would be, "beware
of beginnings."

Though I abhor novels, yet, perhaps, the celebrated one of Cecilia is worth
reading, if it was only to guard our fashionable ladies from splitting on the
dreadful rock of the Harrels. Many characters, in that book, are overstrained;
but this is borrowed from real life, and daily observation.

LETTER VIII.
LAY down a little plan for yourself, and all your studies, exercises and
employments will be easy and practicable. You will have time for every thing;
and you will never seem in an hurry or embarrassed.

Order is the first law of nature, and of nature's God. The moon, stars and
tides vary not a moment, and the sun knows the "hour of its going down."

Without order, a thousand things will be improperly delayed, or wholly
neglected. Whilst we are hesitating where to begin, or what to do, hours fly
away, insensibly, never to return!

If every thing knows its place, you will escape the loss of many, valuable
moments, and the anxiety of as many unprofitable searches. Exactness is, by no
means, the necessary appendage of an old maid.

Order is the very parent of tranquillity. A person is always easy, whose
affairs are, always, in a regular arrangement. At the same time, let the
mechanism of your process be invisible. The perfection of art, you know, is to
conceal it.

Be always ready to receive your friends with an open countenance, and a
cheerful heart. Society and connection have claims upon us, to which we should
sacrifice every selfish consideration.

If you are an early riser, you may sind time for every thing. It is amazing
how much is gained by lopping off an hour or two, from indulgence in the
morning. Nor is the mere saving of time the only advantage. Our spirits are
more lively, and our faculties are more awake.

I do not know a practice which I should more recommend, whether devotion,
health, beauty, or improvement of the mind, were the objects in view. How
cheerful and how animated are the meditations of the morning! What a delightful
bloom flus^es into the cheeks from its balmy exhalations! What an unspeakable
cheerfulness glides into the sold from hearing the devotional matins of the
lark, and from beholding the newborn scenery of nature! How necessary is such
a regimen to preserve that sweetness of complexion, and of breath, which are
the very essence and perfume of beauty! When people think of accounting to God
for the talents, they have received, they overlook the hours, which are lost in
morning sloth, and unreasonable indulgence.

I have inured myself, for many years, to this habit of early rising. In the
spring months of April and May, particularly, I grudge every moment that is
wasted after five. I consider it as a rude neglect to all those sweets, which
opened to salute me. And I always find so much more deducted from the firmness
of my health, and the vigor of my understanding.

LETTER IX.
I HAVE indeed, as you say, frequently dwelt with pleasure on Miss Lou^sa --,
and do think her a charming woman. She always struck me as possessing, in a
superior degree, those qualities, which constitute the graceful and attractive,
and therefore as a very proper pattern to all young people. Not that I think a
servile imitation of any original, however excellent, would render another
pleasing. Nature no more intended any two persons to have precisely the same
manner, than the same eyes, or features, or complexion. But still a familiar
intimacy with such a woman must insensibly communicate some traits of
resemblance, which by incorporating with the general mass of a character, will
form a beautiful and consistent whole.

Though I have always admired her only in the gross, and was charmed, without
considering the constituent principles of her excellence, I will, as you
request it, endeavor to analyze and trace them to their source.

He^ person is rather genteel, than beautiful, so that she is more indebted to
herself, than to nature, for her attractions. And a wonderful energy indeed
they have. For I have often seen this girl steal the notice of the whole
company from others of her sex, who were infinitely more distinguished by the
beauty of their persons, as well as the advantage of birth and fortune.

The ground work of all her charms, is, (what I cannot call by a better name,
than that of) simplicity; an artless, undesigning, unstudied manner, flowing
from an innocent and virtuous heart, which, ne^^^r seeks concealment, as having
indeed nothing to conceal. Louisa never affects to be any thing, but what she
is. She does not exalt herself above measure, nor ever ridiculously degrades
herself, in order to be exalted. Her gestures, attitude, voice, pronunciation
are all under the immediate impression and guidance of nature. Louisa expresses
an innocent pleasure, because she feels it in the company of sensible and
agreeable men, and yet never seeks it with an improper avidity. She never
harangues upon, or vaunts a superior sensibility, but frequently displays no
inconsiderable share of it, by involuntary emotions. She never, in any respect,
affects connections, appearance or any thing above her fortune, nor endeavors
to shine at the expense of others.

This, though very imperfectly described, is, according to my idea, the first
excellence in the character of this lady. It is the very reverse of that absurd
affectation, which, by assuming a thousand, fanciful shapes, renders graces
unlovely, and even beauty disgusting. Louisa charms every person, because she
is always amiable and obliging, without studying to charm. Her face is always
welcome in company, though she throws no artificial lightning into her eyes,
softness into her features, nor lisping into her articulation.

The common systematic education of girls is unfavourable to this simplicity.
The tendency of modern culture is to raise art, upon the ruins of nature. Such
a method would not succeed in any thing else, and how should it in the
treatment of women? If there be one object in the world, more disgusting than
all others, it is a girl, whom nature formed to be innocent and artless,
reducing affectation and disguise to a system.

It is with simplicity of manner, as it is with ease of style, in a writer.
When we read his works, it appears the most easy attainment imaginable; but, in
fact, nothing is so uncommon, either in conduct or in writings. And the reason
must be, that, instead of attending to the guidance of nature, people make an
extraordinary effort to be something great, or superior, and uncommon.
Simplicity may be styled the easy and the graceful negligence of conduct, yet,
as in dress, it charms more than the most elaborate ornaments.

Through all the wonderful works of God there is a majestic simplicity. Nature
knows no affectation. Her prospects, hills, valleys, alcoves, grottos are all
unstudied; her magnificence is wild and artless. There is a simplicity of
design and effect in all her wonders, in the construction and revolution of
planets, in the flow and ebbing of the tides, and in the vomiting of immense
volcanos. The carnation never aims at the stately magnificence of the
ostentatious hoary oak. Every rose is content with its own natural hues and
odours; and affects not the elegant sweetness of the Reseda, (minionette.)

Nature is the standard of perfection. Every character and every art is only so
far finished, as it approaches to her likeness. No paintings are beautiful
without this groundwork of simplicity. It charms in a Correggio. It was the
excellence of a Raphael. It lives in the exquisite touches of a Reynolds.

The beauty of all writing is founded in simplicity. It was with Homer, Virgil
and Milton, when they sketched out their inimitable poems. Of Shakespeare it
was the very soul. Statuaries, sculptors, architects have only gained an
extensive reputation, in proportion as they have studied this divine simplicity.

No woman can be graceful without it. It will go further, in the art of
pleasing, without any accomplishments, than all the accomplishments will go,
without it.

LETTER X.
ANOTHER striking quality in Louisa, is her constant cheerfulness. Though few
women in the world are more serious or thoughtful, where any solid duties are
concerned, where the health, peace, comfort, convenience of her friends and
parents, or any domestic attentions are at stake, and though she is possessed
of such an exquisite sensibility, as is apt to produce an unevenness of
spirits, yet, whenever I see this lovely girl, she always beguiles me into a
temporary cheerfulness, by the force of her own. This gaiety of heart, equally
removed from a thoughtless levity or a moping gloom, is a most desirable
quality in women. Men are perplexed with various anxieties of business and
ambition, and are naturally more thoughtful, profound, and melancholy; women
certainly were formed to sooth and to enliven. It is one of the greatest
blessings we derive from their society, and from the most sacred of all
connections.

Cheerfulness (says the wise man) does good, like a medicine. It has a
wonderful effect on all the finer organs of the body. If it was not for little
innocent sallies of this kind, it would be impossible to bear severe
application. The year would be insupportable, if it was wholly composed of the
dark and gloomy days of November.

There are many unavoidable ills, sicknesses and misfortunes in human life,
which will come uncalled to deject our spirits, and poison our repose; but we
should not anticipate them by gloomy apprehensions, nor ever suffer an
unnecessary melancholy to sit upon our looks. It is the truest policy to be
innocently gay and cheerful, whilst we can. It forbids the approach of
wrinkles, and adds many years to the little fleeting span of human life. Some
pietists have encouraged gloom by their erroneous notions of the Deity, and of
christian self-denial. But I should strongly suspect their goodness, or their
judgment. If any thing can make a person truly cheerful, it should be a good
conscience. And true religion is doubly charming, when it wears a smile.

A melancholy countenance is, by no means, feminine. It is as remote from the
true point of gracefulness, in the sex, as ill-natured wit, or ironical
pertness.

LETTER XI.
THOUGH Louisa is the most remote from prudery, of any woman I know, easy and
accessible to the other sex, and cheerful, lively and unconstrained, (...) her
conversation with them, yet she has really so great a share of true, female
delicacy, that the most licentious man living would not dare to use a double
entendre in her company, or give the conversation an improper turn. Nor is it,
that she has reduced rules of propriety to a system. She has really a native
feeling, which vibrates to the most distant touch of what is proper and
becoming, and would tremble, like the sensitive plant, where any thing, that
could stain the delicacy of her mind, was conveyed in the most distant allusion.

Fashionable manners have been long attempting to banish delicacy, as a sort of
encumbrance; but no woman will ever long be lovely without it. Let France or
Italy do what they will, it is that sacred fence, which is never broken down,
without melancholy consequences. Delicacy is a very general and comprehensive
quality. It extends to every thing, where woman is coneerned. Conversation,
books, pictures, attitude, gesture, pronunciation, should all be under its
salutary restraints. If a girl ever loses it, farewell, a long farewell to all
her greatness! If this "salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be
seasoned?"

How unfit are many parents to educate a daughter! What injudicious
pleasantries do they sometimes use, even in their presence! A girl should hear,
she should see, nothing, that can call forth a blush, or even stain the purity
of her mind.

Another distinguishing grace of Louisa is softness. She is (what nature
intended her to be,) wholly a woman. She has a quality, that is the direct
opposite to manliness and vigor. Her voice is gentle; her pronunciation
delicate; her passions are never suffered to be boisterous: she never talks
politics: she never foams with anger: she is seidom seen in any masculine
amusements: she does not practice archery. I will venture to prophesy, that she
will never canvass for votes at an election. I never saw her in an unfeminine
dress, or her features, discomposed with play. She really trembles with the
apprehension of danger. She feels, unaffectedly, for every person, exposed to
it. A friend, leaving her father's house, only for a short time, calls forth
her concern. The farewell tear stands big in its transparent sluice. And
whenever he returns, the easy, undissembled smile testifies her joy. She
displays more symphathy for the indisposition of a servant, than some do for
the death of their nearest friends.

Of all the women I ever saw, Louisa has the most universal and indiscriminate
affability. She never meets any poor persons in her neighborhood, without
entering into a very minute inquiry about the health of their children, family
and friends; and the villagers revere her. They know that she is constantly
planning for them some assistance and relief.

Little minds endeavor to support a consequence by distance and hauteur. But
this is a mistake. True dignity arises from condescension, and is supported by
noble actions.

Superciliousness is almost a certain mark of low birth, and ill breeding.
People, who have just emerged into greatness, think it necessary to maintain
their superiority by a proud look and an high stomach. The consequence is
general hatred and contempt.

In fact this proud, high-bearing reserve is a very great crime. Every person,
that bears the image of his Maker, is entitled to our attentions, and indeed
our benevolence. Inferiority is, of itself, a sufficient burden, without our
endeavoring to aggravate it by ill nature or neglect.

I have often heard Louisa dwell, with rapture, on the entertainment and
edification she has received in many cottages when she has been carrying
clothing, cordials or money to the distressed inhabitants; and tell me which is
the more dignified character? a woman, who would turn from her poor neighbors
with disdain, or one, who for her kindness and attention to them, is praised,
as often as her name is mentioned, and followed, whithersoever she moves, with
their tears and with their blessings.

There is not a greater charm in any character, than such a condescension. A
woman, thus forgetting all her distinctions, to sympathize with the
unfortunate, must captivate every man, who has either a single grain of piety
or understanding. Even the plainest face would be forgotten in such real and
unaffected goodness.

The manner of Louisa finishes her character. It is a beautiful bordering to
all her graces and her virtues. It is impossible for me to define, (what I mean
by,) manner; yet no one can be, half an hour, in the company of this lady,
without feeling its astonishing effects. Though she frequently says nothing,
but what might have dropped from any other person, yet in her it becomes so
very interesting, as to command attention, and even to delight. She
embellish^^, in a wonderful manner, a look, a gesture, an attitude, nay even
silence itself. She confers a grace on the most common civility. She heightens
every favor by the mode of doing it, and she oblige^, almost, by refusal.

The best definition I can give of this quality must be imperfect. I should
call it, however, a quick discernment of what is graceful, directed by an
exquisite sensibility, and saying in an instant, to airs, g^stures, features,
looks, come with corresponding energy, and they "come." No rules can be laid
down for its attainment. Nature must have been propitious, where it is seen in
any high perfection.

Manner is more engaging, than the most finished beauty. The latter is an
agreeable prospect, that soon grows insipid, and fatigues by uniformity. The
first is a continual change of country, with landscapes ever new, interesting
and delicious.

LETTER XII.
THE father of Louisa is one of the most worthy elergymen, I ever knew, and has
long lived in my esteem. He married, early in life, a woman of considerable
beauty and fortune, but infinitely more distinguished by her piety and
understanding. He has learning and goodness enough to have graced the highest
stations in the church; but he suffers not ambition to disturb his tranquillity,
and prefers the silent pleasures of retirement to all the pomp and splendor of
a court. He is rector of a small parish in the county of --, and has such a
pastoral tender^^ss and affection for his flock that I do not think he would be
tempted to leave them for any temporal considerations whatsoever. I would not
resign (he has frequently said to me) the fragrant shrubs and plants that
encircle this little cot for the most enviable promotions; nor should the
tumults and anxieties of the highest station deprive me of those domestic
endearments, which after all its bewitching gaiety and bustle, are the only
real sweetness of life. What could equal the heartfelt joys I derive from the
fond and ever growing attachment of my Harriet, or the pleasure of watching the
continually expanding graces and improvements of my lovely girl?

It has, long, been my private opinion, that a good clergyman is more likely to
have a dutiful and affectionate family, than a person of almost any other
character. And I am not a little confirmed in it by the instance before us.

Whoever sees this happy pair, is delighted with that mutual esteem and
fondness, which revolving years have not been able to diminish, but only to
mature; and must form a very high idea of that union, which the licentious only
endeavor to ridicule, because they have not taste and innocence enough for its
unpurchased, and refined sweets. I have lately spent a few days with this
amiable group, and returned, quite disgusted with my own situation. It
appeared, uncommonly solitary and insipid. I began to blame my books, as the
obstacle of ^m, felicity, and to ask philosophy and cold-hearted prudence, what
joy they had to boast, if compared with these natural transports of the soul.

Fortunately for my friend, a comfortable, paternal fortune, in conjunction
with that, which he received with his lady, has placed him in very easy, and
rather affluent, circumstances. Providence has crowned their virtuous
friendship only with Louisa; but indeed, in her alone, has rained down a
profusion of its blessings. In her, therefore, all their cares and anxieties
concenter; and her education, you may well suppose, has not been neglected.

Her parents are both averse to boarding schools, as inspiring a young person
with improper notions, and undermining the taste for pure simplicity and
domestic worth. She has, therefore, been always kept under their own, immediate
inspection; but her hours are as strictly arranged, as they could have been, at
any school, into a regular plan of employment. She has her allotted intervals
for domestic duties, needle work, reading, correspondence, exercise and
recreation; and every hour knows its particular engagement.

She opens every morning, and closes every day with an hymn of praise to her
bountiful Creator, which is chanted to the harpsichord, with so sweet a voice,
as I cannot even at this distance of time, recollect without emotion.

If you saw the beautiful fancy-work, which has been wrought by this girl, in
carpers, baskets of flowers, embroidery, etc. you would imagine, that she could
have but little leisure for the improvement of her understanding. But a strict
economy of time, an invariable adherence to order, and an habit of early rising
have enabled her to do wonders. Her father superintends that part of her
education, which is connected with books; and has such an happy method of
conveying his idea as wonderfully mixes instruction with delight.

Natural history and botany, on fine days, they study in the fields; and when
the weather is less favorable, she has such a collection of animals, insects,
and other curiosities as would adorn the museum of a connoisseur. This is
called her grotto; and is placed in a shady part of the garden, over-arched
with an alcove of entwined elms.

History, in the hands of her able instructor, becomes a fund of unspeakable
improvement. When events are recorded, she is asked what causes gave them
birth; what instruments were made use of for their completion, and what traces
she can discover, of a wonderful and an all-wise Providence, governing the
whole.

Geography and chronology are inseparable guides consulted on the occasion; and
when characters are described, she is interrogated concerning the praiseworthy
or the reprehensible, in them; where the historian has been too sparing of his
praise, or extolled beyond the bounds of reason and of truth. Her sentiments,
on all these subjects, are given, in her own language, upon paper; and
afterward corrected by the mature judgment and critical taste of her
incomparable tutor.

On Sundays, she prepares a concise abridgment of the sermon, which undergoes
the same rigid examination; and she has a little volume, filled with such
sacred reflections, as would not dishonor the understanding, or the repository
of a professed divine.

You would suppose from this account, that Louisa would appear (what the world
calls,) a very learned woman. No such thing. In a mixed company, you would not
discern, that she possessed any superior knowledge or advantage over her sex,
except in an elegant mode of expression. She enters into other people's views,
feelings, interests and concerns, with a politeness, that very few possess; and
converses with all her country neighbors, on such easy terms, as banish every
unpleasant feeling of distance or restraint.

The heart of this lovely girl is, all over, sympathy and softness. The big
tear trembles in her eye, on every trying occasion; and in her closet, along
with a small, but well chosen collection of books, she has a little box, with
this inscription, "sacred to the poor." Into this, she puts, every night,
before she sleeps, something to be a fund for merit and distress. She enriches
it with the savings she has made, by retrenching some expensive articles of
dress or pleasure. It is filled with money, that others would have spent on
plays, concerts or assemblies; and I will venture to say, that she has
infinitely sweeter music in her heart, and a more innocent, sparkling
brilliance in her eyes, than any of the most admired frequenters of these gay
amusements.

LETTER XIII.
FROM Louisa's strict consinement and systematic life you would conclude,
perhaps, that she had almost contracted a disrelish for books. But, indeed, it
is far otherwise; her studies are her pleasure; they are so judiciously mixed
with entertainment, and so interwoven, as it were, with the common casual
occurrences of the day, that she considers them more as an amusement, than a
business. Her private moments, when she is left to her own choice, are not
unfrequently beguiled with the very same employments, which had engrossed the
other parts of the day.

The garden is the scene, where she indulges all the luxury of her taste; and
her rambles into it are as frequent, as the great variety of her avocations
will permit. One day, I found her in this retizement. The place was very
happily fancied. Large clumps of trees, on both sides, with their intervening
foliage, had rendered it impervious to any human eye. Nature had wantoned with
particular luxuriance. A clear, transparent spring murmured through the valley.
And it was fenced, on both sides, with a very lofty mound, cast up as on
purpose, and planted with perennial shrubs. A shady arbor, in the middle,
catching through a beautiful vista, the spire of the village church, invited to
meditation and to repose. She was reclined here rather in a pensive attitude,
reading Burke's Essays on the Beautiful and Sublime; and to me she appeared, I
must confess, more enchanting, more beautiful and more sublime, than the
admired work of that well known and admired author.

On another occasion, her mother being much indisposed, she had stolen from the
domestic circle, to indulge, at leisure, a solitary grief. The book she held in
her hands, was Lord Lyttleton's Dialogues of the Dead. The soft melancholy
visible in her countenance, the very apparent agitation of her spirits, and the
grief, bursting through her animated eyes, formed a very interesting whole;
whilst her observations on a future life, on the comfort she derived from the
hope of conversing with her friends after death; on the probable nature and
happiness of heaven, and the permanency of virtuous friendship and affection,
would no have disgraced any divine or philosopher of the age.

A third time of her elopement, she was reading the only novel, which she
permits herself to read, that of Sir Charles Grandison. Tears, like an April
shower, tinged with the sun, were mingled with her joy.

The book was opened, where the once-amiable Harriet Byron is now Lady
Grandison; where the painful suspense of her virtuous, though premature,
attachment, is crowned by an eternal union with its object, and she is kneeling
to her ever-venerable grandmother, to implore a blessing. "Heavens!" (said
she,) what an exquisite and inimitable painter was Richardson! How overwhemled
with admiration, esteem and self-annihilation do I, always, feel myself, when I
read the description of his Harriet Byron. So much piety, yet so much
cheerfulness; such filial duty, tenderness, affection, so exquisite a
sensibility; so deep and glowing a passion, conducted with so much delicacy;
such beauty of person, lost in so much greater sweetness of temper, and such a
winning candor and openness of heart, complete my idea of every thing that is
noble and aimable in woman.

I never read this writer without weeping. He had an amazing talent for the
pathetic and descriptive. He opens all the sluices of tenderness, and tears
flow down our cheeks, like a river. And (what is most of all,) I never open his
book without feeling my sentiments elevated and sublimed, and my heart more
alive to all the suggestions of piety and virtue. If all novels had been
written on such a plan, they would, doubtless, have been very excellent
vehicles of wisdom and goodness.

The last time I broke in upon Louisa's retirement, she was surrounded with
authors. She seemed bent upon indulging her elegant taste, in all its
extravagance.

Addison's papers on the Pleasures of Imagination; several pieces of Miss
Seward: Mason's English Garden; Ariosto, with Hoole's Translation, and Webb's
Inquiry into the Beauties of Painting, together with a Collection of Poems,
lay, in promiscuous dignity, beside her. She has accustomed herself to enter
into a sort of commonplace book, passages, which she thinks particularly
striking. I am happy in being able to give you a little specimen of her choice,
for she indulged me with a sight of the valuable manuscript.

The first, poetical rose she had plucked, was from the Italian poet, Ariosto.
It was his beautiful picture of Alcina, the enchantress. I will transcribe a
few of the lines, and the translation, though a modest blush tinged her cheeks,
whilst I read the description.

Di persona era tanto ben formata,
Quanto me finger san pittori industri,
Con bionda chioma lunga ed anodata;
Oro non e, che piu risplenda e lustri.
Spargeasi per la guancia delicata
Misto color di rose, e di ligustri.
Her matchless person every charm combined,
Famed in the idea of a painter's mind.
Bound in a knot, behind her ringlets rolled
Down her fair neck, and shone like waving gold;
Her blooming cheeks the blended tints disclose
Of lillies, damask'd with the blushing rose, etc. etc
From Lord Lyttleton's monody on his lady, she
had copied the following pathetic verses. Whilst
I read them, she appeared amazingly affected.
O shades of Hagley, where is now your boast?
Your bright inhabitant is lost;
You she preferred to all the gay resorts,
Where female vanity might wish to shine,
The pomp of cities and the pride of courts:
Her modest beauties shunned the public eye:
To your sequestered dales,
And flow'r-embroider'd vales,
From an admiring world she chose to fly.
With nature there retired and nature's God,
The silent paths of wisdom trod,
And banished every passion from her breast,
But those, the gentlest and the best,
Whose holy flames, with energy divine,
The virtuous heart enliven and improve,
The conjugal and the maternal love.
Sweet babes, who, like the little, playful fawns,
Were wont to trip along those verdant lawns,
By your delighted mother's side,
Who now your infant steps shall guide?
Ah! where is now the hand, whose tender care
To every virtue would have formed your youth,
And strewn with flowers the thorny ways of truth,
O loss beyond repair!
O wretched father lest alone
To weep their dire misfortune and thy own!
How shall thy weakened mind, oppressed with woe,
And drooping over thy Lucy's Grave,
Perform the duties, that you doubly owe!
Now she, alas! is gone
From folly and from vice, their helpless age to save?
Mrs. Carter's celebrated Ode to Wisdom always makes one thrill with a
melancholy pleasure, and it had furnished Louisa with these beautiful stanzas:

Thy breath inspires the poet's song,
The patriot's free, unbiased tongue,
The hero's generous strife;
Thine are retirement's silent joys,
And all the sweet, endearing ties
Of still, domestic life.
No more to fabled names confined
To thee, supreme, all perfect mind,
My thoughts direct their flight:
Wisdom's thy gift, and all her force
From thee derived, unchanging source
Of intellectual light.
O send her sure, her steady ray
To regulate my doubtful way
Through life's perplexing road;
The mists of error to control,
And, through its gloom, direct my soul
To happiness and good.
Beneath her clear, discerning eye
The visionary shadows fly
Of folly's painted show;
She sees through every fair disguise,
That all, but virtue's solid joys
Is vanity and woe.
Miss Seward's poetical address to Mr. Wright, engaged in taking her father's
picture, had supplied her with these four most interesting and pathetic lines:
O when his Her father's.
urn shall drink my falling tears,
Thy Wright's.
faithful tints shall shed a soft relief,
Glow, with mild luster, over my darkened years,
And gild the gathering shades of filial grief.


The ever graceful and elegant Fontaine, so justly esteemed the Correggio of
poetry, had supplied her with the fables of Le Chene et le Roseau, La Fille;
and from the theater Sur l' Education of the Comtesse le Genlis, she had stolen
the fragrant rose of Salency.

From a judicious arrangement of these separate sweets, she had composed a very
elegant bouquet which casts a delicious fragrance on her character and virtues.

And now, tell me, what think you of Louisa? If she was married to the first
sovereign of Europe, would she not be the richest jewel in his crown?

LETTER XIV.
I WILL now give you another picture. It is that of a young lady, whom I have
lately had the honor of seeing, just arrived from a boarding school. It is
Lady Harriet --. But I will not undertake to say, that the features will please
you. They are certainly different from those of Louisa.

She was almost incessantly practicing little arts, and adjusting all her airs
and graces to engage admiration. When she spoke, she minced her syllables, and
when she looked, she threw an unnatural vivacity into her eyes. She is a fine,
blooming girl; and, if she had not taken such uncommon pains to please, must
necessarily have charmed every beholder.

How long will it be before people learn, that nothing engages so much, as the
ease of nature? An artless simplicity is the highest charm. Whatever sludies
admiration, raises disgust. System and constraint destroy ease. And ease is the
parent of all the graces.

It is the business of education to lop off some little, luxuriant boughs from
the tree of nature, but not to constrain it, that it cannot vegetate, or give
to every branch, an unnatural direction. I should prefer the plain, honest
awkwardness of a more country girl to over-acted refinement.

Though Lady Harriet -- is not yet fourteen years old, she has more than the
airs and forwardness of a woman. Who can have taught this girl, that roses are
expected to open all at once, and not by degrees?

Timidity and diffidence are the most attracting qualities of a girl; a
countenance always modest, and undesigning; a tongue, often silent, and ears,
always attentive.

Boarding schools, it should seem, may be compared to hot-beds. They bring
fruits and flowers quickly to their growth. But they have not their proper
essence, healthiness or flavor.

The girlish state is so pleasing, in itself, that we wish not to see it
exchanged, before its time, for the caution, the artifices, or the subtle
policy of age.

It is desirable, that a girl should retain, as long as possible, the innocent
dress, manners, habit and sentiments of childhood. She will never be more
captivating, when she is a woman. Natural, untortured ringlets, sashes, frocks,
etc. are superior to all the labored trappings of fashion. Nature has given to
every age, as well as to every season of the year, its appropriate charms. We
should be greatly disappointed, if the soft breezes and the pleasing, new born
scenery of the spring were impatient to dissolve into the sultry heats of
summer.

A forward girl always alarms me. Indelicacy, imprudence and improper
connections start up to my view. I tremble for her friends, and see her
history, gradually, unfolding into indiscretion.

Children are apt enough, of themselves, to aspire into womanhood. A governess
should check this spirit, and nip it in the bud. A long nonage, if I may so
call it, is savourable to your sex. During this period, a girl is acquiring
some solid improvement. When she fancies herself a woman, company, pleasures
and conversation with the other sex, unhinge her mind, and bid unquiet thoughts
take possession of her fancy.

I could discover from the conversation of Lady Harriet, that she was deeply
read in novels and romances. Her expressions were beyond nature, turgid and
overstrained, where she only wished to convey a common idea.

A volume would not be sufficient to expose the dangers of these books. They
lead young people into an enchanted country, and open to their view an
imaginable world, full of inviolable friendships, attachments, ecstacies,
accomplishments, prodigies, and such visionary joys, as never will be realized
in the coarseness of common life. The romantic turn, they create, indisposes
for every thing that is rational or substantial. They corrupt all principle.
Fortitude they unnerve, and substitute in its place; a sickly sensibility, that
cannot relish common blessings or common things; that is continually wounded
with its own fancies, and even "ready to expire of a rose, in aromatic pain."
Their sentiment is but a fine-spun word for indelicate emotions. Their sympathy
and friendship are often but a specious, flimsy covering for criminal
attachments. Such false, over-strained ideas have led many a poor girl to ruin.
Under the notion of superior refinement, similarity of souls, and involuntary
friendship, she has gradually been seduced from the paths of virtue, to the
commission of the gros^est crimes. A fine, splendid idea has been used to
palliate the dreadful action. Sentiment has triumphed over the vulgar shackles
of conscience, and of every social and moral obligation.

Plays, operas, masquerades, and all the other fashionable pleasures have not
half so much danger to young people, as the reading of these books. With them,
the most delicate girl can entertain herself, in private, without any censure;
and the poison operates, more forcibly, because unperceived. The most
profligate villain, that was bent on the infernal purpose of seducing a woman,
could not wish a symptom, more favorable to his purpose, than an imagination,
inflamed with the rhapsodies of novels.

Lady H -- betrayed great pride, in disavowing any acquaintance with some young
ladies, at the same school, because their parents were not equal to hers in
point of fortune. She had formed, poor girl wrong notions of importance; and
they had not, it should seem, been properly corrected.

Under the idea of teaching young people, what is due to their rank, boarding
schools encourage pride by a system. Whoever consults the happiness of a
daughter, should, as systematically, endeavor to propagate humility.

Alas! my dear girl, what have any of us to boast of? What dignity is there in
an heap of money, unless it be devoted to charitable actions? To be carried in
state, to eat deliciously, or to sleep on down, may have something in it, to
weak mortals, that elevates and charms; but to an inhabitant of heaven, or to
superior spirits, must be as frivolous, as the toils or little play things of
children appear to us.

What supreme importance does it give to a rational creature, that the silk
worm has spun for her a robe of elegance, or that the milliner has be spangled
her with ornaments? These ornaments alas! cover only a "poor worm," a sinner! a
creature, subject to innumerable infirmities and sorrows! and after all, the
peacock has more gaudy plumage, and flowers of the field are more beautifully
decked!

Where against the dignity of high birth, unless it leads to dignified conduct?
And what are all these distinctions to a creature, that, any instant, may be
stripped of every thing; that may die any hour; and must be called to a very
severe account, if they have not been religiously improved?

If you are ever disposed to be proud, look forward to the moment, which will
bury, along with you, in the dust, titles, honors, riches, beauty, friends,
connections -- to the moment, when the world will be shrivelled into atoms --
when you must stand, a naked and unprotected criminal, before the supreme
Majesty of heaven: and endeavor to acquire tha^ ^niversal love, which, for the
sake of doing a religious action, is content to "become the servant of all."
This love will be a sovereign balsam to the soul. It will heal a thousand
disorders, and prevent as many more.

The Author of all wisdom and greatness was "meek and lowly in heart." He, who
could have commanded kingdoms, inhabited a cottage. Humility is the
distinguishing badge of his religion. And, whenever you are his real disciple,
you will not exalt yourself above the meanest creature, but under an
accumulation of all worldly distinctions, will smite upon your breast with the
publican, and say, "God be merciful to me a sinner."

Happiness and pride are absolutely incompatible. Continual vexations, fanciful
slights and injuries and provocations wound the self-sufficient mind.

Pride is contrary to every thing, that pleases in a woman. It has no softness,
no benignity, no ease. The apostle has justly called "a meek and quiet spirit,
an ornament." It is the robe, in which a woman should always be dressed, who
wishes to secure a permanent esteem.

LETTER XV.
MY DEAR LUCY,
I GAVE you a description of the true delicacy of Louisa. I have lately seen it
over-acted by another person, in such a manner, as to disgust me beyond
expression. The virtues and graces have all their limits. If pushed further,
they degenerate into the very opposite defects. The lady, who hurt my feelings,
had not considered this maxim. Or she had not taste and sense enough to apply
it. Her delicacy was absolute prudery and affectation.

True delicacy is nothing more, than the refinement of modesty. It is the
sensitive plant of woman, which gives the quickest notice of approaching
danger, and trembles at the bare apprehension of any thing, which can injure
her honor, her safety, or repose. So amiable in itself, one cannot wonder,
that every female wishes to be thought in possession of it. But it is a shy and
timid plant, and least displays itself, where it is known to exist in the
highest cultivation.

Some women are so over-loaden with this virtue, as to be almost insufferable
in society; so outrageously virtuous, that they render all their purity and
principles suspected.

This tremblingly modest female, in a company, of which I had lately the honor
of making one, on hearing that a number of gentlemen were coming to drink tea,
seemed very much alarmed, and pretended to make an apology for retiring. Now
this was nothing less than downright hypocrisy. If it had been possible to look
into her heart, probably, at the very moment, it was thrilling with joy, for
the agreeable information.

Every woman in the world is fond of our society, unless she had formed some
particular attachment, and wishes to indulge the greater luxury of solitary
recollection. It is a natural and an innocent pl^asure, and it would be the
falsest delicacy to disown it. We always suspect these prudes. We fancy, that
their modesty diminishes in private in proportion, as it appears to dilate and
to magnify itself, before the public inspection.

Upon hearing, again, that a young lady had been smart and lively with a
gentleman of her acquaintance, she blessed her stars, and wondered, how such
forwardness escaped reprobation! Now this girl acted from nature. The gentleman
was agreeable. She felt the pleasure. She dared to express it. She wished to
entertain him, and she did right. The other blamed her from envy or from
affectation.

These over-nice and over-virtuous people would do well to consider, that an
odious restraint would banish all the sweets of an intercourse betwixt the
sexes, and fix a moping and a dismal gloom on the face of the creation. It is
no breach of true delicacy to comply with the innocent dictates of nature. A
woman may, very modestly, avow a virtuous attachment. She may express an
approbation of particular men, and do justice to their merit. She may show a
fondness for being in their company. She may chat, in a sociable and an easy
manner with them; nay she may think of being a wife or a mother, without
injuring the finest tints of this laudable quality. Providence intended her for
such circumstances and connections, and they need not a blush.

That piety is most solid, which affects no gloomy rigours, or singularities;
which makes no noise, and courts no observation. It is so with delicacy. That
is always the most exquisite, which is least ostentatious. An unstudied
openness and simplicity of manners are the strongest symptoms of a guiltless
heart, and a virtu^^^s intention. Those young people are, generally the most
amiable, that are most undisguised. Having nothing to conceal, they have
studied no art. They may, sometimes, give way to little sallies, which the
rigid would condemn; but they are sallies of good humor, and generosity
forgives them.

Another instance, in which this Lady offended me, and yet from an over desire
of pleasing, was by assuming a mistaken dignity. In fact, true dignity, in any
person, consists in the virtues; humility, condescension, candor; and is only
supported by great qualities, or by a train of amiable actions. But in a
woman's manner, if she considered only what is graceful, there should always be
more of the lovely, than the great; of the engaging, than the magnificent or
sublime. Her authority should be lost in sweetness; the dazzling, in the mild.

Women were not formed to awe us by their majesty, but to sooth us by their
graces. We may be struck with a Cleopatra, but we love an Antiope. A Catharine
may astonish us, but we are charmed with a -- C -- e.

LETTER XVI.
THE tour of affectation is unbounded. I have just returned from a circle of
ladies, who have been entertaining me with a very long harangue, on (what they
choose to call,) fine feelings. This is quite a fashionable subject. The truth
is, sensibility is considered, as a matter of refinement, and a proof of being
raised above the vulgar; and many young people, I do believe, would be more
hurt by any reflection on their sensibility, than if you suspected their piety
and virtue.

This rage for the compliment of fine feelings seems to have originated in the
writings of Stern. His very eccentric talents were always contriving some
fictitious tale of woe, and bidding the tear to drop; the general circulation
of his works, and the novels which have, since, sprung up in the hot-bed of
France, and of our own imaginations, have led young people to fancy every grace
and almost every virtue, comprised under this specious and comprehensive name.

Nothing certainly can be more nauseous and disgusting, than an affected
sensibility, as nothing is more charming, than the pure and genuine. But, with
all this noise about it, I am far from knowing whether there is much of the
real in the world. They, who would be thought to have it in perfection, are
only in possession of the artificial. For is it sensibility to prefer the
turbid pleasures of midnight to opening buds and blossoms; to the lessons,
which the Creator gives in every vegetable and every insect; to undisturbed
contemplation; to the raptures of devotion, or all the fair and enchanting
landscapes of creation; to the sentiment the taste and knowledge, that are
displayed in the works of the most learned and ingenious men, or the
entertainment and delight and profit, we might receive from the volume of
revelation? Is it sensibility to form a sacred connection with one person, and
encourage a criminal attachment to another? Is it sensibility to leave the
charms, the cries, the wants and tender pleadings of an infant offspring, for
the vain and perishable splendor of a ball, a birth-night, or a levee?

Every thinking person must be disgusted with such a kind of sensibility. Rigid
criticism would call it by a very harsh name, and society has reason to
reprobate its tendency. Yet Sterne's sensibility led to many of these evils;
and who knows not, that a thousand ladies, who vaunt fine feelings, are dupes
to this ridiculous illusion?

True feeling is of a very different complexion. Like genius, it must come from
heaven; indeed it is a part of genius; and, like that, is very rare. It
depends, considerably on temperament and organization; is much heightened by
particular advantages of education, society, friends, reading. observation and
reflection; and will generally be quickest in the most elevated minds. But,
even when it is most gennine and poignant, it will never be a guide, safely to
be trusted, till it is governed by reason, checked by discretion, and molded
by that religion, which requires us to devote every instinct we have, to the
glory of God, and to the happiness of all our fellow creatures, and of
ourselves.

Thus consecrated, it is a source of the purest and the richest blessings. It
is the parent of an earnest devotion to him, who gave it, and of a thousand
blessings to mankind. It appropriates all the sorrows of its brethren; it feels
in every woe, rejoices with them, that do rejoice, and weeps with them that
weep; and doubly alive to all the exercises, of piety, in blossoms, in flowers,
in minerals, in vegetables, in stars, in planets, in the azure vault of heaven,
in thunders, in storms, in earthquakes, in volcanos, in the revolutions of
empire, and destruction of cities, feels more exqui^sitely, adores and loves
and venerates the wisdom, the power, the goodness and wonders of an
all-present, and all disposing God.

It is with this, as with every other grace and virtue. There is a false and a
true. The false is loud and noisy, much addicted to egotism, and obtrudes
itself on public observation in order to gratify its own conceit and vanity;
the other, modest, timid, retired shrinks into itself; feels, but says nothing
of its feelings; suffers, but conceals its sufferings; rejoices, but does not
vaunt its joy, and is too delicate in its nature, and too much interested to
solicit pity, or to court approbation. The one is an humble fire work, which
cracks an sparkles; the other is that lightning, which, in an instant,
electrifies and shocks; this is the offspring of heaven; that, the artificial
creature of the world.

I will conclude this letter with a contrast taken from life. Flavia lies in
bed till noon; as soon as she rises, she opens a novel, or a play-book; weeps
profusely at imaginary distress, sips strong tea, till she is almost in
hysterics; concludes, that sensibility is all her own, and is perpetually
complaining how her feelings are shocked with such a room, or such a prospect,
the coarseness of this character, and of that conversation, and how the sight
of a poor beggar gives her the vapors.

Emily never says a word about her feelings, rises with the dawn, endeavors to
fortify her body with air and exercise, and her mind with devotion; is oftener
seen with her bible, than any other book; seems pleased with every person and
every object about her, and puts on a cheerful smile, when her bosom is really
throbbing with pain, for the distresses of her fellow creatures.

I was lately in her company, when a case of very singular distress happened to
be related, of a lady reduced, from the height of affluen^^* to a poverty,
which she attempted to conceal. She uttered not a syllable, but, in a little
while, quitted the room, and returned, after a considerable interval, with
eyes, that she had vainly bidden not to betray her emotions. The next
circumstance I heard, was, that she had sent a L50 bank note without any
signature, to the relief of the fair sufferer. The secret (...) discovered,
contrary to the strictest injunction (...) the imprudence of the bearer. She
has, since, adopted one of the daughters to be educated for her own.

Tell me now, my Lucy, which of these is the true and the productive
sensibility.

LETTER XVII.
I WILL give you heartily, at your request, my opinion of some celebrated
writers. If you differ from me on reading them, it may produce a collision of
sentiments, which will be favorable to our mutual improvement. At any rate, it
will serve to exercise your own judgment and discrimination.

Voltaire is a graceful, but a superficial writer. He had more taste than
genius, and more liveliness than authenticity. Volatile in his researches,
impatient of investigation and hasty in his decisions, you can scarcely rely on
the truth or authority of any facts, he relates.

If I must recommend any of his works, it should be his Henriade. But I do not
wish you to cultivate any close acquaintance with so erroneous, and seductive
an author.

Rousseau is very fanciful, but very engaging. His whims are all the
ebullitions of genius; and, as such, they please. Nothing was ever so strangely
romantic, as his Emilius, or system of Education; a mere, paper edifice of
children, which the first and gentlest touch of experience totally destroys.
You may read it to be amused, not to be instructed.

Why, you will naturally ask, were these distinguished men enemies to
revelation? The truth is, genius disdains to move in shackles, or to tread
beaten paths. Originality is its constant aim. It must heartily, be owned, that
revelation has some doctrines, superior to our reason. Otherwise, we should
have no exercise for our faith; and our organs of perception would be too
subtle and too refined for a mortal state. And these very enlightened men
choose not to stop at mysteries, but, in the pride of understanding, arrogantly
disbelieve what they cannot comprehend.

Happy the humble christian, who submits and adores! who considers reason but
as an imperfect guide, and patiently waits the moment, when the splendours of
full discovery shall shine around him!

LETTER XVIII.
MY DEAR LUCY,
AFTER all the noise, that has been made about him, what has this great Lord
Chesterfield written? What new ideas has he communicated to the world?

He has given us a few sketches of heathen mythology, of the Grecian, Roman and
English, histories, written in a pleasing style; and he has inculcated upon
youth, that excellent maxim, of not loosing a single moment from improvement. A
man of very moderate talents might have done likewise. He had doubtless, some
claim to taste; but very little strength or originality of genius appears
through his writing, but he was a nobleman, who had been conspicuous for his
station, and his coronet had reflected a luster on his page.

What real critic must not smile at his decision, when he boldly pronounces the
Henriade of Voltaire, superior to the Iliad, the Aeneid, and to Paradise Lost?
Perhaps, this poem may be free from some, little spots of the others; but then
it is not a sun, whose fire consumes every slighter blemish, and leaves the
reader wrapped in a profound enthusiasm and amazement.

If it surpasses them in a cold correctness, has it their sublimity, their
energy and fire? If it has not their excrescences, has it their impassioned
beauties? Compared with the Iliad, or with the work of Milton, it is a neat
spruce sir, placed near a spreading and majestic oak. It is a gentle rivulet
let by the side of a foaming torrent, or a magnificent ocean. It is a pretty
artificial fire-work, playing in the neighborhood of a tremendous Aetna.

But Voltaire was a congenial writer, and a congenial soul. In praising his
superficial talents, Chesterfield did an honor to his own.

If this writer had not been a peer, who would have read his letters with so
much avidity? All he has produced, would, immediately have perished with the
other frothy bubbles of the day. His eternal repetition of "graces, graces,"
makes one absolutely sick; and the regimen he prescribes for the attainment of
them, creates him an enemy, in every friend of religion and of virtue.

Society should burn his books. All the women, in the world, should form an
unanimous confederacy against him. He has done every thing in his power to
render them detestable; they should do every thing in theirs, to make the
infamy of his character, immortal.

Read him, to despise his opinions and maxims. Read him that you may rescue the
honors of your sex, and give the lie, in your own example, to every libel he
has uttered, and every scandal he has endeavored to propagate through the
world.

LETTER XIX.
GIBBON is splendid, elaborate, elegant. To me, however, he is not, always,
perspicuous. I am sometimes, obliged to p^^se to discover his meaning. This
arises from his having studied an uniform, condensed harmony of period, or
attempting to graft the peculiarities of Tacitus, on the English idiom. He is,
however, on the whole, a captivating writer; and I would not forbid you the
pleasure of perusing his interesting work. You may admire his language, without
imbibing his infidelity. It is, indeed, so artfully concealed under beds of
roses, that, if you had not heard so much about it, you would not easily have
discovered the venom of his pen.

What could induce this splendid historian so insidiously to attempt the
undermining of christianity, which is the greatest balm and sweetner of life?
What are his rounded periods, if they have a tendency to rob the world of its
sublimest prospects, and of all its supporting hopes? What will the fame of
talents avail him, if he has done his utmost to circulate infidelity, as widely
as his writings, and strew his paths, in every place, through which he has
passed, with heaps of the murdered.

It is amazing that authors do not, more frequently, look forward to the
moment, when^ to have made a noise in the world, by singular opinions, will
convey no joy or comfort to the heart; and when the only consolation must be,
that they have labored to promote the glory of God, and the benefit of man.

I would not, for the richest mitre in the kingdom, be a Gibbon, in my latest
moments. In health and prosperity, we may be dazzled with tinsel. But when we
come to die, every thing will vanish, but piety and truth.

Immoral writers may do the greatest mischief to society, of any other
characters whatever. They may corrupt and taint the morals of the most distant
posterity. In this sense, they may, for a long time, continue to be sinning,
when their bodies are ent^^^bed. Their sentiments may convey a deadly poison,
to operate on many generations yet unborn. And what reparation or atonement can
they make for unhinged principle, for violated integrity, and undermined hope.
The Romish Church has a very striking doctrine, that such people continue in
purgatory, the longest of all others.

I bless God, that I never wrote a line, however fee^^e, but with a good
intention. And may this p^^ drop from my hands, before it ever leads me ^o
finish a period, that shall give me one uncomfortables thought, or one feeling
of remorse, in my e^pir^^g moments.

LETTER XX.
MY DEAR LUCY,
THOUGH, from principle, a declaimer against novels, yet of one writer, who
goes under this name, I profess myself a passionate admirer. I mean Richardson.
His works, indeed, are not to be examined by the strict laws of a fasti^^ous
criticism. They have many luxuriancies, and too much prolixity. The language is
natural and easy, but it is not condensed into the elegant conciseness and
energy of the ancients. Richardson was a stranger to the inimitable models of
Greece and Rome. He was not a classic; but he possessed a most extensive
knowledge of human life and manners; his judgment was strong and penetrating;
his taste, accurate; his sensibility, exquisite; his imagination, wonderful;
and his heart, impassioned. Master of the human character, he knew all its
meandrings. Master of the human soul, he penetrated into all its foldings and
recesses.

With the same breath, and in the same moment, he melts, he transports, he
elevates, he dignifies, he convinces, and instructs. Pathos is all his own. He
opens the hardest rocks by the mere force of his narrative, and the waters flow.

Richardson was, indeed, a writer of no trifling magnitude. He was a genius of
no ordinary kind. Degrade this ethereal spirit, as you will, it will mount up
to its kindred skies. Call him a novelist, his merit rises above names and
forms. These cannot debase his talents. Handle this substance, as roughly as
you please, it returns, with an elastic vigor, to its usual shape, and defies
opposition.

But the excellency of his intention is above all praise. The interests of
virtue and religion were near his heart; and he chose the epistolatory plan
merely to engage the attention of his readers, and that imagination might lend
its liveliest charms to animate his precepts.

What a pattern of all virtues and graces is his Grandison! What a lovely and
finished girl, is his Harriet Byron! What an unruffled piety! What a melting
affection! What filial duty to her aged grandmother? What a kind sympathy with
all her friends! What sensibility, yet what prudence! What tenderness, yet what
discretion appear in her character! How nicely is her seriousness mixed with
vivavity, her fine sense with modesty, and her frankness, with decorum! How
fondly does she love, yet how delicately does she manage and regulate the flame!

When she pined, in secret, with an unconquerable attachment, what cheerfulness
to all her friends burst through the heavy gloom, that lowered on her mind!
What fear of giving any pain to others, though comfortless herself! What
veneration did she express for the unhappy Clementina! What a generous concern
for the innocent, girlish emotions of Emily! What an unaffected friendship for
the lively Lady G --, and when she was really addressed by her Grandison, with
what an open frankness, yet what a guarded delicacy and involuntary confusion,
did she tell him that he had the full possession of her soul!

How venerable and engaging has this writer made the character of a clergyman,
in the case of Dr. Bartlett! How judiciously has he mixed the pastor, with the
friend, and combined the most rigid principles, with the softest and most
attractive graces. What innocence, integrity, and what prudence and caution
about interfering in family concerns, has he given, in another work, to Dr.
Lewen! What an independent spiit, likewise; what a leaning to the side of the
unfortunate Clarissa, in opposition to all the greatest of her friends; what a
glowing, universal benevolence; what a serene, and undissembled piety! And how
strikingly has he contrasted both with the cunning hypocrisy and pedantic
affectation of another person, who, likewise, wore, without really deserving,
so sacred a ga^^!

In opposition to modern customs, which, under a false idea of greatness, would
trample on sacred ceremonies, and bring the holy ordinances of religion, to
their own fire-sides, in a manner, which divests them of all solemnity and
decorum, what an invincible attachment does his Grandison display to all the
decencies and duties of the church! What a reluctance does he express against
having his marriage desecrated by a private celebration; and how does he oblige
his timid and his blushing Harriet to vow at the altar, in the presence of God,
and in the face of day, her obedience, and her affection! In fact these outward
decencies are the very fences of piety. Break them down, and the sacred
enclosure will soon become common and unclean.

If, in short, I wished a girl to be every thing, that was great, I would have
her continually study his Clarissa. If I was ambitious to make her every thing,
that was lovely, she should spend her days and nights, in contemplating his
Byron.

I must, however, confess a strong preference for the work of Sir Charles
Grandison. The reading of Clarissa leaves, upon the mind, too melancholy
impressions. Her distresses are too deep and too unvaried for sensibility to
bear. She was every thing, that was virtuous, and we look up with admiration.
She was every thing, that was miserable, and we look down with despair. We are
tempted to fancy, that there is no reward for the righteous, nor any God that
judges the earth.

There is a certain point, beyond which our passions will not bear to be
racked. Beyond it even sympathy, the loveliest of them all, turns into the
wildness of despair. Virtue may have its sorrows and its trials; but they
should not be perpetual. Hope would cease to bloom, and the year become
intolerable, if it was wholly composed of a dull and dreary winter, without a
spring. If Providence did not, generally, interfere in favor of its saints,
religion, I should suspect, would soon lose one of its strongest
encouragements, and most sovereign supports.

Miss Byron is always lovely, and always enchanting. Her virtues are more
within the reach of mortality. Her afflictions are less poignant; and when her
long attachment is crowned with success, every good mind feels a pleasure, too
big for expression. We are happy for Clarissa, only when she is dead. We are
very agreeably interested for Miss Byron, through every period of her life, and
Lady Grandison charms us into congratulating triumph.

LETTER XXI.
YOU say very truly, that the pictures of Richardson are drawn above life; that
Sir Charles Grandison never existed, except in idea, nor so accomplished a
woman, as Harriet Byron.

All this is granted. Mortality does not admit of perfection. Light and shade
go together. Foibles and perfections are an inseparable mixture. The rich soil,
which produces great ^^^ents, by the same prolific energy, nurses the rankest
weeds.

But what is all this against his writings? Why people, you say, are deterred
from attempting to imitate so exalted a pattern. But that would be a mark of an
ignoble soul, and of a luke warmness in the cause of religion and virtue. If we
despair of attaining to all their perfections, is it nothing to approximate, as
nearly as we can? Is it not a noble and a glorious emulation, at least, to
exert our utmost strength, when we are running the race of immortality?

The founder of our holy religion is much more highly raised above our
imitation, and yet do not the scriptures press us to make the necessary
attempt? Who ever thought this pattern blameable, because so exalted? Or
whoever dreamed of remitting his endeavors, because he could not reach the
sublimity of its virtues?

The one, you will say, was real; the other is fictitious; this is human; that
was divine.

True; but are we not to copy this divinity, in our degree? And who can blame
fancy for presenting us with a perfect mirror of goodness? If imagination can
be used to an important purpose, this, I think, is the plan; if it can be
sanctified to aid the interests of piety, this appears the mode of
sanctification. It is only to be blamed, and it then becomes, in all these
books, a most dangerous and unholy principle, when it exhibits scenes and
images to inflame those passions, which should always be, religiously,
suppressed.

Nor do I blush, on the whole, cautious as I should be, to have borne this
humble testimony to the merit of the author of Sir Charles Grandison, to have
offered my unavailing incense, at his shrine. If I durst preach in some such
manner, I could make more converts. The pulpit will never have its full
influence and effect, till argument is mixed with strong appeals to the heart;
and till, whilst the judgment is convinced, the imagination is permitted by
lively, descriptive and energetic sallies, to captivate the soul.

LETTER XXII.
MY DEAR LUCY,
I REJOICE to find you disgusted with Tristram Shandy. I never thought these
writings fit for a lady.

Let me heartily ask our modern fair ones? could they bear to hear such
conversations, without blushing, or expressing their contempt? And should not
then the eye be as chaste, as the ear? The first, indeed, can be gratified in
private. But can that delicacy be very exquisite, which can regale, when alone,
on sentiments and descriptions, from which, in public, it affects to turn away
with indignation and abhorrence?

I have always, in private lamented, that Stern was a clergyman. He might be a
lively, humorous companion, but he had too much levity for this profession. It
is true, he had talents, but what is ungoverned genius, but a violent flame,
which burns, instead of warming, and dazzles, where it should enlighten and
direct?

This writer has done inexpressible mischief. He has opened wide the
floodgates of indecency, and an overwhelming torrent has poured on the land.
He has conveyed indelicate ideas into the minds of young people, under the
specious vehicle of sentiment, and he has dignified eventual criminality with
the false, insidious title of involuntary attachment. The corrupted and
unblushing fair has gloried in her shame. She has appealed for her
justification, from the grossness of passion, to secret and irresistible
feelings of the heart.

It is a just compliment to the present age, that the best writers preserve
more decorum. An indelicate allusion would, now, be esteemed an unpardonable
offense against the public taste. Even the stage is considerably reformed. It
was far otherwise in (what was called) our Augustan age. Almost every author of
that period (Addison excepted,) breathes something of indelicacy. In many
passages, Swift is intolerable; Pope indecent; and even Bolingbroke, with all
his claims to birth, as well as eloquence, is not without some gross ideas, and
some vulgar expressions.

But the great corrupter of them all was Swift. The reservoir of filthiness;
all the separate streams might claim him for their parent source. I have
already given my sentiments of this author. It is not necessary to swell the
invective, or add any thing to the charges, adduced against him. His abilities
I never suspected; but I always called in question his temper and his heart.

Panegyrists, however, have enumerated his many virtues. To Ireland, they say,
he was a skilful patriot; to the church, a defender, and to the poor, a friend.

For the honor of human nature, I will not endeavor to put a negative on
these virtues. Let them all be taken into the general account. The balance will
not still be heavy in his favor.

LETTER XXIII.
WHATEVER devotional writers increase your piety, by all means use them. I did
not mention in my catalogue, Mrs. Rowe's Devout Exercises of the Heart, with
which you are so much pleased, because to me they appeared, overstrained, and
rather rhapsodies of a fervid imagination, than the dictates of a cool and a
dispassionate judgment. But if they really warm and edify, that is the great
and ultimate end of all religious writings; and no one can pretend, in this
respect, to prescribe to the conscience or the feelings of others.

From my observations, however, upon life and manners, that piety has always
appeared the most durable, which is most founded on reason and conviction; and,
though I abhor the cold rock of skepticism, yet there is, likewise, some
danger, that a well disposed woman, whose sensibility is, as yet stronger than
her judgment, may founder on the opposite quicksands of enthusiasm, or of
superstition.

Still I would rather see a small mixture of credulity, than unbelief; but
there is an happy medium betwixt the extremes; and it is very observable, that
those people, who, in some peculiar period of their lives, or under some
distressing circumstances, have seemed to soar upon the wings of pious zeal,
into the highest regions, have, afterward, sunk below the common level, into a
strange degree of carelessness and inatte^^^on.

There are moments in the moral life, when fancy plucks the reins out of the
hands of reason; and though she drives at intervals with a furious rapidity,
yet nature soon becomes exhausted with the violence, and cannot mount some
intervening hills without stopping for refreshment. Sometimes she has been
known to sit down in a listless languor, and wholly to abandon the journey in
despair.

We are not, in this state, formed for extremes. Any of the passions, too
violently exercised, would wear out an imperfect frame. True piety is not the
blazing meteor of an hour, fiery in its aspect, and engaging the astonishment
of a gazing multitude, but that softer and settled light of the firmament,
which shines more and more, unto the perfect day.

LETTER XXIV.
I AM sorry to say, that you display a false taste in admiring Kilkhampton
Abbey. I am now speaking of its merits, merely as a composition. It is not
executed with the skill of a master. The same uniform turn of period and of
sentiment, and the same labored pomp of words, is visible through all the
different inscriptions. Surely the epitaphs on so many characters, all written
as might be supposed, by different hands, should be various and multiform.

I never thought epitaph an easy species of writing. It requires such a nice
discrimination of character, such a force of pathos, and so concise an
elegance, as fall not to the lot of one man, in a thousand. Many have attempted
this style of composition; but, in my opinion, few have succeeded.

I do, indeed, most cordially detest this anonymous abuse. It is contrary to
all my ideas of civilization, politeness, fortitude, and even common
generosity, and militates against every thing, that should constitute the real
character of a gentleman, or a christian.

No man lives, without foibles or particularities; and, if instead of making
allowance for those of others, in order to receive an indulgence for our own,
we ungenerously expose them to ridicule or contempt, the consequence, in
society, must be a general coldness, disgust, rancour, hostility, and unceasing
persecution.

No person can be so circumspect, particularly, in a public character, as to
avoid creating, though without intending it, a number of little piques and
enemies against himself; sometimes even by an inflexible discharge of necessary
duties; and if his character must be taken from the colorings of those, whom
he has thus innocently, perhaps laudably, offended, all his virtues will be
thrown into the back ground, and his foibles aggravated with the utmost
virulence of malice and resentment. Prejudice against, may render the most
amiable person ridiculous, by concealing the great, and bringing forward the
little; and prejudice for, may give some sort of merit to the most despicable
and abandoned. Such a liberty of the press is downright licentiousness; and
every friend to order and virtue, if he will consult his own feelings, will not
hesitate to pronounce, that, of all sacred things, character is most so.

If a person, however great, had used me ungenerously, I would certainly expose
him to public censure, and drag him before the formidable tribunal of my
country. I would appeal from the oppression of any individual, to the general
equity and candor of mankind. This, I should conceive, not merely an act of
justice to myself, but likewise to the world. It is a common interest, that
tyrants, however high in rank, or in self-estimation, should meet with their
deserved infamy and contempt. -- Such a display of true spirit wonderfully
stops the progress of despotism, and teaches insolence the hard lesson of
moderation. But, then, it should be done in the most open manner. I would
heartily subscribe my name to the charges, I adduoed; and, whilst I showed the
world that I feared not the person of man, I would convince mine adversary,
that I was far above the meanness of taking an unmanly or ungenerous revenge.

This honest courage was possessed, in an eminent degree, by the late Dr.
Johnson. Nothing has pleased me more in the history of his life, than his troly
magnanimous conduct to the late earl of Chesterfield. When he undertook to
compose his elaborate dictionary, he solicited the favor of inscribing it to
his Lordship, who was then if I mistake not Secretary of State. Flattered with
appearing the patron of literature, Chesterfield accepted the honor of the
dedication, and an honor it would have been to any nobleman in the world. --
In the progress of this long and tedious work, he received no very solid marks
of encouragement from his patron, and suspected on the whole, that the courtly
peer meant only to amuse him.

Johnson had too much spirit either to brook the idea of neglect, the chicanery
of a minister, the violation of a promise, or the servility of an abject
dependence. He was not likely to be dazzled with the glitter of a coronet, or
intimidated with the ceremonious pageantry of office. He, therefore, wrote a
formal letter to the nobleman, upbraiding him with insincerity, disclaiming his
protection, and assuring him, that he did not want, and never would receive,
any of his favors. -- The consequence of this fracas was, that he afterward
stung Chesterfield with such bitter invectives, and so many pointed strokes of
raillery and satire, as made him heartily repent of having roused his
resentment, and desirous, at any rate, of a reconciliation. Johnson, however,
persisted in his antipathy, and never afterward, I believe wrote a dedication.

If Chesterfield intended only to dally with the author of this dictionary, he
should certainly have considered, that men of great abilities have too much
penetration not to see through any flimsy disguises of a minister; too much
irritability not to be exasperated with hypocrisy or artifice, and too lofty a
reliance on their own native powers to be afraid of any peer or monarch in the
world.

Johnson, it is true, had not then attained all his eminence and distinction.
He was comparatively, but rising into notice. The day that should announce him
the hero of literature, was only in its dawn. But contrasted with his solid
merit, what is the paltry tinsel of station, from which some people immediately
become so supercilious and forbidding?

If Chesterfield did not think the author of the Rambler, greater than himself;
if from the foot alone, he could not prognosticate the future strength and
immense proportions of this literary Hercules, he had not a single grain of
that shrewdness or discernment for which he has been so much complimented by
the world.

Such is my idea of the true and genuine spirit, which should characterize a
scholar and a gentleman. It is not a stiletto, stabbing in the dark, but a
challenge to a fair and generous onset, in which your antagonist has the
opportunity of self-defence, and of managing all his weapons to advantage.

LETTER XXV.
THE beauty of the lady you allude to, was her misfortune. It inspired her with
an immoderate vanity, and that vanity paved the way to her ruin. It dug the
grave, in which her peace and character are now intombed.

And after all, my dear girl, what is this beauty? It is a little clay, cast in
an elegant mould, and by the hand of an exquisite artist, fashioned into
something of symmetry and order. It is a small mixture, in the cheek of roses
and carnations.

But who needs to be informed that clay is very perishable, that roses and
carnations are but for summer moments, and that afterward there comes a long
autumn of sickness, or a still more dreaty winter of infirmity and old age.

How transient are the power and duration of beauty! How very slight an
accident or disease blasts it for ever! How fatal is a fever, the small pox, or
a little corroding grief to all its allurements! and if they do not perish
sooner, how dreadfully are they ravaged by the hand of time!

Whilst summer lasts, a few, fluttering insects light upon its lips, to sip the
sweets. Some straggling birds of passage chirp upon the neighboring spray,
delighted with a view of the amiable object. The notice is enchanting, and
imagination promises that it shall be ternal. But the first storm, that comes,
alas! these feathered songsters migrate to warmer climates, and a serener sky,
leaving all its withered charms to perish in neglect!

How ridiculous is the girl, who wilfully swallows the poison of flattery for
any personal charms, and, in the height of her intoxication, can be insolent or
conceited! What woman of spirit should not aspire to qualities, that are less
accidental and less subject to change! What woman of reflection should not
resolve to adorn and cultivate a mind, whose treasures may be inexhaustible,
and whose attractions never die?

I pity every girl, whom nature has gifted with a very pretty face. She seems,
by the very act, to have marked her out for trials and temptations, and our
strength is not always in proportion to our conflicts.

Most of the unfortunate ladies, I have known, have been celebrated for their
beauty. This has gathered all the worthless of our sex about them; and called
them into battle, where, if they have not fallen, they have generally received
considerable scars.

Beautiful women, flushed with conquest, often neglect the necessary
cultivation of their heart and understanding: and, if every man would examine
himself seriously, and was required to give in a list of the females he most
respects, the prettiest, I believe, would not generally, be in the number.

LETTER XXVI.
DO you ask for patterns of conduct after what I have said of Louisa? I do not
think you want any; but I will mention a few, which just occur, and endeavor
to appreciate their merits or defects.

Addison has several in his spectators, which are wrought up with inimitable
beauty.

The Antiope of Cambray, is a charming picture, but it betrays the touches of a
popish ecclesiastic.

Law's Miranda is an heroine of virtue, but she breathes too much the austerity
and the abstraction of that very animated, but peculiar writer. Her piety is
too monastic. It wants grace, cheerfulness and ease.

Richardson's Clarissa has qualities above woman, and her sorrows plunge the
reader into despair.

Miss Byron is every thing, that is finished in a female. We admire her
greatly, but we love her more. The sweetness of the character swallows up its
dignity; in the amiable, we forget the great. She is precisely what every man
of principle and taste would have a woman to be, when he wishes to be married,
and wishes to be happy.

With some persons, his Clementina may have her superior excellencies. A
passion, all sentiment, and all directed to the mind, and a superstitious
religion, in a particular country, wholly vanquishing that passion, may be a
fine-span, amusing speculation. But to me it appears visionary and romantic;
and the admirers of this story will generally, I conceive, be found amongst
those ladies who would gladly persuade us, that by a rant of goodness, they can
rise above the innocent passions of mortality, and all the natural weaknesses
of their sex.

When I wish to be delighted and charmed w^^h woman, I would always place
before me the full-length piece of Harriet Byron. She has sentiment, but she
has frailty; she has spirit, but she confesses herself to have, likewise,
matter in her composition.

LETTER XXVII.
POOR Louisa, notwithstanding all her goodness, is, at present, in the greatest
affliction, and for a reason, which reflects no little honor on her
sensibility and virtue.

I have just received a letter from her father, informing me, that Dr. --,
Rector of B --, and the confidential friend and intimate of their family, is
very probable on his death bed. He was lately called upon, it seems, to visit
one of his hearers, who was sick with a putrid, sore throat, and fever, and has
taken the infection. The physicians entertain but slender hopes of his
recovery, and Philander The father of Louisa.
has been administering to him that holy sacrament, which with prayers and
blessings, he has himself so often, administered to others. -- The whole
village is in mourning. All the peasants, I am told, appear as sheep without a
shepherd.

This good man was well acquainted with every person in his parish. He thought
it his duty, to visit all his hearers, to investigate their spiritual, as well
as temporal wants, and to remove the former whilst he extended a liberal supply
to the latter.

The death of such a person is more than the loss of the nearest relatives. A
good clergyman, in the country, unites, in his own person, all the tender
connections. He is father, brother, guardian, all in one. Dr. -- was not only
revered as a minister, but in every family welcomed as a bosom friend.

A religious pastor, indeed, never fully knows the comforts of his office, till
he is thus united to his people, till he knows his sheep and they follow him.
In such an intimacy, hearts expand; many excellent and seasonable advices may
be given which the solemnity of the pulpit would not admit; little griefs are
unbosomed; little perplexities are removed, and affection springs up by the
side of duty.

I am going to make a visit to this worthy clergyman, and will give you the
earliest intelligence of the state in which find him.

LETTER XXVIII.
THE apprehensions concerning Dr -- were but too well founded. He is, I do
believe, in the last stages of his life. Death is on the point of elosing his
eyes, and opening for him the just reward of all his labors and his zeal.

I have been with him almost night and day, ever since I had the pleasure of
writing to you, and have received a stronger lesson, than ever, of the vanity
of all earthly things, and the supreme dignity of virtue.

These solemn scenes wonderfully improve the heart. They strip ambition of its
plumage. The world appears a phantom! honors and promotions all a dream!

Though I have been much affected, yet I have been comforted in an equal
degree, by his cheerful piety, and edifying conversation. His faith and
resignation rise superior to his pains. They are literally big with
immortality; and he longs to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

Unwearied and exemplary as he has always been in the discharge of his pastoral
duties he is continually lamenting his want of zeal, vigilance and exertion.
The duties of the ministry are, I do believe, beyond human ability: who, said
St. Paul, is sufficient for these things? But when I hear the declarations of
this excellent man, and compare, as it is natural, his example with my own, I
cannot but be seriously alarmed, and sketch out nothing for my own last
moments, but remorse and fears.

My good friend and his lady have taken their last leave. It would have touched
any heart to have seen this interview. I cannot do it justice by words. The
pencil of a Raphael could not fully represent it. It was all heart and soul.
Silent looks and manner were the principal language, and they spoke indeed!
Such a woman's breast panting with grief, upon such an occasion, rises above
the powers of description.

"O (says the expiring christian, raising his languid eyes and endeavoring to
use a tongue, which death had almost palsied,) be as you have been, the
comforters of my people (for they alas! will feel a transient void,) and our
friendship, I doubt not, will shortly be renewed in another life. Death can
only, for a little time, separate these bodies: our real interests. our souls
and happiness must ever be united.

Louisa is inconsolable. "Tears have been her meat day and night;" and her
grief is the heavier, as she is not permitted, from motives of prudence, to see
the last struggles of this excellent man, or receive his blessing.

Providence, (says the accomplished girl,) has now, but, one heavier stroke to
inflict, and that is the death of my father, or my mother. Indeed a second
father he has always been to me, in the fullest sense of the word. What has not
this good man done, what has he not ever said to train my youthful sentiments
to virtue, and direct my steps into the way of peace? To him I could disclose
every rising fear. To him I could unbosom the anxious sorrow, that would have
lurked at my heart. But why should I complain? Have I not still a thousand
comforts, spread round my retirement? Have I not yet two parents left,
accomplished, as they are tender, and watchful, as they are good? It is
improper to grieve. I will dry these tears. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good. The good Abraham was required to sacrifice on the altar, with
his own hands, an only son. And I should surely learn to resign without
murmuring, whenever it shall seem meet to his wisdom and goodness, the nearest
friend.

LETTER XXIX.
THE conflict is finished. The pangs are over. Dr. -- is no more. He is now, I
trust, a blessed spirit, and knows no longer pain, or sorrow or apprehension.

From the natural tenderness and sensibility of his temper you may wonder that
he lived and died unmarried. But it is a secret known only to his intimate
friends that he had formed an attachment, in his early years, which being
disappointed by the death of the lady, the delicacy of his mind never
afterward admitted of another. His partiality was not of the common fugitive
kind. It was a deep and permanent impression. Having once fondly loved, he
attempted to love no more.

As his private fortune was comfortable, and his preferment, good, you will
conclude, perhaps, that he died very rich. But this is not the case. The poor
were constantly fed from his table, as well as edified by his counsels. He was
a living example of the charity he recommended, and a witness of the truth,
"that it is more blessed to give than to receive."

Though remarkable for his prudence, as well as pastoral zeal, yet having but a
few, distant relatives, who were all in very easy circumstances, he has only
left to each, an equal legacy of L100 and the remainder of the L5000, he
possessed, is entirely devoted to charitable uses.

To each of his three servants, he has bequeathed an annual stipend of L20, on
this easy condition, however, that they be never absent, when in health, from
the church or sacrament; that they always appear neat and decent, and that they
lay up, from their pittance, one single six pence on the first day of every
week, to be expended in charity. The residue of his fortune is to be employed,
partly in establising a fund for the distribution of religious books and
tracts, amongst the poor and ignorant of his parish, at the discretion of the
minister; and, partly, for the clothing and educating a specific number of boys
and girls in a school, which he had founded, and very principally supported in
his lifetime.

My friend and I are joint executors. To him he has demised a considerable part
of his excellent library; to me a number of books, which are at once a monument
of his taste and friendship; to Mrs. --, all the elegant furniture of his
drawing room, and to his sweet, and, as he styles her, ever dear Louisa, his
pictures, statues, busts and p^^refactions, beside a number of devotional
authors, gilt and finished with an elegance and beauty, which express the
opinion he had justly conceived of her cultivated mind.

When the poor girl was informed of this legacy, she burst into a flood of
tears, nor could all the tender offices of her friends console her. How
insupportable (said she,) is this man's generosity! with what a cruel kindness
does he haunt me after death! Had it not been for this perhaps, I should more
easily have learned the hard lesson of resignation. But this tenderness renews
my grief, and tears open afresh the wounds, which I have been summoning all my
fortitude to close. But why must I not see this good man on his deathbed, to
testify, for the last time, the warmth of my gratitude, and the sincerity of my
esteem?

But tell me, ye, who were admitted to his presence, what said he of me, in his
latest moments? Did he, then, at all recollect his Louisa? Did he even glance
at so humble a name? Did he send me one precious word of advice? Did he conjure
me never to forget his directions? Did he bid me to be virtuous, did he bid me
to be happy? Yes, blessed spirit, I will remember thy example: I will treasure
up thy counsels. Thy instructions shall never fade. Thy memory shall be
immortal.

And, now, what is your opinion of Louisa? What think you of such a clergyman?
What are dignities, compared with such virtues? What are kingdoms, contrasted
with such joys? Should not history embalm his relics, and should not gratitude
pour over his undying memory, an undying perfume?

LETTER XXX.
I REJOICE to hear that you have so great a taste for paintings. You will find
it an inexhaustible source of pleasure and improvement. For, "Each pleasing art
lends softness to our minds,
"And with our studies, are our lives refined."
I will give you a very handsome eulogy on this art, in the words of a great
writer, Quintilian. Picture (says he,) a silent and uniform address, yet
penetrates so deeply into our inmost affections, that it seems often to exceed
even the powers of eloquence. Its effects, indeed, are sometimes amazing. It is
said, that Alexander trembled and grew pale, on seeing a picture of Palamedes,
betrayed to death by his friends; it bringing to his mind a stinging
remembrance of his treatment of Aristonicus. Portia could bear, with an
unshaken constancy, her last separation from Brutus; but when she saw, some
hours after a picture of the parting of Hector and Andromache, she burst into a
flood of tears. Full as seemed her sorrow, the painter suggested new ideas of
grief, or impressed more strongly her own.

Your question concerning the superiority of the ancients or moderns in this
particular, is very easily answered. In most, if not all the fine arts, indeed,
the former, according to my apprehension, are absolutely unrivalled. By the
ancients, I now mean, particularly the Greeks.

Whether it was owing to the particular nature and freedom of their government
-- to the superior honors and encouragement that were lavished on genius and
the arts in this more early period of society -- whether to any particular
superiority of organization in the natives of this country -- whether to its
beautiful scenery or the allegorical nature of a religion, which so much called
painting, poetry and sculpture into exercise -- or whether we may not ascribe
it to an happy combination of all these separate causes, it is certain, that
their taste and imaginaton were exquisite beyond those of any other people, and
produced a degree of excellence in their artists, that we cannot find in any
other age or country of the world.

Raphael, whom all Europe has so much praised, excelled only, as he formed
himself upon the model of the Greeks. The Italians (observes an able judge,)
may excel in coloring; but composition, drawing, the art of grouping,
attitude, movement, expression, contrast, drapery, character and grace -- all
these, this great genius confessedly borrowed from the ancient statues and bas
reliefs.

Palladio is the first of architects, Michael Angelo, Fiammingo, Algardi, the
most celebrated sculptors, only for the same reason; they studied the Greeks.
Yet Angelo was the boldest genius, that Italy ever had. "It was he, who
conceived the idea of placing the pantheon in the air, and constructed the dome
of St. Peter's on the same dimensions."

Nor in letters were the Greeks less the model of perfection. To emulate their
best writers has been the ambition of every succeeding age. And excellence has
been attained only in proportion to the successfulness of this imitation.

The first and most complete poem in the world, is Grecian -- the Iliad of
Homer. It unites all the separate astonishing excellencies of this most
difficult species of composition; the majestic, the terrible, the pathetic and
the sublime. Naturalists, philosophers, painters, poets, orators,
metaphysicians have all, in various methods, dug from this mine, and still left
it full of inexhaustible treasures. It is proverbially known how much the great
Roman orator studied Homer, and indeed how much he has been praised by the
whole world. I will give you a few testimonies in his favor.

The first critic, that ever existed, is Longinus, who wrote a treatise on the
sublime: This is his opinion of the Iliad:

Those only, who have sublime and solid thoughts, can make elevated discourses
and, in this part, Homer chiefly excels, whose thoughts are all sublime, as may
be seen in the description of the goddess, Discord, who has, says he, her head
in the skies, and her feet upon the earth; for it may be said, that that
grandeur which he gives her, is less the measure of Discord, than of the
capacity and elevation of Homer's genius.

Treatise on the Sublime. Again in another place: To Homer, that is, to him,
who had received the applauses of the whole world.

And, in a third passage, mentioning the number of men, who had endeavored to
imitate Homer, he observes:

Plato, however, is he, who has imitated him most, for he has drawn from this
poet, as from a living spring, from which he has turned an infinite number of
rivulets.

Another excellent judge is Horace who bears to this prince of poets, this
honorable testimony, that he taught philosophy better than many, who were
philosophers by profession.

A third critic of no inconsiderable talents has these lines in his favor:

On diroit que pour plaire instruit par la nature
Homere ait a Venus derobe sa ceinture;
Son livre est d'agremens un fertile t^sor,
Tout ce qu'il a touch se convertit en or.
Pope's opinion of him it is not necessary to recite; and the Jerusalem
Delivered of a great author, is, from beginning to end, a tacit comment on, for
it is an attempt to imitate, his greatness.

Let me not omit the compliment of Dante, for it is worth recording:

Quegli e Omero poeta sovrano
Signor dell'altissimo canto
Che sovra gli altri, come Aquila, vola.
The best writers of the Augustan age of Rome formed themselves considerably on
Grecian models. The most perfect authors in England, France and Italy; Addison,
Pope. Racine, Boileau, Tasso and Metastasio took the same method to arrive at
perfection; and one might challenge the whole world to produce any other poem,
like the Iliad; an orator, equal to Demosthenes; such a finished tragedy as the
Oedipus of Sophocles; any figure in marble, like the Belvedere Apollo; such
fine and light drapery, as that of the Flora, or a female beauty, as perfect as
the Venus of Medici.

The great Montesquieu was, for some time, in Italy, and, as you may suppose,
no superficial observer. This was his decision concerning the Greeks. Taste and
the arts have been carried by them to such an height, that to think to surpass,
will be always not to know them.

I have been thus diffuse on a subject, that may appear, but is, by no means
foreign to your improvement, or above your comprehension, merely that you might
form just ideas in your favorite art; that you might know why we say so much
of classic or ancient writers; and why every person should emulate their
manner, who wishes, even by a single sentence, to please. I will close this
letter with adding my own grateful tribute to the venerable shade of a bard,
that so much delighted my early years, and yet fills me with a pleasing
enthusiasm, every time I peruse him. I will use the words of a French writer:

Recois l'eloge pur, l'hommage merit:
Je le dois a ton nom, comme a la verite.
Art de la Guerre. Receive this pure applause, this hornage due
To thy great name, because I know it is true.
LETTER XXXI.
THE Italians excel in some of the fine arts. In music, perhaps, they may
justly claim a decisive superiority. Of coloring they are great masters.
Amongst many other distinguished painters, they boast a Corregio. No one could
do more honor to any nation. He is the very pupil of nature, and has
wonderfully united elegance and ease. If Raphael shines in the majestic, he has
all the soft and amiable graces.

In landscape painting, Italy is unrivalled. Those of Claude Lorrain are
superior to any other master's. Perhaps one reason is, the beauty of the
scenes, from which they are taken. Viewed collectively, there is not, I should
conceive, a more delightful and enchanting country. It seems to mingle all the
soft and milder beauties of climate, with the magnificent and tremendous;
gentle hills, rich valleys, fruitful extensive vineyards, with craggy, rugged
precipices, with the portentous aspect and caverns of Aetna; the bay of Naples,
with the formidable grandeur and thunder of Vesuvio.

No place has been the scene of so many memorable events, or given birth to
such a number of distinguished men. Tuscany produced Dante, Petrarch, and
Michael Angelo; Livy was born at Padua; Titian at Venice, and Ariosto at
Ferrara. Urbino is justly proud of Raphael, and Parma of Corregio. Rome claims
Tacitus and Lucretius, Arpinum, Cicero, and Venusium, Horace.

If my leisure and opportunities had been equal to my wishes, I should have
gloried in traversing this country. Every step would have had a peculiar
interest, and every scene revived those glowing descriptions of a Virgil or an
Horace, that fascinated my earliest years. When a person has been some time, in
the world, whatever recalls the first days of life, administers the sweetest
pleasure. It is the picture of innocence and tranquillity, whilst our maturer
age is often a bustle or a storm.

In ancient Rome, it was a confessed maxim, that true politeness and taste were
derived from the Grecians. And the Italian artists scill owe much of their
excellence to these primitive masters.

The literary taste of the Italians is very exceptionable. It is a false
sublime, a fictitious glitter, and a barren abundance, and has lost the true
Attic salt of nature, of truth and simplicity. Hence they are said to prefer
the Gothic works of Dante, the absurdities of Ariosto, the extravagancies of
Marini, and the tinsel puerilities of Tasso, to the tender and impassioned
descriptions of Metastasio.

The French seem to think themselves exclusive proprietors of every thing, that
goes under the denomination of taste. And, indeed, they are universally
esteemed a polished, easy, graceful and seducing people. Few of their writers,
however, have much of the profound, or that bids fair for duration. Of all
people, they seem least to have studied the classics. Their style, in general,
wants energy and compactness. In many words they communicate but few ideas, and
their imagination is permitted to run wild without hearkening to the sober
dictates of judgment. Though trees in blossom are a beautiful object, yet the
solid advantage lies in their fruit. I could except many great names from this,
apparently, inviduous censure. One, particularly, I will mention -- that is
Montesquieu. This man will do them honor with all other nations, and the most
distant posterity. His Esprit de Loix is, indeed, a most astonishing
performance. It unites the depth, the phlegm and patience of some other
countries, with the vivacity of that, in which it sprung.

I do not think that England is, by any means, either from climate, or other
fostering circumstanstances, the natural soil of the fine arts. The hot bed of
riches it is true, has raised a few exotics, in this way to a superior flavor;
and public encouragement called forth many virtuosos from other countries. But
in fact, we are too much engaged with trade and politics to cultivate, in any
extraordinary degree, the finer emotions. Commercial habits, manufactures, and
the love of money, wherever they prevail, will always be the grave of virtu and
of taste. In point of polite learning this kingdom has, long since, according
to my apprehension, been at its zenith. The sun of its Augustan age appears to
be set. But for profound knowledge and genius, no nation, perhaps in the known
world has been more distinguished. -- Shakespeare, Milton, Lock, Sir Isaac
Newton! what other country can produce such a group? -- Nor shall we want
models of the most graceful in writing, whilst we can read the works of
Addison, many papers in the World, the Letters of Lady Wortley Montague, or
those of Chesterfield.

I do not mean to deny, but that general science is more cultivated among the
moderns, than it ever was by the ancients, and, in the present age, more than
at any former period whatever. Natural philosophy in all its branches,
chemistry, mathematics, history, politics, jurisprudence, and the mechanical
arts have arrived to a wonderful degree of perfection, and are daily receiving
fresh accessions of improvement. But I must still assert, that polite learning
seems to have flourished most in the days of Swift, Pope and Addison. What can
be the reason? Is it that being then more new, as having but just emerged from
the darkness of the times, it was treated with that superior respect and
deference, we extend to a stranger? Is there a greater dearth of real genius?
That we cannot suppose, if we give ourselves only leisure to consider the many
exalted characters, which Britain boasts. The case, I think, is clear, that a
most extended commerce has debased our feelings and vitiated our taste; that
the grand, political interests of the nation, as it is now circumstanced,
require a most unremitting attention; that the high road to honors and
emoluments chiefly lying through the bar or senate, the greatest talents in the
kingdom are turned into these channels. Men rather choose t^ wrangle and debate
themselves into affluence and titles, than starve on the mere, shadowy fame of
an elegant production.

Wherever there is hope of patronage, genius springs of course; and though his
present Majesty has always been a liberal encourager of polite knowledge, yet
nothing can effectually counteract the wide, and most unlimited agency of this
national situation.

Many writers, in our Augustan age, arrived by their labors merely, not only
to considerable affluence, but to high distinctions. They were caressed and
honored in the most fashionable circles. To reward and patronize talents, was
a glory and a pride. It is very observable, that all the great, literary
characters of the present times, who were born nearest to the p^riod, which I
have described, retain most of this liberal, patronizing spirit. I could, with
great truth and feeling mention some names, if situation and peculiar
circumstances would not expose me to the false suspicion ^^^^ntending to
pronounce fulsome panegyrics. But will not the whole world acquit me of
partiality, if I glance at such illustrious names as the A -- b -- p of Y -- k,
the present Lord C -- l -- r, or the Earl of M -- ^f -- d?

LETTER XXXII.
YOUR knowledge of the Italian language is much superior to my own. The little
that I have, was acquired merely to read a few productions of their best
authors, and be able to form some comparative idea of their merits or defects.

I am far from denying to this people the praise of great genius. But I should
suppose, that it is not properly cultivated, and the reason, perhaps, may be,
that, in modern Italy, learning meets but with little encouragement.

The bad taste of the Italians in poetry, is obvious from many instances.
Dante, in their estimation, is superior to all men; and Ariosto, whom they
consider as much beneath him, they exalt far above Homer himself.

Dante had, doubtless, wonderful abilities. He rises in many instances, to the
sublime; and, for the times, in which he lived, may justly be considered as a
literary prodigy. But his work, on the whole, is but a gothic mass of various
kinds of knowledge strangely heaped together without arrangement, design, or
perspicuity. To compare him with the author of the Iliad, is to betray a total
want of all the principles of enlightened criticism.

Ariosto shines in narrative. He tells a story with gracefulness and ease. Some
of his descriptions are particularly splendid; and his Orlando Furioso is a
lively, and wonderfully various production. But how frequently does he fall
into ridiculous absurdities, where he entirely loses sight of nature and of
truth, forgetting that excellent rule of a judicious critic:

Tout doit tender au bon sens;
Bien n'est beau que le vrai, le vrai seul est aimable.
Let sense be ever in your view,
Nothing is beautiful, that is not true;
The true alone is lovely.
Tasso's Gerusalemme Liberata has, indisputably, great merit. The subject is
grand, and very happily chosen; the language, elegant; the versification,
harmonious: but who can say, that it does not abound with false thoughts, with
infinite instances of playing upon words and a prodigious quantity of tinsel,
or that it is not, in the main, disfigured with low conceits, and trifling
puerilities.

No Italian writer interests so much, or has so nicely developed the human
heart, as Metastasic. He had great advantages by being introduced, at an early
period of his life, into the family of the celebrated Gravina, and there
learning to explode the false taste of his country. He formed himself on the
model of the ancients. He took Boileau and Horace for his guides, and few men
have succeeded better in painting tender scenes, or leaving a durable
impression on the heart. Read his Canzonettes, particularly that which begins
with Grazie agl'inganni tuoi; and tell me whether I have formed an improper
judgment.

LETTER XXXIII.
I HAVE now finished my recommendation of authors. I am apprehensive, indeed,
of having mentioned too many. But from the whole you can select the few, you
like, or which it is most convenient for you to purchase.

Some of these books, particularly those, which treat on religious subjects may
not entertain you so much at present, as they will at some future period, when
your taste and judgment are more effectually ripened; but I did not know
whether then I might have the opportunity of writing to you or whether I should
even be in the world; and I wished to give you something of a systematic plan,
that might be consulted through every stage of your life.

The criticisms upon books, characters, etc. have not been introduced from a
fastidious spirit, or with a view of displaying learning and talents, but to
exercise and improve your discriminating faculties, and enliven the, otherwise,
dull uniformity of didactic letters. I have only presumed to give my opinion;
and to this, in a land of liberty, and in an enlightened age, I conceive myself
to have an equal right with the first scholar, or critic of the world.

Louisa, you well know, is not a fictitious, but a real character; and, though
my partiality may have heightened her merit, yet after all, it is inexpressibly
great; and I introduced her, as a pattern of female graces, merely to avoid the
formality of precepts, and the authoritative airs of a teacher. I considered
this mode, as likely to communicate some little interest and variety to my
letters; and that appeared to me a motive, which, with all young people, should
be consulted.

On the whole, consider me not as dogmatizing, but only as communicating to
you, with great freedom and sincerity, the best sentiments, I can; those, which
convince your understanding, receive with candor; the rest reject, and do not
fancy me so conceited; as even for a moment, to have persuaded myself that from
my tribunal, there lies no appeal.

LETTER XXXIV.
MY DEAR LUCY,
IF I was called upon to write the history of a woman's trials and sorrows, I
would date it from the moment when nature has pronounced her marriageble, and
she feels that innocent desire of associating with the other sex, which needs
not a blush. If I had a girl of my own, at this critical age, I should be full
of the keenest apprehensions for her safety; and, like the great poet, when the
tempter was bent on seducing our first parents from their innocence and
happiness, I should invoke the assistance of some guardian angel, to conduct
her through the slippery and dangerous paths.

You must remember the passage; O for that warning voice, which he, who heard,
etc.

Marriage is, doubtless, the most natural, innocent and useful state, if you
can form it to any tolerable advantage. It bids fairest for that little portion
of happiness, which this life admits; and is, in some degree, a duty which we
owe to the world. If entered into from proper motives, it is a source of the
greatest benefits to the community, as well as of private comfort to ourselves.
What are the highest blessings, unsweetened by society? How poignant are many
sorrows of life, without a friend to alleviate and divide them! How many are
the moments, how many are the exigencies, in which we want sympathy,
tenderness, attention! And what is a moping individual to the world, compared
with the woman who acts in the tender character of a wife, or parent, and, by a
religious culture of an offspring, is training up inhabitants for the kingdom
of heaven.

A single woman is, particularly, defenseless. She cannot move beyond the
precincts of her house without apprehensions. She cannot go with ease or
safety, into public. She is surrounded with many, real dangers, and fancy
conjures up more specter of its own, to disturb her repose.

As she goes down the hill of life, her friends gradually drop away from her,
like leaves in the autumn, and ^ea^e her a pining, solitary creature. Even
brothers and sisters, when married themselves, lose their usual fondness for
her, in the ardours of a newly acquired connection; and she wanders through a
wide, bustling world, uncomfortable in herself, uninteresting to others,
frequently the sport of wanton ridicule, or a proverb of reproach.

Men are often too much engrossed with business, ambition, or criminal pursuits
to think very seriously of this connection; but if they happen to remain
single, their very efforts become their amusement, and keep them from
experiencing that unquiet indolence, which, by enervating the mind, powerfully
awakens imagination and the senses. A woman has abundant leisure to brood over
her inquietude, and to nurse the vapors, till they terminate in disease. She
has not so many methods for dissipating thought. Her element is her household,
and the management of her children; and till she becomes a mother, she has not
objects of consequence enough to occupy the mind, and preserve it from feeling
unpleasant agitations.

I mean not, however, to insinuate, that there is any thing really ^eproachful
in virginity, unless and woman chooses to render it such, by verifying the
stigmas, which have been fixed upon it, and substantiating, in her own
practice, the malevolence, envy, scandal, curiosity and spleen, which have, so
often, sarcastically been imputed to the sisterhood. It may be, and sometimes,
is, the choice of very amiable women, who would not marry any, but the man of
their affections, or with whom they had a rational prospect of happiness; who
having been by death or disappointment deprived of one, had a delicacy, that
never admitted the idea of a second, attachment, or who were not so devoid of
principle and taste, as to be connected with a dissoluted drunken, or abandoned
person, whatever might be his fortune, or consequence or connexions. Women, who
act from such principles, may be exposed to the indelicate scoffs of the
licentions, but must have the unreserved esteem and veneration of all the
sensible and the good.

It should not, however, be dissembled, (for it arises from natural
principles,) that married women are generally more pleasing, than such, as
never formed this connection. Their heart is continually refined, softened and
enlarged by the exercise of all the tender feelings to an offspring, whilst the
weighty concerns of their particular families raise them above that frivilous
insipidity, which, with whatever justice, is the proverbial stigma of a single
state.

A married woman, likewise, has banished that shy reserve, which young ladies
think themselves, and, indeed, in some degree, are obliged to practice, but
which, necessary as it may be, conceals many of their loveliest graces. The
society, moreover, of a sensible man gives, to a female, a richer fund of
ideas, a superior mode of thinking and acting, agreeably tempers her vivacity
with seriousness, and introduces her to many improving acquaintance, and
entertaining circles, from which the ceremonious coldness of a virgin state,
must have kept her, at an unapproachable distance.

Be not, however disappointed, if all your merit and amiableness do not secure
to you such a connection, as your principles and judgment can approve.

The lives of young men are so undomesticated, and, indeed, so criminal, that
deserving women, in the present age, are far from receiving those attentions
and civilities, to which, on every principle of justice and politeness, they
are certainly entitled.

In proportion as the morals of men are depraved, marriage will, always, be
unfashionable and rare* and there are thousands amongst us, who have neither
knowledge, sense or virtue enough to wish for all that delicacy of friendship,
sprightliness of conversation or ease of manners, which only an accomplished
woman can bestow, or for those innocent domestic enjoyments, which communicate
the highest flavor to, and are the grand and ultimate end of, an intercourse
betwixt the sexes.

Pleas of inability to support a family, of the expensiveness of wives, and
their propensity to splendor and dissipation are used. I know, by some to
soften their misconduct, and throw a flimsy veil over their crimes.

This is not a proper place for reasoning with libertines or rakes. Still, from
their arguments, however trifling or fallacious, you may deduce this useful
lesson; that an extravagant turn for finery and show is a great disadvantage to
every woman; that it is adverse to all her happies. prospects and prevents not
a few from ever addressing her, who, in reality, might have been the most
faithful and obliging companions through life. Though immoral persons make this
apology, from very unjustifiable motives, yet many others, in moderate
circumstances, might advance it with truth; who, though they neither w^^
integrity, knowledge, nor a sensibility to the charms and me^i^ of a woman,
would, yet, never think of degrading her to a condition, which they conceive to
be beneath her wishes and her habits.

I have long considered the immoderate expensiveness of young ladies, as, by no
means, favorable to their prospects or happiness, in any view. No parent can
take a more certain method to make a daughter's life a scene of continual
irritatation and misfortune, than by thus ridiculously training her to high
expectations. It has been the gradual death of many; it has made the existence
of others a burden, heavy to be borne. Nor can there even, in point of real
taste, be a greater mistake in education. True dignity consists not in tinsel
or show. The nearest approach we can make to superior spirits, is to have as
few wants, as possible, whilst we inhabit this tenement of clay.

LETTER XXXV.
IN your manner with the sex at large, I could wish you to avoid the modern
forwardness, as well as that shy reserve, which throws a damp on all the
innocent gaieties of life. The first bears upon its face, a masculine
indelicacy; the other is the effect of downright prudery, ill breeding, or
affectation.

Some women affect a coldness in their deportment, and act, as if they supposed
that every man, who approaches them, had a design on their person. Alas! how
miserably are they deceived! How ridiculous is the vanity which gives birth to
such a conduct! Men are so much engaged in business, pleasure, and the
amusements of the world, that the conquest of a female heart is often thought
beneath their ambition. At any rate it is time enough to be upon your guard,
when you really perceive them bent on making serious advances.

Many of them will approach you with flattery. This, they have been led to
think, the only, current coin, with the generality of females. If it be not
very gross, bear it with good humor. Though you may despise, do not wantonly
return, it with contempt. This is the method to make them enemies, and put them
on avoiding your society for ever. You may easily be civil, and yet convince
them by your looks and manner, that you perfectly understand how to appreciate
indiscriminate complaisance.

Though, by no means, seriously bent upon matrimony, yet not a few of them,
will pay you flattering attentions. These, if you be not cautions, may, very
insensibly, soften your heart, and ensnare your affections, particularly if
they come from men, whose general character or manners you esteem. One caution,
therefore, permit me to give you, with an assurance that it must be religiously
observed, as you value either your dignity or repose -- never to believe any
man in earnest, till he makes the most pointed declarations in your favor.

Fashion has made it so much a matter of form to pay attentions to a woman,
and, particularly, if she is smart, witty, beautiful; if she is celebrated for
high connections, or accomplishments, or makes a good figure in public, that
numbers of men will be mechanically led to flutter about you, who, In fact,
mean only to amuse the moment, or do honor to their own good breeding and
politeness.

Believe me, my dear girl, this gay and lively season will soon be at an end.
Girls, that dwell on every body's tongue, and sport away, in all their gaudy
colors, during summer months, like butterfles, are never heard of in the
winter, but sink into a torpid state. They do not, however, resemble some
insects in the very happy, and enviable, privilege of rising with renewed
charms. Once forgotten, they seldom revive, but are displaced by other, rising
favorites for ever; and it has often been observed, that those women are most
rarely thought of for wives, with whom we are the fondest of (what is called,)
flirting, and of saying a thousand, civil things, without meaning or design.

With men of principle and integrity, you are always secure. They will
religiously beware of engaging your affections, without honorable views. But
these alas! where women are concerned, are not so numerous, as might be
expected. More breaches of fidelity are observable in this intercourse, than in
any other instance of the most trifling importance.

To entertain a secret partiality for a man, without knowing it reciprocal, is
dreadful indeed. If you have address and fortitude enough not to betray it, and
thus expose yourself to ridicule and censure, (and yet what prudence is always
equal to the task?) it will cost you infinite grief, anxiety and vexation; and
a victory over yourself, if you do gain it, may be at the expense of your
health and constitution. It will, at the same time, totally unfit you for any
other connection; for who would take the body, when another person is in
possession of the soul?

If any man, therefore, can deliberately be so cruel, as to visit you
frequently, and show you every particularity, that is only short of this grand
explanation, never see him in private; and, if that be insufficient, and you
still feel tender sentiments toward him, determine to shun his company for
ever. It is easier, remember, to extinguish a fire, that has but just broken
out, than one, which has been gathering strength and violence, from a long
concealment. Many have neglected this necessary precaution, and died silent
martyrs to their fondness and imprudence. The eye of beauty has languished in
solitude, or been dimmed with a flood of irremediable tears. The heart has
throbbed with unconquerable tumults, which, gradually have dissolved an elegant
frame, that deserved a much better fate. Undiscovered by the physician, they
have baffled all the resources of his skill; they have rendered ineffectual all
the tenderness of friends, and death alone has administered that ease, which
neither beauty, friends, not fortune could bestow.

It is possible, that men may not always act from unamiable motives, when they
carry their attentions to a considerable height, without an explanation. Their
taste may have privately singled you out from all the rest of the world, whilst
Providence has not propitiously raised them to circumstances, which they
conceive to be worth your acceptance. They may have a delicacy, a dignity, and
independence of mind, which would not easily brook a repulse, or an inferior
situation; and they may be, very honorably, probing by these, little methods,
the state of your inclinations.

Of these circumstances you must endeavor to judge for yourself, or get some
discerning, impartial and more experienced friend to be your adviser. If you
suspect a person's conduct to arise from such motives, you cannot treat him
with too much attention. He has paid you, in the most delicate and flattering
manner, the highest compliment in the world; and you may depend on his
affection being more sincere, in proportion as it is less assuming, confident,
or obtrusive.

If you have any regard for such a character, his penetration will have
discovered it. Use no affectation to him. He will see through all its flimsy
disguises. Attempt no prudery; he will behold your bosom panting through the
thin, slight veil, and the hypocrisy will disgust. Talk not of fortune or
circumstances; they have been the objects of his consideration. I know no
method, but, with an honest candor, to throw yourself, a fair, enchanting
object, on his generous protection. If by any concealment, you should hurt that
self-conscious dignity and affection, which will, always, attend such a mind,
as this, he will never again sue to your clemency, but leave you to ruminate on
the artifices, you have used, in an hopeless repentance.

If you suppose on the other hand, that any person dallies with your feelings
from wantonness, or mere amusement, you cannot show him too marked a contempt.
Though delicacy will not permit you to glance at the particular impropriety of
his conduct, yet there are a thousand methods of making him feel his own
insignificance, and of changing the little plumage of his vanity, into a
monument of his shame.

There is something so unmanly in sporting with the tender feelings of a woman;
there is something so truly despicable in the character of a person, who wishes
a consequence, built upon the tears and distresses of those, whom all great and
generous minds are disposed to protect, that if a female coquette is odious to
your sex, a male one should be doubly abhorted by his own.

If a person once comes to a serious declaration in your favor, affect no
prudish airs of reserve. If you really, feel an affection for him, and can
indulge it with prudence, do not scruple to acknowledge, or to treat him with
the greatest openness and candor. This will engage, for ever, the esteem of
every liberal and honest man. If, from any circumstances, unforeseen at the
time, you should be under the necessity of dismissing him, as a lover, you
would never fail to retain him as a friend; and though, with a base, designing
person, such a conduct may expose you to some little inconvenience, yet whose
will be the disgrace? Leave him to the contempt and indignatiion of the
sensible, and let him make the most of the godlike reflection, that he has
endeavored to triumph over artless innocence, and unsuspecting sensibility.

There is, generally, too much affectation of coyness in this intercourse
betwixt the sexes. I have no idea of a woman's blushing to avow an attachment.
If she has it indeed, it will appear to a penetrating mind, even from her very
efforts to conceal it. The involuntary embarrassment, the timid look, the
modest blush, and the downcast eye are indisputable symptoms of a strong
partiality, which cannot either be concealed or mistaken.

Your sex, I know have ideas of suspense, and fancy, that it heightens the
merit of the prize. -- But I dare not recommend such a dangerous expedient. If
the cunning be discovered, the punishment may be a lasting c^^dness and
neglect. I do not know any thing so really graceful as unaffected simplicity.

Never disclose the offers or preferences you receive, except to those friends,
who are immediately interested in your decision. They are secrets of honor,
which you should carry inviolate to your grave. It is ungenerous to make a man
the subject of observation, perhaps, of ridicule, because he has tendered you
his warmest affections; and the envy of your own sex will not be disposed to
spare you, for such a palpable display of vanity and pride. If you intend to
marry, it is the highest impolicy; and if you mean to dismiss him, it is truel
to aggravate dismission with contempt.

LETTER XXXVI.
FROM the unfavourable sketch, I have given of the morals and sentiments of
young men, it is not probable, that a woman of the greatest merit, will have
any prodigious number of admirers to distract her choice. Generally in the
present state of things, if a lady will be married, she has a number of
accommodations to make, many wishes to sacrifice, and many instances of private
taste to be resigned. She must be content with a fortune merely without
expecting many good or great qualities, annexed; or if she seek the latter, she
must often forego all hopes of the former.

If, however, you should have a number of suitors, (and, without any
compliment, it is not impossible,) there are a few, general principles of most
essential consequence to regulate your choice.

Fortune, splendor, greatness are the alone cry of mercenary friends. I am not
wholly of their opinion. I have seen many wr^tched in marriage, with all the
trappings of gre^^nes^. I have known a still greater number happy, who have had
only "a dinner of herbs and love therewith."

Do not suffer your imagination to be dazzled with mere splendor. Never fancy,
that brilliance is connected with the mind, or that the happiness of women, any
more than that of men, consists in the abundance of the things, that she
possesses.

An immoderate fondness for show is a great misfortune. It has led many a poor
girl to sacrifice herself to some illiterate boor, who had nothing but his
affluence to recommend him. If such should ever be your misfortune, I need not
mention what would be your feelings. If you was prudent enough to avoid all
other evil consequences, (and many such, experience records, but delicacy
forbears to mention,) you might live to envy the ruddy un-ambitious milk-maid,
whose toils are sweetened by conjugal attachment, and whose blooming children
cheer the seeming infelicities of life.

How wretched must be a woman, united to a man, whom she does not prefer to
every other in the world! What secret preferences must steal into her heart!
What unquiet thoughts take possession of her fancy! And what can men of
principle call such an act, but legal prostitution?

If I was a despotic tyrant, I would inflict this punishment on the woman I
abhorred. She should entertain a private partiality for one person, and be
married to another.

Never suffer yourself to think of a person, who has not religious principle. A
good man alone is capable of true attachment, fidelity and affection.

Others may feel a fugitive passion; but on this, alas! you can place no
dependence. It may be abated by caprice, supplanted by some, new favorite,
palled by possession, and, at any rate, will last no longer, than your personal
charms, though those charms may have faded by almost laying down your life for
their sake, by bringing them a beautiful offspring into the world.

During the flattering season of courtship, men will always endeavor to appear
in their best colors, and put on all the appearance of good humor. But
supposing this good humor, real, it is but a fluctuating, unsteady principle,
depending on the motion of the blood and spirits. Nothing, but religion, is
permanent and unchangeable, always consistent, and always the same.

A man of this cast will never fail to treat you with tenderness and attention.
If little provocations happen, he will soften them with gentleness; if offenses
come, he will be shielded with patience; if his own temper be unhappy, he will
correct it by the assistance of divine grace and of reflection; if misfortunes
assail you, he will bear them with resignation; in every exigence, he will be a
friend; in all your troubles, a stay; in your sickness, a physician; and, when
the last, convulsive moment comes, he will leave you with his tears, and with
his blessings. All his impetuous passions he will suppress, from a sense of
duty; and if ever by an unguarded sally, he should unfortunately have hurt your
feelings, or violated your peace, he will suffer more pain from the private
recollection, than he can possibly have inflicted upon you. Ten thousand cares,
anxieties and vexations will mix with the married state. Religion is the only
principle, that can infuse an healing balm, inspire both parties with serenity
and hope, dispose them to mutual concessions and forbearance, and prompt them
to share each others burdens with alacrity and ease.

Gay and volatile as your spirits may be before this union, when, as yet, no
great trials or misfortunes have pressed on them, yet when you seriously think
of having a family, and calling yourself mother of a numerous offspring, what
possible comfort can you promise to yourself without a man of solid probity and
virtue; one who will be regular in the discharge of all the religious, social
and domestic duties; who will faithfully train up your common children in the
fear of God, and not neglect their many interests and wants, and wishes for the
turbid and licentious pleasures of the bottle, gaming, intrigue, the chase, the
theater, or for any other scenes of fashionable dissipation?

The next thing you should look for is a person of a domestic cast. This will,
most frequently, be found in men of the most virtuous hearts and improved
understandings. They will always have abundance of entertainment in private
unknown to vulgar minds. And these will secure them from seeking their
happiness in the factitious pleasures of the world.

Of what consequence are all the good qualities of your husband, if you must be
constantly separated from him? Your tenderness in this case will only be the
instrument of a poignant affliction -- your anxiety will be perpetually on the
rack; your jealousy may be a^^rmed; and, in the best point of view, you will be
a widow, with only a nominal husband, and unprotected with all the appearance
of protection.

Men, whose circumstances absolutely require such absences, should never think
of this tender connection. It is this necessary separation after marriage, and
the artificial one, which fashion has created, that are the cause of half the
disquiets, which infest this sacred state. True affection is only nursed by the
parties living much together, in the stilness of retirement. It is in the shade
chiefly, that the purest affections glow. It is from dwelling on the graces of
a common offspring, and repeating, in the ease of familiar conversation, little
domestic anecdotes, playfulness and events, that matrimonial friendship rises
to its proper maturity and vigor. By constantly growing together, even
branches become inseparably intwined.

The last thing, though I do not mention it, as absolutely necessary, yet
highly desirable in a person, with whom you must spend all your days, is
sentiment and taste. This will variegate every hour with a succession of
pleasure, every scene with animated remarks, every incident with fresh
conversation, and will make a little paradise of your deepest solitude, in
which you will never want the poor resources of foreign entertainment.

Fortune surely should be considered. It were absurd to think of love, where
there is not some prospect of a decent provision for your probable descendents.
That decency depends on birth, habit and education. But if you can compass the
other requisites, be as moderate as possible, in your demands of fortune.
Virtue and affection have an amazing power of inspiring contentment. A morsel
thus sweetened, will be pleasant to the taste. In a cottage so enlivened, joy
will spring. Children, so educated, will be rich in goodness. The Almighty will
look down from heaven, with approbation and crown the happy pair with the
choicest of his blessings!

LETTER XXXVII.
NEVER think of marrying a weak man, in hopes of governing him. Silly people
are often more peevish and refractory, than you would suppose; but if you could
even gain your point, and by great address and management rise to the helm, I
should not, by any means, congratulate your success.

Women, that assume the reins, seldom manage them with dignity. Their authority
breaks forth in numberless, petty instances of tyranny and caprice, which only
render them miserable in themselves, as well as unamiable to every beholder.
The quality, which shows a married lady to advantage, is a modest submission of
her understanding to the man, whom she has not been ashamed to honor with her
choice.

I have frequently mentioned Milton, as peculiarly happy in his ideas of, what
constitutes, conjugal propriety. His Eve reveres her husband. She listens to
his conversation, in order to be instructed. In him, she feels herself
annihilated and absorbed. She always shows that deference and consciousness of
inferiority, which, for the sake of order, the all wise Author of nature,
manifistly, intended. The consequence is, that her character appears lovely to
all, and that her associate, (as all sensible men will,) treats her with double
tenderness, and gives her every mark of a delicate protection:

He in delight
Both of her beauty, and submissive charms,
Smiled with superior love.
To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned,
My author and disposer, what thou bidd'st,
Unargu'd I obey; so God ordains;
God is thy law; thou, mine; to know no more
Is woman's happiest knowledge and her praise.
When men have lived single for fifty or sixty years, through a multiplicity of
business, ambitious schemes, or perhaps from more criminal causes, it is no
uncommon thing to see them, all at once, determined on wedlock, and paying
their court to some fine, blooming girl of eighteen. Indeed, in the present
state of things, if a woman be not married early, her chance is small; so
violent is the rage for youth and beauty, even in decrepit beaus!

There is something in this practice, that very grossly insults both your
delicacy and understanding It looks as if these sovereign lords of the
creation, at the moment, when they condescended to pity your distress, and
found no comfort in habits of another kind, could order the most elegant and
fashionable amongst you, to come at a call!

It is true indeed, that they do make you a consideration. Your jointure is,
generally, in proportion to the age of the party. The hundreds are increased,
as the head is hoary, as the frame is enfeebled, or as wrinkles have contracted
the countenance.

Never indulge the thought of marrying in this manner. Wherever there is great
disparity of years, there cannot be any durable union of hearts. Gloom and
gaiety do not easily assimilate. Nature has placed at a great distance from
each other, the torrid and the frigid zones.

People's views of life, their sentiments, projects, companies, pleasures and
amusements differ so exceedingly, at these different ages, that it is
impossible their affections should be united. A thousand conflicts of taste and
opinion, and as many causes of jealousy and dislike will mingle with so
injudicious a connection.

A woman, in such delicate circumstances, where the heart is not engrossed by a
real attachment, may, and probably will, see many persons more agreeable, than
him, to whom she is bound by an indissoluble tie. If she has prudence and
principle enough to keep up appearances, and thus preserve her innocence in the
eyes of the world, it can be no supreme felicity to be the wife of one man,
whilst her heart is secretly panting for another. It is indeed a trial, which
no splendor can recompense and no fortune ease. If she should ever be so
unguarded as to betray such a preference, in any part of her conduct, her peace
and happiness are lost for ever! But admitting her to behave with the greatest
propriety, and even to be attached to the Sultan, who owns her, Rill the
jealousy of old men is a most amazingly irritable passion. It is that watchful
dragon, which guards the Hesperian fruit; and with a keen-eyed glance, will be
apt to discover some hidden meaning in a look, impropriety in a gesture, or a
violation of the marriage covenant in the most common civility. At any rate, it
is no very flattering allotment to a woman, to be the nurse of a peavish,
infirm or en^aciated, old man, at an age, when she might claim the most
delicate passion, and reciprocal endearments. What woman of spirit would bear
to be suspected? What christian should vow, at the altar of her God, an
affection to a man, when her attachment was solely to his fortune? And who that
has read one page of human life, must not tremble at the consequences, that
have generally, attended such imprudent connexions?

"A reformed rake makes the best husband." Does he? It would be very
extraordinary, if he should. Besides, are you very certain, that you have power
to reform him? It is a matter, that requires some deliberation. This
reformation, if it is to be accomplished, must take place before marriage. Then
if ever, is the period of your power. But how will you be assured that he is
reformed? If he appears so, is he not insidiously concealing his vices, to gain
your affections? And when he knows, they are secured, may he not, gradually,
throw off the mask, and be dissipated, as before? Profligacy of this kind is
seldom eradicated. It resembles some cutaneous disorders, which appear to be
healed, and yet are, continually, making themselves visible by fresh eruptions.

A man, who has carried on a criminal intercourse with immoral women is not to
be trusted, His opinion of all females is an insult to their delicacy. His
attachment is to sex alone, under particular modifications. On him virtue,
knowledge, accomplishments and graces are miserably thrown away. To gratify an
inextinguishable thirst for variety, such a wretch is often seen to forsake the
most deserving wife, to ^eek his usual, fugitive pleasure, with an abandon^d,
mercenary harlot.

What would you think of this? Yet no graces, no affection, no delicacy, on
your part, may be able to prevent it. It seems the curse of heaven, entailed on
his vices, and, generally, pursues him even to the grave.

The supposed predilection of your sex for rakes, must, probably, arise from
their ostentatious appearance, gaiety, spirits and assumed politeness. But how
dearly is such tinsel purchased by an union with them! How often has a long,
harassed life of poverty and remorse been the dreadful sacrifice to this
indiscretion of a moment.

LETTER XXXVIII.
MEN in professions may be expected to possess the most liberal sentiments, as
having enjoyed a superior education; and their manners and society will, of
course, be most agreeable and interesting to ladies. Military people are,
proverbially, favorites.

I will not so much degrade the dignity of your sex, as to suppose, that it is
the mere color of their habits, which dazzles your eyes, and works such
astonishing miracles in their favor. There are reasons, which may account,
more rationally, for your partiality, whilst they do more credit to your
understanding.

Undistracted with cares and business, they are happy in that easy
disengagedness of mind, which can exhaust all its efforts upon the single
article of pleasing. With much time upon their hands, they have frequent
opportunities of being in your company, and of feeling, or at least affecting
admiration. Lively and volatile from an healthy life of activity and exercise,
they easily assimilate with the manners of a sex, whose distinguishing grace is
a cheerful vivacity. Having traveled through various places and kingdoms, they
necessarily acquire that ease and urbanity of manners, which result from a
general intercourse with mankind. -- Expected, professionally, to be men of
courage, you may suppose them the best protectors of your person and your
weakness. Their very choice of the army marks them for genteel notions and
spirit; and any of these reasons is, perhaps, no disadvantage with a female
heart. I should be sorry to suppose, that their general love of pleasure,
gaiety and intrigue is amongst their recommendations to the favor of those,
who should, uniformly, discourage by their blushes and their frowns, every
species of levity and vice.

In fact, and to be impartial, the agreeableness of officers, is like that of
other men. There is the human mixture of the good and the bad. I have always
found, from my own observation, that the older and experienced are some of the
most interesting characters in society. The various scenes, through which they
have passed, give a sprightliness and diversity to their conversation, and
their politeness lends it a charm. I have met with no many of the younger sort,
who have seemed to think the petty ornament of a cockade an adequate substitute
for all improvements of the mind; a shelter for litigious insolence and
puppyism, and an exclusive security for the tenderest affections, and
attachment of woman.

But this evil is not consined, merely, to the army. It is so in the church.
How truly amiable are the experienced, the learned, and the exemplary of this
profession, whose knowledge is happily tissued with devotion, and softened by a
general intercourse with the world! How many, on the other hand, when they are
just initiated into the sacred office, ridiculously pique themselves on a
cassock and a scarf; and, under that solemn garb, go as far as possible, in the
mazes of beauism, vanity, and affectation!

There are, doubtless, very amiable people in the army; but their general
notions and treatment of your sex, forbid me to wish that you should, ever,
cultivate much acquaintance with them, because the circumstances, in which they
are placed, render the thoughts of a serious connection, by no means desirable.
If we could suppose their principles not to be injured by their mode of life;
if they could resign, from the moment of marriage, all their notions of
unlimited gallantry, and pleasure, what is their pay, but a scanty subsistence
for a solitary individual? What is their life, but an unsettled pilgrimage from
one country to another? How often are they called, at a moment's warning, to
sight, perhaps, to perish, for their king and country? or, to die more
suddenly, and more ignominiously, by the hands of a Duelist, who challenges
them into eternity for the slightest provocation, perhaps for the misplacing
only of a syllable!

In the midst of such alarming prospects, what has a woman to expect from
marriage with them, but continual toils, unceasing dangers, perpetual
apprehensions; poverty, remorse, vexation, children, without provision, and
sorrows, which the lenient hand of time, scarcely can assuage.

If you was ever so happily united to a man of this description, how dreadful
must be the absences, you will have to bear, mixed as they will be, with a
dissolving tenderness, and unavoidable alarms; or, on the other hand, how
insupportable your toils, with perils in the wilderness, perils by the sea, and
perils amongst false brethren; with weariness, and painfulness, with watchings,
often; with hunger and thirst; with fastings, often; with cold and nakedness.
Remember the fate of lady C -- w -- s, and drop a tear. That gaiety of heart,
which, once, doted on a man for his smartness or vivacity, will find too much
exercise for its penitence and grief in such serious afflictions.

LETTER XXXIX.
IN several requisites to an happy marriage professional men do not appear, by
any means, the most eligible.

A great writer has called a physician, "the mere play-thing of fortune."
However straitened in his circumstances, from having received an expensive
education, he must assume particularly in the metropolis, the appearance of
property merely to gain employment. This fictitious grandeur may involve him in
difficulties for many years. -- His success, from the nature of things, must,
generally be slow, nor will it ever depend so much on his own intrinsic merit,
as on a fortunate coincidence of circumstances, wholly out of his power. If he
succeeds, it will, frequently be late in life: and, if he does not, he must be
embarrassed indeed! The children of such a person cannot dig, and to beg they
are ashamed. Poverty, sharpened by refinement and sensibility, is afflicting in
the extreme!

I do not think the profession of the law, calculated to render a man, the most
agreeable companion, in the still, unruffled shades of domestic life. It calls
into continual exercise, the more turbid passions; it begets an unpleasant
spirit of caviling and contradiction, and has less tendency to nurse the finer
feelings, than any of the other learned professions.

By being crowded together, at a dangerous age, in the Temple or Lincoln's Inn,
young men are apt to contract a licentiousness of morals, a laxity of
principles, a species of skepticism to palliate their vices, habits of
profaneness, not a little dissipation, and so far as your sex is concerned,
very dangerous notions.

Before marriage, military men and young lawyers are not, in my idea, the
safest acquaintance. The first are only bent, without looking any further, on
domesticating themselves, in agreeable families, by every polite attention to
wives and daughters, and thus amusing many, leisure hours, which, in their
state of continual peregrination, would be, otherwise, insupportable; the
latter, in general, scruple not to go great lengths in gallantry where they
have no serious intention.

Beware of such society; beware of your heart. Let not the unblushing front of
a barrister, let not the mere scarlet habit of a petit maitre, who has studied
the windings of the female heart, infinitely more, than tacties, or the art of
war, let not a few civil sayings or flattering attentions beguile your
imagination, or lay your prudence asleep. I do not think the commerce very
safe. If I had a girl of my own, I would not expose her to so dangerous a
trial. Many, doubtless, have come off conquerors, but more have fallen; and
their wounds and tears have made, upon my memory, a lasting impression.

Our imagination, however, annexes riches, honors, and even titles to the
profession of the law. But this fancy often misleads us. It is true, that merit
has a greater chance in this, than in any other profession; and it is certain,
that a fortunate few have attained to very considerable greatness. We hear of a
Mansfield, a Thurlow, a Kenyon, a Lough borough, a Law, an Erskine, and are
dazzled with their names, their success, and honors. But not a word is said of
a thousand others of the fraternity, whom, though possessed of considerable
talents, fortune never chose to bring into the public view, or to distinguish
with any of her favors.

But all these discouragements apart, if a lawyer is eminent, he can scarcely
ever be at home. Perpetual cares and business surround him, and poison his
repose. His wife and children must be neglected, and domestic endearments
sacrificed to tumultuous cares. And if he be poor, no poverty can open the door
to more chicanery, artifice, or meanness. At any rate, if he be a man of pure
morals and religious principles, he has withstood the greatest temptations,
that human nature can encounter, and for superior and heroic virtue, almost
deserves a place in the calendar of saints.

See now a man's partiality to his own profession; but if it be not founded in
reason, I beg you will reject it.

The office of clergymen calls them to a more regular and retired life, than
that of most other men. Their exemption from the bustle and competitions of the
world nurses innocence and sensibility; and if their heart be not very
depraved, their employments and studies must soften and resine it. Their
education should have given them the power of entertaining, and their calling
supposes not only integrity, but piety and virtue.

A man of this cast seems particularly calculated not only to relish, but to
enhance the happiness of a married state. With hours at command, he has leisure
for the tender offices of friendship, and the little, sportive play fullness of
amusing conversation. Whilst the woodbine and the jasmine surround his modest
mansion, he dreads no unpropitous accident, that shall drag him from his
retreat, and can tread, with the faithful partner of his cares, the lonely
"silent haunts, which contemplation loves." He has time for superintending the
instruction of his children, and calling their latent powers into exercise and
action. He has opportunity to realize the pictures of a Milton, and watch the
opening beauties of the paradise about him.

Let me, however, be candid, and give you the possible reverse of this piece.
The church is in a very unhappy situation. That education, which renders the
ecclesiastic agreeable, often sharpens his affliction. That refinement, which
captivates the elegant and inexperienced, is the spear, which fetches drops of
blood from his heart. Frequently without an adequate provision, and incapable,
by any secular employment, of improving his circumstances, these apparent
privileges are only his misfortune. The sensibility, which loves a woman,
doubly mourns her allotment. That tenderness, which embraces children with such
affection, shudders at their prospects. That independence, which results from
liberal sentiments, startles at the thought of poverty or distress; and that
peace, which he has found in the abodes of solitude, unties him for the
turbulent agitations of the world.

Many men, however, there are in this profession, very amply provided for; and,
if one of these falls to your lot, with the habits and dispositions, that
should result from his character, I think you may form every rational hope of
comfort and enjoyment. Still, do not suppose me narrow or illiberal. There are,
doubtless, numbers of worthy and amiable men in the other professions; there
are, as certainly, many worthless, immoral, and profligate persons in the
church. General rules admit of infinite exceptions. And as your heart is
disengaged, I meant only to state the influence of different habits and
employments on the mind, and the probability of their conducing to happiness or
misery in this important connection. And I still must urge, that if a clergyman
be a bad husband, it is in defiance of the strongest inducements to be
otherwise, and of every disposition, which his studies and his prayers should
have led him, either to cultivate in himself, or recommend to others.

LETTER XL.
A MERE country squire will be more attached to his dogs, his hunting parties,
and horses, than he could be to any wife in the world. The most lovely graces,
the most exquisite accomplishments will make no impression on his debased and
vitiated mind. He will not be able even to discover them. From him, you must
expect none of the little, soothing attentions. He will shock your delicacy
with a thousand coarsenesses, without a sensibility that he is doing wrong; and
if you should expostulate, he will place it only to the account of female
prudery, conceit or affectation. He will converse with you chiefly on the
delicious subjects of the bottle or the chase; and he will occasionally
introduce you to the honor of an acquaintance with a number of ignorant ill
bred boors, who will esteem you in exact proportion, as you want elegance of
manner, sentiment or understanding!

Young ladies never act so injudiciously, as when they sacrifice themselves to
stupid vulgarity. Their charms are never lost on men of sense, delicacy and
politeness. By them their throne is established. It is in their hearts, that
they have always a sovereign and undisputed sway.

I have now given you my sentiments very freely concerning a great variety of
characters. But, marry whom you will, one further lesson is necessary to your
happiness, as well as that of the person, with whom you are connected -- and
that is -- to consider your home, as the chief seen of your pleasures, and
your exertion.

Though a woman, before this union, may be admited for her accomplishments of
dancing, dress, pal^ting, singing, etc. yet after it, we expect her character
to display something more substantial. To a man, who must spend his days in her
company, all these little superficial decorations will speedily become insipid
and unimportant. Love must be preserved by the qualities of the heart, and
esteem se^^^ed by the domestic virtues.

A man does not want to be dazzled in this con^^^ion, or to possess a partner,
who seeks the admiration of coxcombs or beaux. He wants a person, who will
kindly divide and alleviate his cares and prudently arrange his household
concerns. He ^^^^s not a coquette, a fashionist, a flirt, but a comfortable
assistant, companion and friend.

Let not a woman's fancy dream of perpetual admiration. Let it not be sketching
out endless mazes of pleasure. The mistress of a family has ceased to be a
girl. She can, no longer, be frivolous or childish with impunity. The angel of
courtship has sunk into a woman, and that woman will be valued principally as
her fondness lies in retirement, and her pleasures near the nursery of her
children. Nor are these pleasures small. Whatever fashion thinks, they have a
secret relish, which the world cannot give.

If men are expected to distinguish themselves by science, valor, eloquence or
the arts, a woman's greatest praise consists in the order and good government
of her family. Nor is this beneath the dignity of any female in the world.
Never is she greater than in such condescension. It spoils no features. It
places the very finest in the happiest attitude, and in the most favorable
light.

This exercise will be a sovereign preventive of the vapors; and every family,
without it, must be a scene of disorder; a state of anarchy, in which there is
no head to govern, and all the members seem unwilling to obey.

If we could see the inside of some fashionable houses, what a prospect would
they present! The mistress at a masquerade or an opera -- servants, drunken,
extravagant, criminal! -- Children, receiving their very first impressions from
their oaths and curses -- here, meat perishing, which might have fed the hungry
-- there, garments mouldering, which would have clothed the naked -- in one
place, filth and nastiness concealed -- in another, valuable furniture tossed
about, without decency and without care! No fortune can answer such immoderate
expenses. No comfort can consist with so much disorder. A good woman looks
well to the ways of her household, and all her family is clothed in scariet.

A turn for dissipation, in any woman, is unseemly, but, in a married one, it
is criminal in the extreme. If she loves her children, what can so much
entertain her, as their lively prattle, as their innocent endearments, or
unfolding their latent powers? If she loves her husband, what other society can
be half so soothing, or half so delightful?

The tour of a woman's gaiety should terminate with marriage. From that moment,
her pursuits should be solid, and her pleasures circumscribed within the limits
of her household. So much as this, she vowed at the altar: so much her
interests and her happiness require.

A wife, who is always gadding about, virtually tells the world, that she is
unhappy in her connection; that her vanity is most immoderate, or her taste most
depraved.

What strips this union of its sweetest pleasures? What makes wives and
husbands so indifferent to each other? Dissipation.

They spend so little time together in private; and it is chiefly in solitude,
that affection springs.

If a man after the business and fatigues of the day, could return to an house,
where a wife was engaged in domestic cares, and an attention to his offspring,
he must be a monster of savageness and stupidity indeed, if he did not strongly
feel the influence of her virtues, and if they did not convey a soft rapture to
his soul.

What woman is most really admired in the world? The domestic. What woman has
all the suffrages of the sensible, and the good? The domestic.

If I wished a lady's picture to appear to advantage, it should not be taken
when she was dressing for an assembly, a levee or a birth night. She should be
holding one lovely infant in her arms, and presenting a moral page, for the
instruction of another.

Such a painter would give us the finest object in the world, and wrap that
world, libertines and stoics, in one, general admiration.

LETTER XLI.
I AM not at all surprised with the insipid life of the parties you mention.
Their case is, by no means, uncommon. Nor would it have required any great
penetration to have foretold the consequences of so hasty a connection.

The truth is, the gentleman was strictly in the language of the world, a beau
d'esprit, that is, he dressed smartly, frequented (what is esteemed) genteel
company, and public places, drank, hunted, ran into the extremes of fashion,
and had some fortune to support it. In proportion as these little matters had
engaged his mind, small attention had, you may suppose, been paid to the
formation of his heart or understanding.

In this thoughtless period, it was the misfortune of this poor girl, with an
elegant person and interesting manner, to fall in his way. She was beautiful;
nature had designed her to please; and, if she had been connected with a
sensible man, might have been molded almost into any thing, that captivates in
gracefulness, or astonishes in understanding. Her personal accomplishments
inspired this petit maitre with a fugitive passion; his fortune was competent;
dissimilarity of tastes, habits or abilities never was considered; tender tales
were swallowed by her artless innocence, and his addresses were accepted. After
a very short acquaintance, they are weary of each other. The force of beauty
and of passion is exhausted. He has not taste enough for the delicacies of
friendship, nor knowledge to entertain a lonely hour with edifying
conversation, but flies to the bottle and his mad companions, for pleasures,
which it is not in her power to bestow; whilst she, poor creature! has leisure
to brood over her imprudence and misfortunes in still, domestic scenes, having
learned, but alas! too late, that rational and durable enjoyment is only to be
found with a person of virtue, principle and understanding.

For my own part, I had never any idea of such early marriages. If this girl
had seen the world, and a variety of characters, she would not have submitted
to such a connection; and if he had lived single, till he had learned the
extent of his own understanding, or the nature of his frivolous and criminal
habits, he would never have supposed, that mere innocence and beauty would have
satisfied his vagrant, and licentious wishes!

Besides, what knowledge can a girl, at her age, have of the government of a
family, or the arrangement of domestic concerns? Servants will take advantage
of her inexperience; and she must either be made a dupe to their artifices, or,
from a narrow system of jealousy and suspicion, she will lose their confidence,
and become the object of their persecution.

With respect to the other case, you mention, with so much concern, it was
equally probable. People may accustom themselves to speak lightly of religion,
in order to be esteemed men of spirit, and, in a thoughtless circle, pass for
very excellent companions. But, when a man has a family, suc^ a levity is
infamous. If he believes his own principles, he cannot sail to be miserable;
and he will find, that the fence he wishes to break down, is that, which guards
the chastity and affection of a wife; the obedience, morals, and attention, of
children; the respect, fidelity and principies of servants, and the whole of
his affairs from sinking into a terrible ruin and confusion!

The general cause of suicide is a total want, or an unfortunate fluctuation
of, principle. Without the comforts of religion, what support has any man to
lean upon, in the day of trouble? If a person accustoms himself to skeptical
reasonings, he believes, by degrees, that ther^ may be no future torments for
the wicked; and if he can once bring his mind to this unwarrantable persuasion,
he will be ready to lay violent hands upon himself, whenever his pride is hurt
by any fanciful degradation, and he cannot any longer, support the consequence,
for which he has been distinguished by his fellow mortals.

LETTER XLII.
I WILL now give you the description of an happier marriage. I have been
spending a few days in a family, who have long lived in my esteem, and of whom
you have often heard me speak in terms of veneration.

My friendship with Eugenio, (for so I will call the gentleman,) was formed in
those early years, when unsuspicious hearts vibrate to each other, without
ceremony or reserve. For his lady, so soon as introduced to her, I felt a very
assimilating partiality. We mingled souls at our first meeting, and they have
never since, discorded for a moment.

Eugenio is a man of considerable learning, and still greater taste. In every
thing that relates to polite knowledge, he has not many superiors in his age.
He is complete master of music, painting and poetry. In architecture, his skill
is very considerable. In all the phenomena of natural history, he is
professedly, a connoisseur. The best writers of Greece and Rome lie constantly
on his table, and amuse many of his leisure hours.

Nature has given to his amiable lady, superior understanding, which has been
improved by a good education, and polished by the best company in the kingdom.
Her mother was one of those uncommon women, who esteemed it her highest dignity
to be herself the nurse and governess of her children, and taught them to
mingle accomplishments with knowledge, the ornamental graces, with domestic
assiduity.

I will leave you to judge, what must be the consequences of such an union.
Think how Eugenio must have improved such a woman! Imagine how this lady must
have bl^ssed such a man!

In this family, I am quite in my element. I read, stroll, think, or amuse
myself without censure or restraint. I feel a sovereign pity for the world of
fashion, and forget that there are any charms in ambition, or any sorrows in
disappointment.

Their fortune is just, what it should be, for solid contentment; too little to
inspire a fantastic emulation with the manners of the great world; too large to
admit of embarrassment or want. It is, in short, neither more nor less, than L
1000 per annum. Their family consists of two fine boys, and one girl, who is
half as amiable, and distinguished, as Louisa.

Though the fashionable world would think such circumstances narrow, yet that
economy, which can do every thing, has made them very comfortable, and their
entire complacency in each other's company, rich indeed! They do not dissipate
their fortune in expensive journeys to, or by residence in, the metropolis, and
are too happy in themselves, to be frequently seen in any other places of
dissipation.

This, my dear LUCY, is the happiest of lives. -- After all our ambition, and
all our struggles, it is chiefly in the shade, that we must find contentment.
The pleasures there are calm; they are pleasures of the heart.

Their house is situated, at two miles distance from a considerable town in the
county of --, upon an eminence, which commands a full view of the city, but has
its aspect to those woods and shades, with which its owners are infinitely more
conversant, than the more noisy scenes of dissipated life. Elegant, but not
superb, and spacious, though plain, it expresses the cultivated taste of its
inhabitants, and the hospitable kindness that reigns within.

The pleasure grounds and gardens are in that unornamented style, which to me,
is always particularly pleasing. Nature has not been wholly sacrificed to art,
nor wildness to refinement. -- The wilderness here and there presents you with
all its shaggy luxuriance, and venerable glooms. -- You rove imbosomed in woods
and thickets, and are mingled at a distance from every prying eye, in those
silent haunts of solitude, which poetry has always decked with its charms. Here
the hand of the Creator has formed a grotto, and art has not destroyed it;
there an alcove, and the pruning knife has not officiously separated the
intwining branches. In one place, a little fountain murmurs, at its ease, and
nothing has attempted to divert it from its original channel. In another you
have tufted beauties, a cascade, a lawn, an hill or a valley, beautifully
interspersed, exactly as they were formed by the hand of nature, in one of
those more sportive moments, when she wished to please.

Through the branches of a beautiful hanging wood, which lies before the house,
you descry the glittering spire of the parish church, belonging to the village,
of which Eugenio is the patron, and a very exemplary clergyman, the present
incumbent. It is placed on a rising ground, as if continually aspiring to that
heaven, to which its excellent pastor is always calling the affections of his
people. It is built in that gothic style, which I always most approved in this
sacred kind of structure, as best adapted to inspire the mind with seriousness
and devotion. But it is not from the mere beauty of the place, or the
deliciousness of its situation, that its enviable owners derive their
happiness. They expect not from shrubs or blossoms, or the most enchanting
scenery, the pleasures of the heart. They know, that the richest prospects
would soon fade upon the eye, if they did not derive a fresh and lively bloom
from principle within.

In an age of levity, this happy pair are not ashamed to be thought religious.
They are persuaded, that their blessings could have no permanency or relish, if
unsanctified with the smile and protection of heaven. Their house is, in fact,
a temple, where prayers and praises, are regularly offered up, every night and
morning, to the great Author and preserver of their lives. Every servant is
required to attend the service; and they are all occasionally, instructed in
their duties to God and man. They have likewise, each a little library of
devotional tracts, which have been presented to them by their generous
superiors. I had the curiosity one day, to examine the title pages, and found
them, principally to consist of the great importance of a Religious Life;
Beveridge's Private Thought, and Resolutions; Taylor's Holy Living and Dying;
Advice against swearing, drunkenness, profanness, etc. in little tracts from
the Society, for promoting Christian Knowledge; Wilson on the Sacrament; the
Christian Pattern; Henry's Pleasantness of a Religious Life, etc.

It would delight you to observe with what a mixture of love and reverence,
these servants approach their real benefactors. You hear nothing, under this
roof of those feuds and animosines, which so much embitter the happiness of
families. "They live as brethren together in unity." The only contention is,
which shall be most ardent, assiduous and vigilant in the performance of their
duty.

If Maria (Eugenio's lady,) has the slightest indisposition, you might read it,
without asking a syllable, in the anxious looks and gestures of all her
attendants. She was lately confined with a nervous fever: and it would have
astonished you to see the unaffected grief and concern, expressed in their
looks. What (said they) will become of our excellent master, if he should lose
the most amiable woman in the world?

The piety of these people is the more engaging, because it is always cheerful
and serene. It proceeds from reasen, and it encourages no unnatural authority
or gloom. It is mixed with sentiment; it is graced with knowledge, and guided
by discretion, Who would not pique himself on a friendship with such a family?
Who would not wish that friendship to be eternal?

When I have added you to the group, I fancy myself in possession of almost
every thing, that mortality can give, and wish only the continuance of my
enjoyments.

LETTER XLIII.
MANY people of fortune are uncomfortable in marriage, for want of employment,
or of something to give an interest to the, otherwise, insipid uniformity of
the same excursions, visits, company, or entertainments. This is never the case
within the walls of Eugenio. He is always introducing, from incidents as they
rise, some useful and entertaining topics of conversation. A news-paper, books,
the garden, flowers, plants, shrubs, history, the azure vault of heaven, stars,
planets, or even a common insect, furnish to this worthy family, ample subjects
for observation, ever edifying, and ever new. His lady has taste and
information enough to enter into the spirit of all these descriptions; and the
general scene is, not a little enlivened by the mode, in which they treat and
educate their children.

My good friend is persuaded, that public education, as it is generally
managed, is more calculated to teach languages and science, than to inculcate
principles or morals; and, therefore, keeps his sons at home till they have
acquired a sufficient stock of virtue to serve them as an antidote against the
dangers of the world. They have, however, their regular school hours and
exercises, which are observed with the most undeviating punctuality. The older
of the boys has made a considerable proficiency in the Latin Language. He has
abridged the English and the Roman histories, and is completely versed in
heathen mythology. But, above all, he is instructed in the fundamentals of
religion, and of his duty to God and man. The scriptures make a part of his
daily reading; and the sensible parent embellishes them with such a number of
striking observations, as greatly interest the curiosity, and fix the attention
of his unvitiated pupil.

With Rollin's Belles Lettres, and the Abbe Millot's Elements sur l'histoire,
he is perfectly acquainted. The latter he is abridging; and Telemachus is
warmly pressed on his attention, as containing those immortal lessons of
virtue, which alone can dignify any character or station.

Eugenio has been at the pains of throwing select parts of Seneca, Marcus
Antoninus, and the Memorabillia of Xenophon into an English dress, for the
advantage of his little family. He has selected a system of Ethics, and almost
of divinity, from the entertaining works of Addison, Johnson, The World, etc;
and the arrangement is so excellent, that i^ ought to be made public for the
benefit of mankind.

The first morning, that I spent under this happy roof, I was awakened from my
slumbers by the soft harmonious voice of Miss --, who was chanting to the
harpsicord, an early hymn of gratitude and devotion to her merciful Creator. It
was taken from the Spectator.

When all thy mercies, O my God,
My rising soul surveys;
Transported with the view, I Am lost
In wonder, love and praise.
The whole reminded me of the words of an ingenious poet:

J'entends encore sa voix, ce language, enchanteur,
Et ces sons sou^erains de l'oreille et du coeur.
Her voice the enchanting language, still I hear,
Those sovereign accents of the heart, and ear.
This is her constant practice every morning, at six o'clock; and it has the
happiest effect on her temper and spirits, for the rest of the day. It sooths
the soul to harmony, and cherishes all the gentler emotions.

Immediately after this was finished, the lovely girl took a walk into the
garden, as she regularly does, when the weather will permit, to observe the
gradual progress, health and vegetation of her plants and flowers. I requested
the honor of attending her, and was amazed, young as she is, with her knowledge
of natural history, and with the judicious remarks she made on the power and
goodness, on the wisdom and contrivance of the magnificent Creator.

Before breakfast, Maria (their mother,) hears all the children together read
the psalms and lessons for the day. To this pious exercise I was not invited;
but I doubt not it was a specimen of female eloquence, descanting on the vanity
of every thing, but devotion, and glancing at the dangers and temptations of
the world.

The employment of this good family is as strict, as usual, and not less
pleasing even upon Sundays.

The first exercise of this day, after the accustomed hymn of praise to their
Creator, is to abridge a few pages of Wilson's Indian Instructed, or of
Secker's Lectures on the Catechism. After the service, all the children give
in, to the best of their power, an account of the sermon, which they have
heard. The comparison of their different merits is pleasing, and the very
contest excites emulation.

When this is finished their father instructs them with a short comment on the
lessons for the day. One happened to be the history of Dives and Lazarus. Very
few have greater powers of the pathetic than my friend. He brought them all to
tears with dwelling on the pitiable circumstances of the beggar, and poured
this lesson into their softened minds, that riches are apt to harden the heart,
and have no real dignity or use, but as employed in acts of mercy to our
neighbor. He gave, to the parable at large, a new and singular aspect. He
observed, that luxury had led Dives to unbelief, and that unbelief had plunged
him into hell.

On another occasion, he dwelt on the scriptural history of Haman. In him, he
expatiated on the uncertainty and sickleness of all outward greatness, and the
insufficiency of honors, stations, popularity to confer any real happiness on
a mind, that had not submitted to internal government and the discipline of
religion.

"What a trifle (said he,) deranged this great man's enjoyment! Because a poor
Mordecai would not bow to his pomp, his honors lost their flavor, and his
dignities their charm; his sleep went from him, and he refused to be comforted.
If his passions had been subdued, and his sold regenerated with divine grace,
he would have been contented in the lowest obscurity. A cottage would have
given him more satisfaction than this palace. It would have been irradiated
with hope, and it would have smiled with divine consolations."

Eugenio is constant at church, and his deportment there is an excellent
pattern to all its depandents. His features are marked with a serious fervor,
and a cheerful dignity, when he is humbly presenting his supplications to the
author of his being.

You would be charmed to see how the honest peasants dwell on his looks! what
eulogies are expressed in every countenance! what fervent blessings are poured
forth, when he stops to enquire about their families and concerns, and what
earnest wishes, that his mansion may long retain him, for its owner, and that
his continuance amongst them, may be lasting as their days!

Not behind him in any of the milder virtues, his consort looks up to him, with
a conscious inferiority, as the pride of her heart. Blended with more Jofiness,
her piety is, if possible, still more engaging; but she seems to decline all
personal consequence, and to be wholly absorbed in the superior luster of his
character and virtues. She receives the prayers and blessings of their tenants,
as if only due to the man of her affections; and, though the zeal of the
populace would convey her, in their arms, yet, when Eugenio offers his hand to
lift her into the carriage, her eyes sparkle with peculiar cheerfulness, and
strongly express both her love and gratitude to her protector and her friend.

It is no wonder that they are so much admired. No wonder that every tongue
loads them with blessings. This is but the speculative part of their piety; the
practical is more useful and more engaging. They love their God; they love
their Redeemer, and for his sake they go about doing good. Not a tenant
experiences an uncomfortable year, but he receives a considerable abatement in
his rent. Not a person is injured in all the neighborhood, but his cause is
pleaded, and his wrongs are redressed. Not an old man exists, but he has
something, by way of pension, from this virtuous family, to ease his
infirmities, and pillow his declining age. Not a great man endeavors to take
advantage of a lesser, but my friend, who is an excellent lawyer, undertakes
the business, and exposes the oppressor to his merited contempt.

Every hour, that Maria can spare from her particular domestic employments, is
spent in making garments, providing cordials, physic and accommodations for the
naked, the sick and indigent of her village; and there are times of the day, in
which you would conclude, from the vast concourse of people, that their house
was a professed asylum for poverty and distress.

But now comes out the great secret of their happiness. "Alas!" said this good
man to me, one night, after supper, when he was reviewing the actions of the
day, your obliging partiality thinks me happy, and so inded I am. In the
tenderness, friendship, fidelity and discretion of my Maria, I have more than
the treasures even of a world. But this sweet abode would soon cease to please,
and the lovely woman lose the gr^^cer part of her charms, if we were not both
animated with christian sentiments, and if we did not contrive to relieve the
sameness and to dignity the littleness of life by the activities of virtue.
That divine philanthropy, which is the essence of religion, is the source of
our pleasures. And, when I drop into the grave, I shall have but one single
wish, that this amiable guide may be spared to my offspring, and that the poor
may pronounce a last panegyric on me, with their prayers and tears. But how
very selfish and how cruel is the desire! What would become of the, then,
lonely and disconsolate Maria? Alas! continually together in this retirement,
continually endeared by growing acts of tenderness, you cannot think how very
much our hearts are united! But this is the condition of all human happiness.
The tenderest love must feel the bitterest pangs from a separation. It is the
decree of infinite wisdom, that this world should have no unmixed satisfaction,
to put us on earnestly seeking it in one, which is unfading and eternal.

These are the sentiments of as fine a gentleman, as the age can boast; of one,
who would do honor to the politest circles, and has power to charm the most
improved understandings. But that gentleman is a christian. He has learned to
sacrifice all glitter and accomplishments at the banners of the cross. And this
has made him so charitable a landlord, so active a patron, so tender an
husband, so agreeable a companion, so indulgent a parent, and so valuable a
friend. Read this, ye conceited coxcombs, who fancy that the character of
gentleman consists in levity or wickedness, and blush at your mistake!

LETTER XLIV.
I CANNOT fully satisfy your inquiry. So far, however, as scripture and reason
will be our guides, I will endeavor to accompany you into the pleasing
speculation.

To you, who have buried so many dear and amiable friends, and had so short an
enjoyment of them here, it is natural to inquire, what you may see, or know of
them hereafter whether you shall be able to recognize departed spirits after
death, and wherein the joys of heaven will consist.

It is plain from sacred writ, that our present, earthly, will be changed into
glorious, bodies, and our souls, as it were, sublimed or re-modified, as
necessary to the enjoyment of future bliss, whatever it may be. Whilst
therefore we are, in part, composed of ma^ter, it is impossible that we should
have a full ^^^ception, or that any adequate representation can be conveyed to
us in words, of the real nature and essence of such pleasures, as in fact, are
only adapted to minds of a much superior texture, and bodies of a more
celestial and divine organization. Thus the scriptural images of thrones,
sceptres, kingdoms, of shining as the stars of the firmament, of being clothed
in white robes, and having palms in our hands, of feeding in green pastures,
and being led beside living fountains of waters, are not to be understood, as
constituting any thing of the real quality of future happiness, but as
imperfectly shadowing forth, by the analogy of sensible objects, joys, which,
both in their nature and degree, are wholly raised above our present
comprehension.

So strong and literally just is that passage; Eye has not seen nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things, which God
has prepared for them, that love him.

The same idea is, in some degree, intended by St. Paul, when he says, that,
when carried up into the third heaven, he heard things, which it was impossible
for man to utter: he had, it should seem, the idea of them, but could not
convey it, in human words, to the human understanding. It is sufficient for us
to know, that these delights will be of a spiritual nature, proceeding from the
supreme, all-perfect spirit, and adapted to the fullest capacities of those, he
has been pleased to glorify; that they will be exquisite, as unbounded power
and wisdom and goodness can bestow, and lasting, as the days of that eternal
heaven, in which, they spring.

That we shall be able to recognize spirits, and amongst others, those of our
nearest intimates after death, is probable from the very nature of the soul,
which cannot be supposed to lose its consciousness or recollection, whilst the
body is sleeping in the dust of the earth -- from the possibility, that an
exquisite part of future happiness will arise from reviewing, along with
present friends, the trials, temptations, and sorrows, which we overcame, along
with them, upon earth -- and, more especially, from the attributes of God,
which seem pledged to convince us, by, (as it were,) ocular demonstration, that
those, who, we are well assured, suffered undeservedly, in various methods
here, are rewarded hereafter, and that some guilty persons, who wanted no
prosperities in this world, experience all the horrors of another.

To this doctrine, there is but one weak, and ill-founded objection; that
witnessing the misery of friends, if they died in a sinful state, must be a
dreadful abatement of our own felicity. That is impossible. The affection
betwixt relatives here was implanted only for temporary purposes, and will, in
some cases, cease after death. The only attachment, then, will be, (as the only
rational one, always was,) to souls, that assimilate in real wisdom, purity and
goodness. We shall love, in our degree, even as God loves, not with the
weakness of passion or instinct, but the unchangable sublimity of order. They,
that do the will of our Father in heaven, will be our fathers and brethren, our
sisters and mothers.

How glorious and inexhaustible a source of happiness does such a prospect open
to the mind! With what rapture will a tender mother, who left a number of
children behind her, with a thousand, anxious apprehensions for their safety,
meet them in heaven, where their innocence is crowned, their trials are
finished, and their eternal happiness secured! With what dutiful transports
will children embrace the religious parent, to whose counsels under Providence,
they owe considerably their present glorification! And what delight must it
give both parties to reflect, that death can, no more, divorce them from each
other, nor a grain of sorrow poison their cup of bliss! Affectionate brothers
and sisters, unavoidably severed here, by various, important exigences, with
what ardour will they renew their natural connection, and reciprocate each
other's joys! Not a fear to rise upon their future prospects, not a cloud to
darken the celestial sky!

Another delightful idea of heaven is, that it will bring to maturity all those
amiable instincts, which were planted in us by the Deity, whilst we were on
earth, but from a multitude of obstacles, or the shortness of life, could not
attain their perfection.

Our strong thirst for happiness, it is, on all hands, allowed, that was only
mocked in a world of shadows, will be fully gratified in one of glory.

It will, probably, be so with our passion for knowledge -- friendship --
society -- which, when properly directed, are equally virtuous and useful,
propensities, and, therefore, alike proceed from the Author of every perfect
gift.

How eagerly do some men thirst after knowledge, but how much are they retarded
in the pursuit, by the imperfection of their present organs, the weakness of
their bodily frame, by the long, lost space of childhood and old age, by the
want of books, acquaintance, and other opportunities, or by the transitoriness
of life itself! -- or when all human advantages center in one, privileged man,
enlightened as he may seem, what is his wisdom, but comparative folly? When
contrasted with the immensity of science, and the inexha^stible wonders of
creation, what does it resemble, but a grain, an atom, a drop of water, or a
particle of sand on the sea shore? Here we see but through "a glass darkly." A
Newton and a Lock, after all their improvements, felt and confessed this
poverty of soul.

But how sublime will be the pleasures of this intercourse in heaven, when the
greatest men, that have ever lived, are all collected together from all
quarters of the world! When there are no little envies, jealousies, interests
or bigotries to interrupt their mutual concord and improvements! nor any
languor, fatigue or disease in the renovated frame! When the Almighty shall
have unlocked all the treasures of his wisdom, all the secrets of his
government, and the wonders of his grace^. When the sold shall have received
such fresh and superior inlets of intelligence, and "we shall know, even as we
are known." The wondrous page of nature will then be plain. The book of
Providence will open, in the most legible characters, on the enlarged mind.
That mystery of redemption, into which the very angels have been desirous to
look, will be unfolded, in all its abysses; and the consequence of such
discoveries must be an inexpressible sensation of love, astonishment and
rapture. We shall not cease, day or night, to worship him, that sits on the
throne, and the Lamb, that has washed us from our sins, in his own blood.

The case, in all probability, will be the same with friendship. Friendship,
balm of this uneasy state! inspirer of virtuous thoughts and counsels! medicine
of life! still chequered, still imperfect upon earth, mixed with caprice, with
passion, with insincerity, and often chilled by death, (thousands of congenial
souls prevented by seas, mountains, reserve of sex, bigotries of religion,
peculiarities of education, from ever uniting,) this friendship shall, there,
have all its fullest poignancy, and flourish in immortal bloom! The amiable of
all ages and nations shall be assembled together, frailties and death, and the
possibility of separation, wholly done away!

Think only of the expansion and luxury the mind enjoys from unbosoming its
pleasures or sorrows to a person upon earth, from the social glow and
confidential conversation! and imagine, for a moment, what this privilege must
be, where all around us are friends -- where friends are angels -- and angels
are continually imbibing fresh streams of knowledge, of purity and graces in
the presence of their God!

Our social instinct likewise, will, doubtless, have a similar gratification.
People are drawn together into societies on earth, by a similarity of tastes,
pursuits, habits and improvements. The principle is natural and has many
laudable effects; and from the nature of the human soul, which will, probably,
be going through successive stages of improvement to all eternity, may be
supposed likely to continue in a glorified state. Thus, though holiness and
purity be the alone medium of admission into these blessed mansions, yet
societies may be formed of people of similar improvements and congenial tastes;
of holy philosophers, (suppose,) naturalists, divines, doubly endeared by this
resemblance, and carrying their various researches to perfection, in a world,
where knowledge is totally unobstructed, and in the presence of him, from whom
all wisdom and all goodness flows. Whilst the different mansions of heaven may
resemble, on this principle, the scattered groups of stars in the firmament,
and administer that charming and exquisite variety, which seems to be the
wonderful plan of Providence through the whole creation.

Thus much, at least, may be fairly inferred, that the intellectual
improvements, we have made here, will not perish in the grave. We shall,
doubtless, in this respect, rise with the same views and habits of thinking,
with which we died. How much men at present, differ, from this cause alone, so
that the least, and the most enlightened, almost appear creatures of another
species, needs not be observed. And, though a Boil or a Bacon, would from an
union in goodness only, be happy in the conversation of the most illiterate
saint, yet, on all principles of analogy, it may, reasonably, be presumed, that
their bliss could not fail to be infinitely heightened by the society of those,
who, like them, had spent a whole life in laudable investigations.

But the grand idea is, that the "great I AM will be present!" He, who is the
source of all perfection and blessings! He, who can open, in the mind,
innumerable avenues of inconceivable enjoyment! Whose whole creation is but a
ray, emaning from the plenitude of his happiness and glory, and who will
certainly give his children all that their enlarged faculties can admit of
pleasure and fruition.

Here we are continually mocked with the appearance of happiness, which, on
trial, is always found checkered with ill. Here the sweetest odor has
attendant briars; the most delicious landscape has its shade; the most,
apparently, finished enjoyment, its alloy. Even the sweet, engaging child and
friend, dear to us, as our own souls, bring inseparable anxieties, and a
thousand unquiet apprehensions for their health, their innocence and peace.
Every enviable acquisition is followed with its trouble; every accession of
fortune or interest, with its cares; and, in the height of seeming, wordly
bliss, trouble, still, will find, through various chinks, its moments of
admission. But, in heaven, all will be unmixed, all will be perfect, all will
be serene!

Such is my private opinion of heaven. Such is the paradise of my imagination.
If it be innocent, I have a right to indulge it; if you think it visionary, you
are at liberty to reject it. If it be an error, it is, at least, a pleasing
one; and, if it serves to comfort life, or excite us to any laudable
improvements, it has its uses in society, and must, ultimately, promote the
glory of God.

I hope it is true, because time, which dissolves all earthly things, is ever
on the wing, and I wish to have my intimacy with you, perpetuated through
immortality.

LETTER XLV.
I AM truly concerned for your indisposition. Your ner^es are relaxed, and your
sipirits cannot sail to be affected in proportion. The complaints of this age,
principally, arise from inactivity and over-indulgence. We thwart nature, in a
thousand instances, and, in as many, she retaliates the offense.

We almost dissolve in hot, carpeted rooms, instead of continually exposing our
bodies to the open air. We go to sleep, when we should be rising. We invent
artificial methods of provoking an appetite, which can only be excited, in a
proper manner, by labor and application. And factitious amusements are vainly
bidden to create those spirits, which should arise from exercise and air.

This may answer a temporary purpose, but, in the end, it would destroy the
firmest constitution. It is, in fact, undermining the very ground, upon which
we stand, and digging a premature grave under our feet.

To me, who follow nature, and am only a spectator of the bustling scenes
around me, these things appear to have serious consequences. When I look at
fine, enervated ladies, I tremble, by a sort of involuntary instinct, for the
rising generation.

What a vigilant, systematic care did the ancient legislators bestow upon this
sex! To give them an healthy, vigorous constitution, and to consult, in
particular situations, their ease and cheerfulness, was an object not beneath
the attention of those heroes, who, by their valor and their talents, governed
the world.

If you intend to have any comfort yourself, or be of any solid usefulness to
others, you must be careful of your health. It is a plant, that requires
continual nursing, and without the greatest attention, will gradually die.

You must not dissolve on downy pillows, till your frame is almost thrown into
convulsions. You should rise with the dawn, and exercise gently, in the open
air, particularly, on horseback. A little cheerful company will amuse, and keep
your mind, from preying too much upon itself. Too much, on the other hand, will
oppress your spirits, and aggravate your complaints.

Above all, if you wish a removal of your present indisposition, you must
cautiously abstain from tea, particularly in mornings. However agreeable this
beverage may be, it is, doubtless, the source of weak nerves, hysterical and
hypochondriac affections, and of half those dreadful, paralytic symptoms, which
have lately become so general and alarming.

Instead of languishing in elegant rooms, you should frequently be strolling
into the fields or garden, if you would avoid the bitter draught of an
apothecary, or innocently rob the physician of his fee. Your diet should be
simple and moderate, confined to one dish, and that rather animal, than
vegetable. You should eat sparingly, but often, and use a little wine for your
stomach's sake, and your, often, infirmities. The town has, doubtless,
contributed to your disorder. When you return into the country, its pure air, I
trust, and tranquil scenes will considerably restore you. Nature never intended
such multitudes of people to be crowded together, and breathe the infinite,
noxious effluvia of great cities. They are, in fact, the graves of mankind. We
may exist in them for a time; but it is only in the country, that health has
any thing of its natural vigor, or life, of its enjoyment.

Do not tamper with your constitution. The whole power of medicine, in your
case, does not afford the shadow of relief. Disorders of this kind baffle all
the penetration of the medi^^^ fraternity. When they pronounce our case
^e^^^us, it is only saying, in so many words, that they cannot give us any
adequate assistance.

The very nature, form, or texture of the nerves are, to this day, by no means,
clearly ascertained, or fully understood. Perhaps, they compose that subtle and
amazing union of body and soul, of matter and spirit, which eludes all enquiry.
When they are disordered, I know no method, but to avoid all extremes, to fly
into the country and keep the mind, if possible, easy and serene.

LETTER XLVI.
IF I had the opportunity, it would give me great pleasure to the of your party
to Bath. But indeed I am quite fixed and stationary here; unable to move, or
visit even my nearest friends. Every day brings, along with it, a train of
engagements; and almost every hour, substantial duties, that cannot be omitted.

Nature, at times, is disposed to repine, and think such confinement an
intolerable hardship, till I begin to reflect, that all durable pleasure is
derived from employment, and that the only, real di^nity of life consists in
d^ing good.

They, who are continually in motion, and varying the scene, are not that I can
discover, more satisfied than myself. They carry their private burdens, along
with them, over hills and mountains; and, when they have exhausted the whole
circle of pleasures, still there is a great void in the soul.

I was once, for five weeks at Bath, and recollect it with a mixture of
gratitude and pleasure. It was particularly serviceable to my health; and, on
the whole, made impressions on my mind, that will never be erased.

The very ride to this place will amazingly revive you. Worcestershire, at this
season of the year, is one grand magnificent garden, whose air is perfume,
whose scenery is blossoms, and whose walls are the spacious canopy of heaven.
If you make Bristol in your way, I dare promise, that your curiosity will be
amply gratified by a sight of that ancient and extensive city. Though the
place, in itself, is low and dirty, yet the adjacent country is, perhaps, the
most picturesque and beautiful in Britain. Clifton Hill is deliciously
romantic; on one side commanding a full prospect of the city, and looking, on
the other, toward that magnificent ocean, which brings the inhabitants all
their merchandise and riches. At the foot of this eminence, you will descry the
medicinal spring of the hot-wells, so celebrated for their efficacy in
consumptive cases. Here you will be shocked with a number of walking skeletons,
who are yellow with sickness, dying of consumptions, and breathing in their
sighs, the emptiness and vanity of all human things. Thus is no human pleasure
to be unmixed; and thus are thorns to be intwined with the rose.

King's Weston Hill, in the environs of this place, has lately been celebrated
by a poet. But the copy comes not up to the original. Nature has painted
better, than the bard. It is visited by all strangers not only for its own,
magnificent beauties, and wonderful scenery, but as an opportunity of beholding
the sea, which here opens, all at once, in a grand and unexpected expansion, on
the astonished eye. If you are fortunate enough to have a fine day, you cannot
behold a more sublime or striking curiosity.

When you arrive at your journey's end, every thing will desight you. Regular
streets, magnificent buildings, sumptuous public rooms, delightful prospects,
walls, hills, valleys, fountains, gardens, company, amusements -- all will
proclaim, that you are at Bath. You will feel, that this is the paradise of
Britain; and that the goddess of health has here, more particularly, fixed her
abode. The mind, it is true, carries its secret burdens with it, into every
situation; but I know no place more calculated to efface melancholy
impressions, or do away tho bad effects of over exertion. The waters are a
wonderful cordial to the stomach, and a powerful remover of that indigestion,
which, to the studious and the fair of sedentary lives, is become so very
general a complaint; and the mind insensibly, loses its little, fanciful
burdens in the general gaiety and sprightliness of the scene. -- There are, it
must be confessed, many invalids; but there are, likewise, multitudes of young
people of both sexes, whose manners are very highly engaging, and whose faces
wear a perpetual smile.

The amusements, to which you are admitted at a very moderate expense, are
conducted with the s^rictest order and decorum; and in the charms and splendor
of a ball, as it is managed here, one would be led to fancy, that life was
wholly composed of pleasure, if it did not occur, that all this brilliant
throng have their private vexations, and the heart its own bitterness within.

The Abbey church pleases me more, than almost any sacred edifice, I have seen
in the kingdom. -- It has not the grandeur and magnificence of some others, but
it is more calculated for use, and yields to none in elegance and neatness.

Lady H -- 's chapel is visited by all strangers, as an elegant curiosity of
the solemn kind, more perhaps, from the melody and sweetness of the singing,
than motives of devotion. The good woman, probably founded it in this bosom of
pleasure, with a view of calling sinners of distinction to repentance. Her
intention was amiable; and her piety, though grounded on the narrow and
intolerant principles of Calvin, is entitled to respect. When people openly
give their-money, zeal, talents and labor to any cause, we may trust their
sincerity. Nor should criticism expose the little involuntary errors of those,
who scrupulously act up to the dictates of their conscience, and have thus
literally, "left all and followed Christ."

Lady H --, it is said, has much injured her private fortune by her religious
generosity; in building chapels, supporting preachers, and many other public,
and private donations. Prudence, surely did not warrant so extravagant a
sacrifice. But it is not necessary to expose a conduct, which so sew will ever
be disposed to imitate. Overrighteousness is not, by any means, the sin of this
age.

I was indeed, not a little disgusted with the preacher of the evening, on
which I happened to be at her ladyship's chapel. His discourse was a violent,
inflammatory harangue without elegance, reasoning or connection; and consisted,
for the greater part, of a severe abuse of the established ^^^gy. We are,
perhaps, too languid and remiss in the discharge of our duty; but to expose
with virulence and rancour, is not surely the method to reform us. Declamation
or satire irritates. It is solid argument alone, mixed with love and
gentleness, which soften and converts.

These people have not the gracefulness of piety. They display not in their
looks or manner, or censures, the "beauty of holiness." A severe critic,
perhaps, would accuse them of spiritual pride, and give them this motto, Stand
from me, for I am holier than thou. Their preachers appear deficient in general
knowledge. They do not study force of argument or embellishments of style. --
They are not, indeed, without zeal; but it is wild, extravagant and frantic.
They do not seem pitiful or courteous, or to be possessed of that charity,
which thinke^^ not evil.

The greatest disgrace to Bath are the gambling parties at the lower rooms.
Would you believe it possible? You may see people of the first distinction who
are actuated with the infernal rage of play, mixing with a set of the very
lowest, mercenary sharpers! One would suppose that their pride and taste alone
would not submit to such a degradation. But so little is all station, when it
has forgotten its real dignity; so grovelling is the human mind, when it has
(...) sight of the true source of happiness, and (...) hewing out for itself,
broken cisterns, that can hold no water! Even Chesterfield himself, with all
his parade of graces, was a dupe to this most abominable practice!

The Avon, which runs through this city, filled me with great ideas.
Shakespeare, Stratford, the Jubilee, immortal talents and immortal fame rushed
into my mind, as often as I saw its soft, flowing stream roll silently along.

I should wish you to take a view of Prior Park, as a place which has so long
been sacred to science and the muses. The late Mr. Allen was the Maecenas of
his times. You cannot tread the ground about it, without recollecting many of
those celebrated wits, who were often invited to this hospitable retreat, and
entertained its possessor with all that luxury of taste and luscious flow of
soul which genius inspires.

A great character stamps an immortality on the places he frequents, or the
houses he inhabits. -- Prior Park will be remembered, when its elegance is
mouldered. Fancy will plant a laurel round this mansion of taste, which will
continue to be green when the mansion itself shall have crumbled into atoms.

You will much oblige me by a frequency of letters, whilst you are at Bath.
They will improve your own talent at the descriptive. To me they will give a
more lively recollection of pleasures, which I once enjoyed. They will retrace
upon my mind, agreeable scenes and images, which I have, formerly, beheld. They
will interest an heart, that always vibrates to your pleasures or your pains.
They will relieve spirits that are too much oppressed by a variety of thoughts.
Whilst I read them, I shall forget, that I had ever a complaint, or that I ever
was unhappy.

THE END.

