DISINTERESTED LOVE, THE ORNAMENT OF THE CHRISTIAN, AND THE DUTY OF MAN. A
SERMON DELIVERED AT NEW YORK, JUNE 5, 1790; BY SAMUEL AUSTIN, A. M. PASTOR OF A
CHURCH OF CHRIST IN WORCESTER. And published in compliance with the request of
a number of the hearers,

They have made virtue so mercenary a thing, and have talked so much of its
rewards, that one can hardly tell what there is in it, after all, which is
worth rewarding.

SHAFTSBURY. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY WILLIAM DURELL, No. 198, QUEEN STREET.
MDCCXCI.

DISINTERESTED LOVE, THE DISTINGUISHING ORNAMENT OF THE CHRISTIAN, AND THE DUTY
OF MAN. A SERMON.
PHIL. II. 4. Look not every Man on his own Things, but every Man also on the
Things of Others.


THIS precept of the Apostle is plain, and being delivered under the authority
of inspiration, is infinitely binding.

THE great duty which it teaches us, is, to regard with a benevolent affection,
and to endeavor to promote with correspondent engagedness, the temporal,
social, and spiritual interests of our fellow men. Though the precept does not
prohibit a suitably subordinate care for our own welfare, so far as it can be
consulted, in consistency with the claims of benevolence to others; it
particularly inculcates, a disinterested concern for, and suitable exertions to
advance, as in itself a distinct, and desirable object, the good of others. For
by the things of others is undoubtedly meant their good, comprising their
external prosperity, their peace, reputation, social comfort, and whatever is
absolutely valuable to them. This good of others, as in itself a valuable
object, the Apostle directs us to consult. As the object is of a disinterested
nature, the affection enjoined must be disinterested. From the text then, this
doctrine may be fairly drawn, that DISINTERESTED love is at the foundation of
the Christian character, and absolutely binding on all mankind.

IN the prosecution of the discourse, I shall I. ENDEAVOR to give you an
explanation of what is meant by Disinterested Love, by exhibiting its nature,
and the manner in which it will operate and express itself. II. PROVE the
doctrine. III. ATTEMPT to answer some objections which have been raised against
it; and then close with an improvement.


1. I AM to give you an explanation of what is meant by Disinterested Love, by
exhibiting its nature and the manner in which it will operate and express
itself. The term disinterested is not found in the Scriptures. We however make
use of it, to communicate an idea of that love, which our text and many other
passages of the Bible enjoin, because it more concisely, and more forcibly
expresses that idea, than it can be expressed in any other manner.

DISINTERESTED love may be defined thus, It is a love to an object for what it
is in itself; a disposition to consult and rejoice in its good, as an object,
abstractly considered. It is a benevolent regard, which one being feels for the
good and happiness of another, proportionate to its apparent intrinsic worth
and importance, and is a rejoicing in, and seeking the good of that other,
without any regard to personal benefit to be derived from it. Disinterested
love is, in its peculiar nature the contrast of that which is interested.

INTERESTED love is a regard to a being merely on account of the benefits he
confers, or which are expected from him: so that strictly and properly speaking
the being is not loved but his benefits. In this, Satan supposed the love which
Job appeared to exercise toward GOD consisted. Satan imagined that Job's
dutiful respect to the DEITY was founded solely on the blessings with which GOD
had favored him, and that if those blessings should be withdrawn, and GOD
should lay his hand heavy upon him, in a way of chastisement, Job's apparent
love would become extinct, and his enmity rise to a flame. see Job 1.9. Then
Satan answered the Lord and said, Does Job fear GOD for naught? Have not thou
made an hedge about him and about his house, and about all that he has on
every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands and his substance is
increased on every side. But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he
has, and he will curse thee to thy face. This representation exhibits the love
of Job as ultimately mercenary and selfish. Of this nature was that love, which
influenced many of those who followed our Savior when they attended him with
professions of respect, not because they were really attached to Christ, or the
interests of his kingdom, but because they found their own temporal ends
answered by following him. This is clearly intimated in what Christ said to
them, Verily I say unto you, ye follow me not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled. This love Christ speaks of,
as common to men in an unsanctified state. He tells us that they love those who
love them, that they do good to those who do good to them, and lend to those,
of whom they hope to receive as much again. Though they have a kind of love, it
is not that genuine benevolent affection, which terminates in the good of
others. It is of a sinister nature, and in all its operations and fruits has an
ultimate direction to self. All the views and aims of those whom it governs,
center finally in self. Self is their GOD, their supreme object of regard, in
whose service all their powers are employed, and their zeal exerted. This love
does not refuse to embrace others, so far as they can be considered the
instruments of its own gratification, and as subserving its own selfish schemes
and wishes.

IT may even lead the subjects of it to exercise some complacency in the DEITY,
so far as their imaginations represent him in a partial view, and they can
consider him as the author of their pleasures and as invariably consulting
their happiness. But it will go no farther.

ESSENTIALLY and widely different from this, is the disinterested love which we
are endeavoring to delienate. Self is not its object or its end. It is an
enlarged affection of heart, which looks at the good of others ultimately, and
for itself; under the prevailing influence of which, the subject of it
rejoices, in the existence, glory, and happiness of GOD; in the existence,
exaltation and felicity of inferior intelligents; and in all the blessedness
which is shed abroad, or is yet to be extended through the universe. Influenced
by this love, he rejoices in the triumphs of redeeming grace, wishes for the
best good of all around him, even of his bitterest enemies, and feels a
sensible pleasure in every instance of the advancement of their temporal,
social, and spiritual interests; without taking into consideration any supposed
good to be derived from thence to himself. Indeed so ardently does he desire,
and so highly does he value this good of the DEITY and of his fellow creatures,
that he takes his chief satisfaction in it. And so far is he from regarding
others as only subservient to his own interests, that he is willing to give up
his own interest for the greater good of others. In every bosom, in which this
love has the ascendency, it will operate and express itself in a conscientious
obedience to all duty, at the hazard of reputation, property, and life.

WITH respect to GOD the supreme object of it, it will operate in a cordial
complacency in his character as in itself infinitely amiable and excellent. For
a benevolent creature cannot but love a being perfectly benevolent, and GOD is
Love. It will operate in a sincere veneration of the divine government as a
government uniformly equitable, and embracing in its nature and issue the most
noble and benevolent objects. Viewing the divine administration as a system of
holiness, and conspiring to secure the greatest glory and happiness of the
intelligent creation, the benevolent subject of this love will frequently, and
devoutly adopt the language of inspiration, The Lord reigns let the earth
rejoice, let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof, and join the rapturous
song of the Redeemed, Alleluiah, for the Lord GOD omnipotent reigns.

THIS love will operate in an acquiescence in the decrees of GOD; in the
providential allotments of GOD, and make the happy subject of it willing to be
in the hand of GOD, as clay in the hand of the Potter. For if the divine
government in its execution, be a proper object of benevolent acquiescence and
joy, then it must reflect higher honor upon the DEITY, to have planned it from
Eternity, than to have stumbled upon it by any fortunate contingence. And if
GOD be infinitely lovely, as a holy and benevolent Being, then it must be
grateful to every good man, that all things are at his disposal.

FURTHER, this love will lead the subject of it to subscribe to the divine
laws, as holy, just, and good; because they are calculated not only to secure
the greatest good of the universe, but the temporal and eternal happiness of
every one who obeys them.

THE man who is under the influence of this disinterested affection, will
embrace objects according to their worth and importance. He will seek the
divine glory as dearer to him than any of his own interests. He will be
cheerfully disposed to consecrate his all to this glorious object, and to lay
himself, with all his interests for time and for eternity at the feet of his
Maker; and if his own welfare interfere with the great and benevolent ends of
the divine government, he will be willing to sacrifice so small a trifle,
rather than those ends should be frustrated.

THIS love will express itself in the outward obedience of a pious and useful
life. He in whose bosom it reigns, will endeavor to honor GOD by an adherence
to his worship, his institutions and cause at whatever expense. He will be
strictly careful to refrain from all acts of impiety as dishonorary to GOD, and
injurious in their tendency. He will ardently pray for, and by actual exertion
endeavor to be instrumental in the advancement of the Gospel of the Son of
GOD, as a system of grace and happiness; and nothing will give him so much
pleasure, as to hear of the conversion of souls, and the progress of grace in
the hearts of men.

TOWARD men, this love reigning in the heart of a true christian, will be a
fountain of beneficent actions. It will incline him to acts of forbearance and
forgiveness toward his enemies, to be tender of the reputation, peace and
outward prosperity of all those with whom he is associated in domestic and
civil society, or in the bonds of the Gospel, and to maintain a harmless
deportment. It will not prompt him to reproach and calumny. It will not allow
him to wish to build up his own temporal interests on the ruin of the
reputation or property of another. He will consider the peace and social
happiness of his neighbor as dear to him, and will be solicitous not to
disturb them. He will be happy to see them promoted and will rather suffer
himself than be the instrument of his suffering.

FARTHER, he will be active in positive exertions to do good. His hand will be
open to relieve the distressed. The hungry, the naked, the widow and the
orphan; the family of sickness and affliction, will be the objects of his
tenderness and charity. He will sympathize with them under their affliction,
and it will afford him solid satisfaction to contribute to their relief. He
will love the pleasing condescension of communicating council or instruction to
them, or in any way promoting their felicity. The good of the public, of useful
societies, and institutions he will endeavor to advance; and above all, the
eternal salvation of his fellow creatures, as that is by far the most important
of all other social objects, and in itself infinitely desirable, he will
ardently pray for, and to this will his exertions, his counsels, his
persuasions and his example be chiefly directed.

IF it should be asked whether this love to others, and regard to their
welfare, does not connect with it sensible pleasure, and whether therefore it
can be properly termed a disinterested affection?

I WOULD answer. There can be no question, but that the love which we have been
describing, brings with it, its own reward. It essentially involves in it a
pleasure of the most exalted kind. There is a solid joy attending it, which is
undescribably sweet. Yea, the benevolent man's happiness lies in the happiness
of others, and the more his heart expands with the love of GOD and his fellow
creatures, the more happy he is. But this is the effect of the affection; not
the motive or object of it. The good man does not seek his neighbor's
happiness that he may enjoy the pleasure of seeking it. This would be
contradictory. For, were this the case, his neighbor would not be loved at all
in fact, only as an instrument of his pleasure. Disinterested love terminates
not in personal enjoyment, but in the good of others. The man who is the
subject of it, regards the good and happiness of others ultimately. And though
he feels the most sensible pleasure in the exercise of his affection, and
though it conduces directly to the security of his higest present and eternal
interests, this is by no means the motive or object of it, but its spontaneous
effect and fruit. And when we speak of disinterested love, we have reference
merely to the object.

IF any should ask still farther, whether by disinterested love be meant, such
an entire and abstracted regard to the good of others, as implies a total
disregard to, and indifference about our own good?

IT may be answered, that disinterested love, strictly speaking, has no
ultimate respect whatever to self, as self. But while we contend for this, we
do not mean to contend for it, to the total exclusion of all regard to our own
private good. A subordinate, an impartial, a disinterested concern for our own
happiness, is consistent with a disinterested and superior regard to the
greater good of others, and disinterested love will not give up or disregard
the former when it can be consulted in consistency with the latter.
Disinterested love, being absolutely impartial in it nature, cannot lead a man
to an indifferency respecting his own private happiness, but to value it, just
as he would the happiness of another in similar circumstances, and just as
another person, disconnected from him, and viewing things impartially, would
value it. And there can be no doubt but that saints and angels in heaven, who
exercise a perfectly disinterested and supreme regard to the glory of GOD, and
the good of other intelligents, have also at the same time a real, though a
perfectly impartial, subordinate, and vastly inferior value for their own
happiness. Hence the manner of expression which the Apostle uses in the text,
"But every man also on the things of others," is so far from millitating as
some insinuate, against the doctrine of disinterested love, that it rather
corroborates it. For while it implicitly teaches, that it is our duty to
entertain a due regard to our own happiness, it teaches, that that regard must
be impartial or disinterested, so as to admit a due benevolence to others.
Subordinate, I say, for disinterested love will never allow private, personal
interests to interfere with the public, and more extensive good.

HAVING briefly shown you what is meant by disinterested love, and illustrated
the manner in which it will operate and express itself. I proceed

II. To prove the doctrine, that such disinterested love is at the foundation
of the christian character and absolutely binding on all mankind.

THIS part of the subject, seems to divide itself into two branches.

I. LET us consider the proof which may be produced to evince, that
disinterested love is at the foundation of the christian character. When I say
it is at the foundation of the christian character, I mean, that it is
essential to all evangelical obedience, so that without it there can be no
genuine renovation of nature, or any saving conformity to the the Gospel. And
in proof of this proposition, let it be observed,

I. THAT disinterested love is the love which the sum of the moral law
requires. Thou shall love the Lord thy GOD, with all thy heart, and withal thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as
thyself. In this summary view of the moral law, the objects of love are, GOD,
and our neighbor. In them our love is to terminate. They are to be loved
ultimately as objects in themselves considered, disconnected from any selfish
interests of ours, and without any considerations whether that love in its
nature or issue will conduce to our own personal benefit or not. The command is
unconditional and positive, in no measure suspended on the condition of its
contributing to our advantage. And if the affection required, did not produce
to us the least degree of enjoyment for the present, or if there were no
promises of future reward made to it, the command would still be absolutely
binding.

IT cannot be supposed that this command obliges us to love GOD only so far as
he administers to our enjoyment; and that the moment he counteracts our
happiness, even though it be in perfect justice, he forfeits all claim to our
affection: This would, even by divine constitution make self, the supreme and
ultimate object of regard. This would make us respect the DEITY only as
subservient to our wishes, and would be a requisition of no love to him at all.
It would totally preclude on his part all claim to supreme homage, and
complacency.

NOR can it be supposed that the command obliging us to love our neighbor, has
an ultimate reference to our own happiness, and is suspended on the condition
of its conducing to it. This would involve a similar absurdity. GOD and our
neighbor are therefore the express and ultimate objects, to whom our love is
directed in this summary of the divine law. And the reason of this is obvious.

WE are under infinite obligations to love the blessed GOD for what he is in
himself, on account of the infinite worth of his existence, glory, and
happiness; and the infinite amiableness of his character. So absolutely
perfect, excellent, and amiable is that assemblage of divine attributes, with
which the DEITY is clothed; so altogether equitable and benevolent his
government, and so wise his laws and dispensations, that it is impossible but
that every intelligent creature, be his personal circumstances and prospects
what they may, should be under obligations to love him with all their powers,
and to rejoice in him as GOD over all blessed for ever. --

AND we cannot but be bound to love our neighbor, and in the exercise of that
love to seek his welfare; because his existence and happiness are in themselves
of great worth and importance.

DISINTERESTED love then, is the love which the moral law summarily requires.
It is the essence of holiness and of all obedience. But the scripture expressly
assures us, "that without holiness no man can see the Lord;" That it is vain to
call Christ Lord, Lord, while we do not the things which he requires; that the
unrighteous mall not inherit the kingdom of GOD; and that those who are
peculiarly GOD'S people, have his law put into their hearts. The undeniable
consequence is, that disinterested love is at the foundation of the christian
character.

II. THE son of GOD has decidedly made the possession of his spirit, and an
imitation of his example, not only our duty, but absolutely essential to our
saving interest in him. If any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of
his. This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, and
he that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me. My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me Hence the apostolic
exhortation Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ. From these
passages we are evidently taught, that all those who yield any true obedience
to the Gospel, and are savingly interested in its blessings are, in a measure,
under the government of the same temper, aims and affections, which actuated
Christ.

BUT will any man pretend that self was the end of all our Savior's
illustrious actions? Will any man presume to say, that in his incarnation,
self-denial, acts of beneficence, and submission to the agonies of the cross,
he was self-interested? That in this astonishing exhibition of love and
goodness, he ultimately regarded selfish objects? What advantages could that
divine personage possibly obtain, who was in the eternal, independent, and
immutable possession of all glory and blessedness? What interested ends could
he possibly have in view, who was the sovereign proprietor of heaven and earth,
the eternal fountain of good; by whose agency all creatures are every moment
sustained, and on whose providence and beneficence they are absolutely
dependent? What say the scriptures? For our sakes he became poor, that we
through his poverty might become rich. This is love, love of the purest, and
most impartial nature, not that we have loved GOD, but that he has loved us,
and sent his son to die for us for the love of Christ constrains us, Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? The son of man came to seek and save
that which was lost. Now was all this love a mere selfish affection? Is it
selfishness which we venerate in this divine Philanthropist? No. It is a
fervent charity of heart, which sought not its own. It is the charming dignity
of an unfeigned, and spontaneous benevolence, totally removed from any thing of
a selfish nature; a benevolence stronger than death, and which sustained the
illustrious sufferer, through such a scene of humiliation, as the universe
never beheld. Attend heartily to the mere language of these passages, and you
cannot, you will not dispute it. Consider the aspect of his life, and the
history of his atonement. Give impartial credit to the testimony of inspired
truth, and you will acknowledge that it was an ardent, disinterested love,
which ultimately respected his father's honor, the happiness of the universe,
and the salvation of precious souls, which carried the divine Jesus to mount
Calvary, which has gone with him to heaven, and which will for ever burn in his
bosom, as a perpetual and inextinguishable flame.

NOW as the members must be of the same nature with the head, as the branches
must partake of the essential qualities of the vine, the consequence follows,
that disinterested love is at the foundation of the Christian character, and
essential to all saving conformity to the Gospel.

III. THE examples of the Apostles, may be produced as additional testimony in
demonstration of the doctrine before us. The Apostles expressed in their public
preaching, and the leading actions of their lives, not a sordid, narrow
selfishness, which ultimately respected their own interests either temporal or
eternal; but a disinterested regard to the honor of their master, and the
highest happiness of their fellow men. That they were under the government of
this noble propensity of soul, they gave undeniable proof, in their voluntary
renunciation of their worldly ease and temporal prospects, and their uniform
submission to every kind of sufferings, for the furtherance of the Gospel.
Hence says St. Paul, "We seek not yours but you." and again, Even as I please
all men, in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many,
that they may be saved.

NOW holiness is the same throughout every part of the universe. The spirit of
Christ's kingdom is but one. This only is the proper basis of that union spoken
of by Christ, That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, that they
also may be one in us, I in them, and thou in me, that they also may be perfect
in one, and that the world may know that thou have loved them, as thou have
loved me. Is not here then, my brethren, unquestionable proof of the
proposition before us? --

IV. FARTHER evidence in support of the doctrine, that disinterested love is
essential to the christian character, may be produced from many passages of
scripture, which explicitly establish it. To this purpose, you will suffer me
to request your attention to the following. Matt. v. 44. But I say unto you,
love your enemies. Bless them that curse you. Do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you. Luke vi. 31.
"And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. For if ye
love them which love you, what thank have you? For sinners also love those that
love them. And if ye lend to those of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have
ye? For sinners also lend to sinners to receive as much again. But love your
enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall
be great, and ye shall be the children of the highest, for he is kind unto the
unthankful, and to the evil.

THE love here enjoined, as constituting the distinguishing character of
Christ's disciples, is certainly of a disinterested nature. Self-interest is
not the spring of it. We are enjoined to do good without any respect to
personal advantage, from a mere principle of loving to do good, even to those
whom our selfish affections naturally prompt us to hate and injure. And lest we
should imagine that this love was not essential to the christian character,
Christ repeatedly assures us, that if we have it not, and do not act from the
influence of it, we are no better than publicans and sinners. Correspondent to
which, are the words of Christ. Luke 14.26. If any man come to me and hate not
his father and mother, and wife, and children and brethren, and sisters, yea,
and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. i.e. If a man have not that
disinterested love to me and my kingdom, which shall dispose him to a voluntary
sacrifice of his own private interests for my sake, and for the sake of the
Gospel, he belongs to the kingdom of my great enemy, and cannot be admitted to
a share in those blessings, which I will bestow on all, who truly take up their
cross, and follow me. To the same inport, and enjoining the same thing, are the
words of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 10. 24. Let no man seek his own, but every man
another's wealth. In the same manner he speaks of that charity, the nature of
which he particularly delineates in 1 Cor. 13 chapter and of which he says, Though
I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge;
and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no
charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me
nothing; and, which he says in another place, is the fulfilling of the law; of
this charity, he gives this distinguishing characteristic, she seeks another
own. Hence he reprobates the opposite principle of sinners, as repugnant to the
spirit of Christianity. "For I have no man," says he in his epistle to the
Ephesians. like-minded, who will naturally care for your state, for all seek
their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

ADDRESSING his son Timothy on the perilous times that were to come, he speaks
of this, as one of the greatest evils that should attend them, For men shall be
lovers of their ownselves. I need not comment on these passages, because they
expressly teach the doctrine we are now supporting. They unequivocally assert,
that disinterested love is at the foundation of the christian character, or
they teach nothing, they are perfectly unintelligible, and nothing can be
understood from the sacred volume.

BUT it is time for me to proceed to the other branch of the doctrine, and to
show that disinterested love is binding on all mankind.

AFTER what has been advanced to prove, that it is essential to the christian
character, much need not be said to demonstrate, that as the essence of duty,
it is obligatory upon men of all descriptions. For surely, all mankind are
bound to the same obedience, which the true christian renders. If disinterested
love was the actuating principle in the Redeemer of the world, if it was the
grand impelling affection in the inspired Apostles, and if it was taught to
Christ's followers, by such numerous precepts, as that charity without which
they could be nothing, then its universal obligation is indubitable.

BUT that it may be rendered, if possible, still more indisputable, suffer me
to make some additional observations from the nature of things, and from the
express commands of GOD respecting it.

I. IT is obvious from the nature of things, that all mankind are bound to
exercise this disinterested love, and to act in all the transactions of life
from the governing influence of it. Can it be reasonable that self should be
the object of our supreme and ultimate regard? Can it be right that all our
solicitude and concern should center on mere personal interests? Can it be just
for us to view our little selves as of such mighty importance, as to entertain
no regard for other beings, only as they contribute to our felicity, and are
subservient to our purposes? What are we! creatures of a day, whose breath is
in our nostrils, who hang upon our Makers energy; what are we, that we should
be the sole objects of our own regard? Of what little comparative consequence
are we and our interests, in the scale of being? What mighty loss would the
Universe sustain if we were struck out of it? Is not the existence and glory of
GOD, of infinitely more worth and value, than any interests of ours? Is not the
good, the happiness of the moral Creation of far, yea, of inconceiveably
greater consequence than ours? And is not the happiness of an individual of our
fellow creatures, of as much worth as our own happiness? For a man then to love
himself supremely and solely, is it not to make an idol of self, and to raise
himself in his own views and esteem, far above the infinite Creator, and the
hosts of intelligent creatures? Is it not in effect to place all beings as
prostrate at his own feet? And what is this, but a wicked, base contempt of the
infinite GOD, and other beings, repugnant to the plainest dictates of reason
and common sense!

EVERY object deserves love and regard in proportion to its intrinsic worth and
excellence. Hence the Deity has a claim to more regard than the whole Universe
of creatures. And the good of the collective body of intelligent creatures, is
of vastly more worth and importance than ours. And the existence and happiness
of a fellow creature, being of as much worth and importance, have a claim to as
much benevolent regard. It is this disinterested benevolence, this ardent
diffusive love my brethren, which links holy beings in heaven together, into
one perfect harmonious whole. Were selfishness to reign among them, it would
produce universal jar, animosity, and ruin. It is a base narrow selfishness,
which is at the foundation of the wars, tumults, rivalships, envying, and
bickering of the present sinful world. Were men to consult the good and
happiness of each other as much as they do their own, the felicity of paradise
would be restored. Selfishness then, is the subversion of all order, propriety
and happiness.

BUT that all men are under obligations to exercise this disinterested
affection to other beings, is put out of all dispute by the particular, and
peremptory injunctions of the Deity. Thou shall love the Lord thy GOD, with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor
as thyself. This is the summary of the divine law, given by the authority of
GOD, and enforced by the most awful sanctions. And it has been shown that
disinterested love is the love here enjoined. Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others. But love ye your enemies,
and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again. Let no man seek his own, but
every man another wealth. These are express commands of the living GOD. They
enjoin the love we have been describing, and cursed be he whosoever continues
not in all things written in the book of the law to do them.

I AM now to answer one or two objections to the foregoing doctrines.

I. The passage of the Apostle in Heb. xii. 2. is sometimes mentioned as an
objection to the doctrine of disinterested love, Looking unto Jesus the author
and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the
cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of
GOD. The objection from this passage supposes, that the joy which was set
before Christ was an interested object; that it was an additional joy, or
felicity, to which as a personal acquisition, he had ultimate respect. It
supposes that the great end, which Christ had in view was his own advantage,
the advancement of his own happiness. But is it true, that the son of GOD was
influenced, ultimately by selfish motives, in that scene of humiliation and
sufferings, which Christians are wont to contemplate with so much admiration?
Was this the nature of that joy which was set before Christ? Was it mere
personal enjoyment? Was it not on the other hand a benevolent joy, the joy of
seeing, as the result of his sufferings and death, his Father eminently and
eternally glorified; was it not the joy of seeing the empire of happiness
extended, the blessedness of the universe augmented, and millions of precious
souls delivered from sin and endless torments, and raised to the enjoyment of
immortal glory? Well might the benevolent heart of Christ rejoice in the
prospect of this inconceivable good. This I venture to say was the joy which
was set before Christ. This it was which made him so nobly endure the cross,
and despise the shame. It was a joy purely disinterested. And for any one to
say, that it was what the objection supposes, that Christ was ultimately
selfish, in his submission to death, is to advance a position, which militates
with all the representations of the Gospel, which obscures the glory of the
Savior and perverts one of the noblest passages in the sacred volume.

II. Another objection to the doctrine of disinterested love, is drawn from
what is said of Moses in the xi Chap. of Hebrews 26 verse, Esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches, than the treasures in Egypt, for he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward. The objection raised (...) as it is
delineated in the holy Bible, is of so uniformly a disinterested complexion,
that it of itself fully refutes the objection without any comment.

I shall now close what has been said with an IMPROVEMENT.

I. From what has been exhibited we infer, that those are guilty of a great and
very pernicious error, who deny the existence of disinterested love, and our
obligations to the exercise of it.

FROM what has been advanced in this discourse, it is obvious; that
disinterested love is the substance of all duty, and of all moral beauty. It is
the fulfiling of the first, and second commandments of the law. It is the great
bond of harmony and happiness in the heavenly world, and without it, there
cannot possibly exist in the heart of man, any real conformity to that glorious
example of love and goodness, which is set us in the Gospel. Those therefore
who deny this, as essential to the christian character, and binding on every
man, do in effect deny all religion, they take the part of infidelity, and
convert the whole glorious system of Gospel duty into a scheme of mere
selfishness.

II. From our subject we learn, that human depravity is radically founded in
selfishness. Disinterested love is the substance of that holiness which is
required of us. Of course selfishness must be the substance of that rebellion
for which we are condemned. This is the idolatry which GOD will punish with
inextinguishable burnings. Sinners hate GOD because he stands in the way of
their selfish propensities; because he will not let the wicked go unpunished.
They hate his government and laws; because they care for nothing but their own
selfish objects, and because the government and laws of GOD clash with those
objects. And if we will impartially examine the principles of human
intercourse, we shall find that selfishness is the foundation of all those
moral disorders, which disturb society. Men are envious, revengful, covejous,
fraudulent, treacherous, thievish, debauched, because they love their own
interests, and pleasures more than the reputation, peace and happiness of their
neighbors.

III. OUR subject affords this inference, that all external performances of a
religious aspect, which result from motives of selfishness, constitute no real
obedience, and do not enter inot the nature of that holiness, without which no
man shall see GOD. If on the supposition of being destitute of that charity
which seeks not her own, St. Paul could say, though I speak with the tongue
of men and angels, I am nothing. And though I give all my goods to feed the
poor, and my body to be burned, it profits me nothing; then certainly,
whatever external performances result not from this principle within, are mere
dross, and no proper or acceptable compliance with the divine law whatever.

IF a man should serve his country with ever so much external diligence and
activity, though his service in itself might essentially contribute to the
public good; yet, if it all were the result of selfishness and dictated by
motives of self-interest, not by a superior regard to the divine glory and the
good of men, it would be nothing in the divine account. Were a man to
contribute ever so largely to the relief of the distressed, yet if it be done
through an ultimate regard to his own private ends, and not from disinterested
motives, it would be nothing. Hence says Christ, When thou do thine alms, do
not found a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues, and in
the corners of the streets, that they may have glory of men Verily I say unto
you, They have their reward. But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand
know what thy right hand does. If men externally fast and pray ever so
constantly, yet if self is the spring of their apparent duty, it enters not
into the nature of obedience. Therefore says the apostle James, Ye ask and ye
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.
Hence the precept, Whether therefore, ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do
all to the glory of GOD.

IV. OUR subject teaches us, that the thousand years reign of Christ on earth,
in the eminent enlargement and glory of the Church, predicted by scripture
prophecy, will be attended with unspeakable glory and happiness. Inspired truth
predicts, that the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, even as
the waters cover the sea; that the time shall come, when Satan shall be bound
for a thousand years, and not be suffered to deceive the nations any more till
those thousand years shall be fulfilled; when the kingdoms of this world, shall
become the kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ; when many shall run
to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased; and when all shall know GOD, from
the greatest unto the least; and the nations of the world shall beat their
swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks, and shall learn
war no more. Such a blessed period has not yet gladened this sinful distracted
world. It is therefore yet to come. It is advancing as fast as the wheels of
time roll round, and probably it is not far distant. What glory my brethern
will distinguish this illustrious scene! Here will be the reign of holiness,
and holiness is love. Disinterested love will here erect her throne, and extend
her benign and salutary way. The selfish propensities will give way to the
milder and more peaceful influence of impartial affection. Hence frauds,
treacheries and rapine will cease, and mankind will live together as brethren,
anticipating in the grateful fervor of their love to GOD and one another, the
undisturbed felicity of that world, where love will be perfect and interminable.

V. Let me close, by calling upon you all, my christian brethern and fellow
sinners, in the name of that GOD who is love, to exercise and uniformly to act
from the influence of that love which is the fulfilling of the law. If ye live
destitute of this holy affection, as the supreme and governing principle of
your souls, ye will be cumberers of the ground, ye will live under the curse of
your maker, and at last lie down in sorrow. If that charity which seeks not
her own have the ascendency in your hearts, and transfuse itself in your lives,
ye will resemble the divine Philanthropist, who died for us. You will live
usefully and happily; you will leave the world in triumph, and heaven will be
your residence forever. Now to GOD only wise and our Savior, be glory and
dominion Amen.

FINIS.

