MR. ADAMS'S SERMONS ON THE FALL AND RECOVERY OF MANKIND.

Our LAPSE in ADAM, and REDEMPTION by CHRIST considered, IN TWO SERMONS,
PREACHED AT STERLING, IN THE COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS, The 16th of
JANUARY, 1791.

BY ZABDIEL ADAMS, A. M. PASTOR of the CHURCH in Lunenburg.

Published at the desire of many who heard them.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY ISAIAH THOMAS AND EBENEZER T. ANDREWS, FAUST's STATUE,
No. 45, Newbury Street. MDCCXCI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE author takes this method to inform the Subscribers, and others who heard
the following Sermons, that as they were delivered only from some loose and
general hints, without the most distant thought of their being ever made more
public, he was rather disagreeably affected at receiving a request for
printing them. But since the request has been presented, he has endeavored to
recollect the ideas then suggested, and flatters himself that no material one
is omitted. The sermons will evidently retain their original features, though
it is confessed, that by several additions they have grown to a greater size.
To publish sentiments on subjects so differently thought of, and disputable as
the following, cannot be eligible. But as every person has a right to his own
opinion, the author, little anxious what others may think or say of him, calmly
submits them to public censure. If they may, by the blessing of GOD, be the
means of diffusing a spirit of candor, among different men who keep their minds
open to conviction; and especially if they so impress the mind of the reader,
with a sense of his loss in Adam, as to convince him of the necessity of an
interest in Christ, through whom justification and life are only to be
obtained; and put him on proper measures to possess himself of covenant
qualifications, for future happiness, he will consider himself amply
compensated for all his pains; and though others may scoff and condemn, will
abundantly rejoice.

MR. ADAMS'S SERMONS ON THE FALL AND RECOVERY OF MANKIND.
ROMANS, Vth CHAPTER, 19th VERSE. FOR AS BY ONE MAN's DISOBEDIENCE MANY WERE
MADE SINNERS; SO, BY THE OBEDIENCE OF ONE, SHALL MANY BE MADE RIGHTEOUS.


AMONG the preachers of the gospel a great diversity of practice prevails, not
only as to the manner, but as to the matter of their public exhibitions. Some
almost constantly dwell on the moral precepts of the gospel; whilst others
studiously avoiding these topics, entertain their hearers chiefly with the
doctrinal parts of revelation. These are extremes which all will carefully
avoid who take St. Paul for their pattern, and mean to be governed by his
advice. He kept back nothing that was profitable to his hearers. He testified
both to the Jews and Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ; and shunned not to declare the whole counsel of God. Now as all
scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
reproof, correction and instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work, every faithful minister
will, by a suitable attention to all parts of revealed truth, endeavor to feed
the church of God, which he has purchased by his own blood. And though he will
by no means neglect to explain and enforce the moral precepts of the gospel,
pointing out to christians the way of their duty; yet as the doctrines thereof,
when properly interpreted, give us exalted ideas of the wisdom, justice, and
goodness of God, and furnish the strongest arguments to an holy temper, in
which the essence of religion consists, he must believe it to be his duty, at
certain times, to discourse on the peculiar doctrines of revelation; that
having laid this foundation, he may build thereon that superstructure of moral
and evangelical duties, which, when enforced by motives derived from these
doctrines, will, by the influence of the spirit, strongly impel his hearers to
those pious and devout exercises of the heart, which qualify them for, and by
the constitution of the covenant of grace, introduce them to the happiness of
the heavenly world. Deeply impressed with these thoughts, I shall this day
earnestly, though modestly, contend for the faith once delivered unto the
saints; and without pretending to any superior sagacity or information, shall,
according to my ideas of duty, proceed to give my sentiments, concerning the
lapse and recovery of mankind; doctrines differently explained by different
men; from which angry disputes have arisen in the christian church, to the
detriment of that charity which is the bond of perfectness, the end of the
commandment, and the fulfilling of the law.

IN the course of my reading, and from a long acquaintance with many of my
fellow men, I have had the best reason to conclude, that whilst some have
considered the fall as having no pernicious influence on the human race,
subjecting them only to temporal death; others have carried their sentiments to
a contrary extreme, and view Adam's sin, in all senses, the sin of all his
numerous descendants. They even go so far as to suppose that great numbers of
infants are now suffering the extremest misery in hell, merely on account of
their being the unhappy children of a sinful father, or from their
participation of his guilt. They further believe that all mankind have totally
lost the image of God; the power of election, or liberty of choice; all moral
goodness, as well as all principles of holiness; and consequently that they are
totally corrupt, and wholly inclined to evil, and that continually. Now these
great extremes appear to me to be wide from the real truth, and faulty in a
certain degree. The truth, in this as in most other cases, lies in a happy
medium between them, as I shall endeavor to show in the sequel of this
discourse. In farther treating on which, I shall arrange my thoughts under the
two following heads: I. SHALL say something of the one man's disobedience by
which many were made sinners. And II. SHALL enquire how the many, or all, were
made sinners by his disobedience.


UNDER the first head we may observe, that by the one man, we are to understand
Adam, the first of the human race, created in an extraordinary manner out of
the dust of the earth, but yet made in the image of God. Now this image
consisted, not in the form of his body, but in the powers and qualities of his
mind; as having dominion over all terrestrial creatures. As God is the supreme
Governor, man bears some likeness to him, as dominion was given to him, over
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing
that moves upon the face of the earth. This part of the divine image, however
impaired, is not totally lost. But the most essential part of the image of God
in which man was made, consisted in that perfection of his nature, which was
endued with reason and will, with understanding and true holiness. And in this
respect he was made but a little lower than the angels, and crowned with glory
and honor. Concerning God, we read, that his understanding is infinite; he
talleth the number of the stars, and calls them all by name. And has not man
an understanding, which, though infinitely inferior to his Maker's, capacitates
him, when properly cultivated, to unfold a thousand difficulties, to rove from
star to star, to ascertain the laws of the heavenly bodies, to calculate
eclipses, and to predict, with certainty, many future and very distant events?
Though this part of the divine image may be greatly effaced, yet none can with
reason pretend that it is totally lost. Again; he still retains something of
the image of the Creator, as he is a moral agent, has a sense of right and
wrong, and a will to choose the good and refuse the evil, though not, we may
well suppose, in the degree that Adam enjoyed it before he fell; yet so as to
make him, a subject of law, responsible for his actions, and capable of rewards
and punishments. Lastly, he was made in the image of God, not only as he had a
power of acquiring a holy temper, but had a principle of holiness implanted in
his first formation. If we do not believe this, it is difficult to conceive how
God could pronounce this part of his work very good; or how Solomon could say,
God made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions. Or what
consistent meaning we can put on the Apostle's exhortation to the Ephesians, be
renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put on the new man, who after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness? What more rational interpretation
can we put on these words, than that man was first created with the principles
of holiness in his heart; that he lost them by his offense in eating the
forbidden fruit; and his posterity also; and that they must be renewed to this
temper, or recovered to this character, or never be fit for the kingdom of
heaven? The conclusion therefore is, that this part of the divine image was
lost in the fall: and that though there still remain many amiable qualities in
the hearts of men, yet that they are destitute of all holiness till renewed by
the spirit of God. But what was that sin of our first father by which he in
part lost the image of God, and entailed the same disadvantage on his numerous
progeny? It was his transgression of a positive command not to eat of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil. This prohibition was equivalent to a command to
keep his senses and his appetites under the control of reason. It was an easy
task which the Lord of all saw fit to impose on his new formed creature, man.
Though as a rational creature he was obliged to obey all the laws of his
nature; yet on this simple condition his happiness was suspended; and this was
made the term of his enjoying the continued favor of his Creator. And had he
been obedient in this single instance, he and his posterity would have been
continued in endless life. But wonderful to relate, this man, newly created,
and formed in the divine image, with frequent communications from his Maker,
and the fate of his posterity depending, transgressed the law and involved his
offspring, together with himself, in a scene of wretchedness unutterable, had
it not been for the advent of a Savior! This sin was perpetrated through the
influence of that malicious fiend, who walks about seeking whom he may devour.
The Devil, in the form of a serpent, to which he communicated speech, attacked
the woman, the weaker vessel, propounded a doubtful question, then denied the
truth of God's threatening, gave her a contrary promise, and used the name of
God to confirm it. Thus subtly did he manage in seducing our first parents
from their duty! But though the grand adversary was concerned in this
temptation, yet the man and woman were highly culpable in entering into
parlance with him, doubting the veracity of their Creator, and eating the
withholden fruit: For it must here be remembered, that even the temptation of
Satan is no excuse for sin. He can do no more than tempt, and if we resist him
he will flee from us. This sin of the first founders of our race, was attended
with aggravating circumstances, and was a virtual violation of all the commands
of the decalogue. The first was broken by withdrawing faith from God, and
placing it in Satan: The second, by giving a sort of worship to this malignant
spirit, in preferring his declarations before those of their liege or rightful
Lord: The third by profaning the name of God in treating it with so much
contempt as to credit the devil rather than Jehovah, when there was a
contrariety in their declarations. And the fourth also, if what some surmise be
true, that this sin was committed on the Sabbath. The fifth command requires
obedience to superiors. Eve therefore, in not consulting her husband, and Adam
in hearkening to his wife more than to God, really violated it. And what did
they less than murder their children; when they could not but know if the
threatening was fulfilled, it would prevent their existence, or reduce them to
destruction; directly in opposition to the sixth command which requires us not
to kill. The seventh command prohibits the indulgence of the sensual appetite.
But did not Adam more attend to the propensities of animal nature, than to the
command of God in eating this fair and tempting fruit? And was the eighth
unbroken by him when he manifested such discontent with his present condition;
and in order to better it, as he supposed, surreptitiously took the inhibited
fruit, in the face of that authoritative injunction, thou shall not steal. The
ninth requires not to bear false witness; and this virtually implies that we
should not receive a false accusation against any. But did not Adam, in this
instance, pass a false judgment on the fruit, and admit the false accusations
of Satan against his sovereign Lord? Adam and his happy companion had full
liberty to range amidst a wilderness of sweets, and freely to regale themselves
with all that variety of delicious fruits, with which the garden of Eden
abounded, excepting one single tree. Did they not, therefore, discover the
strong prevalence of the covetous desire, when they invaded the interdicted
fruit, and presumptuously partook of that to which they had no title? By this
brief enumeration of particulars, it appears that their sin was aggravated,
extensive and complicated; amounting to a breach of all the ten commands; and
if these commands, as most suppose, comprehended the whole circle of moral
duties, then in this single act, he violated the law of his nature, and was
guilty of a crime of the deepest dye.

I COME in the second place to enquire how many, or all mankind, were made
sinners by his disobedience. It seems by the representation of scripture, our
only guide in this matter, that Adam's sin was not in its influence confined to
himself, but in some way or another descended to his children. He was their
natural, if not their federal head, and his fortune therefore they must follow.
Now though Adam was not naturally immortal, yet if he had been obedient in the
single instance of the forbidden fruit, he was, by partaking of the tree of
life, to have lived for ever and his posterity likewise. But in case of
disobedience, it was threatened that he should die. In the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die. And accordingly the sentence was, dust thou art,
and to dust thou shall return. Now this sentence was not confined to him alone,
but extended to all that proceeded from his loins. Here two questions naturally
arise. First, what are we to understand by this death? And secondly, how comes
it to fall upon Adam's posterity? To the first question, it may be answered; if
we consider the words of the threatening in connection with the sentence
afterward passed, we should suppose that nothing more than temporal death,
with the evils that precede and usher it into the world was intended. But yet
some assert, that temporal, spiritual and eternal death are all meant by that
threatening. But this we know cannot be true, according to St. Paul's manner of
expressing himself on the subject. Though natural, and even spiritual death may
be intended thereby, yet eternal destruction, as it is commonly understood,
could not be meant, if we take him as our expositor. For he tells us in the
chapter of my text, speaking of the consequence of Adam's sin, that death has
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Now it is not true that eternal
death has, or ever will pass upon all men; for the righteous will be received
into heaven through the merit of Christ. I say, therefore, that nothing more
than temporal and spiritual death can possibly be meant by that term. As to
temporal or natural death, that this will sooner or later fall upon all the
sons of Adam by reason of his sin, none deny. But how or by what means does
this take place upon the offspring of Adam? How are we all thus made sinners by
him? I answer, by imputation. In this way natural death comes upon all the sons
of men. There are some, I am sensible, who choose not to hear any thing of
imputation in this sense of the word; and even others are to be found, who,
though they allow the imputation of Christ's righteousness, deny in the most
unaccountable manner, the imputation of Adam's sin. But as the word is capable
of a rational interpretation in this sense, and as it has been used by former
divines, I therefore retain it, and assert that it is by the imputation of the
legal effect of Adam's sin, that all his children become mortal, and will
sooner or later die a natural death. If any dislike the term, they cannot deny
the doctrine, if they are believers in divine revelation. St. Paul asserts it,
and has used arguments to prove it, in the chapter of my text. By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin. And in Corinthians he tells us, As in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. And to prove his assertion
in the twelfth verse, he thus argues in the two following ones; for until the
law, death was in the world, yet death is not imputed where there is no law.
Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not
sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression. The meaning of which is
this, though there were both sin and death in that long space which intervened
between Adam and Moses, yet as there was no positive command threatening death
as the penalty of disobedience, during that term, therefore men did not die for
their own sins, but for the disobedience of Adam; for where there is no law
subjecting men to death for disobedience, there certainly can be no
transgression.

2dly. As Adam was not only subjected to natural death by his sin, but was also
condemned by the law of his nature as a transgressor, having lost that image of
God which consisted in righteousness and true holiness, and which was the
supreme excellence of his nature; so his posterity, by imputation, come into
the world devoid of holy principles, and, consequently, as not coming up to the
requirements of the law of their nature, are in a state of condemnation by it,
even previously to their commission of any actual transgression. Though this,
in the eye of the law, is an important defect, for which they are doomed, by
the righteous constitution of heaven, to many disabilities; yet it does not
come up to our ideas of the formal nature of sin; to constitute which there
must be the consent of the will, in a person, who is a free agent, or has
arrived to years of understanding. It is a defect also which must be remedied,
or they can never obtain justification at the bar of God; never become recti in
l^^e. Whether this is the idea that some men mean to express by our being born
into the world in a state of nature less perfect than Adam was when he first
came out of the hands at his Maker, or what others intend by the corruption and
depravity of human nature, I neither know nor care. It is an idea I have been
led to adopt from reading the scriptures; without which I cannot run a complete
parallel between Adam and Christ, who are heads of their respective seeds, and
covenants, and counterparts to each other; nor give a full and consistent
interpretation of several passages in the New Testament. This is called by some
spiritual death, and not improperly, if we do not include in the notion of it,
the anguish of a guilty conscience; and the infliction of new sorrows on the
soul. The anguish of a guilty conscience, and the infliction of positive pains
on the soul, are the effects not of imputed, but of actual and personal sin.
But still Adam's descendants are spiritually dead, as they have no seeds of
holiness in their hearts, no exercises or sensations of the divine life; and
judicially as they are condemned by the mouth of the Lawgiver, or by his law.
And being thus condemned by the law as dead to all holy sensations, they must,
had it not been for the new constitution of grace, introduced by Christ, either
been held for ever, under the bondage of the grave, or some way made positively
wretched. But since the provision of a Savior, there is now no room for such a
supposition; since he certainly justifies all from the condemnation of death;
and all who believe in him from all other condemnation, whether arising from
the legal effects of Adam's sin imputed, or from their own actual
transgression; and reinstates them in the savor of God. Now, if those who have
never been guilty of personal disobedience are to be raised from the dead as
well as others; the presumption is, from the known character of God, and his
acknowledged benevolence, that they are raised, not for the purpose of being
made positively wretched in hell; but happy in the presence of God in heaven;
all legal disabilities being first removed, and an holy principle implanted,
without which they shall never see the Lord. Now this, in a manner explicable
to us, is done in the new birth; and therefore this new birth is necessary for
all the sons of Adam, of every age, character and condition. This seems to be
the representation of scripture, for it declares, except a man, it is
translated, but it ought to have been except any one (for that is the force of
the Greek article (...)) is born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And
what better reason can possibly be assigned for the absolute necessity of the
new birth, for all men universally, of every age, nation and character, whether
they have been guilty of actual sins or not, than the sentiment I have been
advancing under this head, namely, that all men are condemned by the law of God
as being destitute of any seeds or principles of holiness, until renewed by the
spirit of God, and recovered thereto by the spiritual process of regeneration.
Upon the whole; the bible represents mankind by nature as universally condemned
by the law, particularly in our context; the judgment was by one to
condemnation; and by the offense of one the judgment came upon all men to
condemnation. Now that this condemnation was to something more than natural
death, may be fairly argued from this consideration; that the justification by
the obedience of Christ, intends more than a resurrection from the grave. And
as the condemnation on the one part, must be as extensive as the justification
on the other (saying only that Christ's obedience in merit so far exceeds
Adam's disobedience in demerit, as to deliver from personal as well as imputed
sins) hence the argument is highly probable, if not absolutely conclusive, that
merely by Adam's sin his posterity is subjected to other disabilities than
natural death; because, by Christ's obedience they are exempted from other
penal effects, besides death. I therefore, on the truth of the foregoing
observations, proceed to observe further, that if those who have never been
guilty of actual sins (to which the consent of the will is necessary) are
condemned by the law to something more than natural death, or in a sense
different from it, then surely those who have made Adam's sin, in the fullest
sense, their own, by the commission of many actual offenses, are condemned in a
fuller or higher sense: from the penal effects of which, however, the obedience
of Christ is sufficient to exempt them. Before I proceed to the next head of
discourse, it is necessary, to prevent any mistakes, that I should subjoin the
following observation; that though Adam's sin was in its legal effects imputed
to his posterity in the sense above mentioned; yet we are not from thence to
conclude, that it is, in the strictest sense of the word, the sin of his
descendants. This is impossible. Sin is a quality intransferable. We may be
sufferers even to death by it; yet not conscious of his guilt; nor is it
possible to repent of it as we may and ought, of those which we have personally
committed, by the free consent of our own wills. Adam, when he offended, was
afraid, ashamed, and conscious of evil desert; hence it is said he perceived
himself naked; and endeavored to hide himself from the presence of the Lord.
But though we ought to be ashamed and repent of our own sins, yet for Adam's
offense we cannot feel any such sensations. All therefore that is intended by
the imputation of his sin to his posterity is, that the effects of it are set
to our account, that we are treated as sinners, and are subjected to a thousand
inconveniences on the account thereof. I will now illustrate my idea by the
following example. In some European kingdoms, where the title of nobility
obtains, if a nobleman is guilty of treason, together with his life, he
forfeits his estate and honors; and this forfeiture descends to his children;
they lose their estate and honors by reason of his sin. And yet, who in his
senses can believe that the sin of treason perpetrated by the father is in any
sense, except its legal effects, the sin of his children? In a sense somewhat
analogous, it may be observed; that often times parents, rendered infirm by a
course of intemperance and debauchery, propagate children under these unhappy
circumstances, who all their lives undergo great langours, and often times die
prematurely on that very account; and yet most certainly we cannot think that
the debauchery of the parents was, in the strictest sense, the sin of the
children. Again; if we choose a representative to legislate for us, and he from
sinister, or other evil motives, is induced to concur with others in the
enaction of injurious and oppressive laws (as the case is supposable, and I
believe has sometimes been the truth of fact) the sin considered as such is
peculiar to himself, but the evil effects fall upon his constituents, however
innocent, till the laws are repealed, or cease to operate. Thus Adam who was
our natural, if not our federal head, has by his disobedience entailed many
miseries upon us; and thus we are by imputation sinners, or rather sufferers
through him. But then I go on and say farther, that through one man's
disobedience, (...) all were made sinners actually or inherently. In order to
conceive how this takes place we must consider, that men are now born into the
world, without a principle of holiness in their hearts; with a less perfect
nature than Adam, or in a state of corruption and depravity; and being moreover
subjected to death with the various evils and calamities connected with, and
attendant on it, do, under these several disadvantages, unavoidably commit
iniquity, when they arrive at the exercise of their rational or mental powers.
To this sad event, viz. actual sin, each of the causes abovementioned
contributes its respective proportion; but natural death has perhaps the main
influence in the production of it. To perceive this, we need only advert to the
Apostle's records in the 12th verse of the chapter from whence our text was
taken quoted before, and make a small alteration in the translation; as there
is great reason to believe the present one is faulty. The verse is this; (...)
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; (...) death has passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned. From this verse we collect with the utmost
certainty, that Adam's sin introduced sin and death, into our world, together
with all the temporal evils attendant on humanity, pain, sickness, sorrow and
vanity. If it had been rightly translated it would have told us very plainly in
what way, or by what influence it occasioned the reign of actual sin among the
children of men. To possess ourselves of this idea we need only correct a small
error in the translation of the latter clause of the verse, and instead of the
words for that, substitute the words upon which, or in consequence of which,
all have sinned. The words (...), translated for that, are not only capable of
this interpretation, but this is their invariable meaning throughout the New
Testament, as I could easily make evident; and also in other Greek authors, as
has been make evident in a degree, by a learned writer, who lived in this
century, and died with the deserved character of a just and great critic. The
proper meaning of the passage according to this interpretation (which I suppose
is perfectly just) is this, that death was the imputed effect of the first
man's sin; and that this death, with all its preceding and attendant
inconveniences, has occasioned the universal reign of actual sin, among all
those who come to a capacity of actual transgression. Death has introduced
great disorders among the human species. It has destroyed that nice balance
between their reason, appetites and passions, which God first established. It
has by reason of the curse on the ground, which makes a livelihood difficult
and hard to be obtained, even by enervating toll, called in scripture the sweat
of the brow, occasioned those numerous frauds, chickanery and circumvention,
which not only disgrace human nature, but make the world a scene of woe. Had it
not been for death, and the loss of that image of God which consisted in true
holiness, the mind would have been clear, the affections calm; the appetites
subordinate to reason, the man happy; all his various powers and affections
being harmoniously subservient to the end of his creation, and powerfully,
though sweetly impelling him, to a uniform obedience to law divine. But now
being subjected by the righteous constitution of heaven, to death and its
attendant troubles, temptations are multiplied upon us from every side, that we
cannot so fully resist them, as to preserve the rectitude of our conduct; but
do all, in a greater or lesser degree, actually offend. Poverty and riches,
dominion and servitude, honor and infamy, the effects of the apostasy, have
their peculiar temptations to sin, which few or none resist. Our fears of death
subjecting us to bondage, occasion discontent, anxious solicitude, and
perplexing concern, which constitute the formal nature of sin. And from the
less perfect state of our nature, the consequence of the fall, and the sickness
and death dependent on it, arise those numerous lusts which war against the
soul, and bring us into captivity to the law of sin. From a clear perception of
this the Apostle cried out. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death! Some have supposed that this alludes to a practice
prevailing among some nations of tying a criminal to a dead stinking (...), by
way of punishment. But if this were the allusion, the true meaning of the
phrase is this, since my body subjected to death, entices me to so many sins,
who will deliver me from it, or from this mortal body? which is a proper
translation of the phrase. And then adds, for his own comfort, as well as the
consolation of others, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, that this
deliverance is to be obtained, through the institutions, grace, and
reconciliation of the Savior. But then, though these appetites, inclinations,
and desires have become stronger, and reason weaker by means of the lapse, yet
they do not constitute the formal nature of sin, till they gain the consent of
the will. Though we may be tempted by our own heart's lusts, and enticed, yet
it is only when lust is conceived, that it brings forth sin, and sin when it
is perfected, by giving the consent of the heart, brings forth death. Thus I
have shown you how, by the disobedience of one many are made sinners. If my
explanations of the manner, in which mankind become sinners, in consequence of
Adam's sin, be different from what has heretofore been common; yet the
conclusion of the whole matter is, on the scheme above suggested, similar to
that of ancient divines, who made Adam's sin, either mediately or immediately,
the cause or occasion of all the sins of men. This shows that disputes on this
subject are for the most part not essential; being either verbal; or rather
about the modes of its conveyance; than against the truth, or existence of the
doctrine itself. I shall therefore close what I have said, under the doctrinal
part of this subject, by this charitable observation, viz. that whoever
believes the fall of Adam to be the foundation of Christ's advent in our world,
and that scheme of grace which is mentioned in the gospel, believes all that is
necessary, to regulate his practice, and form his temper, by leading him to a
cheerful acceptance of the redemption through the Savior.

IMPROVEMENT.
FIRST, from what has been said, we learn, that the sin of the first man has
introduced a tragical scene upon the stage of the present world. Death, pain,
toil, vanity, and a thousand dreadful disorders have entered by this door, and
have made our earth, an hospital of diseases, a place of skulls, a field of
blood. From this source carnage and destruction are spread around us; doleful
spectacles are presented to our view, and the most heart breaking separations
frequently take place, among the dearest friends, the most intimate connexions.
Hence the rosy cheek, the ruby lips, and ivory teeth lose their attractive
charms; and those who once possessed them are turned to ugliness and deformity.
Hence we hear the voice of lementation and mourning, Rachel weeping for her
children, and refusing to be comforted, because they are not. When we
contemplate the miseries of mankind, originating from this fountain, we are
often compelled to shed the tear of compassion; though for the sin that
occasioned them, we cannot properly repent; for repentance implies
consciousness of guilt, self condemnation, and change of conduct, which, though
necessary for our own, cannot be for another's sins.

2dly. A serious review of the foregoing subject, should make us all humble in
our own sight. Pride was never made for fallen man. Yet though our blood is
under one common attainder, we find these ebullitions of pride which are truly
surprising. One takes to himself important airs, on account of the noble or
ancient blood which runs in his veins. Another is proud of his beauty; third of
the magnitude of his possessions, the number of his acres and the fullness of
his coffers; a fourth of his rich attire; and a fifth, of his dignity and posts
of honor; and on these accounts are induced to despise their fellow men, not
thus distinguished. To suppress these risings of vanity, let us all look to the
rock whence we were hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence we were dug, to
Adam and Eve our first progenitors; to the crime by which their dignity was
lessened, and the imputation of it to us, by which our glory is obscured. The
little paultry distinctions which take place among the children of men, are not
worth regarding; distinctions, which will be soon levelled in the grave to
which we are destined, where the rich and the poor, the honorable and the base,
the beautiful and deformed, the learned and ignorant, will lie neglected in one
undistinguished and promiscuous mass. After the revolution of a few years, we
must all go to that world from whose bourne no traveller returns; where these
distinctions will be of no avail; and where real righteousness shall alone be
exalted. Let not therefore the wise man glory in his wisdom; neither let the
mighty man glory in his might; nor let the rich man glory in his riches; but
let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, and judgment, and
righteousness in the earth.

3dly. UPON the explication given in the preceding discourse, we learn, how to
interpret and apply the following texts, and other similar ones, to be found in
the sacred volume, which have been often quoted in this connection, as an
illustration of man's depravity, or fall. A few only shall I mention, and they
are the following. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me. That which is born of the flesh is flesh. Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? You has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins; and
were by nature children of wrath even as others, etc. Though I shall not stop
to give a particular explanation of each of these passages, I shall observe in
general, that they do not prove that Adam's sin is, in the strictest sense, the
sin of his descendants; but only that as men are born without any principles of
holiness, and are subjected to death, as a penal effect of the fall, they very
early go astray after they have come to the use of their reason and moral
powers; that all need to be regenerated, and whilst under the disadvantages to
which death and the evils preceding it, subject us, we fall short of the
requirements of the law, and become actual sinners, even in the first dawn of
reason. The expressions are, some of them, highly figurative, and when reduced
to a proper and literal meaning, intend no more, than that we are all born
under such disabilities, as to be condemned by the law, and that being
influenced, in our depraved nature, by a thousand powerful temptations, we very
soon become actual transgressors of it, clearly evincing that the original sin
of our first father, is the prolifie source of all, even the most early and
aggravated personal offenses. Here suffer me to say, that however some persons
deny the pernicious effects of Adam's sin to his posterity; yet every
unprejudiced man, who reads the scripture with attention, must perceive that
the fall of man, is the foundation of the whole scheme of gospel grace. Hence
the contrast between Adam and Christ. And, in my opinion, a man might as well
deny revelation in general, as to deny that the one man's disobedience is the
cause, in some way, or another, of all the sins of mankind.

4thly. IF men are, in consequence of Adam's sin, all born destitute of
holiness, hence we see the necessity of regeneration, or the new birth to all
the children of men, infants not excepted. On no other foundation can this
doctrine, which all believe, stand with so much propriety, as on this. As
without holiness no man or person can see the Lord; and as upon my principles
children are born without it; hence they, as well as the adult, must be
regenerated, or must be excluded the kingdom of heaven. Some persons, from this
principle, who are great sticklers for absolute unconditional decrees, have
concluded, that some infants, dying at that period, are sent down to the
miseries of hell. But as I cannot believe the dreadful sentiment, I give the
following reasons for my non-belief. 1st. If the sentence pronounced against
Adam had been strictly fulfilled, he never could have had any posterity at all.
But from anticipating a Savior to come, his life was protracted, and
opportunity granted for having children, who, without any fault of their own,
are subjected to vanity and death. Now can we suppose that God who sent his Son
into the world, not to condemn it, but that it might through him be saved,
would have raised any, who had never been guilty of any personal
transgressions, from the grave, with a view to make them positively wretched?
Where, on this supposition, is the grace of the Father, and the boundless
compassion of his Son? No, he never would have disturbed their ashes, but left
them peacefully is have slept out the Sabbath of the tomb, if he had not raised
them for a better state. Besides, if this were not the case, how could it be
said of Adam's posterity that the creature, meaning man, was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him, who has subjected the same in
hope. These considerations make it extremely probable, that as a Savior is
provided, whose business, in part, was to restore the loss we sustained by the
lapse, to recover from the penal effects and disabilities of the first man's
sin, that no one was ever denied, who had not made it to all moral purposes his
own, by the free choice of his will, in actual disobedience. And that which is
made probable from the character of God and his gracious design in sending a
Savior into the world, is rendered almost a certainty from the words of
Christ, who knew his Father's will, and still spoke very favorably of those who
fell in Adam, but had, and could have, no sins of their own; suffer little
children to come unto me and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of
heaven: And again, speaking to the adult, he says, except to be converted and
become as little children, ye shall not elder into the kingdom of heaven. The
pious and very ingenious Doctor Watts, entertained a peculiar sentiment, on
this head, which was, that the children of believing parents, who never live to
years of discretion, shall be saved; but that the children of unbelievers will
never be raised from the dead; shall always remain under the dominion of the
grave, in a state of insensibility. He could not admit the shocking idea of
thousands of little creatures weltering under the positive inflictions of the
divine wrath! and to avoid it, had recourse to the scheme of thought above
suggested. But as this militates with the notion that all shall be raised to
life, a doctrine clearly held forth in sundry places of scripture, the more
rational opinion is, that all who die in infancy, will, through the grace of
the gospel, and the merit of the Redeemer, be saved: but then it must be by
passing through the new birth, like those who are adult. The main difference
is, that those who have come to the exercise of their mental powers, and have
been guilty of many personal sins, must seek for this change, desire to be born
again, and made new creatures in Christ; otherwise their condition will be
deplorable indeed: whereas, with regard to children the case is different; for
as the disability came without their fault, the recovery from it comes without
their seeking. Let me therefore, by way of conclusion, exhort all who are still
in their sins, and are consequently unsanctified, and unpardoned, to seek those
gifts and gracious qualifications from Christ, the deliverer of our race, the
friend of man; and to do it in the diligent use of those means, which he has
instituted, by prayers, reading the word, meditation, and hearing. Remembering
that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Watch therefore
at wisdom's gates, and wait at the posts of her doors; cry after knowledge, and
lift up thy voice for understanding; seek for her as silver, and search for her
as for hid treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find
the knowledge of God; for as he has never said to any of the seed of Jacob,
seek ye my face in vain; so we have abundant reason to believe, that none who
thus come to God through Christ, shall in any wise be cast out. -- AMEN.

END OF THE FIRST DISCOURSE.
SECOND PART.
ROMANS, Vth CHAPTER, 19th VERSE. FOR AS BY ONE MAN's DISOBEDIENCE MANY WERE
MADE SINNERS; SO, BY THE OBEDIENCE OF ONE, SHALL MANY BE MADE RIGHTEOUS.


THE apostasy and redemption of the human race are two most memorable events in
the history of the world; events deserving our particular notice, our
admiration, and I had almost said our gratitude; for such is the present state
of mankind with respect to future happiness, under the kingdom of the Messiah,
that it cannot be said that we are eventually losers by the fall. Nay, it may
well be questioned, whether the sons of Adam in general, have not now a greater
probability of securing the lasting felicity of their souls, since Christ has
died for them, than if they never had fallen. This seems to be an idea held
forth by some passages of scripture; and on any other supposition, it is
difficult to perceive how the seed of the woman has bruised the serpent's head;
or how in the contest between these two seeds, the advantage on the whole is
gained by Christ. But be this as it will, the lapse and recovery of mankind,
may be contemplated with admiration. They display the perfections of Deity in
the most illustrious manner; they show the wisdom, justice, power and
compassion of God, in the clearest and most conspicuous light; as well as point
out his sovereignty. That he should suffer sin to come into the world, through
the temptation of the devil; that he should bring good out of evil, provide a
Savior for fallen men, when he passed by the fallen angels; and that he should
grant peace and pardon to the rebellious, through the death and sufferings of
his own Son, are matters which we can ascribe only to the inscrutable wisdom,
boundless compassion, and adorable sovereignty of God. These are matters of
delightful contemplation to pious minds; and though neither men nor angels can
comprehend these unfathomable counsels of heaven; yet they are the theme of
their devout adoration and praise. Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth
and good will toward men. The fall of which the heathens were sensible,
(though they knew not to what cause to ascribe it) came by Adam; but the
recovery from it comes by one greater man, the Lord from heaven. This is the
one intended in our text, through whose obedience many are made righteous. He
is a counterpart to the first, and therefore called the second Adam. He was
made a quickening spirit, as the first man Adam was made a living soul. The
scripture, in plain and unequivocal language, represents him as the Son of God,
the first born of every creature, the brightness of his Father's glory, and the
express image of his person. Nay, it speaks of him as an incarnate God, the
word made flesh. Hence says St. John in the first chapter of his gospel; And
the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, (the
glory of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth. To the same
purpose is the following passage in the 1st Timothy, iiid chapter, 16th verse;
Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh, etc. for he took
the nature of man into a close, though inexplicable union with his divine
person. He took not on him the nature of angels, because for them he did not
appear as a Savior; but he took on him the seed of Abraham, that he might
redeem them from the grave. Agreeably says the Apostle to the Hebrews, for as
much as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him who had
the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them who through fear of
death were all their life time subject to bondage. The nature of man was
contained in him, as well as in the first Adam; only with this very great
advantage, that whereas the first was but a mere man, made in the likeness of
God; the second was a divine person made in the similitude of man. Hence in the
2d chapter of Philippians, the Apostle thus speaks concerning him: who being in
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself
of no rebutation; and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
LIKENESS of men, etc. Thus much concerning THE ONE through whose obedience many
are made righteous. We shall say something concerning this obedience, and show
in what it consisted. In order to treat of it in a methodical manner, I shall
divide it, according to the practice of ancient divines, into active and
passive. With respect to his active obedience, the following things may be
observed. He was perfectly righteous or obedient prior to his assumption of the
human nature, and remained so ever after; and lest he should be contaminated by
his union with our nature, he was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and in a
miraculous manner born of a pure virgin. Behold a virgin shall conceive and
bare a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Isaiah vii, 14. After that union
which capacitated him to act as Mediator, his obedience was perfect in all
instances. For though he was subject to the sinless infirmities of mankind, and
needed to eat, drink and sup like those for whom he mediated, yet he was never
found chargeable with any sin. His obedience was universal, sincere,
persevering and perfect. Accordingly Isaiah, in the 53d chapter, speaking of
what was then future, as though it had really taken place, says concerning him,
He had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. And St. John,
after his advent, declares; Ye know that he was manifest to take away our sins,
and in him is no sin. Christ was not only negatively, but positively righteous.
He not only did not transgress, but positively fulfilled all the requisitions
of the law, both ceremonial and moral. Suffer it to be so now, said he to John
the Baptist, who endeavored to dissuade him from coming to his baptism, for
thus it (...) us to fulfill all righteousness. If he had been a sinner in any
sense of the word, he could not have made reconciliation for the sins of the
world; because the oblation of a sinful person would not have been an
acceptable sacrifice to God. Agreeably we have the following scriptural
declaration: Such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undesired
and separate from sinners; who (...) not delay to offer up sacrifice, first for
his own sins, and then for the people's; for this he did once, when he offered
up himself: For the law makes men high priests who have infirmity; but the
word of the oath, which is since the law, makes the Son who is consecrated for
ever more. Thus much concerning his active obedience. His passive consisted in
those amazing sufferings he underwent, whilst he tabernacled in the flesh; the
indignities, the insults and abuses, which were thrown upon him, when he went
about doing good both to the souls and bodies of men; and especially in that
cruel and ignominious death, which he suffered on the cross. To see therefore
in one lively view, what the Savior suffered for our redemption; follow him in
your minds to Mount Calvary; behold him suspended on the accursed tree,
suffering excrutiating pains in his body, having his tendons stretched, and his
flesh lacerated by those nails with which he was fastened to the cross; and
also enduring that extreme anguish of mind, under the hidings of his Father's
countenance, which caused him to cry out in the bitterness of his soul, My God!
my God! why had thou forsaken me? Now by this active and passive obedience of
Christ, many are made righteous, in the following manner, viz. by imputation
and inhesion. And 1st by imputation. As Adam's sin; so Christ's righteousness
is imputed. And as by the first we are subjected to mortality, and must sooner
or later die; so by the second we shall be raised from the dead. Had not Christ
stepped in to our assistance, and voluntarily suffered death for fallen man, it
would have had perpetual dominion over their bodies. But now as in Adam all
die; so in Christ shall all be made alive. There shall be a resurrection both
of the just and the unjust. The time is coming, when all that are in their
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and come forth; they that have
done good to the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil to the
resurrection of damnation. John v, 29. The grave cannot now boast a complete
and lasting victory over the bodies of men; for Christ having arisen the first
fruits of them that sleep, has become a mighty conqueror, and virtually says to
death and the grave, Oh death, I will be thy plague! Oh grave, I will be thy
destruction!

2dly. HIS obedience is imputed for our justification, at the bar of God, from
the condemning sentence of the law. The Apostle Paul represents mankind,
universally, both Jews and Gentiles, in a state of condemnation, as having come
short of the moral law, or the law of their nature. By this, we are all
condemned, whether young or old, till we are justified by the righteousness or
obedience of Christ. This justification, to those incapable of moral agency,
comes, as does the resurrection, without their seeking. But to the adult it is
the consequence of faith, repentance, and renewed temper. But immediately on
their faith in Christ, they are justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the law, either of nature or of Moses. Now to see the
necessity of this, we must observe, that it is inconsistent with the character
of an holy and righteous God, to pronounce any one righteous unless he comes up
to the demands of the law in all respects. But since the fall, no man is
without sin; there is not a just man on earth, who does good and sins not.
Hence it is impossible that any of the sons of Adam should be justified at the
bar of God, unless they have a righteousness superior to their own. Now this
righteousness they enjoy by imputation. Even as David described the blessedness
of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works. Romans iv, 6.
Christ has fulfilled the law, has magnified and made it honorable; has obeyed
its precept and suffered its penalty; and by this means has achieved a
righteousness highly delectable to his Father. Hence we read, that the Lord is
well pleased for his righteousness' sake. Now this righteousness is the matter
of the believer's justification before God; and it avails to his benefit by
imputation; or in other words, it is set down to his account; as St. Paul tells
Philemon, if Onesimus had wronged or owed him any thing, to put that on his
account. In short, as a pious writer on another subject observes, Doctor
DODDRIDGE.
"all manner of imputation is a metaphor taken from books of account between
debtor and creditor. To impute any act of sin or obedience is to set it down to
his account. The great God is represented in condescension to our manner of
acting and conceiving things, as keeping an exact book of records, by which our
final account shall be determined. And as the most perfect obedience is a debt
which we owe to him as our Creator, Preserver and Benefactor; so on the breach
of his law we owe him some proper satisfaction. In this view, we are all, as
the sons of an apostate father, charged as insolvent debtors in the book of
God. Innumerable sins are set down, or imputed to our account. And were things
to go on in this course, we should, ere long, be arrested by the divine
justice; and being incapable of payment, should be cast into the prison of hell
to come out no more. But God, in compassion to our calamitous state, has found
out a surety and a ransom for us; has provided a satisfaction in the obedience
and sufferings of his Son. It is on the account of this, and from the
complacency which God has in it, that all who are finally justified meet the
divine acceptance, and are delivered from that condemnation which has passed
upon us all, as appears from the verse immediately preceding my text. In this
case, according to the metaphor mentioned above, the righteousness of Christ is
in the book of God imputed or set down to their account, as that by which the
debt is balanced, and they are entitled to such exemptions and favors as
righteous persons might expect from God. But then it is a fixed rule in the
divine administration, that this obedience of Christ shall be imputed to none
but such as believe in him, or have the seeds of holiness in their hearts. But
immediately upon this, they are treated as innocent persons, discharged from
their obligations to punishment, and (...) in the divine favor." Now agreeably
to this, our righteousness in scripture is plainly asserted to be in Christ;
God has made him to be sin for us who know no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God through him. 2 Corinthians, vth chapter, 21st verse. In
the same figurative manner are the following texts of scripture to be
understood, viz. that we are justified by the obedience of Christ. All we like
sheep have gone astray, but the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all.
Isaiah ^., ^. I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Jesus Christ my Lord, for which I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but (...) that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Accordingly Christ
is expressly called our righteousness, and the Lord our righteousness, as in
the Prophet Jeremiah. In a sense analogous to this, he is called, our surely,
or our sponsor; and, for every believer, has cancelled his obligation to
punishment. His whole obedience on earth was for the sake of sinners. In the
fullness of time God sent forth his Son, made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law, for what the law could not do in that it was weak through
the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh; and for
sin, or being made a sacrifice for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh; that
the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. These texts are only a small part of what (...) be
quoted to the same purpose. So that it appears, no doctrine is more amply
supported, than that of our justification through the obedience of Christ. I
have observed already, that these expressions are figurative; and the true
literal meaning of them, I suppose, is the following, viz. That as man had
fallen and broken the divine law, it was necessary that something should be
done to repair the injury, and save, harmless, the perfections of God in the
justification and salvation of guilty men. If an easy pardon had been granted
them, without any satisfaction made, the character of the Deity, as a righteous
and holy Governor, would have been lessened in the view of his moral creatures.
They would have supposed that sin was a light and trivial matter, and would
have been encouraged to trample on his laws and despise his authority for the
future. But, to preserve, in the view of surrounding intelligences, the dignity
of his government, and the rectitude of his character, he saw fit to pardon
their offenses only on condition of his own Son, being a voluntary substitute,
and suffering in their stead; hereby plainly demonstrating, that his laws were
not to be transgressed with impunity; that sin is the abominable thing which
his soul hates; and that he maintains a moral government over rational and
free agents. Though no example exactly similar to this can be produced among
men, yet the matter may be in a degree illustrated, by the following story of a
King, who, in order to discourage the heinous practice of adultery among his
subjects, ordained, that whoever was guilty of this crime in future, should be
punished with the loss of both his eyes. His only son was the first
transgressor. He had great affection for him, and could not contemplate the
idea of making him completely wretched, without the most painful sensations;
and yet the dignity of his law and government must be maintained. In this
exigency, in order at once to manifest his justice as a legislator, and his
compassion as a father, he put out one of his own, and one of the eyes of his
son. Thus, in a way somewhat analagous, God has set forth his Son, to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past; that he might be just, and the justifier of
him who believes in Jesus. So that now in granting pardon to the penitent, on
the sufferings and merit of his Son, who willingly submitted to die in their
room, (...) displays both his righteousness and compassion. And speaking in
reference to this method of (...) mankind, the Psalmist says, Mercy and truth
have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

BEFORE I proceed to the next particular, I shall only make this observation,
viz. that though it is abundantly evident from what has been already said, that
Christ's obedience is imputed in its legal result, or meritorious effects, to
the believer, for his justification from the condemning sentence of the law;
yet it is not his inherent, or personal obedience. As sin in this sense cannot
be transferred from one person to another; so neither can righteousness. Sin
and righteousness, in this sense, are the effects of moral agency; of personal
obedience, and disobedience; the abuse or right improvement of our own mental
and moral faculties. Hence says St. John, little children, be not deceived, he
that does righteousness is righteous. There seems to be the greater necessity
of mentioning this; since it is known in fact, that some persons trust to the
imputed righteousness of Christ alone, not only for justification at the bar of
God in the present world, but for salvation at the tribunal of Christ in the
future; and are ready to say that Christ has done all, and men have nothing to
do in order to be saved. This is a dangerous mistake, founded on the false
apprehension that the personal obedience of the Savior is, in the same sense,
the personal obedience of the sinner, or rather of the believer. That this
cannot be true, is evident from this single consideration; that then every
person, participating of Christ's righteousness through faith, must be equally
holy, and equally entitled to reward. But the whole scope of the Bible teaches
the contrary. It tells us that some are more righteous than others; and that
different degrees of happiness will be assigned to men in the future state;
that whilst some shall shine only as the brightness of the firmament, others
shall shine as the stars which are much more resplendent, for ever and ever.
All therefore that can possibly be meant by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness to the believer is, that they are delivered from the condemnation
of God's law, by means of it, and placed under a covenant of grace, by the
terms of which, if they are sincere, though not perfect in their obedience,
they shall be accepted, and raised hereafter to a degree of happiness exactly
proportioned to their improvements in holy and virtuous obedience.

THIS leads me to say thirdly, that by the obedience of one many are made
inherently righteous. This inherent holiness is absolutely necessary to qualify
any person for the kingdom of heaven; for without holiness no man shall see the
Lord. Now this is the effect of Christ's obedience unto death, and not the mere
consequence of fallen man's own endeavors without divine assistance, and the
operations of the spirit of God upon his heart. Man is now so lost to every
principle of holiness, so sunk in sense, and under the dominion of corrupt
fleshly appetites, that unless his powers are strengthened by divine
assistance, he would for ever go on in a way of disobedience and rebellion.
Christ therefore, that he might perfect his work of redemption, and become a
complete Savior, has not only vindicated the believer from the damnatory
sentence of a broken law, but tenders, by his spirit, help to comply with the
conditions of the gospel covenant. This spirit, in his beneficial operations,
our Savior purchased by his sufferings; and when he ascended to heaven, sent
him down to assist mankind under their great weaknesses; to alleviate their
burdens and to comfort their hearts; to arouse them to a serious consideration
of their spiritual interests; to mortify their lusts; to inspire them with
sorrow for their sins; to lead them to repentance; to sanctify their nature;
and animate them to the conscientious performance of GOOD WORKS; or in the
language of scripture, to reprove, or convince the world, of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment. Now the spirit, which may be resisted, operates
on the hearts of men in a way consentaneous to their rational nature. And as
reasonable creatures we ought to cooperate with him, and in this way to be
workers together with God; that we may be sealed to the day of redemption; or
in the express language of scripture, we must work out our salvation with fear
and trembling; for it is God that works in us both to will and to do of his
own good pleasure.

BEFORE I come to the improvement, it is proper that I should say something to
that particular mode of expression in the text, from which some men have
inferred the doctrine of universal salvation. The word many, in the former part
of the text, intends all, as I have already told you. In the latter clause it
is to be understood in a sense equally extensive. Now what rational and
consistent meaning can we put on this expression, if we do not grant that all
will be finally saved? As, therefore, I do not believe the eventual salvation
of all men, it becomes me to show how this term can be explained in consistency
with my own, and the common persuasion. I answer in the first place, that by
the obedience of Christ, all shall be raised from the dead, which is one thing
evidently intended by all being made righteous. 2dly. The sacrifice of Christ
was intentionally for all; and there is virtue enough in his death to atone, or
satisfy for the sins of all the sons of Adam. Hence we read, that he died for
all; that he tasted death for every man; that he was a propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world; from which,
and sundry other similar passages of scripture, we learn, that universal
redemption is a true doctrine. My meaning is, Christ did not so die for any
particular number of mankind, as to exclude the remainder, or leave them in a
hopeless condition; but by removing impediments out of the way, has rendered
salvation possible to all, so that if they do not attain it, the fault is
wholly their own. But 3dly. The nature of religion, as well as the nature of
man, makes it for ever necessary that we should maintain a distinction, between
the offer, and the acceptance of salvation on the terms of the gospel. The
offer we must believe is by God in sincerity made to all, and unless we would
reflect great dishonor on the sincerity of our heavenly Father, must believe
that spiritual assistances are tendered to all, sufficient to enable them to
repent and believe. But then though this be very true, the nature of religion
obliges us to conclude, that it is in the power, and experience teaches us that
it is often times in the will of man, to resist the strivings of the spirit; to
reject the counsel of God against themselves, and receive his grace in vain.
This results from that liberty in man which he still retains, since the
apostasy; and is necessary to constitute him a free agent, in the most proper
sense of the word: for the idea, that liberty consists altogether in
voluntariness, and is not to be opposed to necessity, must be rejected, as
without sufficient foundation either in reason or scripture. Now, if this idea
of liberty be rational, that the redemption from the curse of the law be by
Christ purchased for all; and grace sufficient to enable them to comply with
the conditions of the gospel covenant, be offered to all, yet still it is in
the compass of man's power to reject the proffered good. And that this is often
done by the sinful children of men, scripture and experience abundantly
convince us. Some become holy, whilst others remain wicked. And to these
different characters, a proper retribution is assigned by the mercy and justice
of God, in the future world. The righteous at death will be admitted to eternal
life; and why may we not suppose that the wicked, at the same period, shall be
sent down to eternal punishment? We have as much reason from revelation to
believe the one as the other. St. Matthew, speaking by inspiration, tells us,
these, that is the wicked of whom he had just before been speaking, shall go
away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life eternal. Yet it
is to be observed that the epithet in the Greek, is in both places the same,
and therefore from this text we have as much reason to believe the eternal
damnation of the wicked, as the eternal salvation of the righteous. But some
tell us that the words for ever, everlasting, etc. do not always intend or
imply a strict eternity. It is readily granted. But does the text just now
quoted, sufficiently prove the eternal happiness of the righteous, as all
believe? Why does it not also prove the endless misery of the wicked? The one
is expressed in as strong terms as the other. Still it has been said by the
fautors of universal salvation, that God is held to fulfill his promises, but
not his threatenings; because if he does not fulfill his promises, he does an
injury to his creatures, as disappointing them of an expected good: but if he
forbears to execute his threatenings, he leaves his creatures better than they
expected. Very true. But where is the truth and rectoral holiness of the great
Governor of the world, on this supposition? Let God be true though every man be
a liar. Others tell us, that though all who die impenitent shall be doomed to
misery awfully long and severe, yet that they shall sooner or later be
recovered by means of their torments, to an holy temper, and their punishments
shall finally cease. But how can they certainly tell this? From what text in
the Bible, consistently interpreted, do they infer this conclusion? How do they
certainly know that the future world will be a world of probation? St. John, in
the Apocalypse, seems to represent this matter in a different light; for
speaking of the time of death, or of the general judgment, he says, He that is
unjust let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy let him be filthy still;
and he that is righteous let him be righteous still; and he that is holy let
him be holy still. Rev. xxii chapter, 11 verse. These words, I think, cannot
possibly be better explained than by interpreting them to this sense, that
there will be no alteration in men's characters after death, and the time of
probation ends with the present world. But granting we are mistaken in our
interpretation of them, and the time of probation shall continue in the future
world, through many successive states, how can we certainly say, that those who
die impenitent in this world, shall be recovered to a penitent temper in the
future? If we acknowledge that men, in order to be righteous or wicked, must
have liberty to choose or refuse, to repent or rebel; and that such a liberty
constitutes them moral agents, the subjects of praise or blame, of rewards or
punishments, how can we certainly know how they will conduct under any given
circumstances? Is it possible for us, on this supposition, to pronounce that
any quantity of punishment, let it be ever so long and severe, will reclaim
them to a better temper! And yet it is a matter of public notoriety, that the
best writers, in favor of universal salvation, believe that men are possessed
of the liberty abovementioned, and that without an holy temper none can be
happy. In asserting, therefore, that all shall be saved, such persons
contradict their own principles, and cut up the ground on which they stand; or
at least form conclusions, which, from their premises, are infallibly
precarious. Since therefore every text of scripture which seems to countenance
the doctrine of the salvation of all men, is fully explained on the supposition
of the doctrine of universal redemption, as I have above explained it; and
since the notion that a certain degree of punishment, will inevitably recover
the wicked to an holy temper, militates with the essential liberty of man; and
especially, since we know that the instituted means of grace, and all God's
providential dispensations, intermingled with mercy and punishment, with
severity and kindness, have never, in this world, (confessedly a state of
probation,) been sufficient to reclaim certain characters; but notwithstanding
they die in a state of impenitency, and consequently out of favor with God; we
may conclude, that the reasonings of those who are advocates for the final
salvation of all men, are extremely inconclusive and precarious. And hence we
cannot act a more rational part, than to believe in the express words, and most
probably in the very sense of scripture, that the wicked shall go away into
everlasting punishment. But when I say this I will not dissemble, that the
doctrine of eternal torments for the temporary and transient acts of men, is
attended with great difficulties, when viewed in the light of reason, and some
small ones when contemplated in the glass of revelation. It is impossible for
me with certainty to declare, that all men shall not, through the goodness of
God, and the superabounding merit of his son's obedience to death, be finally
reduced from misery, after an awful period of sufferings, intense in degree and
long in duration. Greatly rejoiced should I be, could I pronounce this with
certainty from the sacred pages: for nothing more delights me than the
contemplation of the happiness of the whole world. But the force of truth,
according to my present ideas, constrains me to believe otherwise. However, let
this doctrine be decided as it will, yet of this one thing we may be absolutely
certain, that sinners act with great imprudence, who allow themselves in
wickedness, under an expectation that they will be gainers by their impenetency
in a course of sin; for though we should allow that there is great pleasure in
sinning, even much greater than in keeping the divine commands; yet if God the
supreme Lawgiver, be wise as well as righteous, we may presume, that under his
government, the pains attending the punishment annexed to the breach of his
laws, shall exceed all the pleasures of sin; for otherwise he has so framed his
laws as to be, on the whole, an encouragement to rebels. Now our ideas of God
teach us that this cannot possibly be; because he would not, on this
supposition, be a wise Legislator. If there be really a future state of rewards
and punishments, both the punishments and the rewards, must be very
inconsiderable indeed, not to make it worth a man's while to live a life of
obedience: For if God's laws were given to secure this obedience, he certainly
must have annexed such punishments so long and severe to the breach of them, as
to make it the interest of all to obey; and their exceeding great folly to
transgress. It is in vain therefore for persons to spend their time in zealous
disputes about the nature or the duration of hell torments, with a view to
solace or encourage themselves in sin; for let this doctrine of final salvation
for all men be decided as it will; of this we must have the fullest conviction,
and the most indubitable assurance, that the impenitent sinner shall, upon
balancing the pains and pleasures of sin, find himself a loser; and must in the
end confess that he sinned contrary to all the dictates of wisdom and prudence,
and stands justly obnoxious to the imputation of extreme folly: The fear of the
Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. Thus, to make the
word many, in the latter clause of the verse, as extensive as it is in the
former, without recurring to the doctrine, that all men will eventually be
saved, by the obedience of one, we have only gone upon the principle of
universal redemption, which is doubtless an important truth, and have taken
into our consideration the liberty of the will in all matters of real and
personal righteousness, and its frequent abuse in the refusal of the greatest
good; for the many, in the fullest sense of the word, shall be made righteous,
as delivered from the power of the grave, in which no moral agency can be
exerted; yet none are made righteous or inherently holy, excepting those who
voluntarily concur with the gracious purposes of God in the death of his dear
Son; consequently, though Christ died for all, that all through him might live
spiritually and eternally, as well as naturally; yet not all not concurring in
this plan of grace, not rightly improving their own moral powers, they do not
become inherently holy; and therefore perish, though for them Christ died.

IN these discourses, I have run a parallel between the sin of Adam, and the
obedience of Christ, and their respective effects on the children of men, the
one reducing to death, the other raising to life; the one making them sinners,
and the other righteous; the one condemning, and the other justifying, etc. Yet
to the honor of my Savior, and in compliance with the declarations of
scripture, I am constrained to declare that the antithesis, or parallel, is
not, in all respects, exact; for the obedience of Christ avails to deliver from
more penal effects, than those to which we were subjected by Adam's
disobedience. There is more merit in the one, than demerit in the other. Hence
the Apostle, in this very chapter, says; But not as the offense so also is the
free gift; for if through the offense of one, many be dead, much more the grace
of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto many. And again, not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the
judgment was by one sin to condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses
unto justification; for if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more
they who receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by Jesus Christ; which in few words may be explained to the
following sense; the obedience of Christ not only delivers the believer from
all the penal effects of Adam's sin, but from the evil consequences of their
own transgressions, be they ever so numerous.

IMPROVEMENT.
1st. FROM the representation given above, we learn, that we are under infinite
obligations to God for the gift of his Son Jesus Christ, for the redemption of
fallen man from all the effect of Adam's and our own personal offenses. Though
it does not become us to say, that God could not in any other way have redeemed
man from the wretched consequences of the fall, than by the death of his only
begotten Son; yet we know that this was a most glorious method, by which at
once to display, his dignity as a righteous Governor, and his infinite
compassion to fallen man. He has in the scheme of redemption secured the
rights of his government, and demonstrated the infinite benevolence of his
heart; and as the Apostle expresses it, has abounded toward us in all wisdom
and prudence. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God; how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Let us
adore with most profound submission and gratitude, this astonishing method of
salvation by the incarnation of his Son; and whilst we rejoice that every man
may be saved if he will, let us endeavor, by the right improvement of our own
powers, to be in the happy number of those to whom the Redeemer shall say, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. All that Christ has done and suffered for the apostate
sons of Adam, will no further avail the adult, than to raise them from the
dead, unless they believe and repent, and are found in the number of those who
comply with gospel grace, in the religious improvement of those moral powers,
which God has given them, for the strengthening of which he proffers the
assistance of his holy spirit. Salvation is now made possible to us, but none
will finally secure it, notwithstanding all that Christ has done and suffered,
unless we diligently improve those means of grace which are within our reach,
and in the compass of our power. Though all moral impediments on the part of
God are now removed by the death and mediatory undertaking of his Son; yet none
can be saved who have arrived to years of reason, and do not improve it, in a
hearty compliance with those terms and conditions which the gospel proposes.
Some persons have made most dangerous mistakes on this subject, as supposing
that every thing is done for them by Christ; whereas the true state of the case
is this only, that our Savior has delivered us from the condemning sentence of
the law, and placed us under the gracious constitution of the gospel covenant,
by which perfect obedience is not required for salvation. But then it requires
a sincere and holy obedience to the law of faith, in the performance of which
our own endeavors are necessary: if we do not exert them, it had been better
for us if Christ had never appeared in our world, and died in our stead. His
death therefore does not supersede the necessity of the diligent improvement of
our time and talents; and when we have offended, of repentance; but only makes
them available to pardon and final security. Too much cannot be said on this
subject in this connection; for men are not mechanically made holy, nor sent to
heaven without their own voluntary consent. We shall be raised from the dead,
whether we choose or not; for there shall be a resurrection both of the just and
unjust; but none go to heaven if they have arrived to years of discretion,
without a proper improvement of their own powers, in the use of those means
which Christ has purchased, and now sincerely tenders to the children of men.

LET me therefore, in the second place, exhort you all to put your trust in
Christ for pardon and acceptance; and let it be done in the proper use of your
own mental abilities. You are not like the Jews of old, to go about to
establish a righteousness of your own, in order for justification in the sight
of God, for your best performances as falling short of the law, which requires
perfect unsinning obedience, in this view are of no avail, and are but filthy
rags. But that you may be interested in the perfect righteousness of Christ,
and may be not only justified, but sanctified, and made meet for the kingdom of
heaven, you must lean to him and depend on him, not only for pardon by his
obedience, but for sanctification by his spirit. As your greatest exertions
will not bring you to a full compliance with the moral law; so neither will
your own endeavors, without the assistances of Christ's spirit, possess you of
a covenant holiness. Look to him therefore, depend on him, as a whole and
complete Savior; whole and complete, as not only justifying you by his
righteousness, but as sanctifying you by his holy spirit. Plead therefore his
righteousness for your justification at the bar of God, and depend on his
gospel and spirit, in the diligent use of the means of grace for those holy
qualifications, without which you cannot be prepared for the happiness of
heaven. Had it not been for the kind advent of the Savior, we must all have
been for ever condemned by the law to a state of perpetual misery; but since
his arrival, none shall be made happy in heaven, but those who are justified by
his righteousness, and sanctified by his spirit. And this spirit we enjoy, to
any saving purpose, only in the way of gospel obedience, and by a serious
attention to the means of grace. Let me then exhort you to pray, to read, and
hear, to live a life of holy obedience, and when you have done the utmost in
your abilities, say, that you are but unprofitable servants; that you have done
no more than your duty, and cast yourselves on the mercy of God through Christ,
hoping for eternal salvation only through his sacrifice, who died the just for
the unjust, that he might bring them to God, not only in acts of worship here,
but to endless felicity in the coming world.

3dly. LET us live as becomes righteous and holy persons. We should not only
be careful that our hearts are right with God, but that our external practice
is right in the sight of the world. If the saints cannot fall finally, they
certainly can fall faulty. That our religion may not be evil spoken of, it
becomes them, to let their light so shine before men, that others seeing their
good works may glorify their heavenly Father. They should provide things (...),
as it is translated, but honorable, as it should have been, in the sight of all
men, that their good may not be evil spoken of. It is highly incumbent in true
believers, to walk in wisdom before others, and demonstrate by the holiness and
piety of their conversation, that they are the saved of the Lord, that they
have felt the power of religion on their souls, in its renewing and
transforming influences. In this way we best recommend the gospel of Christ;
and exhibit the most illustrious proofs of its divinity to others. In this way
we shall most effectually disarm unbelievers of their prejudices against
Christ, and the purity of his doctrines; and finally in this way, contribute
successfully to spread the triumphs of his cross!

FINIS
ERRATA.
PAGE 8, line 7, from the bottom, for here, read ever. Page 11, line 15, from
the bottom, for was, read had. Page 12, line 19, for explicable, read
inexplicable. Page 19, line 8, for denied, read damned; line 34, for many, read
any. Page 28, line 4, from the bottom, after rational, dele that, and insert,
it follows that though.


