REV. MR. AUSTIN's SERMON, INTRODUCTORY TO HIS MINISTRY IN WORCESTER.

THE MANNER IN WHICH THE GOSPEL SHOULD BE HEARD, AND THE IMPORTANCE OF HEARING
IT RIGHTLY, ILLUSTRATED AND URGED, IN A DISCOURSE, PREACHED BY SAMUEL AUSTIN,
M. A. IN WORCESTER, ON THE LORD's DAY IMMEDIATELY SUCCEEDING HIS INSTALLATION,
SEPTEMBER 29 th, MDCCXC.

PUBLISHED IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE REQUEST OF MANY OF THE HEARERS.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS. MDCCXCI.

A SERMON.
LUKE VIII. 18. TAKE HEED THEREFORE HOW YE HEAR; FOR WHOSOEVER HAS, TO HIM
SHALL BE GIVEN; AND WHOSOEVER HAS NOT, FROM HIM SHALL BE TAKEN, EVEN THAT
WHICH HE SEEMS TO HAVE.


IN the former part of this chapter we have the parable of the sower, and this
cautionary precept of our SAVIOR was probably intended as a practical
application of it. The parable itself is undoubtedly familiar to all of you.
The moral instruction which it conveys is very obvious. It was manifestly
designed to represent the preaching of the Gospel, to mark the diversity which
is observable in its reception, and to point out the manner in which it must be
heard, so as to admit of the blessed effect, to which it is ultimately
directed. CHRIST in his discourse teaches us, that to secure the personal
advantages, and final benefit of a preached Gospel, the hearing of it must be
like the operation of good soil, upon seed which is sown in it. The soil must
be of sufficient depth to receive the seed, admit of its taking suitably deep
root, favor the principle of vegetation, and its progress to maturity, or
there will be no fruit. So in the exposition of the parable, CHRIST explicitly
assures us, that no good and permanent benefit can be secured to hearers, from
the preaching of the most weighty and interesting truths, unless they are heard
in a manner, correspondent to their solemnity, and the obligations which attend
them. He teaches us, that neither the supine, stupid multitude, who give a
transient attention to the Gospel, as a matter of course only; nor those
unfeeling triflers, who attend to it merely as a matter of speculation; nor
even those, who for a little time are convinced of the reality and importance
of the truths of Christianity, but soon lose this conviction, in scenes of
business or gaiety; can, in the indulgence of their respective habits, be
savingly benefited by the preaching of the Gospel. The substance of what CHRIST
urges, is this, that men must be in that moral situation which will admit of a
due reception of the Gospel, that they must be disposed to receive it
cordially, that they must reduce it to a uniform and conscientious practice,
and that then, and then only, will they bring forth fruit to the glory of GOD
and their own salvation. Such being the importance of hearing the Gospel
rightly; with great force and propriety did CHRIST address the cautionary
injunction to his disciples, and by them to us, Take heed how ye hear. And it
cannot but affect us with a particular solemnity that he adds, for whosoever
has, to him shall be given; and whosoever has not, from him shall be taken,
even that which he seems to have.

FROM the passage, connected with the explanatory observations which have been
made, we are obviously taught these important practical truths; that respecting
the preaching of the Gospel there are duties appropriate to ministers FOR
unless the Gospel is duly preached, it cannot be heard, How can they hear
without a preacher?
; that there are also duties which are peculiar to, and binding on the people,
as hearers; and that the discharge of these duties reciprocally, is essential
to the security of the saving, and final benefit of a preached Gospel. Let us
then pursue the following arrangement in the consideration of this subject:

I. INQUIRE what is to be heard; or what are the chief things which ought to be
insisted on, in the due publication of the Gospel. II. HOW such an exhibition
of the Gospel should be heard. And, III. SHOW the importance of hearing it in a
right manner.
I. WE are to inquire what is to be heard; or what are the chief things which
ought to be insisted on, in the due publication of the Gospel.

HERE let us for a moment consider what is the design of the Gospel; for that
will help us to determine, what those truths are, which should be chiefly
insisted on, in the preaching of it. The Gospel is not designed to develop the
principles of civil government, or furnish a philosophical survey of the
material system. It is not designed to make men politicians, artists, or
proficients in husbandry. It is not designed to teach them skill, or to
stimulate them to enterprise, in worldly pursuits; but to make them holy. Its
grand object is, to exhibit the true character, the will, and the purposes of
GOD; to display the medium of salvation for sinners; and to mark out the path
in which they must go, that they may be assimilated to GOD, be reinstated in
his favor, and become candidates for, and the final possessors of celestial
blessedness. Whatever truths then have an obvious direction to these objects,
and are intimately connected with them, are to be principally insisted on in
the ministration of the Gospel. Give me leave to descend to a few particulars.

IT cannot be supposed that men will be truly religious, that they will love
GOD, and be happy in him, unless they have just views of his character. The
attributes of the DEITY then, as the foundation of all religion, and forming
the distinguishing glories of the divine character, are to be illustrated, as
far as they are discoverable, from the light of nature, and the holy
scriptures. It is not conceivable that men will feel that they are sinners, the
objects of divine abhorrence, and exposed to punishment, and realize their need
of that atonement which the Gospel proposes, unless they know whether they are
transgressors of the divine law; and this they cannot decide until they become
acquainted with it. The moral law then, as a transcript of the divine nature,
and containing the sum of our duty, is to be distinctly explained, and warmly
enforced. Farther -- How can men realize their proper moral standing with
respect to GOD and his kingdom, and their need of supernatural agency to
transform and sanctify, and of the blood of JESUS to cleanse them, unless they
are made acquainted with their fallen, i. e. with their totally sinful state?
The history then of the original lapse of human nature, and the extensively
dreadful consequences of it, must be faithfully given. The decided declarations
of Scripture, on this subject, must not be withheld; that we are by nature
children of wrath, being children of disobedience; that we are dead in
trespasses and sins; that the carnal heart is enmity against GOD, not subject
to his law, neither indeed can be. Hence too the doctrine of regeneration, as
wrought by the agency of the HOLY SPIRIT, is a cardinal doctrine of the Bible;
is essential to the scheme of religion there exhibited; and though called in
question by some, and derided by others, is one which cannot be too critically
explained, or too peremptorily urged. It is so clearly taught by CHRIST and his
Apostles, that the christian preacher, in his public ministrations, cannot
pass it over, or conceal its importance, without treason against his Master,
and the cause he has professedly espoused. That men may know whether they
exercise a holy trust in GOD, and are prepared to join the triumph of Angels in
his government; and that they may be led to anticipations of that triumph; the
nature of the divine administration, with respect to the immutable plan of it,
as laid in the eternal and predeterminate counsels of the DEITY, as
comprehending the conditions of creatures, and operating in the way of a
gracious election, holy sovereignty, and perfect benevolence, is to be held up
to view in all its extent and glory. In connection with these subjects, that
which was the leading one of the Apostles' addresses, the salvation of the
cross, in respect to its author, its nature, and issue, as it must warm the
heart, will be frequently the theme of the faithful preacher. To his fellow
sinners he will exhibit the LORD JESUS CHRIST, in his absolute divinity, as the
only Savior. The different offices which belong to his mediatorial character
he will explain: The nature and sufficiency of his atonement he will delineate:
The terms of an interest in it, repentance and faith, he will illustrate and
enforce; together with its infallible safety as a ground of dependence. It is
highly important also, that the invariable connection between faith, and a
personal compliance with the duties which we owe to GOD and our fellow
creatures, be fully urged. And that men may be persuaded to live by faith on
the SON of GOD, and to lead holy and unblamable lives; that sinners may be
awakened, and saints prompted to zeal and diligence, the solemn realities of
death, judgment, and eternity, are to be displayed in their utmost seriousness.
The endless horrors of the world of punishment, and the glories of the heavenly
paradise, are to be painted in all their solemnity and luster. Public and
prevalent sins are to be the subject of reproof. Men's accountableness at the
bar of GOD for every thing done here in the body, is to be solemnly taught; and
many other interesting topics there are, which a true minister of CHRIST, in
fidelity to his Master, and the souls of men, will insist on with honest
fervor and boldness. In a word, the whole counsel of GOD, as contained in the
Holy Scriptures, is to be exhibited without partiality or palliation; as
becomes a dying man, standing on the verge of eternity, and soon to leave the
present scene, for the solemn adjudications of another, and an endless state.
We are now to show

II. HOW such an exhibition of the Gospel is to be heard. Take heed how ye hear.

THESE, my friends, are not mere philosophic speculations, or matters of
transient occurrence. They are truths, weighty, divine and eternal; in which
the everlasting life or death of every son and daughter of Adam is embarked.
These are truths which the SON of GOD came into the world to reveal and
propagate; they have been sealed by his blood; they have been witnessed to, by
the tragical deaths of innumerable martyrs; and there is no room to doubt, but
that the Gospel which consists of them, will operate as a savor of life unto
life, or of death unto death, to every one of us here present. We shall all of
us soon find, that such is the importance of hearing suitably, this Gospel,
that whosoever has, to him shall be given; and whosoever has not, from him
shall be taken, even that which he seems to have. How then should we hear?

1. WITH honest and good hearts. This is what CHRIST expressly inculcates, in a
verse preceding our text. But that on the good ground are they, which in an
honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it and bring forth fruit
with patience. Nothing is so insuperable an obstacle to saving improvement,
under the preaching of the Gospel, as a vitiated and unsanctified heart. It is
indeed as absolutely impossible, that a heart unsubdued by divine grace, and
retaining its native aversion to divine things, should well receive and duly
improve the Gospel, as that a rock should receive seed, and rear it up to
fruitfulness. Hence the apostle says, They that are in the flesh, they who
retain a depraved heart, and are not led by the SPIRIT, cannot please GOD;
those who receive not the truth in the love of it are expressly condemned. What
can be more indisputable, and obvious, than that holy exercises are absolutely
necessary to render a performance beneficial, and acceptable? What is there of
duty in a prayer offered up with the lips only, without sincerity or affection?
What is there in an external act of charity, which can be acceptable to GOD,
when he himself, and the proper motives of action, are disregarded? Of what
advantage was it to the disobedient Jews, to be addressed with the glorious and
endearing truths which CHRIST preached, while they were his inveterate enemies,
and were resolved to persecute him, and his disciples, to the last extremity?
Hence holiness of heart is the primary thing enjoined in the Scriptures. My son
give me thine heart. -- Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby you
have transgressed against me, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for,
Why will ye die, O house of Israel? How correspondent with this sentiment is
the injunction of the apostle -- As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the word that ye may grow thereby.

2. THE truths of the Gospel must be heard with solemn and serious attention.

IT certainly can answer no valuable purpose for you, my friends, to come to
the house of GOD, unless you attend seriously to the proper business before
you. If you bring the world with you into the sanctuary -- if instead of
worshipping GOD in spirit and in truth, and giving that attention to divine
truths, which the nature of the Sabbath, and the importance of the truths
themselves clearly demand, your minds are occupied in sensual and worldly
concerns -- Can GOD be pleased with you, or can it be supposed that you will be
gainers by the Gospel? Inattention to the faithful preaching of the Gospel, is
in every view totally inexcusable. It is a shameful index of a hard, stupid,
and unfeeling heart. The Gospel is of consequence enough to engage attention,
whether we consider it as the only medium of our salvation, or as a source of
moral instruction merely; and the motives which are adapted to secure this
attention, are certainly numerous and weighty. These motives, however, I shall
have occasion by and by to exhibit more fully. I take leave but to observe
here, that whatever good individuals may obtain by the preaching of the Gospel,
it is impossible that any advantage should be obtained without attention.

SUPPOSE a man comes to the house of GOD, and the most solemn truths are
delivered, and in the clearest and most forcible manner -- yet if he sleep, or
employ his time in gazing on trifling objects, or in studying how he may
successfully push his worldly schemes -- In what respect will he be the wiser
or the better? He will go out of the house of GOD as ignorant and as stupid as
he came in, and will be more the child of hell than before. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of GOD. But how can there be this hearing
without serious attention?

3. THE truths of the Gospel should be heard without prejudice.

PREJUDICE has a most pernicious influence in the minds of men: It is like a
deep rooted, and incurable disease, which resists all applications, and
forebodes certain death. When a spirit of prejudice is imbibed, either against
truth, against religion in general, against a minister, or professors of
Christianity; but little good is to be expected from the most diligent labors.
There is scarce any thing which more obstructs the genuine progress of the
Gospel than this. It renders the subject of it deaf to all reason, to all
reproof, and may entirely defeat the most benevolent exertions for his good.
Prejudice has fomented enmities, divided churches and societies, made man an
enemy to man, and has probably done more toward peopling the world of darkness
with wretched inhabitants, than is conceivable. We should therefore make it our
great concern, to have all our prejudices mortified; we should be open to
conviction; we should be candid, and liberal; ready to yield to the light of
truth whenever it is exhibited. For he will be likely to know most, and to
judge rightest, whose mind is least under the shackles of prejudice, and whose
ingenuous heart is most open to the light of revelation.

4. THE truths which are exhibited in the preaching of the Gospel, ought
certainly to be heard, without a cavilling and captious spirit.

THERE are many people who attend upon the solemnities of public worship, with
scarce any other view than to find fault. They come to the house of GOD, not to
honor him, not to seek his favor and learn their duty; but to discover
imperfections in the preacher, in his manner, in his language, or in his
doctrines; that they may have the malicious pleasure of railing against him
afterward, and disaffecting others toward him. Is this a proper return for
the benevolent exertions of a faithful minister? Is this the spirit, with which
we should appear in the sanctuary of the LORD GOD of hosts? Is this the temper,
with which the Gospel of the meek SAVIOR should be heard? What an unamiable
disposition of mind is this! What protection can it meet with, my friends,
before the bar of that Being, whose solemn requisition is, Take heed how ye
hear; and who can approve of those only, who, as new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby? And what an effectual
barrier must such a spirit be, to preclude all the benign influences of the
blessed truths of Christianity! How much more lovely and charming is the temper
of that man, who is formed to benevolent propensities, who loves to throw a
veil of charity over the defects and undesigned deviations of his minister, and
whose ultimate desire is to be made better by the solemn truths he delivers!

5. THE truths of the Gospel should be heard, with a serious respect to those
very truths, and not from an idle unmeaning curiosity, or a chief regard to the
manner, language, and address of the speaker.

WE come not to the house of GOD, that is, if we come rightly, to see new
things, or to gratify a trifling spirit. We come not to the temple of the LORD,
as many go to a concert or theater, to have the ear pleased with music, the
flowing ease of language, or the graces of oratory. And to gratify people in
their undue thirst for these objects, can never be solicitously sought by that
minister, who considers that he is speaking for GOD, and that the eternal life
or death of his hearers is, as it were, suspended on every word he utters. It
will be rather his concern, faithfully to declare the whole counsel of GOD, and
to win souls to CHRIST. And those people only will hear in a right and
profitable manner, who chiefly regard the truth, who have consciences open to
conviction, and who realize that the Gospel contains an infinitely momentous
address to them from the King of Heaven, and that if they receive it not, it
will be but a savor of death unto death to them.

6. THE Gospel should be heard with prayerfulness.

MINISTERS are but humble instruments in the accomplishment of the designs of
grace. Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but GOD
that gives the increase. As with respect to our existence, in him we live, and
move, and have our beings; so with respect to every moral good exercise of
heart, he works in us, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. On the
favorable gales, and friendly influences of his spirit, are we dependent, so
that without them the Gospel will be preached absolutely in vain. This
dependence we should feel, and relying on the ability, the inexhaustible
fullness, and unmerited mercy of GOD, through JESUS CHRIT, we should come to him
as children to a father; soliciting the grateful breathings of his SPIRIT, and
his particular blessing on his own institutions. Let us therefore, says the
Apostle, come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find
grace to help in time of need. Blessed privilege! O that we knew the sweets of
it, by a more general and constant experience! Were there more prayers in the
morning of the LORD's day; were there more in the evening; were there more
ejaculatory desires offered up in the course of public worship; did we know
more generally, in what a devout communion with GOD consists; divine truths
would undoubtedly have a more extensive, and blessed influence. Then, in the
language of the Psalmist, the righteous would flourish like the palm tree, he
would grow like a cedar in Lebanon. Thrice happy that man who walks with GOD,
and while he is hearing divine truths dispensed, lifts the pious desires of his
soul to him, that those truths may sink deep into his heart, and be a mean of
his conformity to his Maker.

7. IF we would comply with the direction of CHRIST, in our manner of hearing
the weighty truths of his Gospel, we must hear them with a disposition, and
readiness to obey them in our practice. Faith must be attended with the
external testimony of good works. Theory is of little use without practice. The
more we become acquainted with the character of GOD, the greater are our
obligations to love it, and to exhibit the fruit of such a love, the purity of
a holy conduct. The end of studying the Gospel and its precepts, is, that we
may rejoice in the one, and fulfill the other.

8. THE Gospel should be heard as a message from GOD, and not from men. It is a
revelation from GOD, and contains the best news that were ever published to the
universe. It is to be heard therefore as the word of GOD, and not as the word
of men. It behooves us to give heed to it, as a proclamation from Heaven,
announcing terms of peace to rebellious creatures; on the improvement of which
depends our eternal well being. It is to be attended to, not as the dream of an
enthusiast, or a compilation of fabulous legends, but as the unalterable word
of the immutable GOD. This invests it with a solemnity which demands the
deepest regard -- which requires us to yield up our understandings to its
instructions with implicit faith; and did we attend to it duly under this
consideration, every sentiment would come to us with irresistible weight, and
it would be impossible for us to be easy while disobedient to its requirements.

9. THE preaching of the Gospel should be heard under a sense of the
uncertainty of its enjoyment.

OPPORTUNITY to attend to the overtures of redeeming grace is a precarious
privilege. The means of spiritual improvement may be shortly taken from us, and
the things which relate to our everlasting peace, may be soon hid from our
eyes. We are sliding with rapidity, on the tide of time, into the boundless
ocean of eternity. Very soon our seats in the house of GOD will be vacant, or
be filled by others. The Gospel, as to us, will be published no more, and all
opportunity for gaining instruction unto salvation will be lost forever. How
serious and solicitous should this consideration make us in our attention to
the glorious Gospel of CHRIST; especially since it must be eventually a savor
of life unto life or of death unto death to us! -- Which brings me to observe,

Finally, THAT we ought by all means to hear the Gospel, not only as dying, but
as accountable creatures.

OUR accountableness at the bar of GOD should stimulate us to the greatest
circumspection and diligence in every duty. The declarations of the Holy
Scripture on this subject are delivered in such solemn language as this -- Woe
unto thee, Chorazin, woe unto thee, Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which
were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, that it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the day of judgment, than for you. Whosoever
has, to him shall be given; but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken,
even that which he seems to have. He that despised Moses' law, died without
mercy under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer punishment suppose ye,
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the SON of GOD, and
has counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite unto the SPIRIT of grace. What can be more solemn
than these declarations! To what an infinitely awful and interesting scene do
they point us! As stewards, we are to remember that we are to be responsible
for our spiritual privileges, at the tribunal of the great GOD. Solemn inquiry
will be made whether we have listened duly to the proclamations of his grace.
At that period of grand assize, when the intelligent universe shall be
assembled before the SUPREME JUDGE, to sustain their respective irreversible
allotments, we shall be weighed in the balance of divine truth, and find, to
our eternal joy or sorrow, that nothing is more important than a due hearing of
the truths of Christianity, Now under the influence of these vast and weighty
ideas, we should hear the Gospel, and certainly if we do, our attention will be
very serious.

III. THE third particular which was to engage our attention, you recollect
was, The importance of hearing the Gospel in a right manner.

THIS part of our subject I have in a measure unavoidably anticipated, in what
has been already said; but you will suffer me to make some enlargement.

A SUITABLE hearing of the Gospel of the blessed JESUS, is of great importance,
because it must conduce in the highest degree to our reputation and usefulness.
The knowledge of the sublime truths, and great duties of religion, connected
with their sanctifying influence on the heart, will go far toward furnishing a
man for the discharge of the various duties of life with honor to himself, and
extensive advantage to others. This will qualify him to contribute essentially
to the good of his fellow creatures, in different capacities and relations. It
is this, more than any one thing, which forms the good statesman, the upright
patriot, the charitable benefactor, the constant friend, the amiable spiritual
instructor, the firm supporter of the truth, the kind neighbor, the humane
master, and the tender relative. He who hears properly, who imbibes and
practices, the essential principles of Christianity, is a pillar of society and
an ornament of his generation. He goes about, in imitation of his Divine
Master, doing good. He wipes the tear from affliction's eye. He espouses the
interests of public and private happiness. His prayers draw down blessings
upon a guilty world. He lives revered, and when he dies, society feels the
shock, and the blessings of many come upon him. Farther,

TO hear the Gospel rightly is of the highest importance to the happiness of
the present life. The ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her
paths are peace. Great peace, says the Psalmist, have they who love thy law,
and nothing shall offend them. The man who has heard the Gospel in the love of
it, who has made it his object to learn and to fulfill his duty, who has been
careful to treat the solemnities of Revelation with that deference and
attention which they claim, is happy. He is happy in that he has a system of
faith on which he leans, and which will not admit of his being driven about by
every wind of doctrine. He is not easily turned aside from the foundations of
his hope, or the comforts of it, by the glooms of melancholy, the cavils of the
sceptick, or the jeers of the scoffer. He is happy in that he is prepared to
sustain the calamities of life with fortitude and serenity. His principles,
views, affections and hopes disarm adversity of its sting, and furnish him with
those consolations, which are more than a counterbalance to the severest stroke
of affliction. Which leads me to observe, that he is more especially happy in
his devotional exercises. Heaven is shed into his bosom. He has anticipations
of future blessedness which are not to be conceived by natural men. His own
experience teaches him, that the kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the HOLY GHOST.

LET us now for a moment look at a character the reverse of this. Consider him
as born in a christian land, taught to read his Bible from his childhood, and
led, in compliance with education and habit, to attend generally on the public
worship of the Sabbath; but he has never read the Scriptures with an interested
attention and evangelical spirit. His heart has still remained hard, stupid,
and uninfluenced by religion. Though he is present statedly in the house of
GOD, he is trifling and inattentive. His mind is buried in worldly concerns. Or
if in a measure externally attentive, some darling prejudice perhaps has made
him deaf to every rational sentiment, and to all the remonstrances of truth. He
has made no serious inquiries into his own personal state, or future prospects;
and having no relish for spiritual objects, he is a stranger to the sincere
devotional effusions of the humble heart. Such is the character of one who
hears the Gospel carelessly. He is in a christless, spiritually dead state. The
consequence is, he is almost as ignorant as a heathen of the great principles
and glorious scheme of Revelation; and is of course liable to become a prey to
every delusion. He is neither furnished, nor disposed to communicate
instruction to his household, nor to benefit his neighbors in their most
important concerns. While he is exposed with others to disappointments,
distresses and crosses; this peculiar infelicity attends him, that he is not
armed against them. His conversation is not improving. It savours not of
Heaven, but of present and sensual things. His example is poisonous. Death is
his terror. In short, he has a bare existence, without solid enjoyment.

BUT the importance of hearing the Gospel rightly rises, and appears to be
infinitely great, as it respects our eternal welfare. Here the vastness of the
subject eludes our conceptions. On this are suspended the amazing decisions of
the future world. Though we are by nature and practice sinners, and condemned
by the laws of GOD to endless woe; we are not left in absolutely hopeless
circumstances. A SAVIOR is provided, and offered to us; pardon is proclaimed
in his name to the penitent and believing. The declaration is made, Today if ye
will hear his voice harden not your hearts; and we are assured that there is no
other name under heaven given amongst men whereby we can be saved; and that he
who believes and is baptized shall be saved; and that he who believes not
shall be damned. The present is a state of probation. At death it is closed.
The allotments beyond it are retributive, fixed, and irreversible. If we hear
the Gospel rightly, receive with cordiality its gracious overtures, become the
subjects of the genuine spirit of Christianity, and the true followers of the
LAMB, the Gospel will operate as a savor of life unto life to us. Its promises
will be ours. We shall die in peace. This corruptible will put on incorruption,
and this mortal immortality. -- Through the gloomy valley of the shadow of
death, the divine presence will irradiate our way, and we shall be brought to
the general assembly and church of the firstborn, to JESUS the mediator of the
new covenant, and to an innumerable company of angels. We shall be embosomed in
the embraces of Almighty Love, and shall be making progress in knowledge, in
dignity and happiness, to all eternity. On the other hand; if we wear away this
probationary state, as forgetful hearers and not doers of the word; if we are
stony ground hearers; if we neglect the great salvation; and live in the
ungrateful rejection of GOD's unspeakable gift, our death will be dreadful, and
our eternity wretched. Our doom will be pronounced by the lips of JESUS
himself, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels. We shall be excluded from the society, the peace, and bliss of Heaven.
Hope will be extinguished in our bosoms, and leave them to be the mansions of
despair. Never more shall we hear the invitations of the Gospel, or have
opportunity to believe unto salvation. Our residence must be, in the lake of
fire and brimstone. Our associates apostate and malicious spirits. For without
are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever loves and makes a lie. Our consolations will be the gnawings of
that worm which never dies. Such is the portion of those who forget GOD. This
shall they have at mine hand, says the LORD, they shall lie down in sorrow.
This, my hearers, will be our inevitable doom, if we listen not to the pacifick
terms of grace in the Gospel, if we continue barren figtrees in the vineyard of
GOD, if we do not take heed how we hear. And it ought to be observed, and I
pray that we may deeply realize the truth, that our punishment will be
aggravatedly intense, in proportion to the privileges which we enjoy. Our
misery will be more intolerable than heathens, who have no Gospel to account
for. Their treatment at the hands of their Judge, will be far more lenient,
their doom will be far less deplorable, than what those of us will experience,
who have had the Bible in our hands, and been favored with the publication of
its glorious truths, from Sabbath to Sabbath, and yet have rejected them. GOD
will not see his SON slighted, and yet hold his despisers guiltless. He cannot
be an indifferent spectator of ungrateful abuses of his grace. And by how much
he loves his only begotten SON, by so much will he make the contemner of him
feel the weight of his displeasure. Now the only way to shun this immense
misery on the one hand; and to secure the enjoyments of heaven on the other, is
to hear the Gospel of the SON of GOD rightly. We must treasure up the truth
into good and honest hearts, receive it in the love of it, hear as accountable
creatures, and with that serious and practical diligence, which become such
solemn realities. This is the great thing which we need as immortal creatures.
Many other things may be of advantage to us in this world, but nothing else
will do for the other. Learning, extensive knowledge in different branches of
human science, may make us respectable in the sight of men; but without the
genuine influence of religion, we shall be odious in the sight of GOD. Skill in
trade may facilitate your worldly advancement, and furnish you with the means
of figure, and grandeur; but it can never save you from hell, or put you into
heaven. Ingenuity in the mechanic arts, may make your circumstances
comfortable in this world; but can never make your circumstances comfortable in
eternity. Diligence and prudence in husbandry, may fill your stores and your
barns with valuable commodities; but can never insure you a treasure in heaven.
By learning, skill and industry, we may arrive to worldly opulence and honor,
and yet at the summons of mortality sink deeper than Judas in the dungeon of
darkness. A king may today wield the scepter of extensive dominion, and
flourish with all the splendour of an eastern monarch; yet, if he neglects duly
to hear the Gospel of the SON of GOD, and disregards its gracious proposals,
tomorrow he may be the most abject, and wretched creature imaginable.

OF how much consequence then our present usefulness and happiness may be
supposed to be; of how much our interests in a future and retributive state; of
so much importance it is, that we hear the great truths of the Gospel in a
right and acceptable manner.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. FROM the preceding observations, we may assign the reason why preaching
does no more good among mankind in general. It is very obvious that if the
truths of the Gospel were clearly, faithfully, and forcibly delivered; and if
they were heard with that cordiality, candor, prayerfulness, and seriousness,
to which they are entitled, the most blessed effects would be produced.
Religion would be the cement of society, and the stability of the times.
Hypocrisy would be extirpated from churches. Ignorance and stupidity would be
banished. The light of the Gospel would break forth as the morning, and the
salvation which it proclaims, would wear a brightness like a lamp that burns.
B^^ now, religion is contemned, and eternity forgotten. Wickedness of every
kind, profanity, irreligion, debauchery, fraud and falsehood, reign triumphant.
Genuine Christianity has but few adherents; and even those who profess to love
CHRIST, at least many of them, seem ashamed of his cause, and act as though
they really thought him unworthy of their obedience. What can be the reason of
this? Certainly a principal one is, that the great truths of the Gospel are not
generally preached with that clearness, fidelity, and fervor; and are not
heard with that cordiality, attention, candor, and prayerfulness, to which
they are entitled.

1. SUCH being the Gospel when properly exhibited, the manner in which it is to
be heard, and the unspeakable importance of hearing it rightly, we can scarcely
fail of feeling our absolute need of a supernatural agency and blessing. As
preachers, and as hearers, we may alike exclaim, Who is sufficient for these
things! Without divine strength we can do nothing. If we are left to ourselves
we shall, notwithstanding the fullness and glory of the Gospel, and the frequent
publication of it, treasure up to ourselves wrath, against the day of wrath,
and the revelation of the righteous judgment of GOD. On our knees then let us
daily fall; and as dependent, polluted creatures, humbly implore the blessing
of GOD, the guidance of the HOLY SPIRIT, and grace to help in every time of
need.

3. FROM the preceding discourse we may infer, that the duties which are
incumbent on a minister and people respecting the Gospel, are the most solemn
and weighty that belong to man. It is his province to watch for souls as one
who must give account. It behooves him at his eternal peril to warn every man,
to declare the whole counsel of GOD, and to endeavor by every possible mean to
be instrumental in the progress of the REDEEMER's kingdom, and the salvation of
precious souls. He must not be intimidated from the faithful prosecution of his
duty, by the malice or the ridicule of men. Persecution he must patiently
encounter, in whatever shape it may meet him. Truths which are grating to the
proud hearts of sinners, he must not suppress, lest they should give disgust.
But he must be faithful to GOD, and to his own conscience, and cheerfully
risque the consequence. On the other hand, people, to whom the truths of the
Gospel are addressed, are bound to take heed how they hear, to receive the
truth in the love of it, to practice it, to feel its importance, and to act
from the influence of it. They are bound to hear as under the inspection of
their Judge, and as hastening on the swift wings of time to his bar; always
remembering, that the rule of judgment, respecting the Gospel, is to be,
whosoever has, to him shall be given; but whosoever has not, from him shall
be taken, even that which he seems to have.

4. SUFFER me now, my brethren and friends, to call into view our personal
concern in this subject, especially with respect to the relation which has
recently been formed between us. In the distributions of GOD's holy providence,
I am now established your minister. This to me is a concern of infinite moment.
Death is before me, and the awful, the grand, the all interesting solemnities
of a judgment to come, are soon to be realized. The charge which I have
received to watch over your souls as one who must give account, lies heavy on
my heart. The loss of a soul how, fearful! What! an immortal spirit wading
through seas of anguish, sustaining a punishment without diminution or end! And
shall that soul be lost through any carelessness, stupidity or unfaithfulness
of mine! May divine grace keep me from such an unspeakable infelicity. I desire
to be faithful, to declare to you the whole counsel of GOD, though I should
provoke your displeasure, and destroy my own temporal ease. I come to you, my
dear friends, as far as I know my own heart, not seeking yours but you; and I
trust I shall aim at your best good, though the more I love you, the less I be
loved. Could I be instrumental in your eternal happiness, I should count no
trials too great in the pursuit of so dear an object. From the experience I
have had of the difficulties attending the faithful discharge of the duties of
the ministry, I do not allow myself to look forward into future life, with any
great expectations of temporal prosperity, or happiness. But it is of very
little consequence what befalls me, if you, my dear friends, may but be saved;
and that you may indeed be saved, I hope will be the drift of my prayers, my
exertions, my preaching, and my whole course of life. I trust I shall have your
prayers, your friendship, your kindness. I find in my heart that I love you,
and unless I be deceived, I shall love you till my last breath. My time in this
world will probably be short. May it be filled up with the most diligent
exertions for your good. As I am brought into a near and tender relation to
you, I shall enter into all your afflictions, your distresses, and your
spiritual wants. May we live together in love, may we walk together in
christian duty, and at last meet in the bosom of JESUS. I wish you to use
freedom with me, with my house and family, in neighbourly intercourse; and
should any of you have any distresses of mind, should you hereafter feel the
want of a christian instructor and guide, when sunk under spiritual burdens,
come to me freely as to a brother, and let me endeavor to be an instrument of
your happiness. If I declare to you, at any time, truths which are grating to
your natural feelings, remember it is because I would not flatter you at your
eternal expense, but would approve myself to GOD a faithful minister of the New
Testament. And inasmuch as some intricate doctrines must be preached and
explained, and the manner of treating them may be misunderstood, whenever
persons are dissatisfied and feel an opposition to them prevailing in their
minds, I request that they would be so ingenuous as to converse familiarly with
me on their difficulties, that I may have a fair opportunity to remove them,
that so that harmony which is the only basis of happy society may be secured.

ON your part, my brethren, you see your duty. Obey then the injunction, Take
heed how ye hear. Hear with honest, good, and believing hearts. Hear with
solemn and serious attention. Hear without prejudice. Hear without a captious
and cavilling spirit. Hear from an interested respect to the truths of the
Gospel; and not from an idle curiosity, or a chief regard to the manner,
language, and address of the speaker. Hear with prayerfulness. Hear with a
disposition and readiness to obey in your uniform practice. Hear the Gospel as
the word of GOD, and not as the word of men. Hear under a sense of the
uncertainty of its enjoyment. And hear as creatures who are to give account at
the last great day, and whose eternal state is to be determined by their
reception or rejection of the Gospel. Let me be encouraged by your strict and
conscientious attendance on the public exercises of the LORD's house. Do not
suffer yourselves to fall into habits of sloth and tarrying at home on the
Sabbath. Let me, I entreat you, be favored with a solemn attention to the
truths I am called to deliver. Let every one remember that he must give an
account for the manner in which he treats the Gospel. Deeply realize that if
you neglect the great salvation which it proposes; if you fail to hear rightly
its interesting truths; if you manifest an indifference and disrespect to the
proclamations of redeeming grace, and refuse a compliance with them;
destruction will most assuredly overtake you as an armed man, and there will be
no escape. Lay feelingly to heart the aggravated guilt, which must attend a
voluntary, and habitual abuse, of that exhibition of almighty love which is
addressed to you in the Gospel. Consider what anguish will penetrate your souls
at the day of judgment, if you are unhappily found to have received this grace
of GOD in vain. Remember that if ye believe not, still GOD abides faithful; he
cannot deny himself. The Eternal Word, found in the form of a servant,
addressing sinners, by the ministers of his kingdom, with the endearing
persuasions of suffering love, cannot be disregarded with impunity. Consider
also the present felicity, and the interminable future glory, which are
annexed, by divine promise, to a due hearing, to a cordial admission of the
Gospel. Welcome then, I entreat you, its instructions, and let them have
control over all your views, feelings, and conduct. Let your ears, your
understandings, your hearts be open to the reception of the truth as it is in
(...). Take heed that ye do not bring on yourselves the reproof and sentence,
dictated by the HOLY GHOST, For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the LORD; they would none of my counsel; they despised all my
reproof: Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices. May you all, of every age and description, experience
the divine benediction, and hear, and feel, and act under the guidance of the
HOLY SPIRIT. And may the GOD of peace, who brought again from the dead our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, (...) great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make you all perfect in every good work to do his will;
working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through JESUS CHRIST;
to whom be glory forever and ever.

AMEN.

