AN ACCOUNT OF THE Soil, growing Timber, and other Productions, OF THE LANDS in
the COUNTRIES situated in the back Parts of the States of New York and
Pensylvania, IN NORTH AMERICA.

AND PARTICULARLY the LANDS in the COUNTY of ONTARIO, KNOWN BY THE NAME OF The
GENESEE TRACT, LATELY LOCATED, AND NOW IN THE PROGRESS OF BEING SETTLED.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1791.

A Map of the GENESEE TRACT, in the COUNTY of ONTARIO, STATE of NEW YORK*
showing its distance from water communication with New York, Philadelphia and
Baltimore: -- also its distance from the new City of Columbia, or the proposed
seat of Government of the UNITED STATES.


A MAP of the GENESEE LANDS in the County of ONTARIO and State of NEW YORK
according to an accurate Survey which was made of the same (...).


AN ACCOUNT OF THE LANDS called the GENESEE TRACT, IN THE COUNTY of ONTARIO,
and STATE of NEW YORK, IN NORTH AMERICA.
THE lands generally known by the name of the Genesee Tract, are situated in
the back parts of the State of New York, and contain upwards of Two Millions of
Acres, mostly good Arable Land, Extent of the Lands.
forming nearly an oblong square of 80 miles in length from south to north, and
42 miles wide from east to west.

These lands were granted to Messrs. Gorham and Phelps, the original purchasers
from the State of Massachussets, in the year 1788. And this grant was
afterward confirmed by the six nations of Indians, who, on receiving a
valuable consideration, alienated the whole of this property, and soon after
these nations removed themselves and families to a distant country.

Situation, Latitude, and Longitude.
The south-east corner of this tract is in latititude 42, longitude 82, miles
west from the river Delaware; and 77 miles west from Philadelphia.

The distance from the great Towns in America.
The actual distance of the eastern boundary, from the Hudson's River or Albany,
is about 140 miles. From Philadelphia, by the nearest road, the distance may be
about 180 miles. And not more than 200 miles north of the proposed new city of
Columbia, the intended seat of government of the United States, as will appear
from the map hereunto annexed.

But the peculiar advantages which distinguish these lands over most of the new
settled countries of America, are these following:

1st, The uncommon excellence and fertility of the Soil.

2d, The superior quality of the Timber, and the advantages of easy
cultivation, in consequence of being generally free from underwood.

3d, The abundance of Grass for cattle in the woods, and on the extensive
meadow grounds upon the lakes and rivers.

4th, The vast quantities of the Sugar Maple Tree, in every part of the tract
The Sugar Maple is likely to become extremely valuable, in consequence of a
very important discovery which has been made, of the mode of graining the sugar
which is extracted from the juice or sap which is drawn from this singular tree.

It has been known by the Indians time immemorial, that a species of sugar or a
saccharine substance, answering this purpose, could be extracted from the sugar
maple; and not only the Six Nations, and other Indians inhabiting the back
countries from Pensylvania to Canada, were accustomed to use it, but also the
first settlers upon the North River and New England, who, having learnt from
the Indians how to boil up the juice, have for many years supplied their
families with this kind of sugar, exhibiting the appearance of a kind of black
cake, and answering all the common purposes of sugar.

But until within the last two years, it was not ascertained that the sugar of
this tree was capable of being grained, so as to become an article of
merchandise; neither was it satisfactorily authenticated, till very lately,
that there was a sufficient number of these trees to produce that quantity of
sugar which could enduce the pursuit of this object upon a large scale.

The surveys, however, that have been made (particularly of the forests in the
Genesee country) as well as the lands in the back parts of Pensylvania and
New York, incontestibly prove that this tree is so abundant as to afford a
resource for the supply of all North America with sugar; and the arrival of a
quantity of this sugar at Philadelphia and New York, in spring 1790, prove
also, that the quality is equal to any muscovado sugar imported from the West
Indies.

An American farmer of great respectability, who had been for many years
acquainted with the usual way of making this sugar, being desirous of improving
the method, he obtained instructions from a sugar refiner in Philadelphia; and
with the additional advantage of this information he began his experiments in
February, 1790, at Stock-port, about three miles below the junction of the
Mohock and Popatchtunck branches of the Delaware.

He soon found that the business was only in its infancy, and that, by a
departure from the old practice of boiling down the sap, and graining the
syrop, great improvements might be made, so as to produce sugar in color,
grain, and taste equal to any imported.

The result of his experiments have fully confirmed his hopes on this head, for
the sugar he has made and sent down to Philadelphia, in the opinion of well
qualified judges, is equal to the best sugar imported from the West India
Islands. The respectable individual who made these interesting experiments,
whose judgment is much to be relied on, as well from his experience in the
business, as from his known and established character for cando^r and
integrity, is clearly of opinion, that four active industrious men, well
provided with materials and conveniences proper for carrying on the business,
nay turn out in a common season, which lasts from four to six weeks; forty
hundred weight good sugar; that is, ten hundred weight to each man.

If four men can effect this, and produce as much sugar in six weeks, (equal to
15 shillings sterling per day to each man, at 6d. per pound) what must be the
produce of the separate or associated labors of many thousands of people who
now inhabit and may inhabit, the immense tracts of lands which abound with the
sugar maple tree? It is an interesting era in the history of the world. A
resource for commerce and productive industry, which till now was not even in
the contemplation of those individuals who have been long in the practice of
converting this sugar to domestic purposes.

It is here to be remarked that no cultivation is necessary; that no
contingency, such as hurricanes or bad seasons, can disturb the process; that
neither the heavy expense of mills, engines, machinery, or a system of
planting, which occupies negroes for the whole of the season, is necessary at
all to make the maple sugar: -- The process occupies six weeks, from the middle
of February to the end of March; and the whole of the buildings, and other
articles necessary for carrying it on, are to be obtained at so trifling an
expense, as to be within the reach of any person of common industry, whose
conduct in life can entitle him to the most moderate credit.

Upon the scale of four men, and for the purpose of making 40 cwt. of sugar,
all the implements that are necessary, are these following: EXPENSE. 1st,
Sixteen kettles of 15 gallons each, to boil the sap, with pot racks for each
kettle, L16 0 0 2d, Two iron ladles, with bowls of a gallon, to shift the sap
from one kettle to another 1 5 0 3d, Four screw augurs, to inch, for boring the
trees 0 6 0 4th, Ten buckets with covers, of 3 gallons each, for collecting the
sap, and yokes for carrying two between the shoulders 2 10 0 Carried over, L20
1 0 Brought over, L20 1 0 5th, Sixteen hundred wooden troughs, of three gallons
each, to receive the sap from the trees, 3d. each 20 0 0 N. B. One man,
acquainted with the business, may cut down wood and make 20 troughs in a day,
(or eight days work of ten men) 6th, Six wooden troughs, dug out from large
timber, like a canoe, for holding the sap 4 10 0 In a new country where
cisterns cannot be had, such large troughs, made of well-seasoned timber (of
which there is vast abundance, of an uncommon size, wherever the maple tree
grows) answer the purpose very well. Upon the top of this cistern there should
be a linen strainer fixed, through which the sap brought in the buckets should
pass. 7th, A shed and walls for the fire places to be erected, of stone or clay
(of both which there are plenty in the country) of sufficient length for the 16
boilers; which shed should be covered so as to keep out the weather 10 10 0
Carried over, L55 1 0 Brought over, L.55 1 0 8th, Sugar moulds may be made of
seasoned boards, until earthen ones can be procured 1 10 0 9th, Pickers (so
called by the sugar bakers) to run up the moulds, may be also made of hard wood
found in the country 0 9 0 10th, Spouts for the trees, 3,200 in all 6 10 0
11th, Wooden gutters and narrow troughs for facilitating labor 1 10 0 Total
cost, L. 65 0 0


These are the whole implements that are required for a sugar work in America,
all which, it is to be observed, excepting the sixteen kettles, the two iron
ladles, and the four augurs, are prepared by the workmen themselves from the
resources they find in the country. -- If, however, a large work were to be
established, the expense would probably be less, in proportion, than upon the
scale of four men engaged in this pursuit.

SEASON FOR TAPPING.
By trials in February each year, it will be discovered when the maple tree
ought to be bored, for the purpose of extracting the syrup or sap, as in that
month, sometimes earlier and sometimes later, it begins to yield a sufficient
quantity for commencing business.

TAPPING OR BORING.
Four hundred trees, each tree bored with two holes on the south side, and also
with two holes on the north side of the tree in the early part of the season,
with screw augurs from half to one inch, according to the size of the tree. And
toward the middle of the season, a like number of trees to be bored in the
same manner.

This upon the Scale of Four Hands. Eight hundred trees in all, to be tapped.

The sap of the second tapping will be found richer and more productive than
the first.

At first, the augur should go no deeper into the tree than of an inch, and to
be deepened afterward to the extent of 2 inches, as the manner of the saps
running may render necessary. -- The hole to be made in a slanting or
descending position, that the sap may run freely in frosty weather. -- In these
holes there should be fixed spouts to project from the tree 12 inches, but not
to enter the orifice more than half an inch. Elder wood spouts to be prepared
in the season.

PRESERVING THE SAP OR SYRUP.
In the early part of the season, the sap will keep during frost, but as the
spring advances, it will be necessary to boil it the day after it is drawn from
the tree, to prevent souring and fermentation.

BOILING THE SAP.
A smart fire should be kept up while the sap is boiling, and a table spoonful
of slacked lime put into each 15 gallon kettle, while the sap is warming, and
before it boils, to raise the scum, and give the sugar a grain.

When the scum rises, it should be skimmed off. -- When the liquour is reduced
one half, discharge it into the one half of the kettles continuing the process,
till the whole is placed in one kettle, filling up the empty ones as soon as
possible with fresh sap.

When the liquor in the last or aggregate kettle becomes a syrup, it should be
strained through a woollen cloth, before it becomes too thick.

When thus cleaned, it should stand in buckets or other proper vessels 12
hours, that the whole sediment may fall to the bottom, and the clarified syrup
to be poured off into a kettle or boiler. The sediment to be boiled up again
with fresh sap.

In graining, cleaning, and whiteing the sugar, the method of the sugar-bakers
to be used.

In graining the sugar, pour the syrup into a boiler, after having stood 12
hours, and place it over a smart fire of charcoal, so as to prevent any flame,
using butter or hog's-lard to keep down the sap when it rises to the top. This
should be carefully attended to when the sugar is graining.

The mature state of the boiling is known by taking a little of the syrup from
the boiling stick, and trying if it ropes or draws into a thread between the
finger and thumb* then it should be put into a tub or cooler, and stirred
incessantly until the grain can be felt, when it is in a fit state to be poured
into the moulds.

MOLASSES AND VINEGAR.
When the trees of the second tapping become poor, which may be about the 31st
of March, or perhaps not till the 10th of April, the number of fresh tapped
trees will yield a sap, of which may be made good molasses, and excellent
vinegar.

Rum has also been made of an exceeding good quality from the rich sap.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
In Maple Plantations, it may be useful to cut down all other timber which grow
intermixed with the sugar trees, and also those of that specie which are not
thriving.

It is not yet ascertained from experience, how long a tree may be tapped with
success. -- But there are instances among old settlers on the North River, of
trees being tapped for 50 years, and still continue to yield their sap in
season, the same as new trees; and it is even asserted by persons of some
experience, that these trees become more valuable, yielding a sap of a richer
quality the more they are tapped.

How far a careful cultivation in plantations may still increase the quantity,
and enrich the juices drawn from this valuable tree, remains to be ascertained
by experiment.

The presumption, however, is in favor of still greater advantages from
cultivation and art.




.

5th, The great variety of other fine Timber, such as oak, hickery, black
walnut, chestnut, ash of different kinds, elm, butter-nut, basswood, poplar,
pines, and also thorn trees of a prodigious size.

6th, The variety of Fruit Trees, and also smaller fruits, such as apple and
peach orchards, in different places, which were planted by the Indians, plumb
and cherry trees, mulberries, grapes of different kinds, raspe-berries,
huckle-berries, black-berries, wild goose-berries, and strawberries in vast
quantities; -- also cramberries, and black haws, etc.

7th, The vast variety of Wild Animals and Game which is to be found in this
country, such as deer, moose deer, and elk of a very large size, beavers,
otters, martins, minx's, rabbits, squirrels, racoons, bears, wild cats, etc.
many of which furnish excellent furs and peltry.

8th, The great variety of Birds for Game, such as wild turkeys, pheasants,
partridges, pigeons, plovers, heath-fowl, and Indian hen; together with a vast
variety of waterfowl on the rivers and lakes, such as wild geese, and ducks,
of many different kinds not known in Europe.

9th, The uncommon abundance of very fine Fish, with which the lakes and rivers
abound; among which are to be found excellent salmon of two different kinds,
salmon-trout of a very large size, white and yellow perch, sheep-heads, pike,
succos, and eels of a very large size, with a varity of other fish in their
different seasons.

10th, The excellence of the climate in that region where these lands are
situated, which is less severe in winter, and not so warm in summer, as the
same latitudes nearer the sea. -- The total exemption from all periodical
disorders, particularly the sever and ague, which does not prevail in the
Genesee country, on account of the rising grounds and fine situations.

11th, The vast advantages derived from the Navigable Lakes, Rivers, and
Creeks, which intersect and run through every part of this tract of country,
affording a water communication from the northern parts of the Grant, by the
Genesee River one way, or by the Seneca River another way, into the Great Lake
Ontario, and from thence, by Catoraqui, to Quebec, or by the said Seneca River,
the Oniead Lake, and Wood Creek to Schenedady on the Mohawk River, with only
mile of land carriage, and from thence to Albany, with a postage of 16 miles;
affording also a water communication from almost every township of the southern
part of the Grant, by means of the different branches of the Tioga River, which
joining the Susquehanna, affords an outlet to produce, through an immense
extent of country on every hand, to Northumberland, and all the towns upon the
great branch of this river, down to Maryland and Virginia; and (with a postage
of 12 miles) even to Philadelphia with small boats; and when the improvements
are made in the Susquehanna, and the projected canal cut between the Schuylkill
and that river, there will be an uninterrupted good water communication for
boats of 10 or 15 tons from the interior parts of the Genesee country, all the
way to Philadelphia.

12th, But above all the uncommon benefits these lands derive from the vicinity
to the thick settled countries in New York and New England governments on the
one hand, and Northumberland County in Pensylvania on the other, from all which
quarters, from the great advantages that are held out, there must be an
overflow of emigrants every year, until these lands are fully settled. Which
expectation is already fully evinced, from the rapid population that has taken
place on the east boundaries of the Grant upon the Tioga River, and between the
Seneca and Cayuga Lakes, up to Lake Ontaro These lands are part of the tract of
country which was granted to the officers and soldiers of the Continental army,
for military services. The soil is in general the same as the Genesee
pre-emption: but they do not possess equal advantages, in being exempted from
the land tax for 15 years. These lands are not only subject to the usual taxes
of the state, as soon as located, but settlements must be made, and houses
built, within a limited time, otherwise they revert back to the state.
, where, in the course of three or four years, above eight hundred families
have fixed themselve* in this fertile country, most of whom having emigrated
from the eastern states of New England, New York, and Pensylvania, have all the
advantages which are to be derived from a perfect knowledge of the country, and
from that kind of education and local resource, which soon renders the
situation of a new settler comfortable and happy, enabling them, at the same
time, to assist new comers, who may be less acquainted with the nature of the
country.

As a proof the estimation in which the Genesee Lands are held by the
neighboring inhabitants, it is only necessary to state the following facts,
relative to the population, soil, and produce, etc. which have been extracted
from letters and public documents, upon which the utmost reliance can be
placed. The information is in these words: There are already settled in this
particular tract, upwards of 1000 people, in different townships, although two
years ago there was not a single person on the whole of the Genesee Lands. This
winter there is to be a great addition to the number. The return made by the
deputy-marshal of New York, shows not only the precise number of inhabitants
that have made settlements in these lands, but also the different townships
upon which these settlers have established their farms, and fixed their
residence. -- Of this Return the following is an exact copy:

A RETURN of the Settlers on the PRE-EMPTION LAND, in the County of ONTARIO,
December, 1790.
Ranges Families Males above 16 Male under 16 Females Indians Free Negroes
Slaves No. of Townships. Total Number In the 1st range, 10 22 11 26 0 0 0 No. 2
59 ditto, 12 24 16 25 0 0 0 7 65 ditto, 3 12 4 9 0 0 0 8 25 ditto, 10 30 13 7 0
0 0 9 50 ditto, 8 33 5 17 0 0 0 10 55 ditto, 2 4 3 4 0 0 0 11 11 In the 2d
range, 6 8 7 12 0 0 7 No. 1 34 ditto, 5 9 7 9 0 0 0 2 25 ditto, 1 1 2 6 0 0 0 5
9 ditto, 7 20 9 9 0 0 0 8 38 ditto, 6 12 1 0 0 0 0 10 13 ditto, 2 4 0 0 0 1 0
11 5 In the 3d range, 18 70 8 20 0 0 1 No. 10 99 ditto, 12 32 10 13 0 0 0 11 55
ditto, 4 10 1 3 0 0 0 12 14 In the 4th range, 4 18 2 0 0 0 0 No. 8 20 ditto, 3
7 4 2 0 0 0 9 13 ditto, 10 38 6 20 0 1 0 10 65 ditto, 4 13 2 4 0 0 1 11 20 In
the 5th range, 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 No. 9 2 ditto, 7 18 4 4 0 0 0 10 26 ditto, 2 5 3 2
0 0 0 11 10 ditto, 8 15 4 9 0 0 0 12 28 ditto, 4 10 6 4 0 0 0 13 20 5th and
6th, 10 17 12 21 0 0 0 3 and 4 50 In the 6th range 4 7 5 11 0 0 0 No. 10 23
ditto, 9 26 12 18 0 0 0 11 56 ditto, 1 3 1 4 0 0 0 12 8 In the 7th range 1 1 3
1 0 0 0 No. 6 5 ditto, 8 16 4 11 1 0 2 9 34 ditto, 8 18 15 26 0 0 0 10 59 West
of the Genesee River, 7 10 9 15 0 0 0 0 34 Indian Lands opposite to No. 5, 8,
and 9, in the 7th range 4 8 3 6 0 0 0 0 17 Total, 201 523 192 318 1 2 11 1047

Respecting Settlers and Population.
Besides these settlers who actually occupy the Genesee Tract, there is an
establishment of quakers, called the Friends Settlement, situated on the
eastern ridge of the Grant, and at the outlet of the Crooked Lake, consisting
of 260 persons, who are very industrious, and have already made considerable
improvements, having completed an excellent grist and saw mill some time
since. -- It is expected there will be double that number before a twelvemonth.
-- To the northward of this settlement, 12 or 15 miles distant, at the
north-west corner of the Seneca Lake, and about three miles from the boundary
of the Grant, is the town of Geneva, in the neighborhood of which there are
many settlers, and so on northwardly to Lake Ontario, and in different
directions for about 30 miles. About 20 miles south from the Friends
Settlement, near the head of the Seneca Lake, is the village of Culvers, and
four miles further on is Cathrines Town. In the neighborhood of these villages
there is a district of country bounded by the Pensylvania line on the south,
and the heads of the Seneca and Cayuga Lakes on the north, and running east
from the Genesee southern boundary, to Owega Creek, in which there are near 600
families settled. Between the Seneca and Cayuga Lakes, and particularly to the
eastward of the latter, the country is settling very fast, and so on along the
east branch of the Susquehanna, to its source at Lake Ocsega. -- It would be
difficult to ascertain the present population of the lands adjoining the
Genesee Grant, but it may be safely concluded, from the progression of
settlements for two or three years past, that in the course of a very few
years, the whole country to the eastward of the Pre-emption line, will be well
and thickly inhabited An idea of the rapid population may be formed, from a
detail of the towns and villages which have been built within the last three
years, and which are now in a state of progressive increase, namely,
INHABITANTS. 1st, The town of Cannandarqua, at the north end of the lake of
that name, lying within the Genesee Grant, and intended to be the head town of
the county of Ontario 99 2d, The Friends Settlement, at the outlet of the
Crooked Lake 260 3d, The town of Geneva, at the north-west corner of the Seneca
lake (supposed to be) 100 4th, The village of Culvers, near the head of the
Seneca lake, (supposed to be) 70 5th, The village of Cathrines Town* situated
on the head of the Seneca lake, four miles from Culvers 30 Carried over, 559
Brought over, 559 6th, New Town, a beautiful village on the eastern forks of
the Tioga River (supposed) 100 7th, Cheeming Town, three miles below New Town
50 709 The settlements on the lands surrounding these towns, in a square of
about 80 miles 5931 Total, 6640

. The New England settlers, who have already fixed themselves on the Genesee
tract, have made such favorable reports of the climate and soil, that there
are vast numbers of their countrymen preparing to remove thither. Some of these
who at first bought townships of the original grantees, are selling farms to
new settlers from two to three dollars an acre, according to quality,
situation, and other local advantages.

A proposed Navigation to Philadelphia.
It is in contemplation at present to make a water communication between the
Susquehanna and the Skuylkill, which, if effected, will lay open the market of
Philadelphia for the reception of the produce of all the Genesee country. And
as the soil and climate are supposed to be the best in the world for raising
large and productive crops of hemp, flax, Indian corn, Soil excellent for Hemp,
Flax, and all sorts of Grain.
wheat, rye, barley, oats, buck-wheat, peace, beans, and every other species of
grain produced in North America, much benefit will be derived to the settlers,
by every improvement which can be made in facilitating carriage by inland
navigations.

At present wheat can be sent from the Genesee settlements to Philadelphia, at
one shilling sterling per bushel; Prices paid for transporting Produce from,
and dry Goods to the Genesee country.
but if the water communication be opened between the two rivers, the cost will
not exceed four pence.

Dry goods can now be sent to these new settlements at about eight shillings
sterling per hundred weight, which will probably be reduced to three shillings,
when the navigation is completed.

No country in the world is better adapted for raising cattle than the Genesee
Grant. The Country well adaped for raising Cattle.
One of the first settlers in that country asserts, that he can every season
cut wild grass on his own farm, in the Genesee flats, sufficient to maintain
2000 head of cattle through the winter. And that such hay, with rushes and
vegetables which are found above the snow, generally keep the cattle fat
without any expense. Hogs can also be reared in the woods at little or no
expense to the farmer.

A Road to be completed this Year between the Genesee Country and Philadelphia.
As the distance from Philadelphia (between which and the Genesee lands a road
will be completed this year) is somewhat less by land than 200 miles, there can
be no difficulty in driving fat cattle and hogs to that market for sale, as
they can transport themselves at a very small expense, and as the demand for
provision increases every year, and a liberal price is given for beef and pork,
there can be no doubt but the rearing of cattle and hogs, as well as horses for
sale, in the low countries, will soon become a great object of profit to the
settlers, as the extensive ranges of meadow ground on the flats, Extensive
Ranges of Meadow Grounds for Cattle.
and the blue grass, white clover, and pea vine in the woods, must enable the
farmer to feed almost any number he can raise, or find capital to purchase. --
In many parts of the tract there is little or no underwood, and excellent
pasture in the forests between the trees, Good Pasturage also in the Forests
for Cattle and Horses.
in consequence of there being in general of an enormous size, and a
considerable distance between them, -- thereby affording even a wide range for
cattle in the upland country, as well as in the flats, and meadows which have
already been represented to be luxurient beyond description, in a species of
coarse grass, very fit for hay. It is said, that there are many wild horses
upon the tract, which is an additional proof of there being winter food in the
flat lands and in the forests.

The Farming Lands exhibit a variety of different soils adapted to every
species of cultivation. Farming Grounds, and mode of cultivation.
-- The bottoms between the rising grounds being universally rich, and the soil
deep in every part of the tract, may be turned successfully to the raising of
hemp and flax of the very first quality, also Indian corn. -- On the rising
grounds, wheat, rye, oats, barley, buck wheat, potatoes, (which are said to be
the best in the world) turnips, and all kinds of vegetables may be cultivated
in the greatest perfection; However great the advantages are which result to
the settlers of new lands in chosen good situations in America, it is by no
means insinuated or suggested that the comforts or benefits to be derived from
such settlements are to be obtained without labor and industry. -- It is
sufficient to say, that in no country in Europe, does labor and industry
produce to the farmer, so ample, and so certain a return, where good judgment
and perseverance are exercised. -- And perhaps the best way to elucidate the
nature of the employment of the first settlers in such a country, as has been
already described; is, by a detail of the routine of his occupation as a farmer
and planter in the American woods for the three first years, which will be
nearly as follows: --

FIRST YEAR.
The Farmer or Planter is supposed to be a man of small property, young,
active, and originally bred in this line; such a person setting himself down in
the Genesee country, may enter upon the business of life, with an assurance of
being soon in easy circumstances and independent, if he either possesses money
or credit to stock his little farm, as follows: 1st with One breeding mare, One
milk cow, with calf, Two oxen or steers, Two sows with pig, A few turkeys,
geese, ducks, and dunghill fowls.
Sterling. in all L.30 0 0 2d, Farming Implements. Two axes, Two grubbing hoes,
and 2 common hoes, A plow and harrow, with their appendages, A grindstone,
ditto A cross cut saw, ditto Other Farming Implements, with two guns, powder
and shot, and fishing tackle.
in all L.15 0 0 3d, Household Furniture, 15 0 0 4th, Corn, flour, and other
provisions for six months, 10 0 0 Total in Sterling, about L. 70 0 0


With this stock of cattle, implements of husbandry, and other conveniences,
the settler chooses his spot of ground, and commences his operations in the
month of March, having previously cut down and prepared a small quantity of
timber.

In March He builds himself a log house or cabin, which, with the assistance of
his friends and neighbors, is generally completed in one day.

He grubs 3 acres of his best ground for Indian corn, etc. and occasionally
employs himself in shooting game and in fishing, for subsistence through the
year.

April He plows the land which he has grubbed, and cuts rail timber for fencing
it. May He plants his Indian corn, (1 peck to 3 acres) and between the rows,
pumpkins, cucumbers, and squasshes are planted.

He also plants half an acre of potatoes; and

He likewise makes a small garden for pease, beans, collards, and other
vegetables.

June He weeds and hills his Indian corn and potatoes; and

He proceeds to clear land for sowing wheat in the fall.

July He continues to weed and hill his Indian corn, and to clear more land for
wheat.

He also clears half an acre for turnips.

August He sows his turnips, tops his Indian corn, and blades it for the cattle
-- Continues to clear and prepare his wheat land. September He continues
clearing his wheat land, and begins to plough it up. October He sows his wheat,
(one bushel to an acre) harrows it in -- Also sows wheat between the rows of
his Indian corn. -- Kills game for the family. November He fences his wheat
land, which should extend to 10 acres, if he is industrious. December He takes
in his Indian corn, potatoes and turnips, and builds a crib for holding his
corn, and a pit in the ground for securing the potatoes and turnips against the
frost.

Builds a shed for shelter for the cattle, also a small house for the hogs.

January He cuts and splits timber for fence rails, and he also cuts logs for
enlarging his house, which he hawls upon the snow. February He continues
cutting timber for fence rails, and deading trees on such land as he intends to
prepare for cultivation during the ensuing season.
Having thus detailed the progressive employment of the American Farmer for the
first twelvemonths, after he settles in a new country. -- It may be proper to
state the probable produce of his farm, which may be estimated as follows: 1st,
90 bushels of Indian corn. 2d, 100 bushels of potatoes. 3d, 200 bushels of
turnips. 4th, 150 bushels of ashes. 5th, 1 colt. 6th, 1 calf. 7th, 8 or 10
pigs. 8th, 3 or 4 dozen of turkeys, geese, and fowls. 9th, Vegetables for
family use, such as squashes, pumpkins, melons, cucumbers, garden stuffs 10th,
Game and fish equal to half the subsistence of his family, such as deers, elk,
wild turkeys, wild geese, ducks, pigeons, pheasants, etc. etc. -- Also, salmon,
salmon-trout, cat fish, chub, etc. etc. 11th, Furs and peltry from deer, elk,
moose deer, minx, otter, etc.


SECOND YEAR.
March, The farmer must now in consequence of the additional quantity of land,
be assisted with one labourer.

He clears more land for corn, to the extent of 6 acres, and prepares railing
for fencing it.

April, He plows the land, and completes the fencing. May He plants his corn
land, with pumpkins, squashes, and cucumbers between the rows.

He clears more ground for potatoes.

He now extends his garden ground, by converting a part of his last years
potatoe land into that use.

He plants all kinds of vegetables, pease, beans, etc.

He sows hemp and flax on the remainder of his potatoe ground and turnip ground
cleared the former year.

June, He plants his potatoes on new ground, grubbed for the purpose, to the
extent of an acre.

He clears more land for wheat.

July He reaps his wheat, (about 13 acres) with a cradle scythe -- after he has
reaped one acre, he carries the grain off -- Plows the ground immediately, and
sows buck-wheat on that one acre. (half a bushel is sufficient for an acre.) He
then proceeds to cut the rest of his grain, and brings it to his barn-yard, and
stacks it up. August, Pulls his flax early this month, and preserves the seed.

Prepares half an acre of new ground for turnips, and sows them.

Tops his Indian corn, and blades it for the cattle

Continues to clear more ground for wheat, and to prepare fence railing.

Pulls his hemp toward the end of the month.

September, Begins to plow his wheat ground, which is generally a boy's work.

Spreads out his flax, after being watered.

Spreads out his hemp also in the weather, to remain till winter.

October, Sows his wheat on his new ground; also sows wheat between the rows of
his Indian corn.

Cuts his buck-wheat; thrashes it in the field; takes home the grain, and
stores it in the loft of his house.

November, Fences his wheat land about ten acres more.

Also sows rye on ten of the acres which formerly bore wheat* the other three
he reserves to sow with oats in April.

December, Takes in and secures his Indian corn, turnips and potatoes early in
the month, and cuts down rail timber. January, Begins to cut logs to carry over
the snow to the nearest saw mill, for boards to assist in building a better
house, and also for planks for doors, and for building a proper barn and
threshing floor.

Beats out his hemp and flax with a brake.

February, Continues to dead more trees, and to clear more land for Indian corn.

Begins, for the first time this month, to draw the sap from the sugar tree,
and to make as much sugar, molasses, and vinegar as will serve for the family
use.


Second Year's Crop ought to be nearly as follows:
Indian Corn, 180 bushels Wheat, 260 ditto Buck Wheat, 30 ditto Turnips, 200
ditto Potatoes 200 ditto Hemp about, 150 lb. Flax ditto, 100 lb. Ashes ditto
200 bushels Skins and furs for sale.
N. B. The wheat is carried to the nearest grist mill and there ground into
flour for family use, and for sale.

LIVE STOCK increased,
1 Mare. 2 Colts. 1 Cow. 2 Calves. 2 Steers. 20 Hogs and shoats. Poultry in
abundance.
The OPERATIONS of the AMERICAN FARMER, for the THIRD YEAR.
He is then assisted with two stout hands, on account of the additional
quantity of lands which are by this time cleared for cultivation; and his crops
will now afford him the means of paying wages. He purchases an additional horse
and yoke of oxen.

March, He continues, with the assistance of his wife and domestics, to draw
off the sap of the sugar tree, and to boil it up for sugar, molasses, and
vinegar.

This month, for the first time, he turns his attention to meadow ground. He
chooses for this purpose his lowest land, which he prepares and sows with
Timothy grass, which is deemed superior to clover for new lands in America.

April, He sows a little spring wheat on new land.

He sows oats on the three acres formerly reserved.

He sows spring barley on the six acres in corn last year.

May, June, July,
He proceeds in the same routine as the former year, in clearing land, planting
corn and potatoes, sowing hemp and flax, pumpkins, squashes, cucumbers, and
melons. Improves and extends the garden ground, and sows and plants all kinds
of vegetables. Sows buck wheat in July. Also finishes his harvest of wheat,
oats, and barley, and stacks it up in his barn-yard. August, He clears and
prepares ground for an additional quantity of turnips; also for wheat. Tops his
Indian corn; pulls his hemp; waters his flax; and saves his flax seed*

He also sows his meadow ground with turnips, along with the Timothy grass.

September, October,
He proceeds in the same routine of agricultural pursuits as the former years,
but on a larger scale. November, The necessary parts of the improvement of the
farm being then pretty well advanced, the farmer now thinks of planting
orchards. For this purpose he appropriates the ground nearest his house, which
had been cleared and cultivated the first year, to the following purposes: 1st,
For an apple orchard, 3 acres, which bear fruit in four years. 2d, For a peach
orchard, 1 acre, Idem. 3d, For cherry trees, plumb, and pear trees, etc. 1
acre, Idem.
Between the rows of trees in the orchard may be raised every year, Indian
corn, wheat, oats, etc.

At the end of the third year the aggregate produce of the farm should be
nearly as follows: Acres. Bushels. s. d. Sterling. 1, Indian Corn, 10 300 2 6
L37 10 0 2, Wheat, 20 400 4 0 80 0 0 3, Spring Wheat, 3 60 3 6 10 10 0 4, Buck
Wheat, 5 100 1 9 8 15 0 5, Oats, 3 120 1 6 9 0 0 6, Barley, 3 120 1 9 10 10 9
7, Potatoes, 1 200 1 6 15 0 0 8, Turnips, 3 900 0 5 17 15 0 9, Hemp, 1 1000 lb.
0 2 8 6 8 10, Flax 1 500 lb. 0 5 8 6 8 11, Garden, 1 Vegetables, 10 bushels of
Peace, etc. also Flax Seed. 10 0 0 51 12, Meadow Ground, 4, for hay next year.
Total, 55 Acres. 13, Ashes, 500 bushels, 0 3 6 5 0 14, Hogs for sale, 10 10 0 5
0 0 L.226 18 4

LIVE STOCK increased, viz.
1 Horse, purchased this year. 1 Mare. 3 Colts. 2 Cows. 2 Calves. 2 Yoke of
oxen, or 4 stears. 20 Hogs and shoats, etc. Turkeys, geese, ducks, and fowls in
abundance, for family use.
This is the routine of farming which a man of small property, or who went upon
credit, would consider it as most prudent to pursue. But to settlers of
substance, who could afford to hire servants, and purchase a stock of cattle
and horses, the plan would be different.

1st, A good house of framed timber, brick or stone, would be built at once.

2d, A barn, stable, and all other conveniences.

3d, An ash work with sheds, for making pot and pearl ashes.

4th, Sheds and proper apparatus, for making sugar in the season.

5th, A corn mill, and also a saw mill, upon some stream near the house, the
cost of both would not exceed L250 sterling.

6th, Meadow ground would be taken in the first year, for hay for the cattle.

7th, A large tract of ground would be cleared for corn, wheat, oats, barley,
rye, buck wheat, potatoes, turnips, hemp, flax, etc.

8th, A garden and orchard would also be completed the first year.

9th, A seine, or fishing net, would be procured for providing the family with
fish, and other measures would be pursued for a constant supply of game of all
kinds.




and considerable advantages may be derived from making ashes from the timber
consumed in clearing the grounds.

Resources independent of Agriculture in Sugar, Ashes, Furs, and Peltry.
Indeed the Woods of America, furnish much resource, independent of agriculture,
not only in the article of pot and pearl ashes, and in the sugar extracted from
the sap of the maple; but also in furs and skins; from the woods surrounding
the farm; and such articles always produce ready money to the new settler, Iron
ore also on the Genesee Lands.
to assist him in his agricultural pursuits. -- On the Genesee lands, iron ore
has also been discovered, which, at a future period, may be productive of great
advantage to the proprietors. -- Already very good ore has been found on the
township No. 12, in the 5th range, and information has been actually received,
that iron founderies are soon to be erected on the township No. 13, Iron works
to be erected
in the 4th range, on the property of a Mr. Facit.

Every part of the tract abounds with springs of excellent water. --

It has also been asserted, that there are Salt Springs on the Grant, Salt
Springs on the Tract.
and that some of them are now worked by the new settlers, so as to supply the
whole with good salt, at a moderate price. --

"There is likewise a natural Sulphur Spring in the tract. -- Sulphur Spring.


The present Settlers have already got a fine stock of cattle and hogs,
Settlers have got a fine stock of Cattle.
and find that they thrive and increase very fast; but as yet, there are few
sheep, although, it is supposed, they would succeed well on the hills, after
the country is more fully peopled. Several genteel families are preparing to
settle on the tract this season, Several genteel Families to settle on the
Tract.
which will greatly facilitate the population of these lands.

The crops of Wheat, Indian Corn, and other small grains, Crops last year very
abundant.
were very abundant last year, so that the present settlers are in a situation
to assist and to supply the wants of new comers.

The Market for Grain and Provision raised in the Genesee Country, will be on
the spot for some time to come, The market for produce.
and the constant influx of settlers, who may be expected, until the whole of
these lands are occupied, will, at least for a time, consume all the surplus
produce; afterward the city of Philadelphia will probably be the best market;
and while the country is in the progress of being settled, the hemp and flax
raised by the Genesee farmers, and also the ashes and sugar made upon these
lands, and the skins and furs procured by hunting, must ultimately go to
Philadelphia and New York; but this will be the business of the merchant, who
will receive all these articles from the farmer in return for dry goods,
implements of husbandry, salt and rum, and such other articles as the settlers
may want.

It is the constant practice in America, for small traders to establish what is
called Flying Stores, for the sale of goods wherever new settlements are made.
Stores established, and Produce bought and exchanged.
And already there are actually such merchants established in the Genesee
Country, at the county town of Canandraqua, at the north end of the lake of
that name, where all kind of produce is bought and sold by the merchants
already settled there.

Wheat is at present, one dollar per bushel, 4s. 6d. sterling. Price of Produce
in the Country.


Indian Corn, - - ditto, 2s. 6d. ditto.

Salt, from the Onandago works, 60 miles east of the Grant, is half a dollar a
bushel, -- in time it will be cheaper.

At a future period, when population shall have rendered various markets
necessary, the heavy articles raised on the northern part of the Grant, will
probably be transported to Quebec, Quebec will probably become a great market
for produce.
by the way of Lake Ontario, Catoroqui, and Montreal; and such articles as will
bear land-carriage, by the way of the Mohawk River, and New York. -- As the
crops are extremely uncertain in Canada, it is by no means improbable that this
country must often be resorted to in order to supply the Canadians with bread.

It has been already mentioned, Climate.
that the climate of this country is reckoned more mild in winter, and less
sultry in the summer, than the same latitudes nearer the Atlantic Ocean, and as
agriculture advances, and the country becomes more open, the climate will
improve. At present it is extremely healthy, and none of those periodical
disorders are known among the settlers, which prevail in those parts of America
which are nearer the sea, such as intermitting fevers, agues, and bilious
complaints.

The severe weather generally sets in about the beginning of December, with
sharp cold, black-frosts, and falls of snow. About Christmas the grounds are
covered with snow, which continue about two months, or till the first week in
March, during which interval there is a clear serene sky, with fine weather. It
is then that the farmer transports his corn and other produce to a market, or
to the granaries and stores at the landing places, to be in readiness when the
weather opens for water communication. Advantages derived from the Snows in
Winter, over the more southern Countries.
This transportation is managed with great ease by means of slays over the
snow, where one horse will perform more than four times the number in those
latitudes in North America, where snows do not lie in the winter.

This period, when the snows are upon the ground, is also the season of
festivity with the American farmers, as it affords an easy and expeditious, as
well as a cheap mode of traveling, Winter*
and of paying visits to one another, and in holding a friendly intercourse
with their relations at a distance, in which they appear to have more real
enjoyment than the same class of people in any other country in the world.

These snows are therefore reckoned extremely beneficial, for while they
meliorate the ground, and assist the farmer in removing his heavy timber and
produce, Winter.
at an easy expense, they contribute much to his comfort and happiness, in the
intercourse with his friends and neighbors, in the facility of traveling from
one place to another, and in the fine, serene and clear atmosphere which is
experienced during the whole of the winter.

The snows are generally off the ground about the middle of March, Climate.
when the spring weather commences, by mild showers of rain, Spring.
which continue occasionally during the whole of the months of April and May,
gradually becoming warmer and warmer, which occasions a quick vegetation.
During this season the country is delightfully beautiful, with the whole fruit
trees in bloom, as well as every shrub or vine which bears any wild fruit in
the woods.

In June the weather begins to grow warm. Summer.
In July and August it is occasionally sultry, with frequent thunder-showers,
which are succeeded immediately by fine serene weather, without the
intervention of any settled rains. During this season the flies are very
troublesome; but this will be less and less the case as the country is cleared.

The months of September, October and November, Autumn.
are delightfully pleasant. The mornings and evenings are sometimes foggy; but
the middle part of the day is clear and serene, without any rains to distress
the farmer in saving his different crops, or to prevent him from reaping the
full extent of the fruits of his industry.

The great variety of fruits and game also, at this season of the year, adds
not a little to the pleasure and comfort of the settlers. But still these
comforts are not to be acquired without industry and labor.

The Genesee country making a part of the new County of Ontario, in the State
of New York, Government.
is consequently under the government of the Congress of the United States,
which government is perfectly free. Every inhabitant is eligible to be chosen a
member of the legislative body, or to be appointed a public magistrate. All
Religious Societies at liberty to exercise their own mode of worship.
Religious opinions exclude no man from any public situation in the government,
and every sectary or society are at perfect liberty to exercise their own mode
of worship, under the protection of the same laws which give the most perfect
security to their property.

Native Indians tranquillized. Are removed from the Genesee Country.
The native Indians have wholly retired from the Genesee country. In this
particular quarter of America, these tribes are now perfectly tranquillized,
and disposed to cultivate the arts of peace and civilization. After ceding any
tract of country, for a valuable consideration paid, and after a treaty signed
for that purpose, as in the present case, no instance occurs of these Indians
ever settling upon the same lands. They are remarkable for keeping faith in
this respect. Indeed they always retire from the settled countries, on account
of the scarcity of game, upon which they principally depend for subsistence.

Additional Security derived from the increased Population of White Inhabitants.
But above all, the extended society of white inhabitants, amounting to upwards
of six thousand persons, already established in this new country, half of whom
may be presumed able to bear arms, gives the most perfect security to the
settlers, and the more especially as their numbers will daily increase.

Seminaries of Learning, and Churches established.
With this increase will also be introduced, in a greater degree every year,
public schools and other seminaries of learning for the education of youth of
both sexes, as well as places of public worship. Some churches and chapels are
already built in this new country; and the latest advices state, that the Rev.
Mr. Ross was to establish an academy, for the education of youth, in the county
town of Cannandarqua, in the Genesee Tract, in the course of the spring or
summer 1791.

To these improvements in civil society are added, courts of justice, and
public magistrates; and judges for the new Country of Ontario; where
court-houses, and other public buildings, are either erected or in progress, so
as to extend to the inhabitants the same civil and political privileges, in
well-executed laws, and in sending representatives to Congress and to the
Assembly, which are enjoyed by other citizens of America.

FINIS.
THOUGHTS ON EMIGRATION.
IF any country in Europe has more people than can be comfortably subsisted in
it, some of those who are incommoded may be induced to emigrate. As long as the
new situation shall be found to be preferable to the old, emigration may
possibly continue; but when many of these, who in the old countries in Europe
interfered with others in the same rank in the competition, (for farms, shops,
business, and other means of subsistence) are gradually withdrawn to another
country, the inconvenience of that competition ceases; the numbers remaining no
longer half starve each other. -- They find they can now subsist comfortably,
and, though perhaps not quite so well as those who left them; yet the inbred
attachment to a native country is sufficient to over-balance a moderate
difference, and thus the emigration ceases naturally of itself, without the
necessity of any legislative restrictions, which are neither necessary nor
politic.

The waters of the ocean may move in currents from one quarter of the globe to
another, as they happen in some places to be accumulated, and in others
diminished; but no law beyond the law of gravity, is necessary to prevent their
abandoning any coast entirely. Thus the different degrees of happiness of
different countries and situations find, or rather make their level by the
flowing of people from one to another, and where that level is once found, the
removals cease. Add to this, that even a real deficiency of people in any
country, occasioned by a wasting war or pestilence, is speedily supplied by
earlier, and of course more prolific marriages, encouraged by the greater
facility of obtaining the means of subsistence; so that a country half
depopulated would soon be re-peopled, till the means of subsistence were
equalled by the population. All increase beyond that point must perish, or flow
off into more favorable situations. -- Such overflowings there have been of
mankind in all ages, or we should not now have had Thirteen States in America,
containing near four millions of people; but to apprehend absolute depopulation
from that cause, is to suppose that by the ebbing and flowing of a great river,
in time its waters would be exhausted.

That great national advantages may be acquired to the old countries in Europe,
from whence people emigrate has been shown in one point of view: But if such
overflowing of people should go to another country where land is easily
acquired, and population encouraged by early marriages, there is another point
of view in which the parent state may be benefited by the removal of the people
it can spare. This benefit will arise from predilections for the manufactures
of their native country, hence an extended consumption of the labor of the
people who are engaged in manufactures in the old countries, from whence these
people emigrated; and in so far as these people multiply in a greater degree
than they could have done in Europe, and in so far also as they, by means of
cheap land and agricultural pursuits, can consume more of the manufactures than
they could have done in their own country, from being richer and better able to
buy them; in the same proportion are these people rendered more useful to the
state, than if no emigration had taken place, seeing that their labor is
rendered productive abroad, which was not the case in their own country.

The new settlers in America finding plenty of subsistence, and land easily
acquired whereon to seat their children, seldom postpone marriage through fear
of poverty. This natural increase is therefore in proportion far beyond what it
would have been had they remained in Europe.

New farms are daily every where forming in those immense forests, new towns
and villages rising, hence a growing demand for the manufactures of their
mother country, to the greater employment of the manufacturer, and enrichment
of the merchant. By this natural augmentation of the demand for manufactures,
the strength of an empire is increased, and its members are multiplied.

Was this country already attached to Great Britain by the tie of
consanguinity, a similarity of language, religion, and natural affection
secured by these means and the mutual advantages which would arise from a
treaty of commercial alliance; -- it would afford an additional strength to the
British empire far superior, and more to be depended on, than any advantage
that ever could have been acquired by the most successful conquest.

These national advantages would certainly more than equiponderate with any
ideal inconveniences that might be suffered by the emigration of superfluous
cottagers, who would remain in poverty and misery in Europe, useless to
themselves, and a burden to their country. By removing to enjoy plenty and
happiness, in cultivating the vast unoccupied tracts of fertile land in North
America, they would not only ease their own country of its supernumerary
inhabitants, but as they advance in opulence, consume its manufactures.

The overflowings of Germany and France are now emigrating to America; and it
might, in the course of a few years, be matter of serious regret if Britons and
Irelanders, who have a much better right, did not endeavor to cement, by this
intimate connection and a natural alliance, counties which are by nature
designed for the mutual aggrandizement and support of each other.

FINIS.
REMARKS FOR The Information of those who wish to become SETTLERS in AMERICA.
The Production of a very celebrated American Statesman and Philosopher,
written a short Time previous to his Decease. Dr. Franklin.

THE governments in America give every assistance to strangers that can be
desired from protection, good laws, and perfect liberty. -- Strangers are
welcome, because there is room enough for them all, and therefore the old
inhabitants are not jealous of them, the laws protect them sufficiently, so
that they have no need of the patronage of great men; and every one will enjoy,
in security, the profits of his own industry. -- But if he does not bring a
fortune with him, he must work and be industrious to live. -- One or two years
residence, give him all the rights of a citizen; but the government does not
hire people to become settlers.

Land being cheap in that country, from the vast tracts still void of
inhabitants, so that the property of an hundred acres of very fertile soil may
be obtained at an easy rate. -- Hearty young men, who understand the husbandry
of corn and cattle, which is nearly the same as in Europe, may easily establish
themselves there. -- A little money saved of the good wages they receive there,
while they work for others, enables them, in a few years, to buy land and begin
their plantation, in which they are assisted by the good will of their
neighbors, ad-some credit. Multitudes of poor people from England, Ireland,
Scotland and Germany, have, by this means, in a few years, become wealthy
farmers, who, in their own countries, where all the lands are fully occupied,
and the wages of labor low, could never have emerged from their low condition
wherein they were born.

From the salubrity of the air, the healthiness of the climate, the plenty of
good provisions, and the encouragement to early marriages, by the certainty of
subsistence in cultivating the earth, the increase of inhabitants by natural
generation, is very rapid in America, and becomes still more so by the
accession of strangers -- Hence there is a continual demand for more artisans
of all the necessary and useful kinds, to supply those cultivators of the earth
with houses, and with furniture and with utensils of the grosser sorts, which
cannot so well be brought from Europe; tolerable good workmen in any of these
mechanic arts, are sure to find employ, and to be well paid for their work;
there being no restraints preventing strangers from exercising any art they
understand, nor any permission necessary. If they are poor, they begin first as
servants or journeymen; and if they are sober, industrious, and frugal, they
soon become masters, establish themselves in business, raise families, and
become respectable citizens.

Lastly, persons of moderate fortunes and capitals, who having a number of
children to provide for, are desirous of bringing them up to industry, and to
secure estates for their posterity, have opportunities of doing it in America,
which Europe does not afford. There they may be taught useful and profitable
mechanic arts, and may follow the same without incurring reproach on that
account, but on the contrary, acquiring respect by such pursuits and abilities.
The small capitals laid out in lands, which daily become more valuable by the
increase of people, affords a solid prospect of ample fortunes thereafter for
their children. Instances have been often known of large tracts of land being
bought, on what was then the frontiers of Pensylvania twenty years after,
selling at a profit of many hundred per cent., without any improvement whatever
made on them.

The establishment of manufactures have rarely succeeded in America, the
country not being yet so ripe as to encourage private persons to set them up;
labor being generally too dear there, and hands difficult to be kept together,
every one desiring to become a master, and the cheapness of land inclining many
to leave trades for agriculture. -- Things that are bulky, and of so small
value as not well to bear the expense of freight, may often be made cheaper in
the country than they can be imported; and the manufacture of such things will
be profitable whenever there is a sufficient demand. -- The Farmers in America
produce, indeed, a good deal of wool and flax, and none is exported, it is all
worked up; but it is in the way of domestic manufacture, for the use of the
family. -- The buying up quantities of wool and flax, with the design to employ
spinners, weavers, etc. and to form great establishments, producing quantities
of linen and woollen goods for sale, has been several times attempted in
different provinces; but these projects have generally failed, goods of equal
value being imported cheaper; for these unnatural operations must be supported
by mutual prohibitions or high duties on the importation of goods, by which
means the manufacturers are enabled to tax the home consumer by greater prices.
Therefore the government of America does nothing to encourage such projects;
the people are by this means not imposed on either by the merchant or mechanic:
If the merchant demands too much profit on imported shoes, they buy of the
shoemaker; and if he asks too high a price, they take them of the merchant;
thus the two professions are checks to each other. The shoemaker, however, has
on the whole a considerable profit upon his labor in America, beyond what he
had in Europe, as he can add to his price, a sum nearly equal to all the
expenses of freight and commission, risque or insurance, etc. necessarily
charged by the merchant, and the case is the same with the workmen in every
other mechanic art. Hence it is that artisans live better and more easily in
America than in Europe, and such as are good oeconomists, make a comfortable
provision for age, and for their children. -- Such may therefore remove with
advantage to America.

In the old long settled countries of Europe all arts, trades, professions,
farms, etc. are so full, that it is difficult for a poor man, who has children,
to place them where they may gain or learn to gain a decent livelihood. The
artisans who fear creating future rivals in business, refuse to take
apprentices, but upon conditions of money, maintenance, and the like, which the
parents are unable to comply with. Hence the youth are brought up in ignorance
of every gainful art, and are obliged to become soldiers, or servants, or
thieves, for a subsistence. In America, the rapid increase of inhabitants takes
away that fear of rivalship, and artisans willingly receive apprentices, from
the hope of profit by their labor during the remainder of the time stipulated
after they shall be instructed. Hence it is easy for poor families to get their
children instructed, for the artisans are so desirous of apprentices, that many
of them will even give money to the parents, to have boys from ten to fifteen
years of age bound apprentices to them till the age of twenty-one; and many
poor parents have by that means, on their arrival in the country, raised money
enough to buy land sufficient to establish themselves, and to subsist the rest
of their family by agriculture. -- These contracts for apprentices are made
before a magistrate who regulates the agreement, according to reason and
justice, and having in view the formation of a future useful citizen, obliges
the master to engage by a written indenture, not only that during the time of
service stipulated, the apprentice shall be duly provided with meat, drink,
apparel, washing and lodging, and at its expiration with a complete new suit of
clothes, but also that he shall be taught to read, write and cast accounts, and
that he shall be well instructed in the art or profession of his master, by
which he may afterward gain a livelihood, and be able in his turn to raise a
family. A copy of this indenture is given the apprentice, or his friends, and
the magistrate keeps a record of it, to which recourse may be had in case of
failure, by the master, in any point of performance.

This desire among masters to have more hands employed in working for them,
induces them to pay the passages of young persons of both sexes, who on their
arrival agree to serve them two three, or four years; those who have already
learnt a trade, agreeing for a shorter term, in proportion to their skill, and
the consequent immediate value of their service; and those who have none,
agreeing for a longer term, in consideration of being taught an art their
poverty would not permit them to acquire in their own country.

The almost general mediocrity of fortune that prevails in America, obliging
its people to follow some business for subsistence, those vices that arise
generally from idleness, are in a great measure prevented. Industry and
constant employment, are great preservations of the morals and virtue of a
nation. Hence bad examples to youth are more rare in America, which must be a
comfortable consideration to parents. To this may be truly added, that serious
religion, under its various denominations, is not only tolerated, but respected
and practiced. Atheism is unknown there, infidelity rare and secret; so that
persons may live to a great age in that country, without having their piety
shocked by meeting either an atheist or an infidel. And the Divine Being seems
to have manifested his approbation of the mutual forbearance and kindness, with
which the different sects treat each other, by the remarkable prosperity with
which he has been pleased to favor the whole country.

FINIS.

