THE INFINITE IMPORTANCE OF THE OBEDIENCE OF FAITH. BY MR. BACKUS.

THE INFINITE IMPORTANCE OF THE OBEDIENCE of FAITH, AND OF A Separation from
the World, OPENED AND DEMONSTRATED.

By ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN MIDDLEBOROUGH.

Purifying their Hearts by Faith.

Acts xv. 9. We have received Grace and Apostleship for Obedience to the Faith
among all Nations.

Romans i. 5. If any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him.

1 John, ii. 15. SECOND EDITION, CORRECTED AND IMPROVED.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill. MDCCXCI.

THIS discourse was first published in 1767, the year in which the law was made
that brought on the American war. It is now revised and corrected, to hold up
the living obedience of faith, as our only way of deliverance and happiness.

Middleborough, Feb. 27, 1791.
THE INFINITE IMPORTANCE OF THE OBEDIENCE OF FAITH.
JAMES 11.22. See thou how Faith wrought with his works, and by works was
faith made perfect.


MANY have imagined that the apostles, Paul and James, differed in sentiment
about justifying faith; because the one says, A man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the law; and the other says, By works a man is justified,
and not by faith only. But if we duly attend to the occasion and scope of their
writings, it will pull down all such imaginations. For Paul was called to lay
the foundation of Christianity, among nations who were strangers to revelation,
and to the hope of the gospel; which hope is built upon the pure mercy of God,
as revealed in his Son, and not upon any doings of the creature. And to fix
these ideas in the mind is of infinite importance to every child of Adam. But
after Christianity had become honorable among men, many professed to believe in
Christ, who neglected obedience to his laws, and imagined that true faith and
holy works could be separated. Therefore James was inspired to write unto the
twelve tribes who were scattered abroad, and to call them to rejoice in the
diverse temptations which they fell into, to try their faith and patience, in
prosperity or adversity, in view of the crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them who love him. But he warns them against ever saying that God
enticed any into sin; for all sin proceeds from the lusts of men. And to guard
against all error, he says, Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth,
that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. James i. 1 -- 18. So
that James held to the doctrine of the entire depravity of human nature, and to
regeneration and salvation by the sovereign grace of God, as much as Paul did.
There was a sweet harmony between them; as will more fully appear, if we
consider the nature of faith, the influence of it upon human conduct, and how
it is made perfect by works.

1. What is faith? In the common affairs of life, faith is as easily understood
at any word in language; but in religion, all arts have been made use of to
render it as obscure and uncertain as possible. When it respects a report or
testimony, faith is receiving what is reported or testified for truth; and when
it relates to promises and covenants, it is verity and punctuality in the
promifer, and trust and confidence in him or them to whom the promises are
made. And an impartial and effectual execution of the laws, and submission and
obedience thereto, is the faith of government. But how little of it is now seen
in the world. When the Son of God was manifested in the flesh, his servants
said, Who has believed our report? Faith comes by hearing, and hearing, by
the word of God. Romans x. 16, 17. He that has received his testimony, has set
to his seal, that God is true; for he whom God has sent speaks the words of
God; for God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. The Father loves the
Son, and has given all things into his hand. He that believes on the Son,
has everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him. John iii. 33 -- 36. We are not of them who
draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe, to the saving of the soul.
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen. For by it the elders obtained a good report. Through faith we understand
that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen
were not made of things which do appear. By faith Abel offered unto God a more
excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness, that he was
righteous, God testifying of his gifts; and by it he being dead, yet speaks.
Heb. x. 39. xi. 1 -- 4. But Cain slew his brother, because his own works were
evil, and his brother's righteous. 1 John iii. 12. And all that dwell upon the
earth worship the beast, who received his power from the devil, whose names are
not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world. Rev. xiii. 4 -- 8. From whence we may see the infinite importance of the
obedience of faith.

Which leads us,

II. To consider the influence of faith upon human conduct. When God called
Abraham out of Chaldea, he revealed to him, that a great nation should spring
from him, who should inherit the land of Canaan, out of whom should come the
king Messiah, in whom all the families of the earth should be blessed. And
Abraham believed in the Lord, and he accounted it to him for righteousness. Yet
after the promised child of Abraham was born, and had obtained a great share in
his affections, God saw fit to try his faith, by saying, Take now thy son,
thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the land of Moriah;
and offer him there for a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains which I
shall tell thee of. And Abraham was all obedience to the command, until God
released him from the execution thereof, and said, Now know I that thou fear
God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. Genesis xii.
3. xv. 6. xxii. 1 -- 12. But how could Abraham believe that a great nation, and
the king Messiah, could spring from that son, if he was sacrificed upon the
altar? Answer, He accounted that God was able to raise him up, even from the
dead; from whence also he received him in a figure. Heb. xi. 19. See thou how
faith wrought with his works. He believed that God was always to be obeyed; and
that the iron gates of death could not hinder the fulfillment of his promises.
God gave him that son, when he and Sarah were as good as dead; therefore
nothing was too hard to do, nor any favor too great to expect, in the way of
obedience. Fear and love were united in his soul, which principles had been
divided by the fall; and faith, hope and love, raised his heavenly mind above
all the obstacles that fleshly reasonings, or infernal temptations could cast
in his way. And they who are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham,
and heirs according to the promise. Gal. iii. 7, 29. The believer views all the
precepts of God to be true, and therefore to be obeyed; all his promises to be
true, therefore he shall be supported; and he views eternal things as real and
near, therefore to be regarded without delay. The serpent deceived our mother
Eve, by representing the law of God as unreasonable, and the penalty of it as
false; and by the same arts, the minds of many professed Christians have been
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Cor. xi. 3. By inventing a
duplicity of meanings to the holy scriptures, men have corrupted themselves
more than brute beasts, who know and obey their owners. Jude 4 -- 10. Isai. i.
2, 3. Yea, they are twofold more the children of hell than the Jews were, who
were a generation of vipers. Matt. xxiii. 15, 33. For the Jews have a fixed
regard for the law of Moses, and for the land of Canaan, where they yet hope
for an earthly kingdom; but proselytes to revelation, who are not born again,
have no fixed rule of conduct, nor any country that can set any bounds to their
pride and love of money, which is the root of all evil. 1 Timothy vi. 3 -- 10. But
true believers understand our Lord, when he says, He that has my commandments,
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. John
xiv. 21. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and his
commandments are not grievous. 1 John v. 3. We therefore come,

III. To consider how faith is made perfect by works. An inspired apostle says,
Whosoever is born of God, overcomes the world; and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. 1 John v. 4. As a living child, he grows
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Peter
iii.18. For the path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day. Prove. iv. 18. They who have the knowledge of the
truth, yet form many wrong conclusions therefrom, which are corrected and
removed by exercise and experience. Rebekah believed that her son Jacob was
heir to the peculiar promise of God to their family; but her mistaken
apprehensions caused her to move Jacob to deceive his father, in order to get
the blessing; as if God needed any such methods to help him out with his
promise. So far from it, that she and her son brought themselves into great
perplexities thereby. And when Jacob was returning from a twenty years exile,
none of his inventions could help him; therefore he said, O God of my father
Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord who said unto me, Return unto
thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: I am not
worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou have
showed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I
am become two bands. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from
the hand of Esau; for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the
mother with the children. He pleaded the promise of God, in the way of
obedience to his precepts, and in so doing he obtained the name of Israel,
which signifies, A prince of the strong God. Genesis xxxii. 9 -- 28. In reference
to which, Jesus said, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. John i.
47. And Paul says, In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk according to this rule,
peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Gal. vi. 15, 16. Faith
carried the mind of Moses above all the allurements of Pharaoh's court, and
above its terrors too; though Egypt was then the richest, and the most powerful
kingdom in all the world. Yet Moses chose to suffer affliction with the people
of God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt; for he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the king; for he endured as seeing him who is invisible.
Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that
destroyed the firstborn, should touch them. Heb. xi. 24 -- 28. Thus by works is
faith made perfect. The believer grows up to the stature of a perfect man in
Christ Jesus. Ephesians. iv. 13. Even so as to put away childish things. 1 Cor. xiii.
10, 11. Also by works the perfection of faith is made manifest. For Peter said,
Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus
whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Acts ii. 36. That is, He has
declared him to be the Son of God with power. Romans i. 4. True faith is a
growing principle, and by its exercise the perfection of it is made known, and
believers let their light shine before men, that they may see their good works,
and glorify their heavenly Father. Matt. v. 16. And though all evildoers hate
the light, yet they will be constrained to glorify God in the day of
visitation. 1 Peter ii. 12. And this view of the obedience of faith may teach
us many lessons of great importance.

1. It may teach us the unreasonableness of all the objections of men, against
the doctrine of sovereign grace in Jesus Christ. Many have represented, that
the belief of free and certain salvation in him, makes men careless about their
conduct in the world, and very injurious to true morality. Yea, not a few have
said, "If I believed that doctrine, I would gratify my lusts as much as I
pleased; and if I believed that my good works could not procure the favor of
God, and eternal life, I would not do them." But such language may well remind
us of the words of Solomon, who says, When he that is a fool walks by the
way, his wisdom fails him, and he says to every one that he is a fool. Eccl.
x. 3. For such men show plainly, that they love themselves above God and their
neighbors; and that the only restraint upon their lusts is fear of punishment,
or some other selfish end. And therefore, under high pretenses to reason, they
often deal with revelation, as crafty politicians do with bills which are
proposed for laws; namely, to endeavor to spy faults therein, and propose
amendments, in order that such laws may be rejected at last. But before men
even venture to speak evil of the things which they know not, let them reason
about things which they do know, according to the above principles. Let one of
them come out and say, "I have a very loving and faithful wife; and I keep her
so by often threatening to divorce or forsake her; and I have no way to keep
her in good order, but by ever holding her in suspense about my unshaken love
to her. I have also a family of obedient children, and they are kept so by
terror, and by always holding them in doubt about ever enjoying my
inheritance." If men could not deceive others about their souls, any more than
such reasonings would do about their bodies and families, they could not
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's
sake, as many do. Titus i. 10, 11. God said, Two shall be one flesh; but he
that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit. 1 Cor. vi. 16, 17. And the believer
says to Christ, Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm;
for love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave. Cant. viii. 6. --
How cruel then are all teachers, who represent assurance of the eternal love of
God to the soul, as that which would make it careless about obedience to him!
God says, I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
servant. -- If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; if
they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless, my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail; my covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips. Psalm lxxxix. 3, 30 -- 34. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that has
this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure. 1 John iii. 2, 3.
Therefore all men who imagine that assurance of our being the children of God,
and heirs of eternal life, is injurious to the cause of holiness, or of human
happiness, have not that exercise of faith which he requires. And this may
teach us,

2. The reason why all sin is included in unbelief. For our Lord says, Every
one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his
deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. The Comforter will
reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin,
because they believe not on me. John iii. 20, 21. xvi. 7 -- 9. Jews and
Gentiles are all under sin. God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all. Romans iii. 9. xi. 32. There is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus; and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise. Gal. iii. 28, 29. The covenant of circumcision
made a great difference between Jews and Greeks, bond and free, males and
females; but the Gospel removes all these distinctions, and opens a door for
each sinner to come to God through his Son; and all who do so are equally heirs
of promise. Heb. vi. 17, 18. But the main of the natural children of Abraham,
loved their lands, their oxen, and their wives, above the Son of God, and his
Gospel feast; and therefore he said, None of those men which were bidden, shall
taste of my supper. -- So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not
all that he has, he cannot be my disciple. Luke xiv. 15 -- 27, 33. But men
have been so far from believing this truth, that multitudes have imagined that
they were made disciples of Christ, and heirs of the promises of the Gospel,
without their own knowledge or choice. And they do not now believe, that
intemperance will bite like a serpent, and sting like an adder; nor that
uncleanness is like lying down in the ocean, or upon the top of a mast. No, nor
that the getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro
of them who seek death. Prove. xxi. 6. xxiii. 31 -- 35. Instead of believing the
word of truth, they bend their tongues like their bow for lies; but they are
not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil,
and they know not me, says the Lord. -- They have taught their tongue to speak
lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity. Jer. ix. 3, 5. Much use is made
of the maxim, "Of two evils choose the least;" but how is it applied? There is
the evil of sin, and the evil of affliction; the one is against God; the other
affects self; and how often does self prevail? Wealth, health, and friendship,
are the dearest things in this world. Job spoke well of God under the most
surprising loss of the two former of these; but when friendship failed him, and
rather increased his sorrows, he cursed the day of his birth. And after he had
wearied himself and others, in vindicating his character, Elihu said to him,
Take heed, regard not iniquity; for this have thou chosen rather than
affliction. And God brought him to say, I abhor myself, and repent in dust and
ashes. Job xxxvi. 21. xlii. 6. And they who lived by faith, chose to endure
cruel mockings, scourgings, imprisonment, and death, rather than accept of
deliverance in any sinful way. Heb. xi. 35 -- 38. And from hence we may see,

III. The infinite importance of a separation of the church of Christ from the
world. He says, Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers; for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has
light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has he that believes, with an infidel? and what agreement has the temple of
God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God has said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a
father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God. 2 Cor. vi. 14 -- 18. vii. 1. Multitudes have been deceived
with the pretense, that we are only required to separate from open infidels and
idolators. But the Jews are more firm believers in revelation, and greater
enemies to open idolatry, than any other men are, who are not born again. And
the church of Rome are open idolators, and yet are as firm believers in
revelation as any natural men are. It is also a certain fact, that putting
baptism before a personal profession of faith in Christ, and holding a
successive power in ministers to administer it, came from the church of Rome.
She is the mother of harlots, and all churches who go after any lovers but
Christ, for a temporal living, are guilty of playing the harlot. When the
priests in Israel did so, God said, As troops of robbers wait for a man, so the
company of priests murder in the way by consent; for they commit lewdness.
Hosea ii. 5. vi. 9. Christ is the only door into his church, and all teachers
who do not come in by faith in him, are thieves and robbers. John x. 1 -- 10.
Suffering is unavoidable, in this sinful world; but the command is, Let none of
you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evildoer, or as a busybody in
other men's matters: Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf. 1 Peter iv. 15, 16. The word
which is here translated busybody, means an overseer, and it is sometimes
translated bishop. Therefore, after a glorious revival of religion in our land,
fifty years ago, the ministers, both in the Massachusetts and in Connecticut,
took the first of these verses to prove that it was one "of the greatest
crimes," for any minister to preach the Gospel within any parish where another
minister was settled, without his consent. They called it, "doing the office of
a bishop in another's diocese." Chauncy's Thoughts, 1743, p. 42, 43. Newhaven
Consociation against Robbins, 1748, p. 43. My history, vol. 2, p. 153, 182.
From whence the church of England took encouragement, that they should get
their religious scheme established in America; and they pursued the bloody
design, until they forced us into a separation from them. Yet many ministers in
America, who received their power to be supported by force, in the name of the
king of Great Britain, hold that power over the people to this day. They have
exhorted rulers and people to venture their eternal all upon the truth of
Christianity, while themselves refuse to trust it for a worldly living. And
this deceit and cruelty is made use of by many, to require their ministers to
go a warfare at their own charges; and if ministers inculcate the laws of
Christ for their support, artful men will ruin their characters, if possible.
Yea, as Christ was crucified between two thieves, even so is his cause now
dealt with. All the villainies that have ever been acted under the name of
Christianity, are cast as a reproach upon the pure laws of Christ; while the
hypocrisy and infidelity of multitudes is recurred to, as a reason for
continuing the use of force to support religious ministers. God says, A good
name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favor rather than
silver and gold. Prove. xxii. 1. Now all the country are engaged to detect, and
to hang men who rob others of silver or gold; while multitudes will try every
deceitful art to rob all of their good name, who fear and obey God above man.
And when they have robbed them of their good name, they can also force away
their money, for the support of deceitful teachers, and for other evil
purposes. Stealing the words of God, is the worst kind of theft. Jer. xxiii.
30. This is done by claiming the promises of God, without obeying his precepts.
The Jews who did so, were guilty of stealing, adultery, and sacrileges. Romans
ii. 21, 22. And how full is the world of these evils in our day! Multitudes
claim the promise of God to Abraham, without doing the works of Abraham. For
God said, I know him, that he will command his children, and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Genesis xviii.
19. He will, and they shall, was the language of his first covenant with
Abraham and his seed; and I will, and they shall, is the language of his second
covenant with them; and he took away the first that he might establish the
second. Heb. viii. 10, 13. x. 9. And this may teach us,

4. What the separation is, which believers are required to maintain. It is not
any carnal division among mankind. So far from it, that the word of God says,
Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of all
men. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceable with all men.
Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. Mark them which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them.
For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly;
and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Romans xii.
17, 18. xiii. 8. xvi. 17, 18. Their god is their belly, their glory is in their
shame, who mind earthly things. Phil. iii. 19. These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. Jude 19. Covetousness is idolatry.
Col. iii. 5. And when our Lord sent his Gospel into the wide field of the
world, he knew that many would profess to believe in him, who would appear by
their fruits to be children of the devil; and also, that when the sword came
into the hands of his servants, they would incline to use it, to root up such
tares. But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the
wheat with them. Let both grow together until the harvest. Mat. xiii. 24 -- 30,
37 -- 43. This he says of the world, while he says to his church, I have
written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. -- Put away from among yourselves
that wicked person. 1 Cor. v. 11 -- 13. But by confounding church and world
together, which is mystery Babylon, all these characters have been lawgivers
and judges for the church of Christ. And now, truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter. And the nations are rejoicing at the prospect of
enjoying the honors and profits of religion, without being tormented with
fears of future punishment. Rev. xi. 7 -- 10. But God will yet repay fury to
his enemies, and recompense to the ISLANDS. And he says to the Redeemer in
Zion, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed's seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and forever.
Isai. lix. 14 -- 21. And from hence an inspired apostle proves, that the Jews
will again be ingrafted into the church, by the word and Spirit of God, which
will be life from the dead. Romans xi. 15 -- 27. Which scripture has been often
brought to prove, that the natural offspring of Christians are taken into the
covenant of grace with them, without their own knowledge or choice; and also
that souls who are truly converted, may yet fall from grace received, and
perish forever. And innumerable evils have proceeded from the practice of
setting every believer in the place of Abraham, instead of viewing him as an
eminent type of Jesus Christ, the great head of the church. For Abraham had no
right to circumcise any person who was not born in his house, until he had
bought him as a servant with money. And his seed were to destroy all the
inhabitants of Canaan, when their iniquity was full. Genesis xv. 16. xvii. 13, 14.
And as Christian privileges are much greater than the Jews enjoyed, the nations
who have professed the name of Christianity, have claimed a right to seize upon
the lands of the heathen, and to destroy or enslave all men, as far as they
could extend their sword. They have denied that God ever repealed his covenant
with Abraham. Whereas circumcision was the shedding of human blood. And after
Christ had purchased his people with his own blood, he said, Circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the commandments of
God. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men. 1 Cor. vii. 19,
23. Which is a full repeal of the covenant of circumcision, as he calls his
covenant with Abraham. Acts vii. 8. Infant baptism never was a commandment of
God; but it is a wicked invention of men, whereby they have held his church in
bondage. His saints are his only temple here below; and because the Jews
rejected the sacrifice of Christ, God chose their delusions, and brought their
fears upon them. Isai. lxvi. 1 -- 4. Acts vii. 48 -- 53. They said, If we let
him thus alone, all men will believe on him; and the Romans shall come and take
away both our place and nation. Yet when a Roman governor would not condemn
him for blasphemy, they accused him of high treason, and said, If thou let this
man go, thou art not Cesar's friend. -- We have no king but Caesar. John xi. 48,
xix. 12, 15. And Caesar came and burnt their temple, and destroyed their nation,
in a most terrible manner. They said, Crucify him, crucify him; and the Romans
crucified a great number of the Jews. The cause of their rage against Christ
and his disciples, was the restraint which light and truth laid upon their
consciences. But God said, Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a
vain thing? the kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel
together, against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break
their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Psalm ii. 1 -- 3. Upon
which the disciples lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said,
Lord, thou art God which have made Heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that
in them is; who by the mouth of thy servant David have said, Why did the
heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? the kings of the earth stood
up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his
Christ. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were
gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
before to be done. Acts iv. 24 -- 28. These things were all determined before
by God, and yet were wickedly acted by men; which two things are now generally
denied through the world. But let us learn,

5. How God is fulfilling his word, in the late events of his providence. After
the Jews returned from Babylon, and began to build the temple at Jerusalem,
some of their old men wept, because it appeared as nothing in their eyes, in
comparison with Solomon's temple. But God said unto them, According to the word
that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains
with you, fear ye not: for thus says the Lord of hosts, yet once, it is a
little while, and I will shake the Heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the
dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall
come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. Hag. ii.
5 -- 7. And accordingly, the Son of God came into the second temple, and taught
as no man ever did before. And after he had given himself a sacrifice for our
sins, he ascended to Heaven, and gave the Holy Ghost and fire, whereby three
thousand souls were born in a day. And all who were thus born, in every
country, As lively stones, were built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood
to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. I pet. ii.
5. He is our only High Priest; and every one of his children are a holy
priesthood, who may come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Heb. iv. 15, 16. The mercy-seat
was placed upon the ark, in which the law of God was kept whole. Deuteronomy. x. 5.
And he said, There I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from
above the mercy-seat, from between the two cherubims, which are upon the ark of
the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment unto the
children of Israel. Exodus xxv. 22. Therefore after Christ had ascended to
Heaven, and given the Holy Spirit to his church, the apostle of the Gentiles
said, See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from Heaven: whose voice then shook the earth; but now
he has promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also
Heaven. And this word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those things
that are shaken, as of things which are made, that those things which cannot be
shaken may remain. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let
us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly
fear; for our God is a consuming fire. Heb. xii. 25 -- 29.

His fire of truth and love, removed the national constitution of the Hebrew
church, which was from Heaven, and it shook down all earthly kingdoms. And
though the Gentiles introduced national schemes of religion, whereby the holy
city of God has been trodden under foot, ever since the beast arose out of the
bottomless pit; yet when the seventh angel shall sound his trumpet, great
voices will be heard in Heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become
the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever and
ever. -- And the temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his
temple the ark of his testament; and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail. Rev. x. 7. xi. 2, 15 -- 19.
Then it will be seen, that the only way of mercy for sinners, is by faith in
Christ, in whom the two tables of the law are kept whole. For on the two
commandments, of loving God with all our powers, and loving our neighbors as
ourselves, hang all the law and the prophets. Matt. xxii. 36 -- 40. This is
that good part, which shall not be taken away from any who choose this law of
love. Luke x. 25 -- 28, 42. It is the circumcision of the heart, which delivers
us from dogs, evil workers, and the concision. Romans ii. 29. Phil. iii. 2, 3. It
is the change which God requires of us, and which he has promised to work in
us. He said to the church of Israel, Circumcise the foreskin of your heart, and
be no more stiff-necked. And when they were scattered among all nations, he
said, The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed,
to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul, that thou
may live. -- The word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, that thou may do it. Deuteronomy. x. 16. xxx. 6 -- 14. If any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. -- For Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believes. -- For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. -- Him that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations. Romans viii. 9. x. 4, 10. xiv. 1. Beware lest any man spoil you
through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; for in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him, which is the HEAD of
all principality and power. In whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the circumcision of Christ; buried with him in baptism, wherein also
you are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. Col. ii. 8 -- 12.

Yet in the second and third centuries, philosophy and vain deceit, carried
teachers into the practice of setting up themselves as priests, in distinction
from the brethren; and of setting up some teachers above others, under the name
of bishops; with an imagination that they could regenerate persons by baptizing
of them. And in the fourth century Constantine adopted this corrupt scheme, as
an engine of state policy. And in writing to each bishop, he styled him, "Your
holiness." Which was so pleasing to them, that one of them went and delivered a
long oration in the presence of Constantine, in the thirtieth year of his
reign, wherein he said, "His empire resembles the celestial empire, so that
lifting up his eyes to Heaven, he governs his subjects in this inferior
empire, according to the pattern and form of the heavenly empire. For law,
which is king of all, has prescribed a Monarchy to be a government most
suitable to a prince and people. For a Monarchy does exceed all other kinds of
commonwealths and manners of government; for that government is various which
consists in an Aristocracy, or a government of men equal in riches and
dignity; also a Democracy, or government of the people, which is opposed to a
Monarchy, is rather a seditious confusion than a government." Yet he was never
baptized until near his death; and then they said, "Constantine was the first
of all the Emperors that was regenerated by the new birth of baptism, and that
was signed with the sign of the cross." And when they buried him they said,
"The priests and people, with tears and lamentations, prayed unto God for the
Emperor's soul." Eusebius's Life of Constantine; Lodon edition, 1663, p. 29,
^1, ^^, 96.


From whence we may see, that enmity against a free government of the people,
calling ministers priests, baptism regeneration, using the sign of the cross,
and praying for the dead, were all as early as the use of secular force to
support Christian ministers. And by removing the seat of the empire to
Constantinople, and dividing it among his three sons, Constantine made way for
the bishop of Rome to exalt himself above all men upon earth, and above the God
of Heaven, who can never violate his promise or oath, or entice any into sin. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 -- 12. And on May 4, 1493, the year after America was first
discovered, the Pope gave it to the crown of Spain. And though he soon after
received a deadly wound, by the sword of the Spirit, yet that deadly wound was
healed. Rev. xiii. 1 -- 5, 11 -- 18. For the Protestant beast has carried
blood and slavery round the world, in galleys and gallant ships, as far as the
first beast ever did. And the two beasts of Britain and Spain, agreed last fall
to divide the lands and trade of the heathen, on the other side of the world,
between them. Yet the spiritual tyranny, which came from Rome and England, is
continued in several of the United States of America. For when the freemen of
the Massachusetts elected Delegates to frame a new constitution of government
for us, they empowered the majority in each corporation to force the rest to
support such religious teachers as they were pleased to choose. And to justify
it, they said, "As the happiness of a people, and the good order and
preservation of civil government, essentially depend upon piety, religion, and
morality; and as these cannot be generally diffused through a community, but by
the institution of the public worship of God, and of public instructions in
piety, religion, and morality: therefore, to promote their happiness, and to
secure the good order and preservation of their government, the people of this
Commonwealth have a right to invest their legislature with power to authorize
and require, and the legislature shall, from time to time, authorize and
require the several towns, parishes, precincts, and other bodies-politic, or
religious societies, to make suitable provision, at their own expense, for the
institution of the public worship of God, and for the maintenance of public
protestant teachers of piety, religion, and morality, in all cases where such
provision shall not be made voluntarily." But they set up the ministers of
congregational churches, as the only ministers who should be overseers of the
University at Cambridge. And both of these names were excluded from being a
test of our civil rulers; but each of them must say, "I believe the Christian
religion, and have a firm persuasion of its truth," when he enters into his
office. If Roman catholics will say these words, they may be lawgivers and
judges for us about the worship of God. And in 1782, the doctrine of purgatory
was published in Boston. In 1783, the President of the University in
Connecticut said to their legislature, " Dominion is founded in property; and
resides where that is, whether in the hands of the few or many. -- The
congregational and presbyterian denominations, however hitherto despised, will,
by the blessing of Heaven, continue to hold the greatest figure in America;
and, notwithstanding all the fruitless labors and exertions to proselyte us to
other communions, become more numerous than the whole collective body of our
fellow protestants in Europe." Election Sermon at Hartford, May 8, 1783, p. 8,
73.
And on March 23, 1786, the legislature of the Massachusetts made a law, which
gives each inhabitant the power of voting in town affairs, who pays two thirds
more in one tax, than a poll tax. And it says, "That the freeholders, and other
inhabitants in each respective town, qualified as aforesaid, at the annual
meeting, for the choice of town officers, or at any other town meeting
regularly warned, may grant and vote such sums of money, as they shall judge
necessary for the settlement, maintenance and support of the ministry, schools,
the poor, and other necessary charges, arising within the same town; to be
assessed upon the polls and property within the same, as by law provided."

Here the majority of voters in each town are empowered to compel the rest to
support such teachers as they are pleased to choose, without any regard to the
faith of the Gospel. Indeed they are to be protestant teachers. But this name
originated in Germany, twelve years after Luther began the reformation there;
and above twenty thousand men were hired from thence, to assist the protestants
in Britain, in their late bloody attempt to enslave America. And the
congregational name was invented at Boston, where they hanged four persons, an
hundred and thirty years ago, for opposing their cruel scheme. And our
constitution says, "No subordination of any one sect or denomination to
another, shall ever be established by law." And the men who framed it, said to
the people, on March 2, 1780, "Your Delegates did not conceive themselves
vested with power to set up one denomination of Christians above another; for
Religion must at all times be a matter between God and individuals." So that
the above law is a violation of a foundation principle of our government, and
directly against the nature of religion. And honest people, in our various
towns, are daily exposed to the spoiling of goods or imprisonment, for refusing
to undermine our government, and to violate their allegiance to our Lord Jesus
Christ. For he is the only lawgiver for his church; and every soul who will not
hear him, shall be destroyed from among the people. Acts iii. 22, 23. He was so
far from giving any countenance to his church, in their invasion of the work of
civil rulers, that when one desired him to speak to his brother to divide the
inheritance with him, Jesus said, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over
you? He knew that the way to avoid the leaven of hypocrisy, was to keep the
government of his church distinct from the world. Luke xii. 1 -- 14. Murder and
lying came from the devil. John viii. 44. And from him came the power which has
been claimed, by the churches of Rome and England, to divide the lands and
trade of America between them. Neither can the putting of baptism before a
personal confession of faith in Christ, and supporting religious ministers by
the sword of the magistrate, be traced up to any better source. The covenant of
circumcision yoked believers and unbelievers together in the church of Israel,
until Christ came and shed his blood for us. But the covenant of circumcision,
and the covenant of grace, are as distinct in their nature, as Hagar and Sarah
were in their condition, or as Sinai and Zion are in their situation. The
children of the first were born after the flesh, while the children of the
second are born after the Spirit; and the promise is to the children of the
free woman. And Paul says, Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. -- A
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Gal. iv. 21 -- 31. v. 1, 9.

And this country is now so much leavened with hypocrisy, that our wisest men
have excluded all religious tests from the government of these United States.
And when great opposition was made thereto at Boston, three years ago, a noted
congregational minister said, "The great object of religion being God supreme,
and the seat of religion in man being the heart or conscience, that is, the
reason God has given us, employed on our moral actions, in their most important
consequences, as related to the tribunal of God, hence I infer, that God alone
is the God of the conscience, and consequently, attempts to erect human
tribunals for the consciences of men, are impious encroachments upon the
prerogatives of God." All religious tests, imposed by men, are against piety,
religion, and morality. Yet the same minister had said to our legislature, near
ten years before, "Let the restraints of religion once be broken down, as they
infallibly would be by leaving the subject of public worship to the humors of
the multitude, and we might well defy all human wisdom and power to support and
preserve order and government in the state." But as his infallibility has
failed him, it is hoped that our civil rulers will soon leave the government of
the church to the laws and Spirit of Christ, and not believe any teachers, who
will not trust him for a temporal living. For Jesus says, If any man love me,
he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. John xiv. 23. If there come any unto you, and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him
God-speed; for he that bids him Godspeed, is partaker of his evil deeds. 2
John 10, 11. Faithfulness in ministers and people to each other, and to avoid
deceivers, are ever matters between God and individuals, as much as faith in
Christ is for eternal salvation. AND LET GOD BE TRUE, BUT EVERY MAN A LIAR.

AMEN.
Lately published by the Author, and to be sold at the Shop No. 53, in Cornhill,
AN ANSWER to Mr. WESLEY, on ELECTION and FINAL PERSEVERANCE, and a DISCOURSE
on the LIBERAL SUPPORT of GOSPEL MINISTERS.


