THE ACTS OF INCORPORATION, BYE-LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS, OF THE BANK OF THE
UNITED STATES.

An Act to incorporate the Subscribers to the Bank of the United States.
WHEREAS it is conceived that the establishment of a bank for the United
States, upon a foundation sufficiently extensive to answer the purposes
intended thereby, and at the same time upon the principles which afford
adequate security for an upright and prudent administration thereof, will be
very conducive to the successful conducting of the national finances -- will
tend to give facility to the obtaining of loans for the use of the government,
in sudden emergencies -- and will be productive of considerable advantages to
trade and industry in general -- Therefore,

I. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America, in Congress assembled, That a bank of the United States
shall be established; the capital stock whereof shall not exceed ten millions
of dollars, divided into twenty-five thousand shares, each share being four
hundred dollars; and that subscriptions toward constituting the said stock,
shall, on the first Monday in April next, be opened at the city of
Philadelphia, under the superintendance of such persons, not less than three,
as shall be appointed for that purpose by the President of the United States
(who is hereby empowered to appoint the said persons accordingly) which
subscriptions shall continue open until the whole of the said stock shall have
been subscribed.

II. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for any person,
co-partnership, or body politic, to subscribe for such or so many shares as he,
she or they shall think fit, not exceeding one thousand, except as shall be
hereafter directed relatively to the United States; and that the sums
respectively subscribed, except on behalf of the United States, shall be
payable one fourth in gold and silver, and three fourths in that part of the
public debt which, according to the loan proposed in the fourth and fifteenth
sections of the act, entitled, "An act making provision for the debt of the
United States," shall bear an accruing interest, at the time of payment, of six
per centum per annum; and shall also be payable in four equal parts, in the
aforesaid ratio of specie to debt, at the distance of six calendar months from
each other; the first whereof shall be paid at the time of subscription.

III. And be it further enacted, That all those who shall become subscribers to
the said bank, their successors and assigns, shall be, and are hereby created
and made a corporation and body politic, by the name and style of THE
PRESIDENT, DIRECTORS AND COMPANY, OF THE BANK OF THE UNITED STATES; and shall
so continue until the 4th day of March one thousand eight hundred and eleven:
And by that name, shall be, and are hereby made able and capable in law, to
have, purchase, receive, possess, enjoy, and retain to them and their
successors, lands, rents, tenements, hereditaments, goods, chattels, and
effects of what kind, nature or quality soever, to an amount, not exceeding in
the whole fifteen millions of dollars, including the amount of the capital
stock aforesaid; and the same to sell, grant, demise, alien or dispose of; to
sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered, defend and be
defended, in courts of record, or any other place whatsoever: And also to make,
have, and use a common seal, and the same to break, alter and renew, at their
pleasure; and also to ordain, establish, and put in execution, such bye-laws,
ordinances and regulations as shall seem necessary and convenient for the
government of the said corporation, not being contrary to law, or to the
constitution thereof (for which purpose general meetings of the stockholders
shall and may be called by the directors, and in the manner herein after
specified) and generally to do and execute all and singular acts, matters and
things, which to them it shall or may appertain to do; subject nevertheless to
the rules, regulations, restrictions, limitations, and provisions, herein after
prescribed and declared.

IV. And be it further enacted, That for the well ordering of the affairs of
the said corporation, there shall be twenty-five directors: of whom there shall
be an election on the first Monday of January, in each year, by the
stockholders or proprietors of the capital stock of the said corporation, and
by plurality of the votes actually given; and those, who shall be duly chosen
at any election, shall be capable of serving as directors, by virtue of such
choice, until the end or expiration of the Monday of January next ensuing the
time of such election, and no longer. And the said directors, at their first
meeting after each election, shall choose one of their number as president.

V. Provided always, and be it further enacted, That as soon as the sum of four
hundred thousand dollars, in gold and silver, shall have been actually received
on account of the subscriptions to the said stock, notice thereof shall be
given by the persons under whose superintendance the same shall have been made,
in at least two public gazettes printed in the city of Philadelphia; and the
said persons shall, at the same time in like manner, notify a time and place
within the said city, at the distance of ninety days from the time of such
notification, for proceeding to the election of directors; and it shall be
lawful for such election to be then and there made; and the persons who shall
then and there be chosen, shall be the first directors, and shall be capable of
serving, by virtue of such choice, until the end or expiration of the Monday in
January next ensuing the time of making the same, and shall forthwith
thereafter commence the operations of the said bank, at the said city of
Philadelphia. And provided further, That in case it should at any time happen,
that an election of directors should not be made upon any day when pursuant to
this act it ought to have been made, the said corporation shall not for that
cause, be deemed to be dissolved; but it shall be lawful on any other day, to
hold and make an election of directors, in such manner as shall have been
regulated by the laws and ordinances of the said corporation. And provided
lastly, That in case of the death, resignation, absence from the United States,
or removal of a director by the stockholders, his place may be filled up by a
new choice, for the remainder of the year.

VI. And be it further enacted, That the directors for the time being, shall
have power to appoint such officers, clerks, and servants under them, as shall
be necessary for executing the business of the said corporation, and to allow
them such compensation, for their services respectively, as shall be
reasonable; and shall be capable of exercising such other powers and
authorities, for the well governing and ordering of the affairs of the said
corporation, as shall be described, fixed, and determined by the laws,
regulations, and ordinances of the same.

VII. And be it further enacted, That the following rules, restrictions,
limitations and provisions, shall form and be fundamental articles of the
constitution of the said corporation, viz.

1. The number of votes to which each stockholder shall be entitled, shall be
according to the number of shares he shall hold, in the proportions following:
That is to say, for one share, and not more than two shares, one vote: For
every two shares above two, and not exceeding ten, one vote: For every four
shares above ten, and not exceeding thirty, one vote: For every six shares
above thirty, and not exceeding sixty, one vote: For every eight shares above
sixty, and not exceeding one hundred, one vote: And for every ten shares above
one hundred, one vote: -- But no person, co-partnership, or body politic, shall
be entitled to a greater number than thirty votes. And after the first
election, no share or shares shall confer a right of suffrage, which shall not
have been holden three calendar months previous to the day of election.
Stockholders actually resident within the United States, and none other, may
vote in elections by proxy.

2. Not more than three-fourths of the directors in office, exclusive of the
President, shall be eligible for the next succeeding year: But the director,
who shall be President at the time of an election, may always be re-elected.

3. None but a stockholder, being a citizen of the United States, shall be
eligible as a director.

4. No director shall be entitled to any emolument, unless the same shall have
been allowed by the stockholders at a general meeting. The stockholders shall
make such compensation to the President, for his extraordinary attendance at
the bank, as shall appear to them reasonable.

5. Not less than seven directors shall constitute a board for the transaction
of business, of whom, the President shall always be one, except in case of
sickness, or necessary absence; in which case, his place may be supplied by any
other director, whom he, by writing under his hand, shall nominate for the
purpose.

6. Any number of stockholders, not less than sixty, who together shall be
proprietors of two hundred shares or upwards, shall have power at any time to
call a general meeting of the stockholders, for purposes relative to the
institution, giving at least ten weeks notice, in two public gazettes of the
place where the bank is kept, and specifying, in such notice, the object or
objects of such meeting.

7. Every cashier or treasurer, before he enters upon the duties of his office,
shall be required to give bond, with two or more sureties, to the satisfaction
of the directors, in a sum not less than fifty thousand dollars, with condition
for his good behavior.

8. The lands, tenements, and hereditaments, which it shall be lawful for the
said corporation to hold, shall be only such as shall be requisite for its
immediate accommodation in relation to the convenient transacting of its
business, and such as shall have been bona fide mortgaged to it by way of
security, or conveyed to it in satisfaction of debts previously contracted in
the course of its dealings, or purchased at sales upon judgments which shall
have been obtained for such debts.

9. The total amount of the debts which the said corporation shall at any time
owe, whether by bond, bill, note, or other contract, shall not exceed the sum
of Ten Millions of Dollars, over and above the moneys then actually deposited
in the bank for safe-keeping, unless the contracting of any greater debt shall
have been previously authorized by a law of the United States. In case of
excess, the directors, under whose administration it shall happen, shall be
liable for the same, in their natural and private capacities: and an action of
debt may in such case be brought against them, or any of them, their or any of
their heirs, executors or administrators, in any court of record of the United
States, or of either of them, by any creditor or creditors of the said
corporation, and may be prosecuted to judgment and execution; any condition,
covenant, or agreement to the contrary notwithstanding. But this shall not be
construed to exempt the said corporation, or the lands, tenements, goods or
chattels of the same, from being also liable for and chargeable with the said
excess. Such of the said directors, who may have been absent when the said
excess was contracted or created, or who may have dissented from the resolution
or act whereby the same was so contracted or created, may respectively
exonerate themselves from being so liable, by forthwith giving notice of the
fact, and of their absence or dissent, to the President of the United States,
and to the stockholders, at a general meeting, which they shall have power to
call for that purpose.

10. The said corporation may sell any part of the public debt whereof its
stock shall be composed, but shall not be at liberty to purchase any public
debt whatsoever; nor shall directly or indirectly deal or trade in any thing,
except bills of exchange, gold or silver bullion, or in the sale of goods
really and truly pledged for money lent and not redeemed in due time; or of
goods which shall be the produce of its lands. Neither shall the said
corporation take more than at the rate of six per centum per annum, for or upon
its loans or discounts.

11. No loan shall be made by the said corporation, for the use or on account
of the government of the United States, to an amount exceeding one hundred
thousand dollars, or of any particular state, to an amount exceeding fifty
thousand dollars, or of any foreign prince or state, unless previously
authorized by a law of the United States.

12. The stock of the said corporation shall be assignable and transferable,
according to such rules as shall be instituted in that behalf, by the laws and
ordinances of the same.

13. The bills obligatory and of credit, under the seal of the said
corporation, which shall be made to any person or persons, shall be assignable
by indorsement thereupon, under the hand or hands of such person or persons,
and of his, her, or their assignee or assignees, and so as absolutely to
transfer and vest the property thereof in each and every assignee or assignees
successively, and to enable such assignee or assignees to bring and maintain an
action thereupon in his, her, or their own name or names. And bills or notes,
which may be issued by order of the said corporation, signed by the president,
and countersigned by the principal cashier or treasurer, promising the payment
of money to any person or persons, his, her or their order, or to bearer,
though not under the seal of the said corporation, shall be binding and
obligatory upon the same in the like manner, and with the like force and
effect, as upon any private person or persons, if issued by him or them, in
his, her, or their private or natural capacity or capacities; and shall be
assignable and negociable, in like manner as if they were so issued by such
private person or persons, -- That is to say, those which shall be payable to
any person or persons, his, her or their order, shall be assignable by
indorsement, in like manner and with the like effect as foreign bills of
exchange now are: and those which are payable to bearer, shall be negociable
and assignable by delivery only.

14. Half yearly dividends shall be made of so much of the profits of the bank,
as shall appear to the directors advisable; and once in every three years, the
directors shall lay before the stockholders, at a general meeting, for their
information, an exact and particular statement of the debts which shall have
remained unpaid after the expiration of the original credit, for a period of
treble the term of that credit; and of the surplus of profit, if any, after
deducting losses and dividends. If there shall be a failure in the payment of
any part of any sum subscribed by any person, co-partnership, or body politic,
the party failing shall lose the benefit of any dividend which may have accrued
prior to the time for making such payment, and during the delay of the same.

15. It shall be lawful for the directors aforesaid, to establish offices
wheresoever they shall think fit, within the United States, for the purposes of
discount and deposit only, and upon the same terms and in the same manner as
shall be practiced at the bank; and to commit the management of the said
offices, and the making of the said discounts, to such persons, and under such
agreements, and subject to such regulations as they shall deem proper; not
being contrary to law, or to the constitution of the bank.

16. The officer at the head of the treasury department of the United States,
shall be furnished, from time to time, as often as he may require, not
exceeding once a week, with statements of the amount of the capital stock of
the said corporation; and of the debts due to the same; of the moneys deposited
therein; of the notes in circulation, and of the cash in hand; and shall have a
right to inspect such general accounts in the books of the bank as shall relate
to the said statements: Provided, that this shall not be construed to imply a
right of inspecting the account of any private individual or individuals with
the bank.

VIII. And be it further enacted, That if the said corporation or any person or
persons, for or to the use of the same, shall deal or trade in buying or
selling any goods, wares, merchandise, or commodities whatsoever, contrary to
the provisions of this act, all and every person and persons, by whom any order
or direction for so dealing or trading shall have been given, and all and every
person and persons who shall have been concerned as parties or agents therein,
shall forfeit and lose treble the value of the goods, wares, merchandises and
commodities, in which such dealing and trade shall have been; one half thereof
to the use of the informer, and the other half thereof to the use of the United
States, to be recovered with costs of suit.

IX. And be it further enacted, That if the said corporation shall advance or
lend any sum for the use or on account of the government of the United States,
to an amount exceeding one hundred thousand dollars; or of any particular state
to an amount exceeding fifty thousand dollars; or of any foreign prince or
state, (unless previously authorized thereto by a law of the United States) all
and every person and persons, by and with whose order, agreement, consent,
approbation or connivance, such unlawful advance or loan, shall forfeit and
pay, for every such offense, treble the value or amount of the sum or sums
which shall have been so unlawfully advanced or lent; one fifth thereof to the
use of the informer, and the residue thereof to the use of the United States,
to be disposed of by law and not otherwise.

X. And be it further enacted, That the bills or notes of the said corporation,
originally made payable, or which shall have become payable on demand, in gold
and silver coin, shall be receivable in all payments to the United States.

XI. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the President of
the United States, at any time or times within eighteen months after the first
day of April next, to cause a subscription to be made to the stock of the said
corporation, as part of the aforesaid capital stock of ten millions of dollars,
on behalf of the United States, to an amount not exceeding two millions of
dollars; to be paid out of the moneys which shall be borrowed by virtue of
either of the acts, the one entitled, "An act making provision for the debt of
the United States;" and the other entitled, "An act making provision for the
reduction of the public debt;" borrowing of the bank an equal sum, to be
applied to the purposes for which the said moneys shall have been procured;
reimburseable in ten years, by equal annual instalments; or at any time sooner,
or in any greater proportions, that the government may think fit.

XII. And be it further enacted, That no other bank shall be established by any
future law of the United States during the continuance of the corporation
hereby created; for which the faith of the United States is hereby pledged.

FREDERICK AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG, Speaker of the House of Representatives. JOHN
ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.
Approved, February twenty-fifth, 1791. GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the
United States. (True Copy.) THOMAS JEFFERSON, Secretary of State.


An Act supplementary to the Act, entitled, "An Act to incorporate the
subscribers to the Bank of the United states."
I. BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America, in Congress assembled, That the subscriptions to the stock
of the Bank of the United States, as provided by the act, entitled, "An act to
incorporate the subscribers to the Bank of the United States," shall not be
opened until the first Monday in July next.

II. And be it further enacted, That so much of the first payment as by the
said act is directed to be in the six per cent. certificates of the United
States, may be deferred until the first Monday in January next.

III. And be it further enacted, That no person, corporation, or body politic,
except in behalf of the United States, shall, for the space of three months
after the said first Monday in July next, subscribe in any one day, for more
than thirty shares.

IV. And be it further enacted, That every subscriber shall, at the time of
subscribing, pay into the hands of the persons who shall be appointed to
receive the same, the specie proportion required by the said act to be then
paid. And if any such subscriber shall fail to make any of the future payments,
he shall forfeit the sum so by him first paid, for the use of the corporation.

V. And be it further enacted, That such part of the public debt, including the
assumed debt, as is funded at an interest of three per cent. may be paid to the
bank, in like manner with the debt funded at six per cent. computing the value
of the former at one half the value of the latter, and reserving to the
subscribers who shall have paid three per cent. stock, the privilege of
redeeming the same with six per cent. stock, at the above rate of computation,
at any time before the first day of January, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-three; unless the three per cent. stock shall have been previously
disposed of by the directors.

FREDERICK AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG, Speaker of the House of Representatives. JOHN
ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.
Approved, March second, 1791. GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United
States. Deposited among the Rolls in the Office of the Secretary of State.
THOMAS JEFFERSON, Secretary of State.


AT a general meeting of the stockholders of the Bank of the United States,
Page 39
held at the city-hall in Philadelphia, on Monday evening October 31st, 1791,
the stockholders agreed to the following ORDINANCE.

"Sec. 1st. The charter of incorporation granted to the Bank of the United
States, amongst other rights, privileges and abilities therein conveyed, having
empowered the stockholders, at general meetings, legally convened, to make,
ordain, establish and put in execution, such byelaws, ordinances and
regulations, as shall seem necessary and convenient for the government of the
said corporation, -- Be it ordained by the President, Directors and Company, of
the Bank of the United States,

"Sec. 2d. That the bank shall be opened for the transaction of business every
day in the year, (Sundays, Christmas Day, and the fourth of July excepted)
during such hours as the board of directors shall deem advisable.

"Sec. 3d. That the books and accounts of the bank shall be kept in dollars and
cents, and shall be regularly balanced on the first Mondays in January and
July, in each year, when the half yearly dividends shall be declared and
published in at least four of the public news papers."

Sec. 4th. That the bank shall take charge of the cash of all those who choose
to place it there (free of expense) and shall keep it subject to their order,
payable at sight, and shall receive deposits of ingots of gold, bars of silver,
wrought plate, or other valuable articles of small bulk, in the same manner,
and return them on demand of the depositor.

"Sec. 5th. That the bank shall receive and pay all specie coins, according to
the rates and value that have been or shall hereafter be established by
Congress.

"Sec. 6th. That until offices of discount and deposit shall be established,
there shall be at least two discount days in every week, when meetings of the
board of directors shall be assembled: -- discounts shall be made at a rate not
exceeding six per cent. per annum, on notes or bills of exchange that have not
more than sixty days to run, and with at least two responsible names, and under
such modifications as the board of directors in their discretion shall deem
satisfactory and expedient.

"Sec. 7th. That the president shall have power to convene the directors, on
special occasions, and with the approbation of the board of directors, to affix
the seal of the corporation to all conveyances or other instruments, and sign
the same in behalf of the corporation. The said seal shall always remain in the
custody and safe keeping of the president.

"Sec. 8th. That a committee of the board, consisting of at least three
members, to be elected monthly, by ballot, shall visit the vaults in which the
cash and other effects shall be deposited, at least once in every month, and
make an inventory of the same, to be compared with the books, in order to
ascertain whether they perfectly agree therewith.

"Sec. 9th. That no notes of the bank shall be struck or signed, or bank paper
made, but by the direction of the board.

"Sec. 10th. That in case the board of directors shall at any time make a
dividend exceeding the profits of the bank, and thereby diminish the capital
stock, the members assenting thereto shall be liable in their several
individual capacities for the amount of the surplus so divided.

"Sec. 11th. That the board of directors shall, previous to the first day of
December in every year, call a general meeting of the stockholders to be
assembled, within three days after each annual election.

"Sec. 12th. That the board of directors are hereby authorized and empowered to
fix and establish requisite, Page 42
safe and convenient forms for transfering bank stock -- for receiving half
yearly dividends -- for conveying a right to proxies to represent stockholders
at any general meeting, after the second Monday of January next -- for the
certificates of capital stock of the bank -- for the circulating post notes of
the bank -- and for the oath or affirmation of the officers of the bank,
previous to their entering on the execution of their respective duties.

"Sec. 13th. That the board of directors are hereby authorized and empowered to
establish a common seal, with suitable devices -- to ascertain and mark out the
various duties and employments of the officers, clerks and servants of the
bank, and to direct them accordingly, as well as to determine the amount of
securities they shall respectively give for the faithful discharge of their
duties -- to assign to the President such additional functions as are not
already designated by law -- and to re-issue, or renew at their discretion, the
notes in circulation."

Sec. 14th. That the directors shall have power to make loans to the government
of the United States, or of any state, to such extent and on such terms as they
shall deem expedient, not contrary to law: Provided, That a board, consisting
of not less than a majority of the whole number of directors, shall be
necessary to decide in all such cases.

Sec. 15th. That the board of directors are hereby authorized to lease or hire,
for a term not exceeding two years, such suitable buildings as the
administration of the affairs of the bank may require.

Sec. 16th. Page 43
That the board of directors are hereby empowered to form and establish all
other rules and regulations that they may deem necessary for the interior
management of the bank.

RESOLVED, Page 50
That discounts for the present, and until altered by a quarterly or special
meeting of the board of directors convened for that purpose, shall be made at
the rate of six per cent. per annum, and that all bills and notes offered for
discount shall be delivered into the bank on Monday or Wednesday (changed to
Thursday) and laid before the directors, together with a state of the funds of
the bank, every Tuesday and Thursday (changed to Friday) on which days the
discount shall be settled, and shall be made known on the next succeeding day.

2d. That no discount shall be made without the consent of each director, at
least seven being present, nor shall any reason be required by the directors of
each other, nor ever assigned to the public, for refusing discounts.

3d. That the board of directors may examine the state of any individual's
account, who may be applying for discounts, or when other reasons may make it
necessary; but no director shall be permitted to inspect the accounts of any
person with the bank.

4th. That discounts shall be made for the present, and until altered by a
quarterly or special meeting of the board of directors, convened for that
purpose, upon personal security only, with at least two responsible names, for
a term not exceeding sixty days; and that three days of grace be allowed on all
bills or notes payable to the bank, and that the discount be taken for the same.

5th. That there shall be a quarterly meeting of the directors, for the
regulation and general superintendance of the affairs of the bank, and not less
than thirteen directors shall constitute a board for those purposes, of whom
the president shall always be one, except in case of sickness or necessary
absence, when his place shall be supplied by any director whom he by writing
under his hand shall nominate for that purpose; and the said meeting may
adjourn from time to time. -- All questions shall be decided by a majority of
votes; and the said quarterly meetings shall be held on the first Tuesday of
January, the first Tuesday of April, the first Tuesday of July, and the first
Tuesday of October.

6th. That bills or notes left with the bank shall be presented for acceptance,
and the money collected or demanded, free of expense: Provided nevertheless,
That in case of non-payment and protest, the charge of protest shall be paid by
the person lodging the bill or note.

7th. That payments made at the bank, shall be examined at the time, and no
error suggested afterward, shall be corrected.

8th. That the cashier give bond with four sureties, to the satisfaction of the
directors, in the sum of fifty thousand dollars, with condition for his good
behavior -- The first teller give bond with two sureties, to the satisfaction
of the directors, in the sum of five thousand dollars: -- Second teller to give
bond with two sureties, to the satisfaction of the directors, in the sum of
four thousand dollars: -- Assistant clerk to give bond with two sureties, to
the satisfaction of the directors, in the sum of two thousand dollars: -- An
runner to give bond with two sureties, to the satisfaction of the directors, in
the sum of two thousand dollars, with condition for their good behavior.

9th. That it shall be the duty of the President to take into his safe-keeping
and separate custody at the bank, the plates, paper moulds, and bank paper;
carefully to superintend the printing at the bank, of all bills or notes
ordered by the directors to be printed; and a regular account shall be kept of
the bank paper in the custody of the president, and of the quantity from time
to time ordered for impression; which account shall be checqued by quarterly
examinations of the bank paper in the custody of the president. -- And it shall
moreover be the duty of the president to superintend the conduct of all persons
employed in the bank; to sign all bills and notes at the bank, which may be
issued by the corporation.

10th. That it shall be the duty of the cashier to countersign at the bank all
bills or notes to be signed by the president, by order of the directors;
carefully to observe the conduct of the persons employed under him; daily to
examine the settlement of the cash accounts of the bank; to count the money
deposited each evening in the vaults; to compare the amount thereof with the
balance of the cash account of that day, and in case of disagreement, to report
the same at the next meeting of the directors.

11th. That it shall be the duty of every other officer, clerk and servant of
the bank, to do and perform all such duties and services as may from time to
time be required of them respectively by the president or cashier.

12th. That the president, cashier, and every other officer, clerk and servant
of the bank, previous to their entering on the execution of their several
duties, respectively take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation, to
wit:

I (...) do swear (or affirm) that I will to the best of my knowledge and
abilities, perform the duties assigned to, or trust reposed in me, as (...) of
the Bank of the United States.

13th. That the form of the power for voting by proxy, Page 56
at any elections, be --

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That (...) of (...) do hereby appoint (...) to
be substitute and proxy, for and in (...) name and behalf to vote at any
election of a director, or directors of the Bank of the United States, as fully
as (...) might or could, or were (...) personally present. In witness whereof,
(...) have hereunto set (...) hand and seal, this (...) day of (...) in the
year (...) Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)

14th. That the form of the power for voting by proxy, respecting the enacting,
repealing or amending bye-laws, ordinances and regulations, be --

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That (...) of (...) do hereby appoint (...)
substitute or proxy, to represent (...) at all meetings of the stockholders of
the Bank of the United States, and in (...) name and behalf to vote respecting
the enacting, repealing or amending such bye-laws, ordinances or regulations as
may be deemed necessary and convenient for the government of said bank. In
witness whereof (...) have hereunto set hand and seal this (...) day of (...)
in the year (...) Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)

15th. That the form of the power for selling, assigning and transfering bank
stock, be --

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That (...) of (...) do hereby constitute and
appoint (...) of (...) true and lawful attorney, for (...) and in (...) name
and behalf to sell, assign and transfer unto any person or persons, the whole
or any part of (...) share (...) unto belonging in the capital or joint stock
of the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of the United States, and
for that purpose to make and execute all necessary acts of assignment and
transfer, and furthermore one or more persons under (...) to substitute, with
like full power. In witness whereof (...) have (...) hereunto set (...) hand
and seal, this (...) day of (...) in the year (...) Sealed and delivered in the
presence of (...)

16th. That the forms of the powers to receive dividends, be --

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That (...) of (...) do hereby constitute and
appoint (...) lawful attorney, for (...) and in (...) name and behalf to
receive and give receipts for all dividends now due, or which (...) may grow
due on (...) share (...) to (...) belonging, in the capital or joint stock of
the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of the United States. In
witness whereof (...) have hereunto set (...) hand and seal, this (...) day of
(...) in the year (...) Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)

RESOLVED, Page 59
That that the bank receive transfers of any of the public debt, in trust for
such persons as may request the same.

RESOLVED, That in all cases when thereunto required, that the bank accept
powers of attorney for receiving interest due, or to grow due upon any of the
public debt, and hold the same at the order of the proprietor, free of charge.

RESOLVED, Page 79
That on failure of payment of any note or bill, before the shutting of the
bank on the last day of grace, the note or bill shall be forthwith protested.

2d. The money payable from the bank on any note or bill discounted, shall be
placed to the credit of the applicant, on the day of discount.

3d. Discount shall be taken for the day in which it may be agreed to discount
any note or acceptance, and also for the last day of grace.

4th. Notes or bills deposited for collection at any time before the
commencement of the day of grace, shall, as to notice, demand and protest, be
proceeded with as notes or bills discounted, unless the person depositing the
same shall direct otherwise, in writing, and payment shall be received, if
offered at the bank, on notes and bills deposited at a later period; but the
bank shall not in such cases be expected to give notice, make demand, nor cause
protest to be made -- but the note or bill, or the money received for it, as
the case may be, shall remain subject to the order of the depositor, as it is
provided in cases of other deposits.

5th. No gold, silver or copper, coined within the United States, other than
such as is or shall be authorized by Congress, shall be receivable as money at
the bank.

RESOLVED, Page 83
That the discounts in future be made upon Tuesday and Friday, and that the
notes offered for discount be presented at the bank on Monday and Thursday.

RESOLVED, Page 88
That to entitle a note or bill to be discounted in future at the Bank of the
United States, the maker or acceptor thereof must usually reside in the city of
Philadelphia, or the payment of the note or acceptance must by the tenor
thereof, be assigned to be at the Bank of the United States, or some house
within the city of Philadelphia.

An ORDINANCE to prevent a greater number of persons, Page 91
who are directors, from being returned as new directors at any election, than
are allowed by law.
BE it ordained by the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of the
United States, That if at the present or any future annual election for
directors, there shall be more of the former directors chosen, than the law
allows to remain in office, those of the said directors who have the greatest
number of votes, shall be considered as duly elected, until the number allowed
by law to be re-elected, is complete; and the votes given for the others of the
said directors shall be deemed to be lost, and their places shall be supplied
by as many stockholders having the next greatest number of votes at such
election.

An ORDINANCE respecting the elections of Directors.
Sec. 1st. BE it ordained by the President, Directors and Company of the Bank
of the United States, That previous to all future elections for directors for
the said bank, the directors for the time being shall, on the Friday preceding
the election, appoint three stockholders (not being directors) to be judges of
the election, who shall conduct and regulate the same, and the directors shall
prescribe the hour of the day, and the place at which the election shall be
held.

Sec. 2d. And be it further ordained, That in case an election of directors
shall not be begun, or being begun shall not be completed on the first Monday
of January in any year, the judges of the said election shall adjourn the same
from day to day, not exceeding five days from the said first Monday in January,
until the said election shall be made and completed.

Sec. 3d. And be it further ordained, That the said judges shall on the
forenoon of the day, after the election shall be completed, at the farthest,
transmit to the cashier of the bank, an authenticated certificate of the
persons elected; and the cashier shall thereupon forthwith notify such of the
said persons, as shall be within convenient distance, to meet at the bank at
six o'clock in the evening of the same day, for the purpose of choosing a
president.

An ORDINANCE authorizing the Directors to transfer funded stock, Page 94
in certain cases therein mentioned.
WHEREAS it is permitted by law to the stockholders to pay to the bank, funded
three per cent. stock, redeemable by payment of six per cent. stock; and sundry
stockholders may have paid, or may hereafter pay to the bank, funded three per
cent. stock, in manner authorized by law. -- And whereas also sundry
stockholders or other persons, have transfered, or may hereafter transfer
funded stock, to be held by the President, Directors and Company of the Bank,
in trust, or with intent to be conveyed to such stockholders or other persons,
on demand --

BE it ordained by the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of the
United States, That the board of directors shall be, and they are hereby
empowered in all the above recited cases, to transfer and re-convey in the name
of the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of the United States, the
funded stock, to the several parties entitled thereto.

ORDERED, Page 104
That no officer of the bank disclose the amount of discounts made.

RESOLVED, Page 152
That it be the duty of the monthly committee chosen to inspect the vaults, to
audit and examine all accounts against the bank, other than those for the
salaries of the officers.

RESOLVED, Page 167
That every note or bill which shall have been protested, shall after one
o'clock of the next day ensuing the day of payment, be put in suit against the
maker, and at least one endorser thereof.

RESOLVED, Page 168
That the resolution of the board of directors of the 8th day of May, directing
the books of transfer to be closed fourteen days before the first day of July,
and the first day of January, be repealed: And that the said books of transfer
be shut for the space of fourteen days immediately preceding the first Monday
in July, and the first Monday in January, in each year.

RESOLVED, Page 172
That it will be proper that the directors of the offices of discount and
deposit, be elected on the first Tuesday in February, in every year; and that
the directors at that time in office, shall not however vacate their seats,
until the ensuing first Monday in March, at which time the new directors shall
enter into office.

RESOLVED, Page 47
That it will be expedient to establish offices of discount and deposit in the
cities of Charleston and New York, and towns of Baltimore and Boston, and as
soon as may be after the first Monday of January next, upon the following plan:

Art. 1. The directors of the Bank of the United States, shall appoint a number
of directors, not less than nine for each department, a majority of whom shall
constitute a board.

2d. The directors of each department shall choose one of their number for
president.

3d. The directors of the Bank of the United States, shall appoint the cashiers
of departments.

4th. The directors of departments shall appoint their respective tellers,
clerks and servants; and the securities by them given, shall be approved by the
directors of the Bank of the United States.

5th. The directors of departments shall be annually appointed; but not more
than three-fourths of whom, exclusive of the president, shall be eligible for
the next succeeding year.

6th. The manner of keeping, stating and rendering the accounts of the
departments, shall be prescribed by the directors of the Bank of the United
States; and the observance of the rules established, shall be enforced by the
directors of the Bank of the United States, to whom accounts of departments
shall be rendered.

7th. Page 48
All notes issued at the departments shall be signed and countersigned by the
president and cashier of the Bank of the United States -- shall be made payable
at the respective departments from which they are issued -- and shall be
delivered to the cashier of the department, who shall give duplicate receipts
for the same; one of which is to be lodged with the President of the Bank of
the United States, and the other with the president of the department.

8th. All notes which shall have become unfit for circulation, shall be
cancelled by the president and directors of the department, and immediately
thereafter transmitted to the directors of the Bank of the United States, who
shall cause the said departments to be credited for the same.

9th. The respective departments shall once in every week make out and transmit
to the directors of the Bank of the United States, a distinct abstract of the
state of their funds; which abstract shall ascertain the amount of the debts
and credits of the department -- amount of notes issued by the department, and
then in circulation -- the amount of cash on hand: And shall likewise
distinguish in the account of cash on hand, how much thereof is in specie, and
how much in the several kinds of bank notes.

10th. That the continuance of the said departments shall be at the pleasure of
the directors of the Bank of the United States; but none of the foregoing
regulations shall be rescinded, unless at a meeting of a majority of the whole
number of directors, after a notice given for that purpose at a preceding
meeting.

RESOLVED, Page 97
That each cashier give bond in the sum of twenty thousand dollars, with three
sureties, to be approved by this board, conditioned for good behavior.

RESOLVED, Page 109
That the administration of the offices of discount and deposit, shall in no
instance be committed to less than thirteen directors.

That the following officers, clerks and servants shall be employed in the
respective offices of discount and deposit, whose particular duties not
otherwise provided for, shall be prescribed by the directors of the said
offices, viz.

A cashier, Tellers, not exceeding two, at the discretion of the directors of
said offices. Book-keepers, not exceeding two, under the like discretion. A
discount clerk. A runner, and two porters.
That the offices of discount and deposit shall be opened for the transaction
of business every day in the year (Sundays, Christmas Day, public fasts,
thanksgiving days, and the fourth of July, excepted) during such hours as the
directors thereof shall deem advisable.

That the books and accounts of said offices shall be kept in dollars and
cents, and shall be balanced on the first Mondays in January and July of each
year.

That the said offices shall take charge of the cash of all those who choose to
place it there (free of expense) and shall keep it subject to their order,
payable at sight, and shall receive deposits of ingots of gold, bars of silver,
wrought plate, or other valuable articles of small bulk, in the same manner,
and return them on demand of the depositor.

That the said offices shall receive and pay all specie coins according to the
rates and value that have been, or shall be established by Congress.

That there shall be at least one discount day in each week, when the directors
shall be assembled.

That discount shall be made at the said offices at six per cent. per annum, on
notes and bills of exchange that have not more than sixty days to run, and with
at least two responsible names, and under such modifications as the directors
thereof shall deem satisfactory and expedient.

That the presidents of the respective offices of discount and deposit, shall
have power to convene the directors on special occasions.

That a committee of the directors, consisting of at least three members to be
elected monthly by ballot, shall visit the vaults in which the cash and other
effects shall be deposited, at least once in every month, and make an inventory
of the same, to be compared with the books, in order to ascertain whether they
perfectly agree therewith.

That the directors of the said offices shall ascertain the duties and
employments of their officers, clerks and servants; shall assign to their
presidents their functions, and shall prescribe the oath or affirmation to be
taken by their presidents, officers, clerks and servants, previous to their
entering on the execution of their respective duties.

That the directors of the said offices be empowered to form and establish all
other rules and regulations, which they may deem necessary for the interior
management of their respective offices, provided the same be not repugnant to
the laws and ordinances of the Bank of the United States, or the resolutions of
the directors thereof.

That none of the foregoing regulations shall be rescinded or altered, unless
at a meeting of a board, consisting of a majority of all the directors, and
after a regular notice given at a previous meeting, of any proposed alteration.


