AN ESSAY ON THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST. BY ABRAHAM BOOTH.

THEY SHALL SPEAK OF THE GLORY OF THY KINGDOM.

Psalm cxlv. 11. NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by W. DURELL, at his Book-Store and
Printing-Office, No. 19, QUEEN STREET. M,DCC,XCI.

PREFACE.
THE Kingdom of Christ is a subject of great importance: for, according to the
views we have of that kingdom will our conclusions be, respecting various
branches of religious conduct. If those views be imaginary, these conclusions
must be false. By the former, the glory of Messiah's regal character will be
obscured: by the latter, his worship will be corrupted: whereas the true
doctrine concerning this holy empire, may not only be the mean of preserving
from those evils, but of presenting us with data for the decision of many
disputes among the professors of Christianity. A competent acquaintance,
therefore, with its nature and laws, its emoluments and honors, is closely
connected with our duty and our happiness: which acquaintance must be derived
from divine Revelation.

Important, however, as the subject manifestly is, it has been but seldom
professedly discussed. This consideration was a leading motive to the present
attempt. To illustrate the nature of our Lord's Kingdom, and to infer the
conclusions flowing from it, constitute the design of this Essay.

The author has expressed his thoughts with great freedom; yet without
intending the least offense to any party of Christians, or to any person, from
whose notions and practices he conscientiously differs. In the course of
discussion he animadverts, indeed, on some particulars, with a degree of
severity: but then they appear to him in the light of political artifices,
which either impeach the dominion of Christ in his own kingdom; or degrade and
corrupt that worship which he requires. Now, in cases of this kind, the writer
is of opinion, that allegiance to the King Messiah, and true benevolence to
man, demand the language of marked opposition.

Such is the nature of our Lord's empire, that few of his loyal subjects can
seriously reflect upon it, without feeling themselves both delighted and
reproved. Delighted; because it is for the honor of their Mediator, to be the
Sovereign of a spiritual monarchy. A character of this kind apparently suits
the dignity of his Person, the design of his mediation, and the riches of his
grace. -- Reproved; because they daily find a want of that spirituality in
their affections, and of that heavenly mindedness, which become the professed
subjects of such a kingdom. When meditating on the characteristics of this holy
empire, they stand convicted before its divine Sovereign of much carnality and
worldly mindedness, over which they sincerely mourn: while merely nominal
subjects of the King Messiah, or superficial professors of the gracious gospel,
are but little concerned about the state of their hearts, in reference to
heaven; or with regard to the spirituality of their worship.

This being the case with multitudes, the author would not be much surprised,
were various particulars in the following pages to prove disgusting to the
taste of numbers professing godliness. But facts are stubborn things; and the
sayings of Jesus Christ must not be explained away, that conscience may rest in
a false peace, or that the public taste may be gratified LUTHER says, Potius
quam aliquid Regno Christi et Gloriae ejus decedat, ruat non solum pax sed
coelum et terra. Loci Commun. Class iv. p 35.
For, when thinking of our Sublime Sovereign, THY KINGDOM COME, is the language
of every upright heart, let carnal professors and the profligate world say what
they please.

A. BOOTH
Goodman's Fields, July 30, 1788.
AN ESSAY ON THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST.
IT having been revealed by ancient Prophets, that the Lord Messiah should be a
King, and have universal empire, the chosen tribes in every age expected his
appearance under the regal character. While, however, the general idea of that
expectation was fully warranted by the Spirit of prophecy, the bulk of
Abraham's natural posterity were under a gross mistake, respecting the true
design of their Messiah's appearance, and the real nature of his kingdom: which
mistake had the most pernicious influence upon their temper and conduct, when
the gracious promise of his coming was fulfilled.

The sense which they affixed to prophecies respecting the great Redeemer, was
manifestly such as flattered their pride and fostered their carnality. This
gave it a decided advantage, in their estimation, over that for which our Lord
and his Apostles contended; and led them to overlook whatever in the ancient
Oracles opposed their secular views. Ignorant of their spiritual wants, and
flushed with a false persuasion of interest in Jehovah's peculiar favor, on the
ground of carnal descent from Abraham, and of the Covenant made at Horeb; the
doctrine, example, and claims of Christ, were extremely offensive. Not
appearing as a temporal prince, discovering no disposition to free them from
the Roman yoke, and frequently addressing their consciences with keen reproof,
on account of their pride and hypocrisy, superstition and covetousness; they
rejected with determined opposition all the evidences of his divine mission,
treated him as an impostor, and procured his crucifixion. -- After he was risen
from the dead, and ascended to heaven, multitudes of them indeed believed, and
professed the Christian faith: but a great majority of the nation continued in
hardened impenitence, and persecuted the Apostles with unrelenting malevolence.
Thus they proceeded till, divine forbearance being exhausted, wrath came upon
them to the uttermost, in the total subversion of their civil and
ecclesiastical polity.

This mistake of the Jews, respecting the kingdom of their Messiah, lying at
the foundation of all the opposition with which they treated him, and of their
own ruin; it behooves us to guard with diligence against every thing which tends
to secularize the dominion of Christ: lest, by corrupting the Gospel Economy,
we dishonor the Lord Redeemer, and be finally punished as the enemies of his
government. Our danger of contracting guilt, and of incurring divine sentiment
in this way, is far from small. For we are so conversant with sensible objects,
and so delighted with exterior show, that we are naturally inclined to wish for
something in the religion of Jesus, to gratify our carnality. Under the
influence of that master prejudice, the expectation of a temporal kingdom,
Jewish depravity rejected Christ; and our corruption, if we be not watchful,
may so misrepresent his empire, and oppose his royal prerogatives, as
implicitly to say, We will not have him to rule over us.

Among the numerous admirable sayings of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles,
that stand recorded in the New Testament, and are adapted to instruction in
this important subject; there is one which deserves peculiar notice. The saying
to which I advert, is part of that good confession which our Lord witnessed
before Pontius Pilate; My kingdom is not of this world. A concise, but
comprehensive declaration, and worthy of him that made it! -- This capital
saying may be considered as the grand maxim on which he formed his conduct when
among men; and it is pregnant with needful instruction to all his disciples,
respecting the New Economy and the Christian Church Relative to matters of
that kind, there is not, perhaps, a more interesting passage in all the New
Testament; nor one which is better adapted to rebuke the pride and carnality of
millions who bear the Christian character. To approve of Christ as a spiritual
monarch, agreeably to the meaning and tendency of this emphatical text,
requires a degree of heavenly mindedness which comparatively few possess.

My kingdom is not of this world, says Messiah the Prince, when standing before
the Roman governor, and questioned about his claim of dignity. He boldly avows
himself a King; yet, while advancing his title to the honors, of royalty, he
tacitly informs Pilate that the civil rights of Caesar had nothing to fear from
him; and that his own disciples had no advantages to expect, of a secular kind,
as the result of embarking in his cause. -- Our Lord, a little while before,
had implicitly conveyed the general idea of this declaration, by receiving from
a surrounding multitude the acclamations due to his royal character, when
riding upon an ass: for while he accepted the honors of royalty, the poverty
and meanness of his appearance plainly implied, that his kingdom was not of a
temporal kind. Zechariah had foretold that the children of Zion should loudly
rejoice in this humble manifestation of the King Messiah, and that their joy
should kindle into rapture. An incontrovertible evidence that he predicted the
public inauguration of a Sovereign, whose kingdom is not of this world. For the
loyal and affectionate subjects of a political monarch never thought it matter
of exultation, that he appeared among them, when proclaimed king, with all the
marks of meanness and of poverty. Yet so it was in respect of the King Messiah.

It is generally allowed, if I mistake not, that the kingdom of Christ is no
other than the Gospel Church Regnum Dei in evangeli^, says WITSIUS, vix alia
significatione venit qua^ ut notet slatum eximium et vere iberum Ecclesioe
Testamenti Novi sub Rege Messia Exercitat, in Orat. Dominic. Exercit, ix. 11.
; which is both distinguished from the world, and opposed to it. Relative to
this kingdom, and its divine Sovereign, Jehovah says; I have set my King upon
my holy hill of Zion. This prophetic Oracle was fulfilled when our Lord,
leading captivity captive, ascended on high and sat down on the right of the
eternal Father. Then was he most solemnly inaugurated and proclaimed King of
the New Testament Church, amidst adoring myraids of attendant angels, and
spirits of just men made perfect. In pursuance of which most grand investiture
with his regal office, he distributed royal donatives, at the feast of
Pentecost, among his devoted subjects -- such donatives, as perfectly suited
the majesty of his Person, and the nature of his kingdom. Yes, that wonderful
assemblage of spiritual gifts and heavenly graces, which he bestowed upon his
disciples at the Jewish festival, was a glorious first-fruit of his ascension,
and of his being a priest upon his throne. The Gospel Church, which is the
subject of his laws, the seat of his government, and the object of his care,
being surrounded with powerful opposers; he is represented as ruling in the
midst of his enemies. Nor shall his mediatorial kingdom and administration
cease, till all those enemies become his footstool.

The empire of Christ, indeed, extends to every creature: for all authority in
heaven and on earth is in his hands, and he is head over all things to the
Church. But the kingdom of which we treat, stands distinguished from that of
general Providence, as well as from every political state. It must be
considered, therefore, as consisting of those persons whom he bought with his
blood, whom he calls by his grace, and over whom he reigns as a spiritual
monarch. These constitute what is frequently called, the Catholic Church,
wherever the favored individuals may reside. Of such also, or of those who make
a credible profession of being such, all those particular churches consist,
which constitute our Lord's visible kingdom -- that kingdom of which we speak.
Into the principal characteristics of this holy empire, and into the genuine
consequences of those criteria, we shall now enquire.

The Gospel Church is a kingdom not of this world, in regard to its origin.
From the time of Nimrod to the present age, secular empires have generally
originated in the vile passions of their first founders: for, in almost every
instance, avarice and pride, ambition and a lust of dominion, have been
conspicuous. -- Not so, in the kingdom of Christ. The remote foundation of his
dominion was laid in the counsels of Heaven before time commenced, by all
comprehending wisdom and infinite goodness, for the glory of God and the
benefit of man: and the immediate basis on which it stands, is his own
vicarious obedience to divine law; both as to its precepts, and as to its
penalty. Justice and goodness, therefore, are the foundation of his throne.
Mercy and truth attend the whole of his administration.

The kingdom of Christ is not of this world, respecting the subjects of his
righteous government. The generality of people in all countries, were born
subjects of those governments under which they lived. No sooner, for instance,
were we capable of reflecting upon our civil connections, than we found
ourselves freeborn subjects of the British crown: and thus it commonly is in
the sovereignties of secular princes. Their dominion being confined to the
exterior of human conduct, and not reaching the heart; natural birth and local
circumstances constitue subjects of the state, put them under the protection of
law, and invest them with civil rights. Such subjects are perfectly well suited
to the kingdoms of this world, and to the character of their sovereigns. For,
considered as men, kings and subjects are on a level: and, as distinguished by
political characters, their obligations are mutual; allegiance on the one part,
and protection on the other. -- Besides, temporal kingdoms respect the present
world. The mutual duties of sovereigns and of subjects, as such, regard the
happiness of civil society, and of that only. As an investiture with political
sovereignty does not constitute a lord of conscience, it gives no claim to
authority in spiritual things, but is entirely confined to the concerns of this
world. It is, indeed, the indispensable duty of secular princes, and of their
people, to love and adore God: yet that obligation does not arise from any
political relation subsisting among them, but from their being reasonable
creatures. It is also their happiness to be the subjects of Jesus Christ: but
that felicity does not result from any thing short of divine mercy exercised
upon them, as depraved and guilty creatures.

The kingdom and claims of Christ being very different from those of Ceasar,
the qualifications and obedience of his real subjects must be so too. For
persons may be good subjects of a temporal sovereign, and enjoy the rights of
such a character, while they are so far from bearing true allegiance to Jesus
Christ, as to be quite inimical to his dominion, and entire strangers to the
privileges of his kingdom. The empire of Christ is not of this world: it is not
a temporal, but a spiritual kingdom. Our Lord, therefore, is a spiritual
sovereign; whose dominion extends to the mind, conscience, and heart, no less
than to the external behavior. Consequently, all the subjects of his
government must have spiritual dispositions, and yield spiritual obedience --
obedience, proceeding from an enlightened understanding, an awakened
conscience, and a renewed heart. For, as is the sovereign, such are the
subjects, and such the allegiance required. A spiritual Sovereign, and subjects
yielding an obedience merely external, are manifestly inconsistent.

As all mankind are born in a state of a postasy from God: as the natural turn
of the heart, or the carnal mind, is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be; we must be born again -- born, not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, before we are permitted to
consider ourselves, or to be considered by others, as the subjects of Him whose
kingdom is of a spiritual kind. Remarkable are the words of our Lord, when
speaking of his loyal subjects: They are not of the world, even as I am not of
the world. No: they are described by the Apostles, as being of the truth; of
faith; and of God John xviii. 17. Gal. iii. 7.9. 1. Joh. iv. 4 6.
Of the truth: enlightened, converted, and sanctified by the gospel. Of faith:
living by it; deriving peace and holiness from Jesus Christ through believing
in him. Of God: born of him; or begotten again to a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. -- Such are the subjects of our
Lord's kingdom: in opposition to whom, the New Testament represents the rest of
our apostate race, as being of the works of the law; of the world; of darkness;
and of the devil Gal. iii. 10. Joh. viii. 23 1 John iv. 5.1 These. v. 5. Joh
viii, 38.41.44 1 John lii. 8.12.
Of the works of the law; seeking acceptance with God by their own imperfect
obedience, which leaves them under a curse. Of the world: carnally minded, and
in a state of enmity to God. Of darkness: ignorant of their perishing state,
and unacquainted with Jesus Christ. Of the devil: partakers of his image,
subjects of his dominion, and performers of his will Rom, viii, 6, 7, 8. Ephesians.
v. 8. Joh. viii. 44. Ephesians. ii. 2.
So great is the contrast formed by Scripture, between those who are under our
Lord's government, and the rest of mankind! Agreeably to which, real Christians
are further described, as delivered from the power of darkness, or the tyranny
of Satan, and translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son: and as being of
God, while all the rest of the world lies in wickedness. None, therefore, but
those who are born from above, are the subjects of Jesus Christ: for if the
heart be not under his dominion, he reigns not at all as a spiritual monarch.

That none but real Christians subjects of our Lord's kingdom, is yet further
apparent from the descriptive characters of those that were members of the
apostolic churches. We find them described in the New Testament, as gladly
receiving the word of grace, as the called of Jesus Christ, and as called to be
saints. The Apostles denominate them brethren, faithful brethren, holy
brethren, saints, and lively stones in the spiritual temple Acts ii. 41. Romans i
6. 1 Cor. i. 2. Ephesians. i. 1. Philip. i. 1. Col. i. 2 Thessalonians. i 3. Heb. iii. 1.1
Pet. 1. 2, 3. and ii. 5.2 Pet. i. 1.
These and similar characters are frequently applied to members of the
primitive churches in general; and of those churches the visible kingdom of
Christ then consisted. We may therefore say, with VITRINGA; The kingdom of
grace, in which Christ is king upon mount Zion, is properly and emphatically
the kingdom of Christ: of which none are subjects, except those who are chosen,
called, faithful, peaceable, and humble; in whom Jesus Christ lives by his
Spirit, as in the members of a mystical and spiritual body, of which he is the
head Observat. Sac. L V. C. iv.


This view of our Lord's subjects is perfectly agreeable to the nature and
genius of the New Covenant, with which the Messiah's kingdom is closely
connected: because it appears, that subjects of any other description, have no
reason to consider themselves as covenantees; and it is plain that a divine
Covenant must suit the Kingdom to which it belongs, whether Jewish or
Christian. -- When, in the fullness of time, God performed his gracious and
comprehensive promise of blessing all nations, it was by the intervention of a
New and better Covenant than that which was made at Sinai. For thus it is
written: Behold, the days come, faith the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant
with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: NOT ACCORUING TO THE
COVENANT THAT I MADE 8. See D^. ERSRINE'S Theolog. Dissertat. p. 111 -- 115.
WITH THEIR FATHERS, IN THE DAY THAT (...) ^^OK THEM BY THE HAND TO BRING THEM
OUT OF THE LAND OF EGYPT; which my Covenant they brake although I was an
husband unto them, says the Lord. But this shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel, After those days, says the Lord, I will put my
law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God,
and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all
know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more Jer. xxxi.
31 -- 34. Heb. viii. 8, 9.


This admirably gracious Covenant is completely suited to a spiritual kingdom,
and to the subjects we have been describing: for it announces no designs, makes
no provisions, confers no blessings, but those that are spiritual, internal,
and everlasting. The true knowledge of Jehovah, writing his law in the heart,
forgiveness of all sin, and perpetual relation to God, are the blessings for
which it engages; but there is not a word ^^^^^cting temporal blessings, nor
concer^^ng any merely external relation to the Great Supreme, though these were
the grand articles in the Covenant made at Horeb. Covenantees, therefore, under
the Christian Economy, can be no other than the spiritual seed of Abraham: and
such are the subjects of this kingdom. Hence the Gospel Covenant is called new,
and is expressly opposed to the Sinai Confederation, from which it is extremely
different. It is also pronounced a better Covenant than that which Jehovah made
with the ancient Israel: and so it is, whether we consider its objects, its
blessings, its confirmation, or its continuance. Its objects: for they are the
spiritual feed of Abraham, gathered out of all nations. Its blessings: for they
are all spiritual and internal. Its confirmation: for it was ratified by the
death of Christ. Its continuance: for it is an everlasting Covenant, ordered in
all things and sure. Yes, it is as much better than the Covenant made at Sinai,
as being the children of God by regeneration, is preferable to carnal descent
from Abraham -- as the number of God's elect in all nations, exceeds that of
the chosen t^^^^ -- as blessings entirely spiritual (...) immortal, are more
excellent than those of an earthly kind and of short duration -- as redemption
from spiritual bondage and eternal ruin, is greater and nobler than deliverance
from temporal slavery -- as the ratification of this Covenant, by the blood of
Immanuel, is more sacred than that which the Old Covenant received by the
slaughter of brute animals -- as the Son of God, the mediator of it, is greater
than Moses, who appeared under that character at Horeb -- and as a Covenant of
everlasting efficacy, that secures the final happiness of all to whom it
relates, is better than one of a temporary nature, which was violated by the
covenantees, and is become for ever obsolete. Hence we read, not only of a
better testament, but also of better promises, on which the New Covenant is
established; of a better hope, introduced by it; of better sacrifices, by which
guilt is expiated; of better things provided for the Christian, than were
enjoyed by the Jewish church; and of a better country for an inheritance Heb.
viii. 6. vii. 19. ix. 23. xi. 17.40.
, than the earthly Canaan, Nay, we are assured by an inspired writer, that the
Sinai ^^^^enant and the Mosaic Dispensation ^ad no glory attending them,
compared with that of the New Covenant and of the Messiah's Economy 2. Cor.
iii. 7 -- 11.
. Now, to this more glorious Covenant, the kingdom of Christ, and the subjects
of it, must agree. As, therefore, none but spiritual blessings are contained in
that Covenant; so none but real saints are the subjects of our Lord's dominion.

Very different, then, is the kingdom of Christ from the ancient Israelitish
Theocracy. For, of that Theocracy, all Abraham's natural descendents were true
subjects, and properly qualified members of the Jewish church; such only
excepted, as had not been circumcised according to the order of God, or were
guilty of some capital crime. To be an obedient subject of their civil
government, and a complete member in their ecclesiastical state, were
manifestly the same thing; because, by treating Jehovah as their political
sovereign, they avowed him as the true God, and were entitled to all the
emoluments of their National Covenant. Under that Economy, Jehovah
acknowledged all those for his people, and himself as their God, who performed
an external obedience to his commands, even though in their hearts disaffected
to him Judges viii. 23.1 Sam. viii. 6, 7. and xii. 1^. Chron, xxviii. 5. xxix.
23.2 Chron. ix. 8.
These prerogatives were enjoyed, independent of sanctifying grace, and of any
pretention to it, either in themselves, or in their parents.

The state of things, however, under the New Economy, is extremely different.
For the great Proprietor and Lord of the Christian church, having absolutely
disclaimed a kingdom that is of this world, cannot acknowledge any as the
subjects of his government, who do not know and revere him -- who do not
confide in him, and sincerely love him. Having entirely laid aside those
ensigns of political sovereignty, and those marks of external grandeur, which
made such a splendid appearance in the Jewish Theocracy; he disdains to be
called the King, or the God, of any person who does not obey and worship him in
spirit and in truth. Appearing as the head of his church, merely under the
character of a spiritual monarch, over whomsoever he reigns, it is in the
understanding, by the light of his truth; in the conscience, by the force of
his authority; and in the heart, by the influence of his love: for as to all
others, his dominion is that of Providence, not that of Grace. -- The New
Testament affords no more ground for concluding, that our being descended from
parents of a certain description, constitutes us the subjects of our Lord's
kingdom; than it does to suppose, that carnal descent, in a particular line of
ancestry, confers a claim to the character and work of ministers in the same
kingdom.

It is of great importance to the right interpretation of many passages in the
Old Testament, that this particular be well understood and kept in view,
Jehovah is very frequently represented as the LORD and GOD of all the ancient
Israelites; even where it is manifest that multitudes of them were considered
as destitute of internal piety, and many of them as enormously wicked. How,
then, could he be called their Lord, and their God, in distinction from his
relation to Gentiles, (whose creator, benefactor, and sovereign he was) except
on the ground of the Sinai Covenant? He was THEIR Lord, as being the sovereign
whom, by a federal transaction, they were bound to obey, in opposition to every
political monarch, who should at any time presume to govern them by laws of his
own. He was THEIR God, as the only object of holy worship; and whom, by the
same National Covenant, they had solemnly engaged to serve according to his own
rule, in opposition to every Pagan idol. But that National relation between
Jehovah and Israel being long since dissolved, and the Jew having no
prerogative above the Gentile; the nature of the Gospel Economy, and the
Messiah's kingdom, abosolutely forbids our supposing, that either Jews or
Gentiles are warranted to call the Great Supreme THEIR Lord, or THEIR God, if
they do not yield willing obedience to him, and perform spiritual worship. It
is, therefore, either for want of understanding, or of considering, the nature,
aspect, and influence of the Sinai Constitution, that many persons dream of the
New Covenant, in great numbers of places, where Moses and the Prophets had no
thought about it; but had the Convention at Horeb directly in view. It is ^wing
to the same ignorance, or inadvertency, that others argue from various passages
in the Old Testament, f^r justification before God by their own obedience, and
against the final perseverance of real saints. Because, to be entitled to
national happiness, by performing the conditions of the Sinai Covenant, and to
lose that right by backsliding into profligacy of manners; are very different
things, from obtaining justification before God, and forfeiting an interest in
the great Redeemer -- so different, that there is no arguing from the one to
the other.

Again: As none but real Christians are the subjects of our Lord's kingdom,
neither adults, nor infants, can be members of the Gospel Church, in virtue of
an external covenant, or of a relative holiness. A striking disparity this,
between the Jewish and the Christian church. Of this difference we may be
assured by considering, That a barely relative sanctity, supposes its
possessors to be the people of God in a merely external sense: that such an
external people, supposes an external covenant, or one that relates to exterior
conduct and temporal blessings: and an external covenant supposes an external
king. Now an external king, is a political sovereign: but such is not our Lord
Jesus Christ, not yet the divine Father. Once, indeed, it was otherwise: for,
concerning the Israelitish nation, it is thus written; I, Jehovah, will be thy
king. Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son
rule over you. Jehovah shall rule over you. Jehovah, your God, was your king
Hosea xiii. 10. Judges viii 23. 1 Samuel xii. 12.
It was the peculiar honor and happiness of Israel, to have a Sovereign who was
the only object of their worship. For thus the Psalmist sings; Blessed is the
nation, whose (king) JEHOVAH is their God Ps. xxxiii. 12 and cxliv. 15. Heb.
See the Septuagint Version, and that of JUNIUS and TREMELLIUS; together with
POLI. Synops. and VENEMA Comment. in loc.
! Hence Jehovah's complaint; They have rejected me, that I should not reign
over them 1 Samuel viii. 7.
Yes, Jehovah, as a temporal monarch, stood related to the ancient Israelites,
and entered into a federal transaction with them at Sinai, not only as the
Object of their worship, but as their King. their judicial and civil
institutes, their laws of war and of peace, various orders respecting the land
they occupied, and the annual acknowledgments to the great Proprietor of it,
were all from God, as their political sovereign. Hence all the natural
posterity of Abraham were Jehovah's people, on the ground of an external
covenant made with the whole nation.

The children of Israel, being distinguished from the Gentile world, by a
system of ceremonial precepts, and their divine Sovereign residing among them,
^ere denominated a holy nation: for that external sanctity which they
possessed, seems to have arisen, partly from their National Covenant, and
partly from their having the Divine Presence, among them. By the former, they
renounced idolatry in all its forms, and gave up themselves to Jehovah in
opposition to the false objects of Pagan worship; which separation to the
service of God, is denominated holiness. By the latter, they had a kind of
local nearness to God, which conferred a relative sanctity; as appears by
various instances. When, for example, Moses with astonishment beheld the
burning bush, the ground on which he stood was pronounced holy, because of
Jehovah's peculiar presence there. Thus it was in the case of Joshua: and so in
regard to the place of our Lord's transfiguration; for Peter calls it the HOLY,
mount Exodus iii. 5. Josh. v. 15.2 Pet. i. 18.
And why was part of the ancient sanctuary called the most holy place? but
because Jehovah in a singular manner, and under a visible emblem, dwelt there.
Hence it is manifest, that the Divine Presence, whether under the form of an
august personage, as in the case of Joshua; or under the emblem of devouring
fire, as in the bush, and upon mount Sinai Exodus xix. 18.
; or under the milder appearance of a luminous cloud, as over the mercy seat,
and at our Lord's transfiguration, confers a relative holiness. It is also
equally plain, that this miraculous presence of God being withdrawn from the
several places to which we have just adverted, they have now no more holiness
than any other part of the earth.

So the Israelites, being separated from all other nations for the worship of
Jehovah as their God, to the exclusion of all idolatry; avowing subjection to
him as their king, in contradistinction to all other sovereigns; and he
residing among them in the sanctuary, as in his royal palace; there was a
relative holiness attending their persons, and ^lmost every thing pertaining to
them For not only Jehovah's royal pavision, with ^ll its utensils and services;
the ministers of that sanctuary and their several vestments; but the people in
general, the metropolis of their country, the houses of individuals, the land
cultivated by them, and the produce of that land, were all styled holy See Exodus
xxviii. 2, 4 xxix. 1. Lev xix. 23.24. xx 26 xxv 2.4. xxvii. 14, 30. Numb. xvi.
3, 38. xxxv. 34. Deuteronomy. vii. 6
. -- The Divine Presence residing among them, appears to have had an extensive
influence upon the people, with regard to relative sanctity and external
purity. So, in cases of corporal pollution by disease, the patients were to be
excluded from the common intercourses of society, that they might not defile
the camp, in the midst of which their sublime Sovereign dwelt Numb. v. 2, 3.
and xxxv. 34.
Nay, divine law expressly required, that even the surface of the ground on
which they trod should be preserved from one species of defilement; and the
injunction is enforced by this consideration, For Jehovah thy God walks in
the midst of the camp Deuteronomy. xxiii. 12, 13, 14
.

Remarkably to our purpose is the declaration of God, when speaking of the
ancient sanctuary; There I will meet with the children of Israel, and Israel
(not the tabernacle) shall be sanctified by my glory. Exodus xxix. 43. Vid.
JUNIUM and TREMELL. in loc.
For, as VENEMA observes, neither the tabernacle nor the altar, is to be
understood; but the Israelites themselves, as appears by the connection and
series of the discourse. Because, in the immediately following verse, the
sanctification of the tabernacle, and of the altar, is expressly mentioned.
Besides, it is plain that the external symbol of Jehovah's presence, was a
sufficient indication of God's glory in the tabernacle. Thus the holiness of
the people, equally as that of places, was derived from the external presence
of God Dissertat. Sac. L. ii. C. iii. 6.
-- Now, as the Divine Presence had a local, visible residence over the
mercy-seat, which was the throne of Jehovah; as that Presence among the
Israelites had such an extensive operation upon their state, both in respect of
privilege and of duty; as the whole nation was a typical people, and a great
part of their worship of a shadowy nature; we need not wonder, that in such an
ecclesiastico-political kingdom almost every thing should be esteemed, in a
relative sense, holy.

Under the Gospel Dispensation, however, these peculiarities have no existence.
For Christ has not made an external covenant with any people. He is not the
king of any particular nation. He dwells not in a palace made with hands. His
throne is in the heavenly sanctuary; nor does he afford his visible Presence in
any place upon earth. The partition wall between Jews and Gentiles has long
been demolished: and, consequently, our divine Sovereign does not stand related
to any people, or to any person, so as to confer a relative sanctity, or to
produce an external holiness

While the Sinai Covenant continued in force, the Son of God was the King of
the Jews: for though, by Saul and others bearing the regal character, the
Divine government was obscured, yet it was not abolished. The kingdom of
Israel, in the hands of the Sons of David, being denominated the kingdom of
Jehovah; the throne on which Solomon sat being called the throne of Jehovah 2.
Chron. xiii. 8. 1 Chronicles. xxiii. 5. and xxix. 23
; and the laws of the state being still divine, we are led to view the Jewish
kings as the vicegerents of Jehovah Vid. WITSII Miscell. Sac. Tom. II p 920 --
936. VENEMAE. Hist. Eccles Vet. Test. Tom I.
-- In this light the queen of Sheba considered Solomon when she said; Blessed
be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee to set the on HIS THRONE, to be
king FOR THE LORD THY GOD. Of the Jewish magistrates it is also written, Ye
judge not for man, but for Jehovah 2 Chronicles. ix. 8
. Now so long as political relation subsisted between the Son of God and the
seed of Abraham, an external holiness continued, as resulting from that
relation. But though this foundation of relative sanctity was not removed till
the death of Christ, there is no intimation in the Evangelical History of any
one being entitled to a New Testament rite, or to the character of a subject in
the Messiah's kingdom, in virtue of that holiness. 198. Dissertat, Sac. L. II.
C. iv.
Nay, the reverse appears in the conduct of John toward the Jews 2 Chronicles. xix.
6.


The Covenant made at Horeb having long been obsolete, all its peculiarities
are vanished away: among which, relative sanctity made a conspicuous figure.
That National Constitution being abolished, Jehovah's political sovereignty is
at an end. The covenant therefore now in force, and the royal relation of our
Lord to the church, are entirely spiritual. All that external holiness of
persons, of places, and of things, which existed under the Old Economy, is
gone for ever: so that if the professors of Christianity do 'not possess a
real, internal sanctity, they have none at all. -- The National Confederation
at Sinai is expressly contrasted, in holy Scripture, with the New Covenant Jer.
xxxi. 31 -- 34. Heb. viii. 7 -- 13.
: and though the latter manifestly provides for internal holiness, respecting
all the covenante, yet it says not a word about relative sanctity. And, indeed,
how should it? since, by its commencement, the whole Sinai Constitution became
obsolete; the partition wall was broken down; the special relation between God
and Abraham's natural seed ceased, and left no difference of a religious kind
between Jews and Gentiles -- no difference, in respect of nearness to God and
communion with him, except that which regeneration and faith in Christ produce.
For, under the present Dispensation, Christ is all in all. We may therefore
safely conclude, that were the Jews converted and resettled in Palestine, both
they and their infant offspring would be as entirely destitute of the ancient
relative holiness, as those Mahommedans are who now reside in that country.

But did an external holiness now exist, we should be obliged to consider it as
very different from that of the ancient Israelites: for it appears, by what has
been said, that the grounds of their exterior sanctity make no part of the
Christian Economy. Besides, their holiness extended to the whole nation: but
in what Utopia shall we find all the inhabitants possessed of this relative
purity? Theirs continued as long as they lived; except they committed some
enormous crime, by which they forfeited their lives, or were cast out of the
congregation. for it did not wear out by age, nor was it lost merely by
continuing in a state of unregeneracy. Whereas, that external holiness for
which so many plead, is not generally considered by them as extending beyond
the time of infancy. -- But why should any contend for the relative holiness of
infants, who deny a sanctity of that kind, to places of worship, clerical
habits, and various other things? for it is plain that the Jewish external
purity, whether of persons, of places, or of things, originated in the same
National Covenant, and in the same relation of God to Israel: and,
consequently, must have the same duration in one case, as in another. We may
therefore justly conclude, that the federal and relative holiness of which so
many speak, neither agrees with the laws of Judaism, nor with the nature of
Christianity. But if so, it cannot belong to the kingdom of Christ.

Further: If all the subjects of Christ he real saints, it may be justly
queried whether any National religious establishment can be a part of his
kingdom. That multitudes of individuals belonging to such establishments are
subjects of the King Messiah, is cheerfully granted: but is it not plain, that
a National church is inimical to the spirit of our Lord's declaration. My
kingdom is not of this world? Does not that comprehensive and important saying
compel us to view the church and the world in a contrasled point of light? And
does not the idea of a National church lead us to confound them? Does it not
manifestly confound the church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven;
with the world, that lies in wickedness, whose names are entered in parish
register, It has been well observed by a sensible writer, that when Jesus told
Pilate the sole end of his kingdom and of his coming into the world, was truth
and the propagation of it; Pilate says. What is truth? He knew very well that
truth had little or nothing to do with the maxims of wordly policy: that he,
that is Jesus, was not at all likely to be a competitor with Caesar: that a
kingdom of truth could not interfere with the claims of his master: that it was
trifling to accuse him as an enemy to Caesar. But then, had Jesus said that he
was setting upon a kingdom that claimed an al^iance with the slate, and which
pretended to a supremacy, Pilate would have had whereof to accuse him. Comment
on Bp, WARBURTON'S Alliance between Church and State, p 9.
? -- The subjects of our Lord's kingdom are born of God, are called out of the
world; but natural birth and local circumstances are considered, either as
giving membership, or as entitling to a positive rite which confers membership,
in a National church. The Church of England, for instance, includes all English
subjects of the British crown, whether they be moral or profligate, pious or
profane: such only excepted, as have not been baptized, or as lie under a
sentence of excommunication. Nay, so tenacious is the English Church of this
idea, as to consider numbers within its pale, who never considered themselves
in that light. For, in certain cases, well known to the doctors in Canon Law,
Protestant Dissenters, and even Popish recusants, are cast out of its communion
-- cast out, with dreadful penalties anaexed, though they never acknowledged
themselves to be in!

The Church of England, indeed, is manifestly a secular kingdom. For it is
established by human laws, and acknowledges a political head: nor is it
esteemed material whether that head be male or female. It is a creature of the
state, supported by the state, incorporated with the slate, and governed by a
code of laws confirmed by the state -- a code, very different from the sacred
canons of the New Testament; those being quite foreign to its constitution. Its
principal officers are appointed by the crown; and, in virtue of ecclesiastical
sta^ion, are lords of Parliament That our first Reformers did not approve of
secular grandeur, power and employments, being annexed to the character of
bishops, is very apparent. Thus Mr. TYNDA^ for instance: Is it not a shame
above all shames, and a monstrous thing that no man should be found able to
govern a worldly kingdom, save bishops and prelates. that are taken out of the
world. and appointed to preach the kingdom of God? To preach God's word is too
much for half a man: and to minister a temporal kingdom is too much for half a
man also Either other requires a whole man One therefore cannot well do both
-- Wherefore if Christ's kingdom be not of this world, nor any of his disciples
may be otherwise than he was; then Christ's vicars, which minister his kingdom
in his bodily absence. and have the oversight of his stock, may be none
emperors, kings d^^^^, (...), knights, temporal judges, or any other temporal
officer; or, under any false names have any such dominion, or minister any such
office, as requires violence." Thus Bp. LATIMER, in his Sermon of the Plough:
"This much I dare say, that since lording and loitering has come up, preaching
has come down, contrary to the Apostles times. For they preached, and lorded
not: and now they lord, and preach not -- Ever since the prelates were made
lords and nobles, the plough stands, there is no work done, the people starve
-- They are otherwise occupied [than in preaching:] some, in kings matters;
some are ambassadors: some, of the privy council: some, to furnish the court:
some, are lords of the parliament; some are presidents, and comptrollers of
mints. Well, well. Is this their duty? Is this their office? Is this their
calling? Should we have ministers of the church comptrollers of the mints? Is
this a meet office for a priest, that has cure of souls? Is this his charge? I
would here ask one question: I would fain know who comtrolleth the devil at
home in his parish, while he comtrolleth the mint? If the apostles might not
leave the office of preaching to be deacons, shall we leave it for minting?"
Thus Bp. HOOPER: "Our bishops have so much wit. they can rule and serve, as
they say, in both states: in the church, and also in the civil polley. When one
of them is more than any man is able to satisfy, let him do always his best
diligence -- They know that the primitive church had no such bishops, as be now
a day (...) In Mr. PEIRCE'S Vin^^^cat, of Dissent. Part III. Chap. I.
Nay, even the doctrines professed, and the worship performed in that
establishment, are all secularized. Its creeds and forms of prayer, its
numerous rubrics and various ^^tes, are adopted and used under the sanction of
civil authority. Its Liturgy, therefore, may be justly considered as an Act of
Parliament respecting religious affairs. It must therefore be considered as a
kingdom of this world.

The tenor of the New Testament, however, agreeably to our Lord's maxim, leads
us to consider particular churches as Congregational; and as consisting of
those who make a credible profession of repentance and faith. Such
congregations, wherever they be, constitute the visible kingdom of Christ. --
That the apostolic churches were Congregational, is clear from the sacred
Records; and that there was no National church for the first three hundred
years, is equally evident. Because there could not be any such establishment,
till the civil government of some nation or other professed Christianity; which
was not the case before CONSTANTINE ascended the Imperial throne. Then, indeed,
a kind of political Christianity came into fashion, which has continued ever
since, and is yet in great repute. Nor are National churches likely to fail,
while the policy of sovereign princes, and the pride of aspiring prelates can
support them. But, being established by human laws, and each of them
acknowledging a visible head, either civil or ecclesiastical, either prince or
pontiff; they are secular kingdoms, and unworthy the name of Christian churches.

Once more: As none but regenerate persons belong to the kingdom of Christ, no
one is a better subject of his dominion, or a more honorable member of his
church, on account of wealth or power, of parts or learning. These things,
though useful in their places, of much reputation to a secular empire, and of
great consequence to it; neither pertain to the true glory of a Christian
church, nor to the sterling worth of a Christian character. For what concern
have worldly wealth and civil power, informing a spiritual character, or in
adorning a spiritual kingdom? The greatest affluence and the highest authority
that mortals can enjoy, add nothing to any one's moral worth. No one is a
better man, because he is rich and powerful; nor the worse, because he is poor
and in a low station. These things are all exterior to moral character. For the
most licentious are often exalted and wealthy, while the most upright and
amiable are lost in obscurity and oppressed with want Besides, when wealth, or
power, is possessed by a true subject of our Lord's kingdom, the honor
attending his character does not arise from his riches, or his authority; but
from the holiness of his life, or his likeness to Jesus Christ.

As our British Sovereign is the fountain of honor to all his subjects, even so
is the King Messiah to all that are under his dominion. The only way however to
be great and honorable in his kingdom, is to be humble, diligent, and useful,
in promoting the happiness of our fellow Christians and fellow creatures. For
among the fundamental laws of Messiah's empire, the following is one, and it
relates to comparative honor: Whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant.
Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give his life a ransom for many Matt xx. 26, 27. Mark x. 42 -- 45.
This being the law of honor, and the rule of promotion, in the kingdom of
Christ, we may safely conclude, that the meanest domestic may be a dignified
character in a gospel church, and adorn the doctrine of God our Savior: while
his wealthy and powerful master, professing the same faith, may disgrace the
name of a Christian, and bring reproach on the congregation to which he
belongs. If the former be diligent and faithful in his menial station: if he be
sound in the faith, zealous for God, and heavenly minded; he is an honorable
subject of Jesus Christ, and high in the estimation of Heaven. If, on the
contrary, the latter be formal in his religious profession; if he be unjust or
haughty, voluptuous or covetous; he does not belong to the kingdom of Christ,
but is manifestly a subject of Satan.

Nor do the most shining mental accomplishments, or literary acquisitions,
enter into the true glory of this kingdom. Genius and learning, like wealth and
power, are frequently possessed by the worst of moral characters. They cannot,
therefore, make any part of that excellence by which the subjects of Jesus
Christ are distinguished from those secular princes. It is not by the gifts of
common Providence, among which parts and learning make a conspicuous figure;
but by the graces of the Holy Spirit, that any person, as a Christian, is
worthy of regard. -- Yes, it is faith in Christ, and obedience to him; love to
God, and benevolence to man; humility, patience, and resignation; spirituality,
and heavenly mindedness, which adorn the subjects of our Lord's kingdom --
which distinguish them from the children of this world. These, and similar
things, respect the state of the conscience, and of the heart. They form a
character for eternity, and savor of the heavenly world. Whereas, learning and
parts, equally as wealth and power, are quite of a different nature. The
distinction they make between one another is entirely superficial, and often
disgraced by a profligate heart -- belongs only to this world, and has no
connection with heaven. But as will appear in its proper place, the kingdom of
Christ is nearly allied to heaven -- is a state of preparation for that sublime
blessedness, an introduction to its employments, and gives an earnest of its
fruitions Consequently, the true glory of that kingdom cannot but consist, in
the lively exercise of holy tempers and heavenly affections. The more there is
of a likeness to heaven, in the heart and life of any Christian; the more there
is of that honor which comes from God, and the more is the cause of Christ
adorned. -- To be a real subject of this kingdom, is a much greater honor than
merely to be a Prophet, or an Apostle. For Balaam was the former, and Judas was
the later; yet both of them were base and wretched Rejoice not that the devils
are subject to you; but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, -- and though I have the
gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge; and though I
have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am
nothing, in the estimate of a spiritual Sovereign, or in reference to the
heavenly state.

No minister of the word, therefore, when performing his public work, should
ever think of exalting himself as an officer in this kingdom, by displaying his
learning, his genius, or his eloquence; for that would be to preach himself,
not Christ Jesus the Lord: but, as in the sight of God, he should honestly aim
at commending himself to every man's conscience, by manifestation of the truth.
Then will he imitate a first rate minister in the Messiah's kingdom, and obtain
the approbation of his divine Sovereign. -- Besides, in the displays of
profound learning, by critical disquisitions; of great acumen, by metaphysical
speculations; or of a sparkling genius, by agreeable turns of wit. Christ and
conscience feel their interests but little concerned. The former is too
observant of the preacher's motives, and too jealous of his own honor, to be
pleased with such a procedure; and the latter is either too sleepy to be
aroused, or too much pained to receive relief, by those means. If our Lord
consider himself as honored by the preacher's labors, and if the minister have
any reason to expect success, it must be by a faithful and simple promulgation
of revealed truths -- those truths which regard supreme authority in the divine
law, and saving grace in the glorious gospel -- those truths, I will add, which
lie open to common capacities. If the conscience receive advantage, it is by
the operation of the same truths; either as convincing of sin and enforcing
duty, or as revealing pardon and affording peace. But the honor of Christ and
the tranquillity of conscience are seldom promoted, in a public ministry, by the
researches of learning, or the refinements of genius: for they are too sacred,
and too spiritual, to acknowledge their obligations to such things.

The kingdom of Christ is not of this world, with regard to the means he
employed in its first establishment, and those he appointed for its enlargement
and support. Craft and violence, injustice and cruelty, have been commonly used
in the founding, supporting, and extending of secular kingdoms. The Roman
empire was founded, and grew to its height, in blood. Even the Jewish republic
was established, enlarged, and defended by force of arms. The Canaanitish
nations, on account of their enormous wickedness, were exterminated by the
sword of Israel; or, if spared by the chosen tribes, became ^^^butary to them.
This, though according to Jehovah's appointment, a^ the great Proprietor of the
whole earth; and though a righteous execution of punishment, for acts of
rebellion against the Eternal Sovereign; was a plain indication that, in
various respects, the Israelitish church was a kingdom of this world. Such also
was that kingdom of the Messiah which the carnal Jews in our Lord's time vainly
expected, whenever the great promise made to their fathers should be fulfilled:
for they dreamed of being exalted to the highest pitch of political grandeur,
and of having all the other nations under their control. -- The principle
instruments employed by princes, to establish, maintain, and extend their
dominions, are -- not persons the most remarkable for integrity and
benevolence, for piety and philanthropy; but those who are most eminent for
political prudence, or martial bravery; for secret intrigue, or open hostility
-- those who are best qualified to persuade by eloquence, to circumvent by
cunning, or to subdue by force.

But the most illustrious instruments employed by our Anointed Prince in the
erecting of his monarchy, were of a character quite the reverse. They were
chiefly selected from the lower orders of life, and called from occupations
esteemed mean. Uneducated in the courts of royalty, in the schools of learning,
or in the field of war; they were strangers to the finesse of politicians,
little acquainted with Gentile philosophy, and unpractised in the art of
eloquence. It may be justly presumed, therefore, that a strong degree of
rusticity appeared in their dress, their aspect, and their accent: for they
were apparently unlearned and unpolished men. So ignorant were they of sciences
called liberal, so unpolite in their address, and so uncanonical in their garb,
that multitudes called Christians, it is highly probable, would be ashamed to
give them a hearing, were they now present among us; unless the public
attention were first excited, by the exercise of their miraculous powers. --
Yes, by the instrumentality of those unlettered and plain men did our Lord
erect his kingdom, or establish the gospel church. In making war upon Satan's
empire, evangelical truth and spiritual gifts, laborious preaching and ardent
prayer, fortitude, patience, and a holy example, were the arms they used. Such
were the militia, and such the armour^ employed by our divine Sovereign; yet
perfectly suited to the nature of his kingdom. For it is an empire, not of
secular power and external pomp; but of truth and of righteousness, of love and
of peace.

Were the Messiah's kingdom of this world, his loyal subjects might lawfully
take the sword, to repel assailants and subdue his enemies: for without the
liberty of such defense, no secular state can long subsi^^. This, however, he
absolutely po^ibited: which prohibition is founded in the peculiar nature of
his kingdom. For thus he speaks, to one who thought of defending his person and
cause by force; Put up thy sword into the sheath. Soon after, on another
occasion, he said; If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants
fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews. but now is my kingdom not
from hence Joh. xviii. 11, 36.
As by the particle now, our spiritual Sovereign apparently refers to his
kingdom among the Jews, so he seems to distinguish his dominion in the gospel
church, from that over the Israelitish nation.

In former times, the Holy Spirit frequently came upon the subjects of
Jehovah's government, to inspire them with martial courage for the defense of
his kingdom, and to destroy his enemies. Hence, among the ancient worthies, we
read of those who subdued kingdoms, waxed valiant in fight, and put to flight
the armies of the aliens. But the disciples of Christ being called to a
different kind of conflict, divine energy is granted for a different purpose.
The military service of a Christian, as, such, is entirely of a spiritual
nature. It is a good fight of faith: a striving against sin, in himself, and in
the world around him: a holding fast the profession of his faith, in spite of
all opposition. The Christian hero is conformed to the captain of salvation, in
maintaining the truth, and in bearing the cross; in enduring the contradiction
of sinners, and in despising the shame that is cast upon him. His accoutrements
are, as Paul informs us, The girdle of truth, and the breastplate of
righteousness; the shield of faith, and hemlet of hope, and the sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. vi. 10 -- 18. 1 Thessalonians. v. 8.2 Cor* ^. 3, 4, 5.
Such is the armor provided by the King Messiah for his devoted subjects; by
which they are enabled to defend themselves, and to promote the general
interests of his kingdom. This holy empire depends not upon power, wealth, or
learning, either for ornament or support. Not by might, nor by power, but by my
Spirit, says Jehovah.

Neither the force of secular power, nor the arts of carnal policy, ought
therefore to be used in promoting the cause of Christ: such things being quite
abhorrent from his intention, and from the nature of his kingdom. The great
design of our Lord in founding a Spiritual empire was, to display the
perfections of God in the holiness and happiness of his chosen people. The
kingdom of Christ, as before observed, is a dominion of truth and of rectitude,
of love and of peace. Now the interests of such a monarchy, and the end
proposed by it, cannot be promoted by any other than spiritual means, and those
of divine appointment. It is only so far as the minds of men are enlightened by
heavenly truth, their consciences impressed with God's authority, and their
hearts engaged on spiritual things, that the cause of Christ is advanced. But
in what way shall persecuting force be applied, to irradiate the dark
understanding, to arouse the stupid conscience, and to sanctify the depraved
heart? It is only by the fruits of an adoring affection for God, of sincere
love to the brethren, and of cordial good will to all mankind, that our Lord is
honored, or his end answered, by the subjects of his dominion. How, then, shall
coercive measures increase those fruits of holiness? Or how shall malevolence,
in any of its infernal forms, be employed to support a kingdom of love and of
peace.

Nor are the contrivances of carnal policy less foreign to the nature of this
kingdom, than the exertions of secular power. For what has the policy of
princes, or of prelates, to do in maintaining; or in extending, and empire of
truth and of rectitude? Truth seeks no subterfuge, and rectitude fears no
examination: but the operations of policy are subtle, and its first designs are
latent. The policy of great men may form civil establishments of Christianity,
and adorn the exterior of public worship. It may dignify ministers of the word
with pompous titles, unknown to the New Testament, and invest them with
temporal power, till their claim of succeeding to the Apostles becomes an
insult upon common sense. These and similar things may be effected by it, under
the fair pretext of rendering religion respectable, and of making it more
general: but the empire of Jesus Christ disdains them all, because they belong
to the kingdoms of this world.

But though our Lord neither needs, nor accepts, the puny arts of men, to
advance his cause and support his interests; yet various methods have been
devised by acclesiastics, to obviate the offense of the cross, to render
themselves respectable, and to promote something called Christianity. That they
might not be thought, like the Fishermen of Galilee, unlearned and ignorant
persons, they have eagerly sought literary tiles, and to be called Rabbi. To
adorn the ministerial office, and to sanction their administrations, they have
been as careful as Jewish priests to appear in canonicals. To prevent the pride
of their hearers being disgusted, certain humiliating truths have been kept out
of sight; and that the consciences of others might not be pained, softening
interpretations of divine precepts have been given. To stand free from a
suspicion of bigotry, the importance of capital truths has been surrendered;
and to keep fair with something called charity, it has been agreed that human
inventions should hold the place of divine institutions. -- Many of the
clerical character, in our National Establishment, have deliberately subscribed
what they did not believe; solemnly professed their consent to what they could
not approve; and frequently practiced, as part of their public devotions, what
they were constrained to wish had never existed For can any man upon earth
really believe all that in contained in the Thirty Nine Articles, and cordially
approve of every thing contained in the Book of Common Prayer?
. Nay, as it the ^inisters of that Establishment possessed a righteous monopoly
of publishing evangelical truth, and of administering divine institutions,
numbers of them have sworn to persecute their Protestant. Dissenting
neighbors, for daring to hold separate assemblies Thus runs part of an Oath
which is taken by Graduates in the University of Oxford. Item specialiter tu
jurabis, quod intenullas communitates, vel personas istius Universitatis,
impedies pacem. concordiam et amorem -- Nec Conventiculis interesse debes, nec
eis tacit vel express consentire; SED EA POTIUS, MODIS QUIBUS POTERIS
IMPEDIRE. Encerp. e Corp. Statut. Univensit. Oxen. Tit. IX. Sect. vi. 1. That
is, You shall in a particular manner swear, that you will not obstruct peace,
harmony and love, among any communities, or persons, of this University -- Nor
ought you to be present in Conventicles, nor either expressly nor tacitly
consent to them BUT RATHER HINDER THEM BY ANY MEANS IN YOUR POWER. -- How any
man, at all acquainted with the rights of conscience, can take this Oath; or,
having taken it, can treat Dissenters as Christian brethren, without renouncing
his own Conformity, I cannot imagine. A more shocking dilemma can scarcely be
conceived: for it is persecution on the one hand, and perjury on the other. --
Of a similar complexion is the eleventh Canon (...) the Church of England,
which is entitled, M^^^^iners of Conventicles censured, and it stads thus:
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or maintain, That there are within this realm
other meetings, assemblies, or congregations of the king's born subjects, than
such as by the laws of this land are held and allowed, which may rightly
challenge to themselves the name of true and lawful churches: Let him be
excommunicated, and not restored, but by the archbishop, after his repentance,
and public revocation of such his wicked errors, -- I will hear subjoin the
following remark of Dr. OWEN: There is in this [ecclesiastical] Conformity
required a renunciation of all other ways of public worship, or means of
edification, that may be made use of. For they are all expressly forbidden in
the rule of the Conformity. No man, therefore, can comply with that rule, but
that a renunciation of all other public ways of edification as unlawful is part
of the visible profession which they make. Video meliora Proboque, deteriora,
sequer, is no good plea in religion. It is uprightness and integrity that will
preserve men, and nothing else. He that shall endeavor to cheat his conscience
by distinctions, and mental reservations, in any concernments of religious
worship, I fear he has little of it, if any at all, that is good for aught.
Enquiry into the Orig. Nature, Institut. and Commun. of Evang. Churches, p.
228, 229.
Thus multitudes have subscribed and consented, trimed and sworn, to promote
the interests of a spiritual kingdom -- a kingdom of truth, of love, and of
peace!

Some, of different communions, have deliberately acted as if the preacher's
work were a mere trial of skill, and as if a pulpit were the stage of a
harlequin. To display the fertility of their invention, they have selected for
texts mere scraps of scripture language; which, so far from containing complete
propositions, have not, in their dislocated state conveyed a single idea. Upon
these they have harangued; while the ignorant multitude have been greatly
surprised that the preacher could find so much, where common capacities
perceived nothing. -- Sometimes these men of genius will choose passages of
Scripture expressive of plain historical facts, which have no connection with
the great work of salvation by Jesus Christ; and handle them (not professedly
by way of accommodation, for then it might be admitted) but as if they were
sacred allegories. Such historical facts being spiritualized, as they love to
call it, doctrines, privileges, duties, in abundance, are easily derived from
them. Nay, so ingenious are preachers of this turn, that it is no hard matter
for them to find a great part of their creed in almost any text they take. Thus
they allego^^ze common sense into pious absurdity. -- It might, perhaps, be too
barefaced, though it would certainly suit the vanity of such preachers, were
they frequently to address their hearers on the pronominal monosyllable I: and
there are two passages of sacred Writ where it occurs in the most apposite
manner. The former would make an admirable text; the latter, a noble
conclusion: and they are as follows: Such a man as I -- Is not this great
Babylon that I have built Mr. G GREGORY, when animadverting on the conduct
which is here censured. says; It is dangerous on any occasion to depart from
the plain track of common sense: and there is no attempt at ingenuity so easy
as that which borders upon nonsense -- It is one of the mean artifices of
barren genius, to surprise the audience with a text consisting of one or two
words. I have heard of a person of this description, who preached from Jehovah
Jireh, and another, from the monosyllable, But These are contemptible devices,
more adapted to the moving theater of the mountebank than to the pulpit, and
can only serve to captivate the meanest and most ignorant of the vulgar.
Sermons, Introduct. p. 14, 15, 18. -- Mr. CLAUDE says, Never choose such texts
as have not a complete sense; for only impertinent and foolish people will
attempt to preach from one or two words, which signify nothing. Essay on
Composit. of a Sermon. Vol. I. p. 3.
? Others, and often the same persons, frequently use the gestures of the
theater, and the language of a mountebank: as if their business were to amuse,
to entertain, and to make their hearers laugh. Extravagant attitudes and quaint
expressions, idle stories and similies quite ludicrous, appear in abundance,
and constitute no small part of the entertainment furnished by such characters.
But in what a state must the consciences of those preachers be, who can
deliberately and with premediation act in this manner! Or, what must we think
of their petitions for divine assistance, in addressing the people, when they
intend thus to treat them! -- I called it entertainment; and, surely, they
themselves do not consider it in a religious point of light. For can any man,
who is not insane deliberately adopt measures of this kind, when really aiming,
either to produce, or to promote, a devotional and heavenly temper in the
hearts of his hearers? Yet that is the general end of preaching. Or can the
preacher have any devotion, while showing the ai^s of a mountebank; and when,
if the bulk of his auditory had no more decency than himself, there would be a
burst of laughter throughout the assembly? Whatever such declaimers may think,
where there is no solemnity, there is no devotion: and, we may venture to add,
that a person habitually destitute of devotion in his own heart, while
pretending to teach others the doctrine of Christ, is a wretched character in
the sight of God, and has reason to tremble. Such a man serves not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but his own interests, in some form or other. He may wish for
popularity, and perhaps may, obtain it from the ignorant multitude; but people
of sense and of piety will consider him as disgracing his office, as affronting
their understandings, and as insulting the majesty of that Divine Presence in
which he stands. For where, upon earth, are we to expect solemnity, if not in
the pulpit? There, a man should be serious and solemn as death.

It may perhads be said; This kind of trifling has its use. It is a mean of
exciting curiosity, and of drawing many to hear the gospel, who might not
otherwise have the least inclination so to do. Such, I presume, is the chief
reason by which preachers of this cast endeavor to justify themselves at the
bar of their own consciences. In answer to which, a repetition of that capital
saving, My kingdom is not of this world, might be sufficient: for that must be
a wretched cause, even of a secular kind, which needs buffoonery to support it.
To trifle in the service of God, is to be profane. It is, therefore, an impious
kind of trifling: and shall we do evil that good may come? -- Through the
interference of Providence, and the sovereign grace of God, various instances
of enormous wickedness have issued in the highest good to mankind. Of this we
have undoubted evidence in the selling of Joseph by his envious brethren. We
have a still more striking instance in the death of Christ, through the
treachery of Judas and malice of the Jews. Nay, persecution has frequently been
an occasion of spreading the gospel: yet few, I take it for granted, have
persecuted for that end, or attempted to justify the practice upon that
principle. Were the farcical conduct, here censured, lawful, there would be
reason to think that the cause of Christ, and the interests of harlequin, are
very nearly allied; because the same kind of means is adapted to promote them.

The Seraphim, however, in Isaiah's vision, and the Apostles of Christ, appear
to have had a very different view of the case. The former (who seem to be an
emblem of apostolic ministers Vid, Vitringam in loc.
,) are presented to notice, as performing the service of their Sublime
Sovereign with profoundest awe. Struck with the majesty of his appearance, and
penetrated by the authority of his commands, they adore and obey with all
humility, and with all solemnity. Agreeably to which, the latter give it as
divine law, that those who would perform acceptable worship, must do it with
reverence and godly fear. This law of devotion, they further inform us, is
founded in the nature of things; as appears by the reason assigned to enforce
the precept, For our God is A CONSUMING FIRE. Such is the Christian's God, with
regard to his purity, his jealousy, and his justice Heb. xii. 28, 29. Deuteronomy. iv.
24. ix. 3.
*

Conformable to this idea of that Sublime Being whom every preacher professes
to serve, was the conduct of Paul when dispensing the gospel. For, in
opposition to some who handled the word of God deceitfully, to amuse the carnal
and win their affections; he labored, by manifestation of the truth, to
commend himself to every man's conscience, as in the sight of God. Truth,
conscience, and God! What facred and solemn ideas! Yet Paul, as a preacher,
habitually acted under their influence. That evangelical truth might be display
ed, that the human conscience might be impressed, and that the will of God
might be performed, were all included in his design* How foreign are these
particulars from every thing of a farcical nature! Nor, can any person who
considers himself, when preaching the word, as having eternal truth for the
subject of his discourse, the consciences of men for the objects of his regard,
and the omnicient God for a witness of his conduct; be otherwise than solemn:
for such an one will speak, as knowing that he must give an account. -- When
hearing a minister who acts in character, and copies the example of Paul, we
are led to reflect on that ancient oracle; I will be sanctified in them that
come nigh me, to perform sacred service. But when sitting under the effusions
of a pulpit buffoon, the language of an Egyptian tyrant occurs to remembrance;
Who is Jehovah, that I should obey him? or what is his worship, that I should
treat it with reverence?

When a sermon was expected from Peter, by Cornelius and his friends, the
centurion expressed himself thus: We are all here present before God, to hear
all things that are commanded thee of God. These Gentiles, it is manifest, were
penetrated with devout solemnity, and filled with holy expectation. Not being
assembled for carnal amusement, but in order to know and perform the will of
God; they considered themselves as in the Divine Presence: and so did their
inspired teacher. A worthy example for us to follow, when convened to preach
and to hear the word of truth. But how contrary to this is that pulpit
drollery, which is the object of our censure! For it converts the solemn
service of God (shocking metamorphosis!) into carnal amusement, upon which
numbers indeed attend with pleasure, but with no more devotion than if they
were in a playhouse.

Is there any raeson to be surprised that men of sense, who are already
prejudiced against the genuine gospel, should have their disaffection to
evangelical truths increased, when they find those truths avowed, and their
importance loudly urged, by merry andrews? If, instead of sound speech, which
cannot be condemned, they meet with extravagance and nonsense, what will thy
say? Is there any reason to wonder, that Infidels should thence take occasion
to redicule the Scripture, as calculated to serve the meanest purposes; or that
they should contemptuously call preaching priest craft? If those who profess to
love revealed truths dress them up in a fool's coat, for the entertainment of
their hearers, will Deists forbear to laugh? If, where the man of God should be
heard, with all solemnity warning sinners to flee from the wrath to come, and
entreating them to be reconciled to God; a farcical droll appear, spouting low
wit and provoking resibility, will the Infidel say; The preacher himself does
not believe the Christian ministry to be a divine appointment, nor the exercise
of it a devotional service; but he finds it convenient for secular purposes to
make pretenses of that kind? Among all the devices of carnal policy for the
support and enlargement of our Lord's kingdom, there are none more
contemptible, and few more detestable, than of converting the pulpit into a
stage of entertainment. Of this mind was an old Nonconformist minister, when he
said; Of all preaching in the world I hate that most, which has a tendency to
make the hearers laugh; or to affect their minds with such levity as
stage plays do, instead of affecting them with an holy reverence for the name
of God. We should suppose, as it were, when we draw near him in holy things,
that we saw the throne of God, and the millions of glorious angels attending
him; that we may be awed with his majesty, lest we profane his service, and
take his name in vain. -- To the pulpit harlequin we may therefore apply the
following lines;

If angels tremble, it is at such a sight:
More struck with grief, or wonder, who can tell?
The kingdom of Christ is not of this world, in regard to the laws by which it
is governed. Secular kingdoms are under the direction of human laws, which are
frequently weak, partial, and unjust -- of laws which, when least imperfect,
extend their obliging power no further than the exterior behavior: for it
would be vain and foolish in a temporal sovereign, to think of giving law to
the thoughts, or desires, of any subject. Civil penalties are the sanction of
human laws, and external force gives them their energy. -- Not so the laws of
this holy empire. For, proceeding from Him, in whom are are all the treasures
of knowledge, they must be consumately wise: being enacted by Him who is
inflexibly just and supremely kind, they cannot but be perfectly good: being
given by him who searches the heart and is Lord of conscience, their obligation
extends to the latent desire, and the rising conception. Controuling the
thoughts and binding the conscience, their sanction is entirely spiritual* The
motives enforcing obedience to them, are the smiles, or the frowns, of Him who
has our everlasting all at his disposal.

As is the kingdom, such is the sovereign; and as the sovereign, such are his
laws. If the kingdom be of this world, it must have a political sovereign;
whose laws must be coercive, and confined to exterior behavior. But if the
kingdom be of a spiritual kind, the sovereign must be so too. His laws must
extend no less to the conscience, than to the conversation, and be enforced by
sanctions of a spiritual nature. Such is the King Messiah, and such are the
laws of his kingdom.

The subjects of our divine Sovereign may be considered, either as detatched
individuals, or as united in distinct societies, and visibly professing their
subjection to his authority. Hence the execution of those laws by which they
are governed, comes under a twofold consideration. As detatched individuals,
the application of his laws to particular cases, is entirely with him, and with
the conscience of each individual. As united in distinct societies, which are
called particular churches, his laws of admission, of worship, and of
exclusion, are to be applied by the community -- applied, not under the
influence of carnal motives, but under the operation of his authority, and for
purposes entirely spiritual.

By the laws of this kingdom, a credible profession of repentance and faith is
required of all, previous to baptism. Such profession being considered as an
evidence of their fellowship in the gospel, and of willing subjection to the
authority of Christ, they are entitled to membership in a particular church. On
this ground they are admitted: nor do they forfeit their membership, except by
some capital departure from that gospel, or some flagrant offense against this
authority. -- But as, by the laws of our heavenly Sovereign, their admission to
visible fellowship was entirely for spiritual purposes, their exclusion from it
does not include temporal disadvantages Their situation as men, and as the
subjects of a political state, not being altered by their church-relation
commencing; they should not be affected, in those respects, by the dissolution
of that relation. For as the laws of Christ say nothing about the admission of
one or another, on account of his domestic or civil connections; nor yet for
his wealth or influence, his parts or learning; so they are equally silent
about pecuniary fines and satisfactory penances, about civil disabilities and
corporal punishments, attending the exclusion of any offender. The former being
quite foreign to qualifications for a spiritual kingdom, the latter must be
utterly abhorrent from the laws by which it is governed; being manifestly the
inventions of Antichrist, and the supporters of his cruel throne. Civil
penalties, in this case, are adapted to generate fear, and promote hypocrisy;
to suppress truth, and render Christianity itself suspicious.

Here we perceive another disparity between the Jewish and the Christian
church. For under the Old Economy, the laws of religion were sanctified by
temporal politics, and frequently those of the severest kind See Exodus, xii. 53,
19. xxx. 33, 38 xxxi. 14. Lev. vii. 20 -- 27. xvii. 3 -- 9. xix. 8. xxiii. 27,
28, 29. Numb. ix. 13. xv. 30, 31. xix. 13. with many other similar places.
To be cast out of the congregation, to be forbidden access to the sanctuary
worship, (except for ceremonial pollution) was to be deprived, not only of
ecclesiastical privileges, but also of civil rights. The church and the state
being coextended, and including the same persons, an exclusion from the former
was an expulsion from the latter; whether it was by a sentence of capital
punishment, or in some other way. But this, like many other things, was
peculiar to that Dispensation. It was founded in the-National form of their
church state, and in their Theocracy. Thence it was that blasphemy and idolatry
were punished with death, as being high treason against their divine Sovereign.
That Economy being abolished, the church of God has taken a new form. The
priesthood being changed, there is of necessity a change also of the law,
relating to the constitution, members, and government of the church. The laws
of admission, and of exclusion, must therefore be very different; as well as
those pertaining to public worship. Now, to understand these laws, we must
study -- not the Pentateuch of Moses; much less the Provinciale of LYNDWOOD, or
the Codex of GIBSON, but -- the New Testament of Jesus Christ. To reason from
the constitution and form, the laws and government, the privileges and rites of
the Jewish, to those of the christian church; is to adopt a capital principle
of Papal depravity, and grossly to corrupt our holy religion.

Our divine Sovereign has also provided for the edification of his loyal
subjects, by ordinances and rites of worship, no less than for the government
of his kingdom. As King of the Christian church, it constitutes a distinguished
part of his royal prerogative, to prescribe the whole of that spiritual service
which is to be performed. Of this prerogative Jehovah was always jealous: nor,
under the former Economy, did he ever more instantly, or more severely punish,
than when his orders about the affairs of religion were disregarded; even
though, as in the case of Uzzah, the motive appeared laudable. -- What is
religion, in its various branches, but that obedience which is due to God? And
what is obedience, but submission to his authority? Now, as authority exerts
itself in commands, there cannot be obedience, there cannot be holy worship,
where there is no divine command, either explicit or implicit. Who has
required this at your hands? In vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men -- exclude and condemn a great number of things, which
millions esteem ornamental and useful in the worship of God.

Strange, that any Protestant church should avowedly claim a power to decree
rites or ceremonies in the solemn service of our divine Lord! As if he were not
the legislator in his own kingdom! Or as if, though possessed of authority, he
had not wisdom enough to provide for his own honor; or were defective in
goodness, respecting his faithful subjects! But whatever the compilers and the
subscribers of a National Creed may think, to perform rites which Christ did
not appoint, and to alter those which he enjoined, are vile impeachments of his
royal character, and must expose to his resentment. The former usurps his
throne: the latter annuls his laws. -- Strange, did I say? the expression must
be recalled. For there is no reason to wonder that a National religious
establishment, with a political sovereign for its head, should make the claim I
have just mentioned. Who can doubt whether the same authority which
constitutes, governs, and supports a community for any particular purpose, may
not prescribe to that community with a view to the end intended by it? But
things should not be called by wrong names; and to denominate such an
establishment a church of Christ, is a gross misnomer.

The kingdom of Christ is not like the empires of this world, in regard to
external splendour. The grandeur of a temporal kingdom chiefly consists, in the
number and affluence of its nobility, the titles and pompous appearance of its
various magistrates, the flourishing state of its trade and commerce, the
wealth of its yeomanry, and the elegance of its public buildings. Magnificent
palaces and royal robes are quite in character for secular princes. Ensigns of
honor, splendid equipages, and stately mansions, are suitable to the nobles:
while a more solemn kind of exterior pomp is very becoming the ministers of
public justice. These and similar things give an air of dignity, and of
importance, to political sovereignties: but they are all foreign to the kingdom
of Christ, the glory of which is entirely spiritual -- The Christian Church is
dignified and adorned, by being the depositary of divine truth in its
unadulterated state, and by practicing divine appointments in their primitive
purity; by possessing the beauties of holiness, and by enjoying the presence of
God. Such is the true glory of our Lord's kingdom, which renders it
incomparably superior to every temporal monarchy.

It must therefore be very absurd to think of doing honor to Christianity, by
erecting pompous places of worship, by consecrating those places, and by
adorning ^mith showy vestments, in the performance of public worship. Let the
galaces of princes, and the mansions of the mighty, be magnificent and richly
ornamented; let the nobles and judges of the land, when acting agreeably to
their different characters, appear in robes of state and in robes of
magistracy; as those things belong to the kingdoms of this world, nor pretend
to any thing more, there is nothing amiss, nothing inconsistent with station or
profession. But confine them there, and by no means think of decorating the
kingdom, or of promoting the cause of Christ, by any thing similar. Were any
man to lacker gold, and paint the diamond, to increase their luster, he would
certainly be considered as insane Yet the conduct of those persons is more
absurd, who borrow the trappings of secular kingdoms, to adorn the spiritual
kingdom of Jesus Christ.

As to places of worship, convenience is all that is wanted, and all that
becomes the simplicity of Christianity. To lay the first stone of such an
edifice with solemn formalities, is Jewish Ezra. iii. 10.11.
: to dedicate it, when completed, to any particular saint, is manifestly
superstitious: to consecrate it by any solemn form; looks as if it succeeded to
the honors of Solomon's temple; as if the Deity were expected to reside in it,
rather than grant his presence to the congregation worshipping there; and as if
it were to possess a relative holiness, like that of the ancient sanctuary. I
may venture to add, that any religious parade at the first opening of such a
place, is apparently inconsistent with the idea of all distinction of places,
in regard to worship, being abolished, and too much resembles a Jewish, or a
Popish consecration I will here subjoin a few particulars mentioned by Mr.
James Owen, relative to Consecrations. He shows, that the Israelites dedicated
not only the tabernacle and temple, but also their private houses, and their
cities (Deuteronomy. xx. 5. Psalm xxx. title. Nehem. xii. 27.) -- That the Jewish
synagogues were not consecrated, nor esteemed holy, as the temple was -- That
the consecration of places for Christian worship was invented in the time of
Constantine -- That Christians had not long been in possession of consecrated
temples, before they thought it expedient to furnish them with altars; and
being provided with altars, they afterward invented the sacrifice of the mass
-- That the Papists, like the old Pagan Romans, first consecrate the ground,
and then the edifice erected upon it -- That Durandus argues for the
consecration of churches, from the example of Nebuchadnezzar dedicating his
golden image -- That Roman Catholics consecrate, with various and solemn
formalities, the first foundation stone of a building intended for public
worship -- That they consecrate bells, priests-garments, and almost every thing
belonging to their corrupted worship -- That though in England, since the
Reformation* it does not appear that any Form for the consecrating of churches,
and of burying grounds, has received the sanction of public authority; yet
various Forms for those purposes have been published and used -- That the
consecrating bishop blesses the church or chapel, and prays that that the
blessed Spirit would send down on the place, his sanctifying power and grace --
That he consecrates the font, the pulpit, the reading-desk, the communion
table, the paten, the chalice, and so on. Hist. of Consecrat. of Altars,
Temples, and Churches, passim.
.

In regard to ministers, when attending to any branch of their holy function,
let them not think of heightening their own importance, or of promoting the
cause of Christ, by imitating Jewish or pagan priests, adorned with peculiar
habits, when performing their different rites. If Christian ministers be
decently clothed, when in their own families, when visiting their friends, or
when walking the streets; why should they not be considered as properly habited
for the performance of their sacred office? What reason can be assigned for the
use of any particular dress, when engaged in public service, that would not
militate against the spirituality of our Lord's kingdom, and the simplicity of
his worship?

It may, perhaps, be said, Clerical habits are indifferent and harmless things,
except when they are imposed. But if so, the idea of imposition being excluded,
the canonical dress of a Popish priest, the red hat of a cardinal, and the
triple crown of a pontiff, may all be justified: for, in themselves, they are
equally harmless as the gown, the surplice, or the band. Innocent, however, as
all these peculiarities are, detached from the ministerial character, and from
holy worship; the reason or motive of wearing them in sacred service, may be
carnal, base, and sinful. In some, there is too much ground of suspicion, a
desire of being esteemed by the vulgar, either as persons of learning, or as
episcopally ordained, when they are not so; and, in others, a lust of
increasing their learned and priestly importance, are the latent reasons of
wearing those idle badges of clerical distinction. But when illiterate men
assume the garb of learning, their vanity is contemptible: when they intend, by
so doing, to obtain that respect from the ignorant, of which they know
themselves unworthy, their practical falsehood is detestable: and when any
minister thinks of magnifying his office, by pomposity in the pulpit, he
betrays his ignorance relating to the nature of that kingdom in which he
professes to be an officer. -- Do the laws of this holy empire forbid the
subjects to affect shining and costly apparel, as not becoming those who
profess godliness 1 Timothy ii. 9, 10, 1 Pet. iii. 3, 4.
; and will not the principle of that prohibition apply with increasing force to
the case before us? Is it inconsistent with that spiritual mindedness, of which
every avowed disciple of Christ makes an implicit profession, to be fond of a
showy dress in the intercourses of common life; and can it be suitable to the
simplicity of Christian worship, to the character of its Lord, or to the
example of his Apostles, for ministers to make a more grand appearance, and
take more state upon them, when performing their solemn service, than at any
other time? Let these who understand the Christian system, and are heavenly
minded, form the determination.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that the ancient people of God had a splendid
sanctuary, and a sumptuous temple; that the Jewish priests, when performing
sacred service, apeared in holy garments; and that the high priest, on certain
occasions, was richly adorned, in a manner peculiar to his office. But then it
is plain, that those things were expressly appointed by Jehovah; that the
Dispensation to which they belonged was of a typical nature; that they were
suited to the church while in a state of minority; that the whole Jewish nation
was then the visible church; that Jehovah was not only the God, but also the
King of that nation; that the ancient sanctuary was a palace, where political
royalty resided Matt. v. 35.
, as well as a temple, where Deity was adored; and that the priests were
officers in the state, as well as ministers of religion. To such a
politico-ecclesiastical kingdom the splendour of the sanctuary, and the dress of
the priests, were manifestly adapted. Hence the tabernacle is called a worldly
sanctuary, and the rites performed there elements of the world Heb. ix 1. Gal.
43, 9. Col. ii. 8, 20.
To these, the heavenly sanctuary, into which our Great High priest is entered,
and the spiritual worship of the Christian church, stand opposed. -- It should
not be forgotten, that though the Son of God, when displaying his glory as King
of the Jewish state, took up his abode in the sanctuary, as in a royal palace;
yet, when he came into his own country Joh. i. 11. Sec Dr. Do^dridge in loc.
, as King of the Gospel Church, he had not where to lay his head.

What, then, have the splendour, the laws, or the rites of Judaism, to do in the
New Economy; except we mean to convert the Christian church into the Jewish
temple? Grandeur and show, whether as pertaining to places of worship, or to
ministers of the word, are abhorrent from the Gospel Dispensation: nor, under
the present Economy, have they any other tendency, than to gratify that pride
from which they originate, and to give the kingdom of Christ a secular
appearance. -- The New Economy being intended for all nations and all
succeeding ages, is equally fitted for the rich and the poor: nor does it make
any distinction, in regard to places, where its worship should be performed.
That God be adored in spirit and in truth, according to his own rule, is all it
requires or one congregation or of another. It disdains, therefore, to borrow
any part of its glory, from the grandeur of an edifice, or from the garb of a
minister. Though far from supposing rusticity, illiteracy, and meanness, to be
characteristics of a Gospel church; yet I may venture to assert, that an
assembly of princes in a splendid cathedral, with an archprelate appearing in
canonical pomp, may insult the Divine Majesty, and be utterly unworthy the name
of a church; while a congregation of day-labourers, with an illiterate minister
in the meanest habit, convened in a barn, may be a spiritual temple, enjoy the
Divine Presence, and perform the Christian worship in all its glory. -- It has
been well observed, by a certain author, that the presence of God confers
dignity and importance: but that he can receive none from created, much less
from artificial pomp and magnificence. To which I will add, in the words of Dr.
OWEN; If the whole structure of the temple, and all its beautiful services,
were now in being on the earth, no glory would redound unto God thereby: he
would receive none from it. To expect the glory of God in them, would be an
high dishonor unto him On the Person of Christ, p. 354, 355.
.

If secular grandeur, however, must needs attend the religion of Him who was
born in a stable, and lived in poverty, who received the acclamations of
royalty, when riding upon an ass, and quickly after expired on a cross; -- if,
I say, it must appear in the worship of any who pretend to follow the Fishermen
of Galilee, those prime ministers in the Messiah's kingdom, let it be confined
to such as avow themselves members of a National establishment. For, with
regard to those who maintain that particular churches are Congregational,
consisting of such as make a credible profession of repentance and faith; pomp
and show in the worship of God are quite unbecoming their principles. Yes, let
those monopolize the splendour in question, who consider the church and the
state as of equal dimensions; who acknowledge a visible head of political
royalty; and who must search, not the New Testament, but a code of Canons and
Constitutions larger than the whole Bible Refering to Gibson's Codex. "When,"
says Sir Michael Forster, Christianity became the established religion of the
empire, and church and state became one body, considered only in different
views and under different relations; the ecclesiastical and civil laws of the
empire flowed from one and the same source, imperial rescripts. Examinat. of
Bp. Gibson's Codex, p. 122. Edit. 3d.
, if they would know on what foundations their ecclesiastical fabric stands,
and by what laws it is governed. The National form of the Jewish church being
their model, and a temporal monarch being their head, why should not they have
magnificent cathedrals, and consecrate them like Jewish temples? Why should not
ancient Judaism be imitated in these particulars, as well as in other things?
As the head of the English Church is adorned with royal robes; as the principle
officers in it are appointed by him, and are Lords in the legislature; and as
it is established by laws of the state, who shall forbid the various orders of
its ministers being adorned with sounding titles, and with pompous canonicals?
There is no reason to wonder that, in such a constitution and such a polity,
almost every thing should wear a secular appearance. For, political authority
pervading the whole ecclesiastical frame, it would be inconsistent with itself
if its various parts had not an air of external grandeur. As a kingdom of this
world, it is respectable; but it should not pretend to any thing more.

But, however it may be with a National establishment, let not Protestant
Dissenters be have as if they envied, either its magnificence, or its
emoluments. No: let not those who consider the Church and the World as opposite
ideas; who maintain, that Christ only is the head of Christian communities; and
that the New Testament contains the whole of their ecclesiastical polity, be
desirous of external grandeur in any thing pertaining to public worship: lest
they practically deny their own principles, and implicitly reproach primitive
Christianity for being too simple and too spiritual. It is frequently much
easier for people, and much more desired by them, to assemble in an elegant
edifice, and for their minister to appear in canonical fashion; than to perform
a spiritual worship, and to shine in the beauties of holiness. The splendour of
a place for assembling, and the pageantry of clerical dress, are procured by
money; but the graces of real sanctity, and internal devotion, are of heavenly
origin: nor is the exercise of them to be expected, unless by those who are
habitually aiming at it. -- I will add, whatever kind of succession to the
Apostles may be claimed by diocesan bishops See Dr. Owen's Nature of a Gospel
Church, and its Government. p. 33.
, yet let not Protestant Dissenting ministers implicitly arrogate an apostolic
mission, powers, and authority, by calling themselves AMBASSADORS of Christ.
For that character, it is plain, belonged to the first-rate messengers of our
divine Sovereign. Or, if any of those who publish the gospel of peace consider
a title of that high importance as quite suitable to the dignity of their
ecclesiastical station, their credentials must be produced.

By this characteristic of our Lord's kingdom, and by the general nature of it,
we are further taught, That simplicity and spirituality must constitute the
chief glory of that worship which he requires -- This forms another striking
desparity between the Messiah's government and the ancient Theocracy -- It has
been observed, by Dr. ERSKINE, that the respect paid to God, under the Old
Testament Dispensation, corresponded to his character as a temporal monarch;
and in a great measure consisted in external pomp and gaiety, dancing,
instrumental music, and other expressions of joy usual at coronations or
triumphs. But the hour is now come, i^ which the true worshippers must worship
the Father in spirit and in truth; not with external show and ^ageantry
Theological Dissertations, p. 69.
. Yes, numerous rites, and ^eremonious pomp, were appointed by Jehovah in the
first establishment of the Jewish church: to which various additions were made,
by divine order, in the time of David 1 Chronicles. xvi. 4, 5, 6. 2 Chronicles. xxix. 25.
These things were undoubtedly suited to the nature of that Dispensation, and
to the church of God, while in a state of minority Gal. iv. 1 -- 7.
On worship, so various in its branches, and so splendid in its appearance,
multitudes attended, and found amusement in it, who were in their hearts
disaffected to God. In hearing the temple music, vocal and instrumental, there
is no doubt but numbers of ungodly people were much delighted. Such a concert,
by persons trained to the employment, and under the direction of skilful
masters, must produce very pleasing emotions in the attending multitude: a
great majority of whom, it is highly probable, considered their system of
worship as the best that could be appointed, it being so grand and so
delightful.

But though that system was fitted both to the people, and to the times; though
it was of great utility, and answered the purpose of Jehovah, under a shadowy
dispensation; yet the New Testament informs us, that its numerous rites were
the mere elements of spiritual knowledge, and of holy worship. Nay, compared
with appointments and services of the Christian church, that they were beggarly
elements and carnal ordinances Gal. iv. 9. Heb. ix. 10.
-- Why, then, should any professors of Christianity be so fond of ceremonious
pomp in the worship of God? Why so attached to the language and forms of
Judaism, or practice a ritual nearly akin to the rubrics of Moses? Why call the
holy supper a sacrifice, the Lord's table an altar, and the administrator a
priest? Why have recourse to the temple worship for musical instruments, and
for a set of singers distinct from the congregation at large? Why should
responsive singing, and tunes more fit for a theater than for the worship of
God, be heard in religious assemblies? Why, without an appointment for
alternate singing, should one part of a congregation suspend an act of social
worship, while the other carries it on? To these and similar queries the answer
must be; Because things of this nature amuse and please the carnal mind --
Because the simplicity and spirituality of New Testament worship have no charms
for the multitude -- And because the generality love to perform something
called religious worship, in a way of their own devising. To save appearances,
however, as many things in the Jewish ritual were pretty well adapted to please
the carnally minded, they will be contented with having the Christian worship
reformed, in various particulars, according to the ancient model, as completed
in the time of David. -- Who, that enters a splendid edifice, where he beholds
a minister in his canonicals, and meets with such entertaining worship, can
forbe^r to think of the temple service? Such, through a course of ages, has
been the predilection of multitudes for ancient Judaism, that a number of its
peculiarities, which were either honorable and profitable to the priests, or
amusing and pleasing to the people, have been incorporated with Christianity,
notwithstanding the mischiefs produced by similar conduct in the apostolic
churches.

I said, Honorable and profitable to the priests -- Amusing and pleasing to the
people. But here they stop: for those branches of Judaism that were of a
different kind, are treated as entirely obsolete. So, for instance, though
numbers of Christian ministers are fond enough of priestly vestments, and of
tithes, jure divino; yet they are not inclined always to wash their feet,
before they perform sacred service Exodus xxx. 17 -- 21.
; much less to perform it bare^oot See Dr. Lightfoot's Temple Service. Chap. I
and X. and Dr. Gill on Exodus iii. 5.
-- As to the people, though multitudes of them are greatly delighted with
pompous appearances and musical sounds, they are far from being in raptures
with circumcision. For notwithstanding that Abrahamic rite retained its
obligation and utility, as long as any Jewish ceremony did; and though, in
apostolic times, judaizing Christians had the highest opinion of its
importance; yet, like the ancient baptismal immersion, it is now considered as
too painful and too indelicate for polished persons to regard. -- Thus the
worship of the New Economy is become a compound, unknown to the Bible, of
Judaism and Christianity: and it is treated by too many ministers, as a trade,
not a divine service; by numbers of people, as an article of decent amusement
suitable to the Lord's day, not as duty to God, and as a mean of preparing for
heaven. Men run to church, says ERASMUS, as to a theater, to have their ears
tickled In 1 Cor. xiv. 19.
The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means, and
my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof? Jer. v.
31.


But though the magnificence of places intended for public worship, the
consecration of those places, canonical habits, and various amusing ceremonies
are now defended (if defended at all by Scripture) on the ground of Old
Testament customs; yet we are taught by the most ^spectable ecclesiastical
historians, that they originated in a perverse imitation of Paganism.
Christians being surrounded with Heathens, of whose conversion they were
desirous; and the latter having been accustomed, in performing their idolatrous
worship, to the external pomp of temples and of ceremonies; CONSTANTINE had no
sooner abolished the superstitions of his ancestors, than magnificent places of
worship were erected, and consecrated with great parade: it being considered as
unlawful, except in extraordinary cases, to perform any part of public worship
in them, previous to their consecration. Heathens having often reproached
Christianity, for the poverty and simplicity of its appearance, the Christians
of the fourth century adopted many of the Pagan rites. Ministers of the word,
for example, when performing their office, appeared in canonical habits, and
with priestly pomp. Their newly erected temples were consecrated, by singing of
such hymns as were thought suitable to the occasion, by prayers, and by
thanksgivings. Then, in the Eastern churches, the responsive singing of David's
Psalms was introduced; precentors were appointed, and laws were framed by
different Councils to direct the singers in the performance of their service
Vid. Spanhemii Hist. Eccles. Sec^l. IV. p. 851, 854. Venemae Hist. Eccles.
Secul. IV. 128.
-- Such was the origin of those gaudy appearances which, to amuse the carnal
mind, have so long corrupted the worship of God, and secularized the kingdom of
Christ! Vain man would be wise, and, in his great wisdom, thinks it necessary
to add a few ornaments and supports to this heavenly empire, of which it was
entirely destitute when the Apostles left the earth. This was thought
expedient, in order to render the religion of Jesus a little more pleasing,
respectable, and edifying, than it was in its native state. But well may he
demand, with the aspect of incensed majesty, Who has required this at your
hand?

The kingdom of Christ is not of this world, in respect of its immunities, its
riches, and its honors. Wealth, titles, and authority, are frequently confered
by secular princes: but they are all external things. A patent of peerage, or a
lucrative office, gives no wisdom to the mind, no peace to the conscience, no
holiness to the heart. The possossor, notwithstanding his plentiful income and
splendid title, may be a fool, a wretch, and a disgrace to the human species.
-- The highest honors and the greatest emoluments which the subjects of an
earthly kingdom can enjoy, are all of them unsatisfactory: and, therefore, the
first favorites of temporal princes are sometimes the most unhappy. Of this we
have a remarkable instance in Haman, the prime favorite of Ahasuerus. -- Great
privileges and exalted honors are enjoyed by comparatively very few subjects of
any temporal monarch; the nature of the case forbidding them to become general,
among the inhabitants of any country. Dukedoms, marquisates, and grants from
the crown, are but seldom bestowed, how loyal soever the subjects may be.
Besides, those distinguished favors are of short duration, and quite uncertain.

Whereas, the immunities, emoluments, and honors of our Lord's kingdom, are all
of them spiritual and internal. They are suited to the state of an enlightened
mind, to the feelings of an awakened conscience, and to the desires of a
renewed heart. Pardon of all sin, and complete acceptance with God; adoption
into the heavenly family, and a title of future glory, are some of the
privileges and honors enjoyed by the subjects of this kingdom. Blessings,
these, of infinite worth, because of their spiritual nature and immortal
duration. Nor are they confined to a few distinguished favorites of our
celestial Sovereign; for they are common to all his real subjects. Yes, they
are all enriched, and all ennobled, with righteousness, peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost.

Now, as the immunities, grants, and honors, bestowed by the King Messiah, are
all of a spiritual nature; his faithful subjects have no reason to wonder, or
to be discouraged, at any persecutions, afflictions, or poverty which may befall
them. Were his empire of this world, then indeed it might be expected, from the
goodness of his heart and the power of his arm, that those who are submissive
to his authority, zealous for his honor, and conformed to his image, would
commonly find themselves easy and prosperous in their temporal circumstances.
Yes, were his dominion of a secular kind, it might be supposed that an
habitually conscientious regard to his laws, would secure from the oppression
of ungodly men, and from the distresses of temporal want. -- Thus it was with
Israel under their Theocracy. When the rulers and the people in general were
punctual in observing Jehovah's appointments, the stipulations of the Sinai
Covenant secured them from being oppressed by their enemies, and from any
remarkable affliction by the immediate hand of God. Performing the conditions
of their National Confederation, they were, as a people, warranted to expect
every species of temporal prosperity. Health, and long life, riches, honors,
and victory over their enemies, were promised by Jehovah to their external
obedience See Exodus xv. 25, 26. xxiii. 25 -- 28. Lev. xxvi. 3 -- 14. Deuteronomy. vii.
12 -- 24. viii, 7.8, 9. xi. 13 -- 17. xxviii. 3 -- 13.
The punishments also, that were denounced against flagrant breaches of the
Covenant made at Horeb, were of a temporal kind Lev. xxvi. 14 -- 39. Deuteronomy. iv.
25, 26, 27. xi. 27. xxviii. 15 -- 68. xxix. 22 -- 28. See Dr. Erskine's
Theolog. Dissertat. p. 22 -- 29. External obedience -- Punishments of a
temporal kind. These and similar expressions is this Essay are to be
understood, as referring to the Sinai Covenant strictly considered, and to
Jehovah's requisitions as the king of Israel. They are quite consistent,
therefore, with its being the duty of Abraham's natural seed to perform
internal c^edience to that Sublime Sovereign, considered as God of the whole
earth; and with final punishment being (...) by him, in failure of that
obedience
.

In this respect, however, as well as in other things, there is a vast
difference between the Jewish, and the Christian Economy. This disparity was
plainly intimated, if I mistake not, by the opposite modes of divine
proceeding, in establishing Jehovah's kingdom among the Jews, and in founding
the empire of Jesus Christ. To settle the Israelitish church, to exalt the
chosen tribes above surrounding nations, and to render the ancient Theocracy
supremely venerable, the divine Sovereign appeared in terrible majesty. Wasting
plagues and awful deaths were often inflicted by eternal justice, on those who
dared to oppose, or to oppress, the people of God. An angel was commissioned to
destroy the Egyptian firstborn; Pharaoh, with his mighty host, were drowned in
the Red sea; and the Canaanitish nations were put to the sword, that the
subjects of Jehovah might possess their fertile country. Manifest indications
these, in connection with express promises, that the special Providence of God
would exalt and bless the natural seed of Abraham with temporal felicity;
provided they did not violate the Sinai Covenant.

But when the Prince Messiah founded his kingdom, all things were otherwise. No
marks of external grandeur attendeded his personal appearance: and, instead of
executing righteous vengeance on those who opposed him, his language was; The
Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do! -- After a life of labor and of
beneficence, of poverty and of reproach, he fell a victim to persecution, and a
martyr to-truth. Such was the plan of divine Providence, respecting Christ our
King, and such was the treatment with which he met from the world! Striking
intimations, these, that his most faithful subjects would have no ground of
discouragement, in any sufferings which might a wait them; and that, considered
as his dependants, spiritual blessings were all they should have to expect.

It must indeed be acknowledge, that as vicious tempers and immoral practices
have a natural tendency to impair health, distress the mind, and waste the
property; so the exercise of holy affections, and the practice of true
godliness, have the most friendly aspect on a Christian's own temporal
happiness, (except so far as persecution intervenes) and on the welfare of
society. But then it is evident that this arises from the nature of things, and
from the superintendency of common Providence; rather than from the dominion of
Christ, as a spiritual monarch. For, so considered, spiritual blessings are all
that they have to expect from his royal hand.

By the prophetic declarations of our Lord himself, and by the history of this
kingdom, it plainly appears, that among all the subjects of his government,
none have been more exposed to persecution, affliction, and poverty, than those
who were most eminent for obedience to his laws, and most useful in his empire.
The most uniform subjection to his authority, and the warmest zeal for his
honor, that ever appeared upon earth; were no security from bitter persecution,
from pinching poverty, or from complicated affliction. Our divine Lord,
considered as a spiritual sovereign, is concerned for the spiritual interests
of those that are under his government. His personal perfections and royal
prorogatives, his power and wisdom, his love and care, are therefore to be
regarded as engaged, both by office and by promise, -- not to make his
dependants easy and prosperous in their temporal concerns; but -- to strengthen
them for their spiritual warfare; to preserve them from finally falling by
their invible enemies; to make all afflictions work together for their good; to
render them, in the final issue, more than conquerors over every opposer; and
to crown them with everlasting life.

Our Lord has promised, indeed, that their obedience to h^s royal pleasure,
shall meet with his gracious regards in the present life. Not by indulging them
with temporal riches, or by granting them external honor and ease; but by
admitting them into more intimate communion with himself, and by rejoicing
their hearts with his favor Joh. xii. 26. and xiv. 21, 23.
Yes, to deliver from spiritual enemies, and to provide for spiritual wants; to
indulge with spiritual riches, and to ennoble with spiritual honors, are those
royal acts which belong to Him, whose kingdom is not of this world. In the
bestowment of these blessings, the glory of his regal character is much
concerned. But millions of his devoted subjects may fall by the iron hand of
oppression, starve in obscurity, or suffer accumulated affliction in other
ways; without the least impeachment of his power, his goodness, or his care, as
the sovereign of a spiritual kingdom.

The kingdom of Christ is not like the dominions of secular princes, with
regard to its limits and its duration. The widely extended monarchies of
antiquity were confined to certain parts of the habitable globe, and in the
course of a few centuries they came to an end. Not so, the empire of Jesus
Christ: for thus run the prophetic oracles, respecting him and his kingdom. He
shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the
earth. All things shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve him There
was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. He
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be
no end. Ps. lxxii. 8.11. Dan. vii 14 Luke i. 33.
Concerning the gradual enlargement and universal extent of this kingdom, our
Lord speaks in his parable of a grain of mustard seed; and in that of leaven,
pervading the whole mass of meal. -- This holy empire shall issue in the
ultimate glory: and though the present form of its administration will cease,
when God shall be all in all; yet the glorified subjects of it shall never die,
never be disunited, nor ever withdraw their allegiance from Jesus Christ. Such
are the foundations of his dominion, and such the excellence of his government,
that each of his real subjects will from the heart say; LET THE KING LIVE! and
let him reign, till all his enemies become his footstool Ps. lxxii. 15. and c.
1. 1. Cor. xv. 25.
!

Once more; The empire of Christ, or the Gospel Church, is called THE KINGDOM
OF HEAVEN. As our Lord, in the most emphatical manner, is denominated, THE KING
OF KINGS; we may with propriety consider his holy monarchy, as the kingdom of
kingdoms. This appellation, the kingdom of heaven, manifestly sets the New
Testament church at the greatest distance from every secular monarchy, and
teaches us to consider it as nearly allied to the heavenly state Ecclesiam
Christi Jesu vere esse Regnum C^lorum et inter ejus statum et condi^ionem
ecclesiae coelestis maximam intercedere affinitatem et conjunctionem. Vi^ringa
in Apocalypse. p. 885. Amstalod. 1719.
The subjects of it are described, as born from above; as the heirs of glory.
They are governed by laws, indulged with privileges, and invested with honors,
which are entirely spiritual, and all from heaven The truths they believe, the
blessings they enjoy, the obedience they per^orm, and the expectations they
entertain, have a regard to heaven* It is the authority of a divine Sovereign
under which they live, and his approbation at which they aim. The pleasures
which they enjoy, considered as the subjects of Jesus Christ, are all of a
spiritual nature, and all savor of the heavenly world.

As Christ is a spiritual monarch, his dominion respects the understandings,
the consciences, the hearts of men; and is a preparation for that sublime
state, where knowledge and rectitude, where obedience and love, where harmony
and joy, are all in their full glory. The foundation of this government, as it
respects individuals, is laid in regeneration. There the preparation for heaven
begins: and all the genuine fruits of that important change, which is made by
divine influence, in the mind, conscience, and heart of a sinner, have a
tendency toward heaven; and many of them are anticipations of it. That worship*
which is performed by the subjects of Christ, is no further spiritual, and
agreeable to the New Economy, than it is animated with such affections as
abound in heaven. For the time is come, when those that worship the Father,
must worship him in spirit and in truth. Knowledge and reverence of God, as
revealed by the Mediator; confidence in him, and love to him; self-abasement in
his presence, and acquiescence in his dominion; are the principle ideas
included in spiritual worship, whether as performed by the subjects of Christ
here, or by the saints made perfect in glory.

It is manifest from this characteristic of our Lord's kingdom, that a
profession of allegiance to him is entirely vain, not attended with spiritual
mindedness: because it is natural for good subjects to seek the prosperity of
that kingdom to which they belong. Now the interests of Messiah's empire are
all of a spiritual nature. In the spread of evangelical truth, and the purity
of divine worship; in the exercise of love, and the practice of holiness, the
interests and honor of this kingdom chiefly consist. Indifference about these,
is an evidence of the heart being disaffected to our divine Sovereign; but
allegiance to him, will manifest itself by an habitual regard to them. -- In
whomsoever this holy Monarch reigns, there is a relish for spiritual riches,
honors, pleasures. To enjoy his favor, and bear his image; to perform his will,
and behold his glory, are things of the highest importance in the esteem of
real saints. Nor is it a mere dictate of the understanding and conscience, that
it should be so. It is matter of choice: for their hearts are engaged on those
objects.

It is common for subjects to imitate a sovereign whom they love and revere;
especeially, if they have derived signal benefits from his administration. Now
such is the nature of our Lord's government, that it is impossible for any one
to be under it, without sincerely loving and profoundly revering him -- without
seeing an excellence in his example, which commands esteem and excites
imitation. But if we be fond of wealth, or emulous of grandeur and show; if we
pursue preeminence, and grasp at power; we imitate the children of this world,
not Jesus Christ. Those things are eagerly sought, and highly prized, by the
subjects of Satan, because they are carnally minded; but he is unworthy to be
called a disciple of Christ, who is not habitually striving to copy his
example. Nor can any pretend, that he ever encouraged, by word or deed, the
pursuit of secular distinctions, the acquisition of wealth, or the pleasures of
sensuality, but quite the reverse. Far from seeking honor which comes from men,
he neither courted the smiles of the rich, nor the patronage of the mighty: for
the friendship of this world, is enmity with God. So our Lord esteemed it, and
so must his disciples. To be the subjects of a spiritual kingdom, and to have
our hearts on temporal enjoyments, are inconsistent. To be carnally minded is
death; but to be spiritually minded, is life and peace.

As Christ is a spiritual sovereign, and his church a spiritual kingdom, all
the subjects of his government must be considered, as in a state of preparation
for heaven. The prevailing dispositions of their hearts are in favor of
heavenly things and to promote the exercise of spiritual affections, the New
Economy, in all its branches, is much better adapted than was the Mosaic
system. For as it is the most perfect dispensation of divine grace, that ever
was, or ever will be enjoyed on earth; so it makes the nearest approaches to
heaven.

It has been justly remarked by a certain author, That the Legal Economy
introduced that of Grace, by the gospel, and then vanished away, The
Dispensation of Grace, in like manner, is now performing its work, fulfilling
its day, announcing, unfolding, introducing the kingdom of glory: and when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. --
Yes, the Old Economy, and the Jewish Theocracy, were manifestly introductory
to the Christian Dispensation, and the Messiah's kingdom. Those, being typical
and shadowy, led to these, and in them received their final completion. But the
New Dispensation, and the kingdom of Christ, have no completion short of
heaven. Thither they lead, and there they terminate. No worship is agreeable to
the Messiah's kingdom, which is not animated by heavenly affections. All the
external services of religion are only so many means of exciting those holy
affections, of promoting communion with God, and of cultivating a heavenly
temper. Consequently, the worship of those who rest in exterior services, is
quite superficial, and has nothing spiritual, nothing heavenly in it.

Jehovah, under the former Dispensation, having chosen the Holy of holies for
the place of his residence, the Jews were directed to address him in prayer,
considered as on his throne between the Cherubim 1 Kings viii. 27 -- 30, 38,
42, 44, 48. 2 Kings xix. 15. Psalm xxviii. 2. lxxx. 1 Dan. vi. 19.
They knew, indeed, that he inhabited celestial mansions; and therefore, when
bending the knee before him, their hands were extended toward heaven 1 Kings
viii. 22.
: but yet he was more immediately regarded by them, as residing in the earthly
sanctuary. For, notwithstanding their desire to be heard in heaven, the cry of
their prayer, and the eye of their faith, were directed first to the mercy seat
The most eminent saints, under that Economy, looked to God in both; did homage
to him in both; nor could they have neglected him in respect of either, without
being culpable. -- Whereas, when Christians pray, they look directly to their
Father who is in heaven, and as on a throne of grace in the celestial temple;
without the least regard to any place upon earth, or to any visible object See
Dr. Goodwin on Christ the Mediator, B. VI. hap. iii.
.

God, says Dr ERSKINE, as husband of the the Gospel church, claims from his
people inward affection and love, and accepts them only who worship him in
spirit and in truth. In the mosaic covenant it was otherwise. There he appeared
chiefly as a temporal prince, and therefore gave laws intended rather to direct
the outward conduct, than to regulate the actings of the heart. Hence every
thing in that Dispensation was adapted to strike his subjects with awe and
reverence. The magnificence of his palace, and all its utensils; his numerous
train of attendants; the splendid robes of the high priest, who, though his
prime minister, was not allowed to enter the Holy of holies, save once a year,
and, in all his ministrations, was obliged to discover the most humble
veneration for Israel's King; the solemn rites with which the priests were
consecrated; the strictness with which all impunities and indecencies were
forbidden, as things which, though tolerable in others, were unbecoming the
dignity of the people of God, especially when approaching to him: all these
tended to promote and secure the respect due to their glorious Sovereign. -- It
was, however, foretold, by one of the minor Prophets, that in Gospel times, men
should not call God, Baali. i. e. my Master, but Ishi. i. e. my Husband -- The
passage imports at least thus much, that God, who in the Jewish Dispensation
had chiefly displayed the grandeur, distance, and severity of a Master, would,
in the Christian Dispensation, chiefly display the affection and familiarity of
a husband and friend Theological Dissertations, p. 4, 5, 6.
.

Yes, under the Mosaic system, the high priest only, and he but once in a year,
was admitted to the mercy seat, or throne of Jehovah, in a worldly sanctuary.
That appearance of the Jewish pontiff before the Lord, though grand and solemn,
was a mere emblem of spiritual things, and of that holy intercourse which all
the subjects of this kingdom have with God, in the performance of spiritual
worship. For as Jesus entered into the heavenly sanctuary, with his own blood:
as he is there a priest upon his throne, uniting the sacerdotal censer with the
regal ceptre; he ever lives, not only to govern his widely extended empire, but
likewise to intercede for all his followers, and to be the medium of their
access to the divine Father. In virtue of his atonement made on the cross, and
of his appearance in the heavenly world, the meanest subjects of his dominion,
when performing sacred service, have boldness to enter into the holiest. Each
of them, in the exercise of faith, of hope, and of love, has access to the
Divine Majesty on a throne of grace; and each has reason to expect a
condescending audience from the King Eternal. Hence we find, that New Testament
saints are called the domestics of God; which may have some relation to that
peculiar nearness to God, in which the Jewish priests were: and refer to that
great intimacy of unrestrained converse to which we, as Christians, are
admitted. In which respect our privileges seem to resemble, not only those of
the people praying in the common court of Israel; but of the priests,
worshipping in the house itself Dr. Doddridge's Note, on Ephesians. ii. 19.
.

The superior advantages of believers under the Christian Economy, in regard
to communion with God, and the sanctifying influence which that holy
intercourse has on their minds, are strongly expressed in the following
remarkable words: But we all, IN an unveiled face, beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord 2 Cor. iii. 18. In an unveiled face. So, I humbly
conceive, should here be rendered. Compare 2 Cor. iv. 6. where the inspired
writer speaks of the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ. That will admit the supplemental preposition in, as well as with,
cannot, I presume, be doubted: and that the whole scope of Paul's reasoning in
the context leads us to think of the face of Christ, rather than that of
believers, being unveiled, is, if I mistake not, solidly proved by the learned
Ikenius, in his Dissertat. Philolog. Theolog. Dissert. xxvi. sect; 4, 5, 6.
. The Apostle here plainly alludes to that glory which appeared in the face of
Moses, after his intimate converse with Jehovah on the mount. So dazzling was
the luster of his countenance, that the children of Israel were afraid to come
nigh him. He therefore put a veil upon his face, that they might have familiar
intercourse with him Exodus xxxiv. 29.35.
: which veil was an emblem, not only of the Jewish blindedness, but also of the
darkness of that Dispensation. -- Now, in contrast with these things, Paul
informs us, that the glory of the divine perfections appears and shines in the
unveiled face of Jesus Christ; that this glory is beheld by New Testament
believers; and that, by beholding it, they are gradually transformed into the
glorious image of God. What an illustrious view does the Apostle here give us
of the New Economy! He not only represents the state and privileges of the
Gospel Church, as greatly superior to those of the Jewish people; but as nearly
approaching to the employments, and the fruitions of the celestial world. For
we cannot easily form a more exalted idea of the business and blessedness of
heaven, than that of contemplating the glory of God, and of making continual
advances in likeness to him.

As, in the person of our Mediator, the nature of God and the nature of man
were not united, till just before the commencement of this kingdom; as God was
not manifested in the flesh, but with an immediate view to this holy and
spiritual empire; so there is no reason to wonder that the favored subjects of
Messiah's government have a more intimate communion with Jehovah, than was ever
enjoyed by the Jewish church. Under the Old Covenant, Israel in general had a
kind of local nearness to God, in the performance of religious worship; and
real saints had spiritual communion with him. But then it was by means of
priests, who had infirmities; of sacrifices, that were imperfect; and of
services, that were mere shadows of heavenly things: all which were confined to
an earthly sanctuary. Whereas the subjects of Jesus Christ have access to the
Father of mercies, without regarding any priest, besides their Sovereign; any
sacrifice, besides his death; any incense, besides his intercession. All these
they regard as appearing, as operating, as efficacious on their behalf, in the
heavenly sanctuary. Yes, their High Priest, who is of infinite dignity, their
sacrifice, which is of boundless worth; and their incense, which is
consummately fragrant, are for ever in the immediate presence of God -- for
ever deserving, and for ever obtaining the divine approbation. On these,
therefore, in all their approaches to Eternal Majesty, their dependence fixes
Hence their worship is performed, through the aids of grace, with reverence and
with confidence, with love and with delight. We have access with confidence, by
the faith of Christ.

Now, to worship God with profound reverence, yet without a slavish fear; with
steady confidence, connected with deep humility; with submission to his will,
as the most high Lord; with love to his excellence, as the infinite beauty; and
with joy in his all sufficiency, as the Chief Good; is to perform a spiritual
service, and to adore in a heavenly manner. In the performance of such worship,
we have communion with the spirits of just men made perfect -- we enter within
the veil -- we have fellowship with God -- we anticipate the business of
heaven, and taste its refined pleasures. In these holy exercises of the mind,
conscience, and heart, we feel ourselves near to God, as the fountain of all
blessedness, and are trained for the heavenly world. Thus we are habituated to
a kind of celestial service, by which our likeness to Christ is promoted, and
our desires after heaven increased. In these things the very life of spiritual
worship and of real religion consists. He therefore is not worthy to be called
a subject of our Lord's kingdom, who is not habitually aiming in his devotional
services, at his delightful and solemn intercourse with God. Nor is he
deserving of that exalted character, whose thoughts and cares, whose hopes and
fears, whose joys and sorrows, are not principally concerned about the
government and grace of Christ, considered in their connection with the
heavenly state.

It must, indeed, be admitted, that this communion with heaven is extremely
imperfect in the present life. Because, though every true subject of the King
Messiah be in a state very different from that of a merely nominal Christian,
and though he is thankful for that difference; yet he is not, he cannot be
satisfied, either with what he knows, or with what he enjoys; with what he is,
or with what he does. Not with what he knows: for he knows but in part, and he
feels the deficiency. His acquaintance with the Greatest and Best of beings --
with the character and perfections, with the works and ways of God, is
extremely small. His knowledge of the adorable Jesus -- of his Person and
offices, of his grace and work, of his kingdom and glory, is ver^ contracted.
Nay, the knowledge he has of himself, and of his final destination in the
heavenly world, is exceedingly scanty: for the heart is deceitful above all
things; and it does not yet appear what we shall be. He cannot therefore be
contented with such a pittance of spiritual knowledge.

Not with what he enjoys: for his enjoyment of spiritual pleasure is, at the
highest, comparatively low. Besides, it is frequently interrupted by the
insurrections of indwelling sin, and by the incursions of outward temptation.
Though he sometimes exults in the light of God's countenance, partaking of joy
that is unspeakable and full of glory; yet he frequently mourns the want of
that exalted pleasure, and groans being burdened.

Not with what he is: for he feels much depravity, and laments over it, as
affecting his mind with darkness; his conscience with guilt, or with stupidity;
and his passions with carnality. So far from perfectly bearing the image of
Christ, that his language frequently is; O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death!

Not with what he does: for though he sincerely desires to perform the will of
God* as revealed in divine precepts, and illustrated by the example of Christ;
yet he perceives that his obedience is very imperfect. Does he, for instance,
address himself to God in prayer? in that devout exercise his whole soul should
be engaged. Reverence of the divine Majesty, and an abasing sense of his own
guilt; says in the great atonement, and confidence in paternal mercy; the
ardour of petition, and the comfort of expectation, should be all united. But
frequently, alas! his thoughts wander, and his pious affections are dull, if
not dormant. His prayer seems little besides a conflict with his own
corruption. He rises from his knees with sorrow and with sighs. Ashamed of the
manner in which he has treated the omniscient Object of his worship, he cannot
for bear exclaiming; God be merciful to me a sinner! and this, perhaps, is the
only petition over which he does not mourn, as destitute of holy animation. --
Or if he enjoy liberty in his converse with the Father of all mercies, how
often does he find secret pride, and self-gratulation, arise in his heart? as
if the Most Holy would regard his confessions, petitions, and thanksgivings for
the sake of their own excellence! Aware of the latent poison, he is almost
confounded. For well he knows, that Christianity is the religion of sinners --
of depraved, of guilty, of unworthy creatures: and that nothing is more
inconsistent with evangelical truth, or more detestable in the sight of our
Maker, than self-applause respecting acceptance with God. Knowing himself to be
a polluted worm that deserves to perish, he trembles to think of ever supposing
that the majesty of the Most High, and the purity of the Most Holy, will accept
his imperfect services for their own sake. In the most emphatical manner he,
therefore, with Job exclaims; Behold, I am vile! -- I abhor myself! So various
and so great are the defects in our devotional services, that we might well
despair, were it not for a High Priest who bears the iniquity of our holy
things. For we find a law, that when we would do good, evil is present with us.

To such imperfections and such complaints, is a real subject of our Lord's
dominion liable in the present life. But, looking forward to the separate
state, when he shall be with Christ, which is far better, and to the
resurrection of the righteous; with joy he adopts the language of David and
says, I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness. Yes, when that
ultimate and everlasting Economy commences, his mind being all irradiated with
divine truth, he shall be satisfied with what he knows: perfectly possessing
the Chief Good, he shall be satisfied with what he enjoys; conscious of
complete rectitude, he shall be satisfied with what he is: and knowing his
obedience to be consummate, he shall be satisfied with what he does. --
Delightful, ravishing thought! To have all our immortal powers expanded and
filled, with knowledge of the Supreme truth, and with love to the Supreme
Beauty; with reverence of the Supreme Lord, and with delight in the Supreme
Good, must constitute complete happiness. Yet such is the grand result of our
Lord's dominion in the hearts of men! To this, therefore, we must look, upon
this our affections must be placed, if we would behave as the subjects of Jesus
Christ, and finish our course with honor. For as this life is the seed-time of
an eternal harvest; as no one gathers grapes of thorns, o^ figs of thistles;
and as whatever a man ^ows, that shall he also rea^; so we have no reason to
expect heaven as our final residence, if we be not habitually desirous of
communion with God in all our worship, and of making it our business to perform
his will.

It is one of the noblest and most delightful employments of the human mind, to
contemplate the gradual revelation of Jehovah's will, and the growing display
of his eternal favor, from the fall of our first parents, to the consummation
of the divine Economy. It is both pleasing and improving to reflect on the
Patriarchal Dispensation introducing the Mosaic System; on the Sinai
Confederation making way for the New Covenant; on the Jewish Theocracy leading
to the Kingdom of Christ; on the government of that kingdom as a preparation
for celestial mansions; on the performance of holy worship, by the subjects of
Christ here, as the mean of communion with saints in light; and on the present
state of worship and of blessedness in the heavenly sanctuary, as preparing for
the ultimate glory.

In reference to the communion of believers with the spirits of just men made
perfect, in the performance of spiritual worship; and respecting the
consummation of all things, Dr. OWEN speaks as follows, with whose words I
shall conclude. Were all that die in the Lord immediately received into that
state wherein God shall be all in all, without any use of the mediation of
Christ, or the worship of praise and honor unto God by him, without being
exercised in the ascription of honor, glory, power and dominion unto [Christ,]
on the account of the past and present discharge of his office; there could be
no communion between them and us. But whilst they are in the sanctuary, in the
temple of God, in the holy worship of Christ, and of God in him, and we are not
only employed in the same work in sacred ordinances suited unto our state and
condition, but in the performance of our duties do by faith enter in within the
veil, and approach unto the same throne of grace in the most holy place; there
is a spiritual communion between them and us. So the Apostle expresses it, in
the twelfth of Hebrews -- As we are here, in and by the word and other
ordinances, prepared and made meet for the present state of things in glory; so
are they, the spirits of the just made perfect] by the temple worship of
heaven, sitted for that state of things when Christ shall give up the kingdom
unto the Father, that GOD MAY BE ALL IN ALL On the Person of Christ, Chap. xx.
p. 365, 366.
.

FINIS
Now in the Press, AND SOON WILL BE PUBLISHED, RIPPONS Selection of HYMNS,
INTENDED BY THE AUTHOR as an APPENDIX to Dr. WATTS's PSALMS and HYMNS; BEING
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL AND APPROVED SELECTION OF HYMNS, EXTANT.

THOSE WHO WISH TO POSSESS THIS TRULY VALUABLE BOOK, MAY BE SUPPLIED BY
APPLYING TO WILLIAM DURELL, THE PRINTER HEREOF, AT No. 19, QUEEN STREET,
NEW YORK.

THOSE WHO WISH TO POSSESS THE REV. ABRAHAM BOOTHS' PIECE ON BAPTISM, ARE
INFORMED, THEY MAY BE SUPPLIED IN THE SPRING, BY APPLYING TO THE REV. WILLIAM
ROGERS, OF PHILADELPHIA, -- AND BY MR. SING, OF NEW YORK. -- ALSO -- BOOTHS'
REIGN OF GRACE.


