AN ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE DISTRICT OF MAINE, UPON THE SUBJECT OF
THEIR SEPARATION FROM THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT OF MASSACHUSETTS.

BY ONE OF THEIR FELLOW CITIZENS.

PRINTED AT PORTLAND, BY THOMAS B. WAIT. -- APRIL, 1791.

TO THE REVEREND SAMUEL DEANE, D. D. AND FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS
AND SCIENCES.

THE FOLLOWING ADDRESS, AS AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT JUSTLY DUE TO YOUR SCIENTIFICK
MERIT, IS MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED AND DEDICATED,

BY YOUR MOST OBEDIENT, AND VERY HUMBLE SERVANT, THE AUTHOR
District of Maine, April, 1791.
AN ADDRESS, etc.
THE separation of the district of Maine from the present government of
Massachusetts was a subject, which, from the year 1785 to the year 1788,
occupied much of the public attention. A business of so much importance, and
pregnant with so many advantages to that part of the country which we inhabit,
ought not to sink into oblivion. During the time comprehended in the
abovementioned periods, it went through a fair and general discussion. Besides
the candid examination of it in the public newspapers, the Portland Convention,
consisting of delegates from a respectable number of towns in the district,
gave the subject its due consideration. A very large majority of that
Convention, after a lengthy and deliberate enquiry into the state of the
district, and its relative situation with the Commmonwealth at large, deemed it
expedient and necessary for us to become a separate government. To carry this
determination into effect, they chose a commitee to draft and prefer to the
General Court, a dutiful and respectful Address, stating their wishes to be
dismembered from the western part of the Commonwealth, their reasons for
wishing to be thus dismembered, and requesting their concurrence therein. This
address would undoubtedly have produced a final decision of the Legislature
upon the question, had not the very particular and distressed situation of the
government, at the time it was presented, absorbed every other public
consideration. -- This time happenned to be immediately subsequent to the late
unhappy insurrections. While the disordered state of the government continued,
the attention of the Legislature could not with propriety have been called to
the subject; and thus the whole business fell asleep, and remained unattended
to, and almost unthought of, till the session the General Court held in
Jannuary, 1791.

So far as the sentiments of the people could be collected, by repeatedly
conversing with the principal men in most of the populous towns in the
district, or by their delegates to the Portland Convention, there is reason to
conclude, that, in the year 1787, a government in this territory would have
been agreeable to a majority of its inhabitants. But many reasons which did not
then exist, now operate to render such an event extremely desirable. The
adoption, and firm establishment of the constitution of the United States, is
one of the first. The several objects of legislation which are the most
difficult to manage, are, by that constitution, taken out of the hands of the
state governments; and referred to the Legislature of the Union. This must be
considered as a great relief to those, whose lot it may be to administer a
government, without the necessary experience. The intricate and important
business of finance, laying and collecting duties, imposts and excises,
regulating commerce with foreign nations and the several States, declaring war,
raising armies and navies, and making provision for their support, and rules
for their government, together with other concerns of such a nature, are trusts
which will not hereafter devolve upon those who are called to administer the
State governments.

To this I might add many others of great weight and importance, to convince
such as were formerly in a state of suspense, that the present time affords the
golden opportunity to revive the important work of establishing a government in
the district of Maine. But these will, with greater propriety, come under
consideration hereafter.

In order to consider this subject clearly, it will be necessary --

First, To enumerate, and enlarge upon, the advantages which will accrue to the
citizens of this district, by a separation from Massachusetts, and an admission
into the Union.

Secondly, To mention, and endeavor to obviate, the objections which have been
raised a inst such a measure. -- And,

Lastly, To make it appear, that no time ought to be lost, in applying to the
Legislatures of the Commonwealth, and of the Union, for their consent.

I. I will endeavor to enumerate the advantages to be gained by the District;
-- And I shall not here confine myself merely to those benefits and advantages,
which will immediately and sensibly result from the establishment of the
government; as all the reasons (from whatever source they may be drawn) in
favor of, and all the inconveniences which would probably be remedied by such
a measure, may with propriety be here considered.

The first and most obvious reason, and indeed that from which most of the
others must be derived, is our detached and already dismembered situation from
the other parts of the Commonwealth. According to the present territorial
situation of Massachusetts and Newhampshire, it seems to be thwarting the
designs of nature, for the district of Maine to continue any longer connected
with another government, than what mere necessity dictates. We inhabit an
extensive tract of country, which, by the intervention of the state of
Newhampshire, is divided and separated from every part of the Commonwealth,
with which we are in other respects connected. There is therefore the same
reason for our being attached to the government of Newyork or Southcarolina, as
to Massachusetts, except that it does not operate in an equal degree; that is,
the distance to the seat of government, for instance, would in that case be
greater, and of course the inconveniences of such a connection greater. But we
are now at a great distance from the seat of government -- we are now as
totally separated from Massachusetts, with respect to local situation, as we
are from Newyork or Southcarolina -- and we are now embarrassed with many of
the same troubles and inconveniences that we should be, were our seat of
government in either of the last mentioned States.

We shall be entitled to send two Senators to the Federal Legislature, when we
become a distinct member of the Union. This is one of the advantages that we
may realize, in consequence of the establishment of the constitution of the
United States, which provides, that "the Senate shall be composed of two
Senators from each State, chosen by the legislature thereof." The happy effects
to be derived from the appointment of two persons to so important a station,
are, the inducements which it will afford (to those of our fellow citizens
whose education and characters allow them the prospect of being elected to fill
it) to qualify themselves by gaining the necessary information, and to conduct
themselves in such a manner, as to enjoy the confidence and approbation of the
wise and good part of the community -- the political knowledge which they must
necessarily gain by paying attention to, and taking a part in the business of
Congress -- the propagating of that knowledge among their fellow citizens at
home -- the circulation of the money which their compensations will entitle
them to receive -- and lastly, their returning from their elevated stations to
mix, converse with, and come down to the level of their masters the people.

Besides these advantages, which will be wholly confined to the District, there
are others which the Commonwealth at large, and the northern States in general,
will enjoy, by this addition of two members to the Federal Senate. Every person
who is acquainted with the commerce, inhabitants, and mode of living in the
various parts of the continent, must acknowledge, that there is a great
diversity of interest between the northern and southern States. The journals of
Congress, or such of their proceedings as have been made public in the
newspapers, for the last two years, sufficiently evidence the truth of this
fact. But were it not for these, it is well known that the commercial interests
of the two extremes of the continent are almost in direct opposition to each
other; and that the mode of education, manners, and habits of life, are
evidently different at the southward, from what they are in the New England
States. Opposite interests, and opposite modes of life, very naturally create
opposite sentiments. Hence it is, that in most of the decisions of Congress,
upon questions which affect the general interest of the United States, we find
the southern gentlemen upon one side, and those from the northward upon the
other. The public business is hereby much retarded; and, in some instances,
the influence and power of the southern members, have produced laws and
decisions, which have an injurious operation upon us. -- Some of the
consequences of these laws now are, that we cannot obtain some of the most
common necessaries of life, without paying a high duty upon them.

The fisheries, those important and valuable sources of livelihood and wealth
to some of our best citizens, are now on the decline; and the carrying trade by
the American shipping, in such a situation, that it must absolutely be given
up, unless some regulations in its favor are speedily adopted. One of these
regulations must be, an additional tonnage upon foreign shipping, to prevent
their becoming carriers of the southern produce. But such is the partiality of
the merchants of the southern States, in favor of shipping owned and navigated
by Europeans, that their representatives in Congress will never consent to such
a tonnage, until they are compelled to it by a majority of votes.

These are evils of the first magnitude. The best and most important interests
of this Commonwealth in particular, as well as of the northern States at large,
are materially affected by them. What remedy shall we apply? Perhaps it is out
of our power, at this time, to provide one that is perfectly adequate; but it
is, nevertheless, our duty to effect all that we possibly can for this purpose.
We ought to become a separate government; and thereby give to the northern
interest an addition of two Senators in the Federal Legislature.

Having enlarged upon the advantages of an additional number of Federal
Senators, I will now mention one or two other reasons which ought to induce us
to wish for a government of our own, and which are also of a general nature.

The constitution of the United States is so happily constructed, that so long
as it is faithfully administered, the powers which it gives to Congress, and
those retained by the several States, will be kept clearly distinct, and be
properly exercised by each of them respectively. But whenever it is
unfaithfully administered, Congress may usurp powers which they have no
constitutional right to exercise; and in the course of time, bring about a
consolidation of the States. This is an event which we have no reason to
believe will be effected very suddenly -- perhaps not in the present age. But
if it should happen at all, it is such an event as every friend to the
prosperity of his country must deprecate more than all the catalogue of
political mischiefs. -- The best security that we have against it, is that
laudable jealousy which the Legislatures of the several States will constantly
exercise over the administration of the general government. This jealousy will
operate as a check upon Congress. For should they attempt a usurpation of any
powers not expressly delegated to them by the constitution, the State
Legislatures will immediately consider such an attempt as an encroachment upon
their rights; upon this principle, that whatever powers are not expressly
delegated to Congress, are impliedly reserved to the people. If these
observations are founded on the principles of the Federal Union, it will
necessarily follow, that the more of these checks there are, the greater will
be the safety in the administration of the government, both of the United
States, and the individual States. An additional Legislature in the District of
Maine, will be an additional check upon the power of Congress.

This argument ought to have its due weight in the scale. I profess to be as
free as any man from groundless jealousies of the administration of the Federal
Government. But it ought to be considered, that the constitution of the United
States is to be transmitted to, and trusted in, the hands of posterity; -- that
we can neither foresee, or prevent, any changes in the principles or morals of
mankind, which the lapse of one or two centuries may introduce, and which may
be very unfriendly to the liberties and happiness of future generations.

Another important argument in favor of a dismemberment of the district, is,
that we shall have the government administered in the midst of the people. The
advantages which will flow from a government thus administered are very
numerous, as every person must be sensible, who is the least acquainted with
the business. The people at large will not then be so far removed from the
sources of political information, as they are at present. It is of great
importance, that they should be as well informed of the measures which their
Legislators are pursuing, as their situation will admit. They will then be able
to form a just opinion of such measures, and of those who pursue them.
Information of this kind will be the means of preventing erroneous and false
representations of the conduct of the Legisslature. This is an evil which too
much care cannot be taken to prevent. It creates a groundless disaffection
between the people and their rulers, which generally produces the worst
mischiefs to society. -- Designing men, who happen to be disaffected toward
the Government, may avail themselves of the ignorance which people far removed
from the seat of governmental information are necessarily involved in; and by
imposing upon their credulity, induce them to believe that the best of men are
become the worst of tyrants. False representations of this kind, by men of this
character, were undoubtedly a principal cause of the late civil discords, which
terminated in nothing short of high treason and rebellion.

In addition to these advantages, the interest of every part of the District is
so precisely the same, that the laws of the new government might be constructed
in such a manner, as to apply directly to the local situation, climate, habits
and business of every part of the territory. It cannot be said that this is the
case with the present laws of Massachusetts, as they respect us. In many
instances their laws have an injurious operation upon us; but admitting that
was not the case, it is nevertheless true, that many new ones might be
instituted more congenial to the state of the country, than any that ever have
been, or ever will be enacted by that government, until the eastern interest
predominates over the western. Whether it will be prudent for us to wait the
arrival of that period before we attempt to do ourselves justice, I leave to
the determination of those who have considered the subject. But in private life
we generally suppose, that when a man's business lies at a distance from him,
he cannot superintend it with that care and attention which is necessary to
prevent its falling into a deranged and relaxed situation. -- It is the same
with the present government. We are considered as the excresence of the family;
and their language is, "We have enough to do in taking care of the Commonwealth
in general; and if we make laws adapted particularly to the District of Maine,
we must do the same for every county in the State." -- This I confess is the
language of truth. Let us then relieve them from so distressing an
embarrassment, and make laws for ourselves. For, being at present but a minor
part of the Commonwealth, whenever a law is proposed to be enacted, which would
be advantageous to the Commonwealth in general, but adverse to the interest of
this part of it in particular, it will not only be the interest, but the duty
of the General Court to pass it. It will also be the duty of our own members to
promote it, although it should be against their interest. For every one of them
is under the sacred obligations of an oath, to discharge the duties of his
appointment impartially, and according to his best skill and judgment. They
cannot, therefore, without a violation of their oaths, be governed by their own
interest, or the interest of those whom they represent, when it comes in
competition with that of the majority. -- Thus it appears, that in all the
instances of the nature of those which I dwell upon, the duty of the General
Court will oblige them to enact such laws as may have a cruel operation upon
us, and that our own members will be under oath to oppress us.

We may rationally indulge a hope, that the establishment of a Legislative Body
in the District will be the means of changing for the better, the present
melancholy state of religion and learning. -- It does not come within the
compass of my present undertaking to point out the necessity of supporting the
institutions of the former, or the benefits that may be derived from a laudable
use of the latter of these ornaments and blessings of human life. But I cannot
forbear to add, that without them, mankind would soon degenerate into savage
ferocity; and society, instead of presenting us with the scenes of delightful
enjoyment, would exhibit the sad, uncomely picture of vicious and capricious
folly. None, therefore, but the abandoned and profligate will deny, that the
benefits of a good government greatly depend upon the instructions and examples
of a learned and liberal clergy; and none but the debased and degenerate will
assert, that the establishment of regular and well ordered schools of learning,
will not tend equally to promote the true interest of an enlightened people.
The disadvantages and disorders which many parts of the District are obliged
constantly to combat, and which those instructions which are gained from
schools, and from the pulpit, would undoubtedly tend to remove, must afford
real anxiety and distress to every heart that wishes for the prosperity and
happiness of mankind. But it would afford greater anxiety and distress to such
a heart, if the real state of the district in this respect were truly
described. I will not undertake to perform the painful task. It is enough for
me to say, that the present laws of Massachusetts are inadequate to the
complete removal of these evils.

In the old inhabited parts of the Commonwealth, the people have been so long
accustomed to provide for the support of ministers and schoolmasters, that mere
habit would be sufficient to induce them to continue in the laudable practice.
But in a new country, where the inhabitants are, for a number of years, obliged
to encounter every hardship, and use every exertion for the support of their
families, they frequently regret the want, but seldom provide for the means of
public worship and private instruction. Thus the same habit which in an
ancient settlement operates in favor of such a provision, in a new one has a
contrary tendency. The force of this habit often tends to persuade people, that
they cannot afford the means for education of their children, when they might
do it without inconvenience to themselves or families.

The neglect with which the laws for the regulations of schools are treated, by
many of the towns in this part of the country, seems to meet with a general
indulgence I will not undertake to enumerate those, which for a long time have
been, and still continue in this neglect. But let any man who is acquainted
with the country, especially the three eastermost counties, call to his mind
the number of towns which ought by law to have been provided with ministers and
schoolmasters for the last ten years; and then let him inquire how many of them
have been punished for their neglect of being thus provided, in the course of
that time. The result of that enquiry will afford full proof, that very little
notice has been taken of the laws; and also, that unless some amendments in
them are introduced, the benefits which they were designed to dispense will
never be enjoyed by the people in the eastern country. But these amendments
cannot be obtained until the governmental connection with Massachusetts is
dissolved. In the western parts of the Commonwealth, the institutions of
religion and learning, are generally attended to, and therefore, as to the
people there, the laws for their support have no need of amendments. But most
unfortunately for us, it is otherwise here; and our duty as men, as citizens
and as christians, calls aloud upon us to introduce a legislature into the very
center of the mischief, in order the more effectually to abolish it.

Another very important advantage that we shall enjoy by a separation from
Massachusetts, will be the sitting of a Supreme Judicial Court twice a year in
some, and once at least in all the counties in the district. At present we are
indulged with but one term of that Court annually in each of the counties of
York, Cumberland and Lincoln; and it is now holden in Lincoln but once a year
for that, and the counties of Hancock and Washington. The extent of the
Commonwealth, and the quantity of business they are called upon to transact, is
so great, that it is impracticable to effect a more favorable arrangement in
that department. All the business of the District, which a Supreme Court will,
for some years to come be called to transact, will not probably require more
than eight weeks in each year, exclusive of the time they are traveling. A
fortnight in each of the counties wherein the Supreme Court is at present
holden, would be amply sufficient for the whole of their business. A Supreme
Court, therefore, in case of a separation, might be conveniently holden twice a
year in the counties of York Cumberland and Lincoln, and once (or oftener if
necessary) in those of Hancock and Washington.

The relief which this arrangement would afford to the people would be very
great. For in each of the two western counties there is but one week allowed
for the whole of the business. The consequence is, that very often near one
half of it is left unfinished, for want of time. Parties and their witnesses,
with all the horrors of poverty in their appearance, are obliged to attend the
Court the whole of the week, and at the end of it, return to their families
with their business undone, disappointed, dissatisfied and impoverished. Their
complaints are loud and affecting, and of such a nature that they cannot be
removed. But, it is of great consequence to the interest and happiness of the
citizens, that their wrongs should be redressed without delay; and we cannot
provide for them a greater blessing than the speedy and prompt administration
of justice.

An additional number of terms of the Supreme Judicial Court would also relieve
the people from a very considerable expense, which is now annually incurred in
the support of criminals committed for trial. This is an evil which is daily
increasing. It is not an unusual thing, for persons to be confined in the
jails, at the public expense, for nine or ten months together, waiting for
nothing but the return of the Supreme Judicial court, to give them their trial.
Samuel Hadlock was confined in Pownalborough jail ten months. -- There are also
two persons now remaining in Portland jail, committed upon a charge of arson,
in the month of August; and who cannot be admitted to a trial until July; which
will be nearly eleven months from the time of their commitment. -- Abigail
Thompson was also confined in York jail eleven months. -- The support of these
persons, at nine shillings a week, which is the sum commonly allowed, amounts
to above sixty pounds.
Upon a fair calculation, one half of this expense would be avoided, if the
terms of that Court could be increased in the manner before stated. But,
suppose an innocent man to be committed for an offense not bailable; or if it
is, the person unable to procure either bail or the benefits of a habeas
corpus: The public must not only defray the expenses of his confinement, but
the injured prisoner may suffer the pairs and horrors of a twelve months
imprisonment, without any other satisfaction than what arises from a conscious
innocence, and the pleasure of reproaching the government for its delay.

The trouble, expense and injury occasioned by keeping the Clerks office of the
Supreme Judicial Court at Boston, are very great, and call for an immediate
remedy. At present, if a man recovers judgment for a debt, he cannot obtain an
execution (without which his judgment is fruitless) until he sends for it to
Boston. Many an honest cause has been lost by the ignorant or careless party,
who has procrastinated the procuring of his necessary papers from this office,
until the distance, or some other difficulty, has prevented his obtaining them
in season for trial. In many instances, they have been unable to defray the
expense; and in all, the trouble of doing business there from this part of the
country, is grievous and intolerable.

The advantages of a Supreme Judicial Court would be peculiarly great in the
counties of Hancock and Washington. Their law business would be done nearer
home; and their eyes would be regaled with a pleasure, that many of the
inhabitants have been quite unaccustomed to enjoy -- I mean the pleasure of
seeing the respectable rulers of the people, acting in concert with the
magistrates of their own counties, in carrying on the business of good
government. Their situation is so remote from any place where justice has been
administered by a collection of magistrates (until the late establishment of
their county courts) that many of them must necessarily be strangers to
judicial proceedings. I have been informed, from good authority, that when a
late Court of Sessions was held at Machias, a number of persons were indicted
by the Grand Jury; and that they supposed themselves to be actually convicted,
as soon as the bill of indictment was found against them. The ignorance of
these people of their right to be tried by Juries of their peers, is a striking
proof of the melancholy state of government in that part of the country.
It is really to be wished, that the sitting of a Supreme Judicial Court among
them may be accomplished. Besides the political and legal information which
they might gain by it, the annual return of the Judges among them would create
habits of respect and reverence for their characters. These would be insensibly
extended to the laws; and naturally produce the enjoyments of peace and good
order.

An argument of great weight in favor of a Separate Government, is, the
inequality with which the public taxes operate upon us. -- Taxes apportioned
according to a general valuation, must always have, in some degree, an unequal
operation, where the article taxed is of greater value in one part of the
Commonwealth than in another. A farmer in this part of the country is taxed as
much for the same quantity of stock, and the same number of acres of land, as a
farmer is in the vicinity of Boston. This is evidently unjust; because a cow in
that vicinity is of double the value of one in this; and ten acres of land may
be managed there in such a manner as to produce more profit to the owner, than
a hundred acres are made to yield in any part of the eastern country. In
addition to this, the length and severity of our winters are such as to
require, at least, one fourth part more of forage to support our stock, than is
required for that purpose at the westward. We are also subject to the loss of
our crops by untimely frosts and wild beasts, which are by no means so
destructive in the southern and western counties as they are here.

These difficulties, arising from such sources as, in our present political
situation, nothing but the hand of Omnipotence can remove, necessarily and
greatly decrease the value of our lands and stock, and reduce them far below
the general value of the same property elsewhere. For this injury there can be
no radical cure but a system of revenue founded upon a valuation of the
property of this district in particular: And if the consequences of it were
thoroughly traced, it would be found that the taxes which we annually pay more
than our just and equitabe proportion, would go far toward the support of a
government of our own.

There are in the district of Maine upwards of thirty unincorporated
plantations, the inhabitants of which do not at present enjoy their full
proportion of the public privileges. This is an argument in favor of a new
government, which ought to have its due weight. By putting them in a better
situation in this respect, we shall derive additional support and assistance
from them in the government, By incorporating them with town privileges, we
should reap the advantages of an increased representation. Members of the
general court, coming from the interior parts of the country where most of
these plantations are situated, would bring with them credible accounts of the
wants and grievances of infant and indigent settlements, which always require
the fostering hand of government for their encouragement and protection. When
they are called upon to bear their proportion of the public burdens, their
representatives will be instrumental in quieting the complaints which generally
follow these demands, by removing their apprehensions that their rulers are
spending their money unnecessarily; and by explaining to them the real state
and management of the public concerns. This will tend to establish in their
minds that confidence in public men, and their measures, without which the
harmony, so necessary to be cultivated between them and the people, will be in
a great measure destroyed.

We need not apprehend, at present, any danger from making our House of
Representatives too unwieldly, by the increase of its number. The business of
legislation is important, and ought not to be transacted in a hurry. The
greatest inconvenience arising from a numerous representation, is, that it
retards the public business. But much more injustice may be done to the
public, in running through the discussion of a measure in one day; and, by not
thoroughly digesting it, determining wrong; than, by spending a week upon it,
and finally determining right. -- I am sensible that it is a favorite
sentiment with many, that a small representation is preferable to a large one;
because it can dispatch the public business with greater speed. In some
respects this sentiment is just; in others it is not so. But, all things
considered, there certainly is greater safety in a full representation than in
a small one.

It is highly probable, that the establishment of a Government in this District
will induce men of learning and education to settle in it. It will be happy for
us, if, by this means, we can add to the number of our men of literature.
Persons of this character, who happen to be a little tinctured with ambition,
will probably make the first attempt They will consider that the new State must
have its officers, civil, military and judicial. This will open a field for
their ambitious and aspiring geniuses. They will imagine a young Government in
a new country, to be the proper theater for the commencement of their career;
and although they may be deceived in their expectations, the country may gain a
number of respectable citizens.

Immigrations of other valuable citizens will probably be increased by a new
Government. Should this be the case, the interest of, and improvements in,
husbandry will be advanced, the country opened, and many of the hardships,
which we now encounter from climate and local situation, alleviated. Good
policy will dictate the enacting of laws for the encouragement of agriculture;
for inviting strangers to settle upon governmental lands, free from taxes for a
number of years; -- and for making other regulations of a similar nature.

A great inconvenience which we labor under in having all our money that is
raised and expended for the support of Government, carried out of the District,
will be remedied by a separation from Massachusetts. All the money which we now
pay toward the support of government, and the discharge of its debts, is
carried to the seat of government, there deposited, and there expended. With
this inconvenience may be also ranked others of a similar nature. While the
seat of government remains at Boston, we are necessarily called to that capital
to transact all our public business. -- Nothing can be done at the offices of
the Secretary, Treasurer, Commissary General, Clerk of the Supreme Court, etc.
etc. without traveling, at a great expense, from sixty to four hundred miles.
It is true opportunities by water frequently happen, and in the most easterly
parts of the District, are generally embraced; but their uncertainty often
occasions delays and disappointments, to the great injury of the people.

If the money, which is necessarily carried out of the country by these means,
could be retained in circulation at home, it would contribute toward the
removal of some of the many complaints arising from the scarcity of cash. All
the money sent out of the District in this manner, is the same to us as if it
were sent out of the world. Our policy ought therefore to be such as will
contribute to keep it among ourselves. In the back and recently settled parts
of the country, cash is scarcely known as a medium of trade. When the people
are called upon for their taxes, it frequently happens that they are obliged to
make great sacrifices of their property in order to obtain cash; and when the
trouble of procuring it at any rate, is taken into consideration, humanity
requires that we should exert ourselves for their relief.

There is another consideration, which ought to come into the list of reasons
in favor of a new government in this District; and that is, the appointment of
such State officers as now are, or in future may be, in the gift of the federal
administration. We are now considered by the federal government, merely as a
part of, or rather as an appendage to, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Whenever, therefore, any thing is to be done, or any appointments made, in
favor of the State at large, our situation is at present such as does not
entitle us to the expectation of being benefited by them. I will mention only
one instance, which has lately happened.

By the passing of the excise bill, which Congress have now agreed to, there is
an officer in each State, called a Supervisor of the excise. The emoluments of
this office, will be handsome; but the President of the United States could not
with propriety appoint to it a person whose place of residence is remote from
the capital. Indeed, his duty requires that he should appoint a man situated in
the center of the business. As there is one of these officers only in each
State, if we had been a separate government at the time of passing the before
mentioned bill, the country in general, and very probably the town of Portland
in particular, would have been benefited by the appointment of a Supervisor of
the excise. The States of Newhampshire and Vermont have been benefited by the
appointment of a Supervisor of the excise, when neither of them are so justly
entitled to the advantage as we are; because we pay a greater sum for impost
and excise than either of those States.


It does not require the spirit of prophecy to predict, that we shall
constantly be in the way of similar advantages, should we become a distinct
member of the Union. But, so long as we continue in our present situation, we
can have no reason to expect the enjoyment of any of them.

To these observations it may be added, that our dignity and respectability
will be increased, by our becoming a member of the great federal body; and when
it is found that our governmental concerns are well managed in the hands of our
own public men, the idea will create a certain regard and attachment to the
welfare of the District, which will tend to ripen and expand the noble
principles of patriotism, in the minds of those who are accustomed to feel for
the prosperity of their country.

The pay now expended in Boston, by the Senators and Representatives of the
people, during their attendance of the General Court, will center at the seat
of the new government; and the circulation of it be thence extended into the
country. -- Wherever this place may be, it will be more rapidly settled by men
in trade than it otherwise would; who may not only benefit themselves but the
whole country by the circulation of their property. Such are our advantages for
ship building and navigation, that the number of wealthy importers of their own
goods, will probably be increased. -- They will by these means be able to
dispose of them at a lower price than they can now be purchased at; the
benefits of which will be extended to the poor and industrious part of the
country.

We shall also reap the advantages of the growth and increase of the country,
by dissolving our connection with the present government. This argument does
not operate with the same force now, as it did before the late assumption of
the greater part of the State debt. But it still has weight, because there is
still a public debt to be provided for, and because the expenses of a new
government will not increase in proportion to the increase of the people.

In order to demonstrate its importance, let it be considered, that our part of
the public taxes, before the last valuation was taken, was about one eleventh
of the whole. -- This valuation was ordered to be taken in the year 1783; and
was completed in the latter part of the year 1785. -- But such is the increase
of our numbers since that time, that if a valuation should be taken in the
present year, and the taxes afterward laid upon the polls only, we should pay
nearly, if not quite, one fifth of the whole taxes of government. This cannot
be precisely ascertained; because the numbers in the District are not yet
accurately known; but from the best accounts the Marshal can obtain from those
he has employed to take the census, and from his own enumeration, our numbers
will amount to about L.95,000.
I will not undertake to determine how it would be, if the taxes were laid upon
the estates as well as the polls; because it is not certain that our property
increases in proportion to our numbers. But admiting our number of inhabitants
to be 95,000, and those to the west of Newhampshire, to be 378,787 (which is
the return of the Marshal of Massachusetts District) our proportion to their's
is about as one to four -- as common arithmetic will demonstrate. -- Now, if
we had obtained a separation, when our proportion of the public debt, and
other public burdens, were only a tenth, allowing that we had made no
provision to reduce them, it would now have been only half as difficult to pay
them as it was then; because we now have double the number of inhabitants to
apportion them upon. And such is the effect of the increase of our country in
this respect, that if we delay the business of a separation until after a new
valuation is ordered to be taken, our proportion of the taxes of the present
government, will fall very little short of double the sum to what it was seven
years ago.

By the constitution of the Commonwealth, the General Court are obliged to
order a valuation to be taken once in ten years; and as much oftener as the
public good may require. As it is now more than seven years since the last
valuation bill passed, and as two years are commonly taken up in putting it in
execution, we may reasonably expect that, in the course of the next year a
valuation will inevitably be ordered to be taken. The house of Representatives
ordered a valuation to be taken in February 1790, and passed a bill for that
purpose, which was negatived in the Senate. They passed another bill for the
same purpose the last February, which was also negatived in the Senate. We may
expect that a third attempt will prevail.
We ought therefore to hasten the progress of a separation on this account.

The present prosperous state of the public treasury, is another reason in
favor of a separate government. While the consolidated debt of the
Commonwealth hung like a dead weight upon the shoulders of the people, it was
conjectured that the difficulty we should meet with in adjusting our
proportion, and the danger of our being unable or unwilling to provide for the
payment of it, would be a reason for the General Court to withhold their
consent to the measure.

The whole of this debt, before the assumption of about four fifths of it by
Congress, amounted to upwards of five millions of dollars; four millions of
which are now taken into the hands of Congress, and must be provided for out of
the resources of the general government. We have, therefore, nothing to do with
it. The balance, or that part unassumed, and which the Commonwealth have now to
provide for, will in the beginning of the year 1792, and including the
interest, amount to L.560,000. To this is to be added about L.75,000, now due
from the treasury of the Commonwealth to individuals, and is commonly called
the debt due by warrants and due bills (which includes the orders upon back
taxes) amounting in the whole to the sum of L635,000.

To discharge this sum, we may rely upon the following resources. First, the
demand which the Commonwealth has against the United States for advances made
in carrying on the late war, more than her proportion. Commissioners have been
appointed by Congress, to receive and allow the demands of this nature, which
the several States have against the United States. The General Court, more than
a year ago, appointed a gentleman, The Honorable Nathan Dane, Esquire
with full power to exhibit and enforce these claims and accounts of the
Commonwealth; who has been laboriously employed in the business to the present
time. And from the best information that I can obtain, as to the state of it,
he will be able to bring the whole to a close, in the course of the present
year. The sum which will be found due to the Commonwealth, upon this
settlement, cannot be precisely ascertained; but it is generally supposed by
those who are acquainted with the business, that the balance in our favor will
amount to a sufficient sum to discharge the whole of the unassumed part of the
consolidated debt. -- I will mention only two facts to show that this opinion
is well founded.

When the armies of the United States were disbanded, at the conclusion of the
late war, nearly one third of all the troops then in service, belonged to the
Massachusetts line. -- If this be true (and I had the information from good
authority) it cannot be doubted that we supported more than our proportion of
continental troops; and that we shall be credited accordingly in the adjustment
of our demands against the United States.

The whole expense Estimated at L.300,000.
of the Penobscot expedition was also borne by this Commonwealth, and is yet to
be placed to our credit in the public accounts. We may, therefore, reasonably
conclude from the foregoing statement, that our demands upon the federal
treasury will be sufficient to set against the whole of the unassumed part of
the consolidated debt. And many who pretend to be well acquainted with the
business, are confident that it will be more than sufficient for that purpose,
and that a considerable balance will be found in our favor.

In order to discharge the L.75,000, due, as beforementioned, by warrants and
due bills, we have more than that sum due to the treasury, upon taxes prior to
No. 8, which is already appropriated for that purpose. Whenever the collection
of these taxes is enforced, we shall find the treasury of the Commonwealth
quite clear of debt. But, admitting that I am too sanguine in my expectations
from the settlement of our demands against the United States; we have
continental securities now in the treasury, to the amount of L.90.000, the
price of which is daily increasing, and will soon rise to their nominal value.
There is L100,000 in specie due to the Commonwealth, from the late purchaser of
the Genesee lands -- Messiers Gorham and Phelps's bond to the Commonwealth for
L.100,000, in consolidated notes, which the General Court have agreed to
receive at 6 s. 8 d. in the pound -- L73.000, the proceeds of 750,000 acres of
eastern lands already sold; and the whole amount of taxes No. 8 and 9 amounting
to L55,000.

Besides the agreeable prospect which arises from the foregoing statement* we
have to mention, that the committee for sale of eastern lands compute, that we
have about eight millions of acres in the whole territory, which is daily
selling, and daily increasing in value. Some parts of it are more valuable than
others, and of course will sell at a greater price; but I believe none of it
has been sold for more than 2 s. nor less than 8 d. per acre. Suppose the whole
to average 1 s. per acre. the amount will be 400,000 l.

Let us now see how the balance stands upon the whole.

Against the Commonwealth.
Balance of unassumed debt, including the interest to Jan. 1792, L.560,000
Amount of warrants, due bills, etc. 75,000 L.635,000 In favor of the
Commonwealth.
Amount of Continental Securities in the treasury, L. 90,000 Due for the
Genesee lands, in specie, 100,000 Amount of Gorham and Phelps's bond, 33,333
Proceeds of eastern lands already sold, 73,000 Amount of taxes No. 8 and 9,
55,000 Value of eastern lands unsold, 400,000 751,333 Balance in favor of the
Commonwealth, L.116,333

The foregoing statement is made without including in the credit of the
Commonwealth any sum we are to receive from the United States, as the balance
of our account against them. And the reader will perceive that no discount is
made upon the continental paper, from the idea that it will soon rise to its
nominal value.

I think it must now plainly appear, that the unembarrassed, or rather the
prosperous state of the treasury of the Commonwealth, is a great reason in
favor of our separation from Massachusetts. Indeed, it is very evident, that
if the public property should be judiciously managed, it might be put into
such a situation as speedily to pay off the public debt; and the residue might
be appropriated in such a manner as to produce an income which would go far
toward defraying the annual expenses of the civil list. -- When this happy
period will arrive, I cannot undertake to say; but sure I am, that the
proportion of the public property which belongs to this District, whenever it
comes into the hands of a Legislature of our own, may be so disposed of as to
produce the happiest effects to the community.

II. I WILL now, according to my proposed original intention, state, and
endeavor to obviate, such objections as have been raised against a separate
government in the District of Maine.

It has been said, that multiplying the number of States will be very
inconvenient; and productive of disagreeable consequences, to the general
interest of the nation. -- This was a real and weighty objection in my mind,
while the States were under the confederation. The absolute and unlimited
sovereignty with which each State was then invested, rendered the general, and
particularly the commercial interest of the Union extremely perplexed. In those
decisions, where the various interests of the extensive whole were affected,
unanimity was out of the question; and as decisions of this kind were
frequently made, an increase of the number of States would then have been an
increase of their perplexities -- But the state of the Union, in this respect,
is far different from what it then was. That excellent and sublime production
of human genius, the federal constitution, has bound the United States
together, with lasting cords, in the sure bundle of national prosperity. -- The
division of a State is now no longer an evil; but by being properly conducted,
may be converted into an important advantage. The great objection against it,
which formerly existed, is now removed. It is now no longer in the power of a
single State in the Union, to prevent the adoption of wise and necessary
regulations, merely by obstinately withholding its consent to them. Having
provided against this evil by the establishment of the federal constitution, we
may now offer the same reason for dividing a State, when the interest or
convenience of its inhabitants require it, as would operate in favor of
dividing a town, in a similar situation. The object of the State Legislatures
is now, merely, to establish such local laws and regulations, as will tend to
make all the burdens of government rest lightly upon the shoulders of the
people. The management of all the intricate and weighty concerns of government,
as has been shown in a former page, is in the hands of Congress. Those of a
less important nature can always be more understandingly managed by a
Legislature in the vicinity of its constituents. Perhaps the true interest of
the United States at large requires, that their number should be increased. I
will suppose, for instance, the time to be now arrived, when, according to the
number of the inhabitants in the United States, the federal House of
Representatives must consist of two hundred members, and the number of states
to be the same as when the constitution was framed. There being no increase of
the number of States, and of course no increase of the number of federal
Senators, it would be in the power of fourteen men to put a negative upon a
law, which two hundred of the Representatives of the people believed to be
necessary and productive of the public good. This is a striking proof of the
necessity of increasing the number of States, in order that the aristocratick
branch of the federal Legislature should bear a greater proportion, in point of
numbers, to that branch which is chosen more immediately by the people.

It has also been objected, that the difficulty of adjusting and settling our
proportion of the public debt, and of the unimproved lands which now belong to
the Commonwealth, will be insurmountable. -- The former of these difficulties,
I trust, is now removed by the prosperous change of our affairs concerning it.
As to the latter, that of dividing the State lands, I can see no difficulty at
all in the business. If a division of them takes place, it is not to be
expected that our several proportions can be ascertained to a single acre. We
have now such surveys of them, as to render their quantity generally known. But
perhaps there is no necessity of their being divided in the present situation
of things. Let the present committee for their sale be continued in their
office, and authorized to go on to dispose of them, on the joint account of the
two States. It will be easy to ascertain and settle our proportion of the
proceeds; -- and whatever that proportion is, we may either have credit for the
amount in the treasury of the Commonwealth, if that should be found convenient,
after the terms of our separation are agreed upon; if not, it may be paid
immediately into our own treasury. I can foresee no possible injury that will
accrue to us from this mode of conducting the business. -- We shall, at all
events, retain the jurisdiction over the land which may be in this manner sold;
and thus avail ourselves, not only of our proportion of the money which the
lands may sell for, but reap the advantages and supports which a settlement of
them by industrious citizens will afford to the government.

Another objection, and which I have lately heard made to our separation from
Massachusetts, is, that it will be the means of transferring to the federal
Judicial Courts, all actions and controversies between the citizens of the two
States. -- It is certainly true, that being citizens of different States, in
case a separation is obtained, their controversies of a certain kind and amount
will be cognizable in the District or Circuit Courts of the United States. But
it is also true, that when a plaintiff in any action thus cognizable, chooses a
federal jurisdiction, it will be in favor of the citizens of this District.
For by the judicial bill of the United States it is enacted, "That no citizen
shall be arrested in one District for trial in another, in any civil action,
before a District or Circuit Court. And no civil action shall be bro't before
either of said Courts against an inhabitant of the United States by any
original process in any other District, than that whereof he is an inhabitant,
or in which he shall be found at the time of the service of the writ." Instead,
therefore, of being liable to be called to answer to the actions of parties in
distant counties of the Commonwealth, as we now are, the certain consequence of
a separation will be, that no citizen can be sued in any court of law, in any
case whatever, which is not holden in some part of the District, unless he
happens to be arrested when he is out of it. For no process proceeding from the
Judicial Courts of a State, can run into, or be executed in, any place that is
not within the State where it is issued. And by the foregoing extract it
appears, that no civil action can be instituted against an inhabitant of the
United States, in any of the federal Courts, which are not holden in the
District where he has his residence.

The consequences of a separation on this account, thus appear to be in favor
of the measure, instead of operating against it. The scandalous practice, which
has too long prevailed, of negociating notes of hand merely for the purpose of
increasing the cost of suing them (by commencing actions upon them in the
extreme corners of the State in the name of nominal or fictitious plaintiffs)
will be effectually abolished. The unfortunate, and perhaps indigent debtor, by
this means, has been frequently loaded with a bill of cost, equal to, if not
greater, than the sum he has been sued for; to the disgrace of the hard hearted
creditor who consented to it, and the avaricious attorney who encouraged and
conducted the suit.

But, in many instances, the real plaintiff may live in a distant county, and
will be justified in calling the party with whom he is contending as near to
his own door as possible. In all these cases, the enormous sums of money which
are now paid for bills of cost, and other expenses incurred by the travel and
attendance of parties and their witnesses, will be saved to those who are
obliged to attend the judicial courts in the west and south parts of the
Commonwealth.

But all these considerations aside, I apprehend the people will continue to be
too partial to the judicial courts of the State, to wish to change them for any
other. And without entering into an examination of the comparative merit or
advantages of the two jurisdictions, we may safely conclude that there is no
danger of the federal court's being preferred to those which we shall hereafter
institute by a Legislature of our own choosing.

A want of learned and experienced men, has been alleged as an unanswerable
argument against a new government. -- Those who are weak enough to make this
objection, ought to be acquainted, not only with the character of the
inhabitants of the District in general, and those in particular who have
already served an apprenticeship in politics, but also with the nature of the
business they will be called to transact. It is improper to particularize any
number of gentlemen, whose abilities might be proved equal to the duties of any
office they may be called to sustain under the new government. But the nature
of their business may be considered and explained, and the people hereby
assisted in forming an opinion as to the probability of its being performed
with honor to the government, and credit to those who may be employed in it.

The executive, legislative, and judicial departments of government, are those
which will most require the exercise of abilities, integrity and industry. --
For the first, nothing more will be required than discretion, sound judgment,
an acquaintance with the world and with public life. The structure of most, if
not all the constitutions on the continent, have denied to this department the
exercise of any powers, which even an improper use of, could render very
prejudicial to the people. But notwithstanding this, the person who is called
to fill it, has an opportunity of gaining such an ascendency over the minds of
the people, that by a prudent management of their confidence, he may in some
measure direct the politics of the State. -- The place, however, that is
commonly assigned him by the frame of government, rather constitutes him a
respectable master of ceremony, than gives to him the exercise of any important
powers. In this, neither sublimity of genius, nor profundity of erudition, are
absolutely necessary.

As to the second, viz. the legislative department, we may observe, as we have
repeatedly done before, that the most difficult and important business of it is
transfered to the general government. With respect to the residue, it is
chiefly done already. The present code of Massachusetts laws (except those
which will require alteration or amendment before they are put in operation
here) will doubtless be adopted. There are enough of them in all conscience;
and I sincerely believe, that if there was not another to be added to them
which would affect the general regulations of property, or the administration
of justice, it would be far better than the continual change through which they
have passed for the last seven years.

The future business of a General Court, after the government is once firmly
established, will consist principally of such local regulations as any men of
common understanding and sound judgment will be capable of making. I trust we
have as great a proportion of such men in the District of Maine, as there are
in any part of the Commonwealth. We may, therefore, go on with a new
government, on this account, with the utmost safety.

But the judicial department must be filled by men of great abilities and
integrity, in order to insure a happy administration of the new government.
Much of its dignity and importance will depend upon a bench of Supreme Judges,
filled by men of this character. For the wisest and best laws may be enacted by
the legislature; but the people cannot enjoy the benefit of them, unless they
are wisely interpreted, and put in operation, by the Judicial Courts.

I flatter myself that four or five men may be found in the District of Maine,
whose knowledge of the law, whose integrity and judgment will be found equal to
an honorable discharge of the duties of a Supreme Court. A knowledge of the
intricate and abstruse points of law, will doubtless be of service to them; at
least so far as to guard them against any unjust attempts of the gentlemen of
the bar, to mislead them. Sound judgment, quick penetration, patient
investigation, and candid deliberate inquiry, together with a knowledge of the
general principles of law, will go very far to make up the character of a
valuable and an upright Judge. We certainly have more than five men in the
District who are in every respect deserving this character. I could enumerate
double the number without the least hesitation.

We shall have still less difficulty to encounter from the supposed want of men
of learning and experience in forming a constitution. We shall have at least
fourteen models before us to select from, some of which are allowed, both in
Europe and America, to contain the utmost perfection of human wisdom in matters
of civil policy. The constitution of this Commonwealth in particular, under the
authority of which we have been so long and so happily governed, has been
generally reckoned one of the best. That of the United States, which contains
the collected wisdom of the whole continent, varies from it but in some few
instances. In forming one for ourselves, we shall have, not only the advantage
of comparing the two together, and judging for ourselves upon that comparison;
but we shall also be able to correct any errors in the former which a ten
year's experience and practice upon it, may dictate.

The last objection which I shall attempt to answer, arises from an opinion
that the expenses of the new government will exceed our proportion of the
present. -- This objection depends entirely upon the future conduct of the
people. If they mean to throw away their money by supporting a great number of
useless officers in luxury and debauchery, the objection is certainly well
founded. But if, on the contrary, they are determined to create no more of them
than may be found necessary for the management of the affairs of the State with
propriety and dispatch, and to allow them such salaries as will be a handsome
equivalent for their services, and no more, it will be found that we shall save
money by the exchange of governments.

The expenses of the government of Massachusetts before the adoption of the
federal constitution, amounted annually to L.18,000; but since that time, they
have been considerably less. The business of the General Court does not now
take up so much time, as it then did; and the pay of the members of Congress,
which was then a State charge, is now taken from the treasury of the United
States. These two circumstances have reduced the annual expense of the present
government to L. 15,000. The proportion of this sum which the citizens of this
District will pay after a new valuation is taken, being one fifth, will be
L.3000. As has been formerly observed, we must expect that the General Court
will order a new valuation to be taken in the course of the next year. Our
calculations, therefore, ought all to be made according to the proportion of
taxes which we shall be obliged to pay after that time: Because, let us be ever
so expeditious, we shall be probably more than a year in settling the terms of
our separation with the government, and in obtaining the consent of Congress.

I will now exhibit an estimate of the expenses of a government in this
District which will fall some what short of L.3000 per annum, and then
endeavor to defend it, by explaining my reasons for each article.

GOVERNOR, L.300 Ten Senators, 60 days each, at 6 s. per day, 180 Forty
Representatives, 60 days each, at 5 s. 600 Travel of 10 Senators and 40
Representatives, averaging 100 miles each, computing 20 miles as a days
attendance, 75 Secretary, 100 Treasurer, 120 Clerks of the Senate, and of the
House, each 30 l. 60 Messenger to the General Court, 25 Chief Justice of the
Supreme Judicial Court, 220 Three associate Judges, 200 l. each, 600 Attorney
General, 150 Chaplain to the General Court, 9 Total, L.2439

By this estimate it appears, that after a valuation is taken, provided the
increase of property in the District has been equal to that of its numbers, we
shall save annually the sum of L.561 by becoming a separate Government, if it
can be made to appear that the estimate is accurate and reasonable. If it is
too high, as many will think it is, it will follow that a larger sum will be
saved.

In the first place, the sum of L300 will be an ample support for the Chief
Magistrate, whom I choose to call a Governor. For as the federal constitution
allows no title except that of President, to the first man in the nation (and
while the office is sustained by its present illustrious possessessor, I may
add, the first man in the world) to give the same title to the Chief Magistrate
of a single State, will be found not only improper, but inconvenient.

But in order to show that the sum of L.300 is ample for the support of a
Governor, it may be said, that their is no part of the District where that
sum, regularly paid and economically expended, will not support a family in as
good a style as will be consistant with the present state of society in this
part of the country. The refinements of luxury in this wooden world would be
rediculous. Besides the pernicious example of idleness which they would set
before the people, the catalogue of vices they would engender might alarm and
affright the plain honest citizen. We have no occasion, therefore, to make any
allowance for the expenses they would create.

An attention to a little private business would be not at all incompatible
with the true dignity of a Governor. By this means he might not only increase
his property, but set an example of industry to the public. From the
peculiarity of our situation he would be unexposed to many expenses which
devolve upon Governors of others States, by the visits of strangers of
distinction, whom decency obliges them to notice.

The next article in the foregoing estimate, is an allowance of 6 s. per day
for ten Senators, supposing their business to require their attendance 60 days
in a year. This allowance will be found fully competent for the pay of that
branch of the Legislature. It is 6 d. less per day than our present Senators
have received for some years past. This sum will not be thought too large; the
doubt as to this article is, whether 60 days in a year will be a sufficient
allowance of time for their business to be done in. We must form our opinion
upon this point, by comparing the business of the whole Commonwealth with what
will probably arise hereafter in this District.

The General Court of Massachusetts, since the establishment of the federal
constitution, has generally sat from eighty to ninety days in the year. Much of
that time has been taken up, in debating upon subjects which we shall have
nothing to do with in future. From the great number of people in the
Commonwealth, who have constant occasion to apply to the Legislature for
remedies which no other tribunal in the government can provide, their private
business necessarily occupies a great share of their attention; perhaps a much
greater, than that of a public nature. The numbers of this District being much
less, the business of our future General Court will be less of course. For
these reasons, it may be fairly concluded, that although more than sixty days
in a year may be necessary upon the first establishment of the Government, in
order to put it into operation, yet, after that time, the ordinary business of
it will not require more than fifty or sixty days at most.

The number of Senators will doubtless be as many as twelve, but not more than
ten out of the number will be constantly attending the General Court.

The travel of the Senators and of the Representatives must both be paid out of
the public chest. I have computed this at L.75, allowing twenty miles travel
to be equal to a day's attendance (which is the present custom) and supposing
the number of Representatives to be forty, and their travel to average each a
hundred miles, including the distance to and from the seat of government. Forty
Representatives are as few as we can expect the General Court to consist of,
when we consider that there are now sixty nine incorporated towns in the
District which have a right to be represented, and also the number of
plantations which will immediately upon a separation, receive the privileges of
incorporation. And it will be found that the allowance of 100 miles travel to
each Senator and Representative is as much as the whole travel will average for
a number of years to come, if the place for the seat of the new government
should be, as it undoubtedly will be, fixed upon in the center of the
inhabitants, and not of the territory.

The allowance of 5 s. a day for the pay of the Representatives, is 1 s. less
than what has been usually allowed by the General Court of Massachusetts. But
as the expenses of living in this District will be somewhat less than they are
in Boston, this sum will be an adequate compensation.

The Secretary will be an important officer, and ought to be fully compensated.
The sum I have allowed him, together with such perquisites of his office as
will naturally accrue, will be sufficient.

The Treasurer is a more responsible officer than the Secretary, and the duties
of his office more intricate and laborious; he will therefore be entitled to a
larger salary. His office will admit of so few perquisites, and require such
constant attention, that L. 120 will not be more than a compensation for his
services.

The allowance of L.30 for each of the Clerks, will be nearly if not quite
equal to the pay of the members of the General Court. They cannot expect to be
better provided for than their employers; but the tedious business of their
office entitles them to be made nearly equal to them. These, together with the
Messenger and Chaplain, will be properly provided for, but naming the precise
sums is of little importance.

The Chief Justice, and the Associate Judges of the Supreme Court ought, above
all the other officers of government, to be liberally paid. The salaries of the
Chief Justice of Massachusetts is L.370, that of the other Judges L.350 each.
The duty of the Chief Justice is of such a nature as entitles him to a larger
sum than his Associates, were the dignity of his office out of the question. I
will mention no instance, excepting that most painful one, pronouncing sentence
of death upon criminals, There is no duty which a man can be called to the
discharge of in society, more distressing, or which would put his sensibility
so much to the torture. When the very nature of it is, to add to the weight of
affliction with which the wretched criminal is loaded, what a miserable
alleviation is money to the distresses of a feeling heart!

The sum of L.200 which I have allowed for the salaries of the puisne Judges,
will not be sufficient to support their families, and to pay their traveling
expenses. They ought therefore to be higher, if the abilities of the people
were equal to it, to enable them to devote that time to study, which must
otherwise be employed in procuring a livelihood. They ought to be placed beyond
the reach of temptation, by being honorably provided for by the government.
They can pursue no other business to advantage while their duty obliges them to
be often upon the circuit; and if any of the bar should be advanced to that
honorable station, they could have no other means of support. -- But it is a
nigardly idea, that the public officers should be barely supported, when every
other citizen is pursuing and adding to his worldly interest. Why should the
man who gives himself up to the service of his country, be the only one who is
precluded from a moderate increase of his estate? It ought to be considered,
that such men have children, whose education and advancement in the world
depend altogether upon their exertions; that if the proceeds of their offices
are expended in the necessary suport of their families, these children must be
brought up in ignorance; and that annexing a low and pitiful salary to the most
important offices in the community, will be the probable means of having them
filled by ignorant or unprincipled men.

The office of Attorney General ought also to be filled by a man of integrity
and abilities. It is an office, upon the faithful discharge of which, depends
much of the prosperity of the government. The Attorney General ought to be
equal, in point of learning and abilities, to any of the Judges of the Supreme
Court; and if the responsibility, labor, and disagreeable business of the
office were duly attended to, he would appear to be entitled to an equal
salary. The salary of the present Attorney General is L.300.
It in a great measure throws him out of other business; and renders him in
some degree an unpopular character. I have omitted to insert in the estimate
any sum for the annual contingent expenses of government. As these cannot be
ascertained with any degree of certainty, to mention any particular sum might
be the means of an erroneous computation. But it is almost certain they will
fall short of our present proportion of that species of expense, which is now
incurred in the Commonwealth. The enormous sums of money which are annually
granted for the support of the State's poor and of Castle William, make a great
proportion of this expense.

From February 1789 to June 1790, the General Court granted the sum of L.6786 3
10, for the support of the State's poor and of Boston alms house; and in June
1788, another sum of L.3500 for the support of Castle William -- amounting in
the whole to the enormous sum of L.10,286 3 10. Although in Justice we ought to
take our proportion of the State's poor, should a separation take place, yet it
may be observed that this will be only a temporary burden. As Boston, from its
extensive trade, is the principal resort of foreigners, the number of persons
who are entitled to the charity of government will generally center in that
capital. But we may add that our proportion of the public property, such as the
State House, the public Arsenals, etc. will balance the expense of that part
of the public poor which will sail upon us for a maintenance.




It has probably been noticed, that the beforementioned estimate does not
contain an allowance for the salary of a Lieutenant Governor, nor the pay of a
Council. My reason for omitting them is, that they will both be unnecessary in
such a form of government as might be safely adopted. The constitution of the
Commonwealth does not give to the Lieutenant Governor a single particle of
power, in any case whatever, excepting in the absence of the Chief Magistrate.
Whenever therefore the Governor is able to attend to business, the Lieutenant
Governor has nothing to do, excepting as a member of the Council, which he
always is, by virtue of his office. And if it should appear, that a Council may
be safely omitted in our new form of government, it will follow that a Lieut.
Governor will be a useless and superfluous officer; a mere cipher in the
government, without any authority to make him or his office respectable. In
short, he would be nothing more than a kind of death watch to the Governor,
waiting, and perhaps wishing for his decease, or removal. -- The President of
the Senate may be appointed to succeed the Chief Magistrate, in case of his
death, or removal from office; and the parade and expense of a Lieut. Governor
by this means saved to the people. Should this plan of government be thought
too simple, a Lieutenant Governor may be chosen, and made the President of the
Senate, and vested with other powers similar to those of the Vice President of
the United States. He might receive his pay as a member of the Senate, without
any additional salary, in which case the increase of expense would be very
trifling.


A Council to advise the Governor, would in my opinion be equally unnecessary.
-- As an authority for this opinion, I need only cite the constitution of the
United States. By that constitution there is no set of men appointed as a
distinct branch of the government, merely to advise the President. But in the
exercise of all the most important powers with which he is invested, he acts by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate. If, therefore, in a government
so complex, and which is designed to be exercised over such an extensive empire
as that of the United States, a Council has not been found to be necessary, we
may with safety be without one in the government of a territory so
comparatively small.

The only objection to this plan is, that it in some degree blends the
legislative and executive departments; but the principle of civil policy on
which this is founded, may be too much refined upon. Our Governor will have
little else to consult the Senate upon, than the appointment of civil officers.
Perhaps it would be as well, if he was left to act independently of the advice
of any branch of the government. His responsibility would in this case be
greater, and the inducements to a faithful discharge of his trust,
proportionably increased. Should he be disposed to make an improper
appointment, the consequences would then rest upon his own head, without his
having the advice and consent of a Council or Senate, behind which to screen
himself.

But after all, our great safety is, that the powers of government are wholly
in the hands of the people. If they make choice of good men for their rulers,
such rulers will make a judicious use of their authority. If by any means bad
men should be called to administer the government, they will be constantly
under the eyes of the people, who can order them into private life, at stated
and short periods.

Having made these observations upon the expenses of the new government, I will
take my leave of this part of the subject, by observing, that it must plainly
appear to every unprejudiced mind, that our expenses cannot be enhanced by the
measure, whether the foregoing estimate, and the plan upon which it is
projected, are accurate or not. -- Our proportion of the expenses of the
present government which is an eighth part of the whole, amounts now to L.1875,
only L.^64 less than the foot of my estimate, which I believe will be
acknowledged, to be fully as high as will be consented to by the government --
Admitting also, that our proportion of the whole will be as much as a sixth
(after a valuation is taken) which will doubtless be the case, it will amount
to L.2500. We shall then make an annual saving of L.70 by the separation. But
if our proportion should be a fifth, after a new valuation is taken, which we
know must be the case if comparative numbers were to determine it, we should
save the sum of L.561 per annum.

To these ideas let us add, the many advantages which will certainly accrue to
us, and it appears to me impossible that any man can hesitate in what manner to
decide upon the question.

III. WE have now arrived to the last thing to be considered, which is that we
have now the best opportunity to apply to the Legislatures of the Commonwealth
and of the Union for their consent to our separation.

That no time ought to be lost in making this application will appear from
diverse considerations. The first I shall mention is, that the terms upon which
we are to separate, will not probably be settled without taking up some time in
coming to an agreement upon them. -- If we were to adopt the opinion of those
who would put off the separation until the year 1795, when the constitution of
the Commonwealth may be revised, I think every prerequisite ought to be first
settled. For if we postpone any steps relative to the subject till the moment a
Convention of the Commonwealth is called to revise the constitution, and then,
instead of joining in that Convention, begin the business of a new government,
shall we not have an interregnum during the whole time we shall be employed in
effecting the measure? The State of Kentucky began the business of a new
government in 1787, and did not obtain the consent of the legislatures of
Virginia and of Congress until the latter part of the year 1790, although they
met with no other delay than what might naturally be expected, in settling a
business of so much importance. Their admission into the Union takes place in
July 1792.
The consent, therefore, of the two Legislatures which the federal constitution
requires, ought to be obtained in such season, that we may have time to agree
upon and adopt a constitution for ourselves, and have every thing else ready
for our admission into the Union, at the time the present constitution is
proposed to be revised. Otherwise we might be reduced to the disagreeable
alternative of refusing to join with the other part of the Commonwealth in this
revision, and of course remaining some time without any government at all; or
of joining with them in amending a constitution which we should have no
intention of being governed by. In either of these cases, the consequences
would be disagreeable and inconvenient. Although I see no necessity of waiting
till the year 1795, yet we cannot be better employed, than in attending to the
business of a separation, and putting it in such a train as will ensure its
advancement to a final issue at that time. Indeed, I cannot but observe, that
the state of the Commonwealth will then be such, that there will be a peculiar
fitness and propriety in our bidding the western part of it a friendly
farewell. The covenant which we have all entered into for the promotion of our
social happiness, will then be in some measure dissolved by mutual consent.
Having been happy in that connection for fifteen years, we can then say to them
-- Brethren, we are of opinion that our mutual interest dictates a separation
from each other. We are become a numerous people, inhabiting an extensive
territory; and shall be able in future, with the blessing of Heaven, to
maintain a government of our own. We think it best not to unite with you in a
revision of the form government, having taken the constitutional steps to
effect an amicable dissolution of our present connection. -- There is land
enough for us both; go ye to the right hand, and we will turn to the lest.

It is natural to expect, that in a business of such importance, we shall meet
with some delays. Whenever the question shall be seriously discussed in the
General Court, such of the members as have not attended to the consequences of
it, will desire to have every doubt removed, and every difficulty solved. If
the application should be made to the first session of the next General Court,
this session being a short one the business will go through but a partial
discussion, and be then refered to the winter session. -- Thus almost a year
will elapse before we can secure the attention of the Legislature to the
subject, in such a manner as to expect a final decision. Many unforeseen delays
may happen, which ought to induce us to embrace the earliest opportunity to
further the undertaking.

We have not much reason to fear that the consent of the Legislature to our
separation, will be withheld after they have been properly informed of the
conditions upon which we expect it to be granted. We may safely rely upon their
impartiality in the decision; but if this were not the case, we might rest
assured that a majority of its members will find it for their interest to vote
in our favor. One immediate effect of our dismemberment will be, the removal
of the seat of government to the town of Worcester. This removal has been
frequently talked of but never effected. -- It is an event, however, which
would be extremely gratifying to a large proportion of the members of the
General Court. The interest of the members who represent what is called the Old
Plymouth Colony, together with the seaport towns in the vicinity of Boston,
would most probably dictate an opposition. To balance which, there would be the
whole of the numerous representation from the counties of Worcester, Hampshire,
and Berkshire, and the interior parts of the county of Middlesex. When a full
representation from this District is added to that last mentioned, there can be
no doubt of our obtaining a large majority of votes in favor of a separation,
notwithstanding its operating to change the seat of government. In addition to
this they will consider that the business of their General Court, Supreme
Judicial Court, etc. will be lessened, the expenses of their government
proportionably curtailed, and the bounds of the Commonwealth made natural and
convenient.

The consent of Congress to our admission into the Union, which is also
necessary to be obtained, may be applied for at this time with greater
probability of success, than at any other which may happen for a number of
years. -- They have lately been petitioned for, and have granted their consent
to, the admission of a new State into the Union, by the name of Kentucky; a
territory which has been hitherto under the jurisdiction of Virginia. The
addition of two members in the federal Senate, from the southern States (which
will be made by the State of Kentucky) will increase their power and influence
in the national Legislature. This power ought, in justice to us, to be balanced
by an equal number of Senators from this end of the continent. I cannot
undertake to state any particular claim the State of Kentucky has to an
admission into the Union, more than we shall have, because I have not heard of
any. All that they have, is undoubtedly the same which we can make use of, with
equal propriety and truth. Having established this precedent, Congress have in
some degree laid themselves under an obligation, to grant a similar request
upon a similar application. Surely they will not manifest a partiality in
favor of the southern interest, at the expense of the rights of their fellow
citizens here.

But, admitting that we had not this reasonable claim upon their impartiality,
they have virtually given their consent to our separation, by erecting us into
a District, separate from, and independent of the District of Massachusetts.
They have done more; they have given the Judge of this District the powers of
the Circuit Courts of the United States. What could induce them to do this, but
a conviction that we ought now to be a State by ourselves? Their conduct in
this instance must have originated from a persuasion, that we cannot with
convenience hold any communion or intercourse with Massachusetts, in the
concerns of government. The circumstance that our District Judge is invested
with circuit powers, operates in our favor with double force; for it amounts
to full proof that Congress were sensible, not only of the great impropriety of
our being annexed to Massachusetts, but considered us so separated from them,
that a Circuit Court could not travel into the District without manifest
inconvenience.

I have now gone through the subject, in the manner that was at first proposed.
I presume its importance, however deficient I may have been in considering it,
will induce every citizen of the District to make a candid enquiry into its
merits. For he may be assured, however indifferent he may feel at present, that
the time is fast approaching when he will be called to decide upon it for
himself and for his posterity. From this consideration, I hope the sources of
every kind of information, will be laid open, for the benefit of the
industrious enquirer. No resolutions ought to be hastily adopted; because, in
order to form a right judgment upon the proposed separation, the advantages and
disadvantages ought to be laid together, and thoroughly examined. Although I am
clearly of the opinion, that we should gain much by the event, our situation at
present is not so deplorable, but that we shall find our advantage in
proceeding with coolness and moderation. Every possible precaution ought to be
taken, against the exercise of that fiery zeal, which blazes no where but in
the breasts of ambitious men.

Fellow citizens! guard yourselves against the effects of ambition, that
dangerous, resistless passion, which too often predominates in the human heart.
If you find men whom you believe to be governed by it, placing themselves at
the head of the important business of a separate government, when they assault
you with the pomp and parade of patriotism, "turn not aside to follow after
them." Trust your cause with the moderate and judicious part of the community;
and be assured, that in due time it will terminate in the effectual
establishment of your public and private felicity.


