Doctor DANA's SERMON ON THE African Slave Trade.

1790.

THE AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE.

A DISCOURSE DELIVERED IN THE CITY OF NEW HAVEN, SEPTEMBER 9, 1790, BEFORE THE
CONNECTICUT' SOCIETY FOR THE PROMOTION OF FREEDOM.

BY JAMES DANA, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN SAID CITY.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND SAMUEL GREEN.

M,DCC,XCL.

At a Meeting of the Connecticut Society for the Promotion of Freedom, etc.
VOTED, That the Thanks of this Society be returned to the Rev. Doctor DANA,
for the instructive Sermon which he delivered before the Society on the 9th Day
of September 1790, and that the President request a Copy thereof that it may be
printed.

A true Extract from the Records, Examined by SIMEON BALDWIN, Sec'y.

Epistle to the Galatians, IV. 31. So then, brethren, we are not children of
the bondwoman, but of the free.
THE churches of Galatia consisted principally of Jewish converts, who were
engaged to incorporate the Mosaic ritual with the Christian profession. They
boasted, at the same time, "We be Abraham's children, and were never in
bondage." With great address and pertinency St. Paul reminds them, "Abraham had
two sons; one by a bond-maid, the other by a freewoman." These were emblems of
the two covenants. Ishmael, by Hagar the bondwoman, represented the Sinai'
covenant; Isaac, by Sarah the freewoman, represented the Abrahamic covenant.
The former was local and temporary, founded in worldly promises, had
burdensome appendages, and only a shadow of heavenly things. The latter was
universal and permanent, a covenant of better hopes, and stripped of that
ceremonial which was a yoke of bondage.

The apostle has described the Christian church in distinction from the Jewish
thus: The Jews under Moses were like an heir in his minority, who is under
tutors and governors. The law was a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ. He
came to redeem them that were under the law; that they might be no longer
servants, but sons; heirs of full age, heirs of God through Christ. "Now we,
brethren, are the children of promise, as was Isaac," with whom the covenant of
better hopes was established. We are not children of the bondwoman, but of the
free.

The apostle proceeds: "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage." The
Sinai' covenant was subservient to the Abrahamic, till the seed promised to
Abraham came. When this seed came, that covenant had answered its purpose, and
gave place to a more liberal one. The Jewish converts acknowledged that this
seed was come: But they encroached on the liberty of their Fellow Christians,
by attempting to compel their observance of the abrogated ordinances of Moses.
This was falling from grace, cutting themselves off from the privileges of the
children of the freewoman, and desiring again to be in bondage to weak and
beggarly rudiments: It was returning to a state of minority, after the time
appointed of the father for their majority and freedom.

The apostle further acquaints them, that "the blessing of Abraham was come on
the GENTILES through Jesus Christ." For the promise was thus expressed: "In
thee shall all nations be blessed." There is therefore no difference, under the
Christian institution, between Jews and other nations. The latter, though by
nature in bondage, are made equally free of the family of Christ as the former.
This is the fulfillment of the prediction, "I will call them my people, which
were not my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved. Where it was said
unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall they be called the children of the
living God." The text, though immediately addressed to Jewish believers, is
equally applicable to believing Gentiles. These are not, any more than those,
children of the bondwoman, but of the free. They are "all one in Christ Jesus
-- children of God, whether Jew or Greek, bond or free, male or female -- If
Christ's, then Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise."

Christian freedom, being alike the privilege of converts from Judaism and
heathenism, primarily intends, on the part of the former, the abolition of the
encumbered ritual of Moses; and, on the part of the latter, liberation from
idolatrous superstition, to which they were in servile subjection: On the part
of both it intends deliverance from the slavery of vicious passions.

When Christ appeared, the whole world were sunk in ignorance and wickedness.
The Gentiles, professing themselves to be wise, know not God, and worshipped
and served the creature more than the Creator. They were vassals to the prince
of the power of the air. The Christian dispensation, accompanied with the holy
Ghost sent down from heaven, called them out of darkness into mavelous light;
they were turned from dumb idols, from the power of Satan, from worldly
pollutions, to serve the living God. The Jewish church had corrupted and made
void the law of God. Their guides taught for doctrines the commandments of men,
perverted to a worldly sense the promises of spiritual redemption, and imposed
a greater burden of ceremonies than Moses had enjoined. Christ removed the
vail of Moses, consecrated a new and living way to God, rescued the precepts of
the decalogue from the glosses of blind and interested guides, and disburthened
religion of that weight under which it had groaned. His yoke is easy, and his
burden light. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty in the highest
sense. The spirit of life in Christ removes the dominion of sin. His disciples,
made free from sin, walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. There is no
condemnation to them. Thus emancipated, they "wait for the hope of
righteousness by faith -- the redemption of the body." When made free of the
kingdom promised them, sin and the curse, pain, sorrow, death shall be no more.
How glorious this liberty!

Further: Christianity is a reasonable service, and founded in personal
persuasion. It permits us to "call no man master; for one is our master, even
Chris" to whom alone every one must stand or fall. His religion is friendly to
free enquiry: It directs us to "prove all things" -- to claim the liberty of
grounding our faith, not on the wisdom of man, but the power of God; and to
allow others the same. Our liberty may not be judged of their consciences, nor
their liberty of our conscience. They who are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak; and should take heed lest by any means their liberty,
their improved knowledge in Christianity, should be a stumbling block to
uninformed minds. "Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another. There is one body, and one spirit, and we are called in one
hope. One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all."

How then should different professors, and different denominations, endeavor
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, with all meekness,
humility and charity? The body of Christ is one, and has many members. The
members then "should have the same care one for another. If one suffer, all the
members should suffer with it; or if one be honored, all the members should
rejoice with it." Those are carnal, and walk as men, who contend for the system
of this or that man, or body of men. The children of the bondwoman would
exclude from the privileges of the Christian church, and doom to eternal
chains, such as do not embrace the faith or opinions they hold: But the
children of the freewoman have not so learned Christ. The simplicity and
perspicuity of this heavenly institution, designed to guide men of common
understanding in the paths of salvation, can derive no assistance from
speculations too high for the generality of mankind -- too high also for those
who exercise themselves therein.

In going off from one extreme, let us shun the other. "We are called unto
liberty:" Should it be an occasion of infidelity and indifference to all
religion, the guilt and shame must be aggravated. The real friends of liberty
always distinguish between freedom and licentiousness. They know that the mind
cannot be free, while blinded by skeptical pride, or immersed in sensuality.
Liberty consists not in subverting the foundations of society, in being without
law. Nor does it consist in reasoning against God, and providence, and
revelation. Nor in attempting to explain his nature, his government, and the
secret things which belong to him.

Christian liberty supposes that we receive the record which God has given of
his Son -- that we be not the servants of sin, but have our fruit unto holiness
-- that we abide in our callings.

Lastly, The spirit of Christianity has the best aspect on general liberty and
the rights of mankind. Would we persuade men to look, not on their own things,
but on the things of others, let us set before them the pattern of Christ. Was
ever grace or liberality like his, "who though he was rich, for our sakes
become poor, that we through his poverty might be rich?" He was "in the form of
God, -- but took upon him the form of a servant." He "came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and gave his life" to purchase spiritual and eternal
redemption for the slaves of Satan. Possibly for a friend, or a good man, some
might dare to die. But HE died for enemies, for the ungodly. Is it glorious to
die for one's country? HE died for all the world. Were the same mind in us, we
should love all mankind, and do good to all as we have opportunity. They who
hate and persecute us would be the objects of our good wishes and forgiveness.
We should pray, "Father, forgive them." We should have compassion on them, as
the good Samaritan had on the Jew whom he found helpless and ready to perish.
Every natural and friendly, every private and public affection is cherished and
improved by looking unto Jesus. And if we speak of universal philanthropy, how
does every example fade before his? He is not ashamed to call mankind his
brethren. His love to them was stronger than death, when they had forfeited the
privileges of children, and might have been consigned, with apostat^ spirits,
to chains and blackness of darkness. They owe all the liberty they have or hope
for to his friendship.

Where the spirit of Christ is, there is no envy, strife or confusion; no
discord and war; no invasion of the rights of others, either those of
individuals, or of societies and nations; but meekness, peace, and harmony, joy
in the happiness, and commiseration of the distresses of others. This spirit
does no ill to others, but all possible good. Rulers, under its influence, are
not oppressors, but benefactors. Subjects do not resist lawful authority; but
render tribute, custom, fear, honor to whom they are due, leading a quiet life
in godliness and honesty. When the spirit of Christianity shall universally
prevail, as our hope is that it will, nations will "learn war no more; they
shall not hurt nor destroy in all God's holy mountain."

Our Lord undertook not to say what men's personal and civil rights are -- what
the prerogatives of princes, or the sovereign power of a nation, and what the
privileges of subjects. He left civil distinctions among men as he found them.
He taught his disciples to "render to Caesar the things that are Cesar's, and to
God the things that are God's.

Among other relative duties, his religion particularly requires of servants,
that they be subject to their masters with all fear; not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward: Showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn
the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Let every man wherein he is
called, therein abide with God. Let as many servants as are under the yoke,
account their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and his
doctrine be not blasphemed. And they that have believing masters, let them not
despise them, because they are brethren.

Revelation has not informed us, what form of government is best adapted to
answer the ends of society. Every from must be some abridgment of natural
liberty. Our being social creatures, our dependence on one another, show that
government is the will of the Creator. The original from was probably
patriarchal. The theocracy of the Jews was appropriate to them. Monarchy was a
subversion of their constitution. No other form than theirs can be pronounced
divine. Nations have a right to institute such form as they choose. The
government of most nations, therefore, has been mere usurpation. Far from
being sanctioned by divine authority, we might rather consider the permission
of such government as his greatest scourge on mankind.

Relying on the candor which I need from my present auditory, I address myself
more particularly to the design of our coming together.

A manner of address calculated to inflame the passions would neither become my
station, nor be respectful to an audience well acquainted with the rights of
men and citizens, educated in principles of liberty.

The Africans belong to the families for whom heaven designed a participation
in the blessing of Abraham. We need not discuss the question, what the state of
those, whom the Europeans have enslaved, was antecedently to such their
slavery. It is more proper to enquire when and how the African slave trade
commenced -- what nations have engaged in it -- in what manner they have
carried it on -- what the probable numbers they have reduced to slavery -- in
what condition these slaves are held -- and what reasons are offered in
vindication of the trade.

A zeal for the discovery of new territory marked the fifteenth century. The
first navigations of the Europeans for this purpose were concerted and directed
by prince Henry, fourth son of John I. king of Portugal. He was born 1394. His
valor in the assault and capture of the city Ceuta in Africa, A. D. 1415,
presaged the fame he afterward acquired. From this period he devoted himself
to naval expeditions for the discovery of unknown countries. The ships he sent
out subjected diverse parts of Africa, and the neighboring islands, to the
dominion of Portugal. After the success in doubling cape Bojador, he gave to
his father and his successors all the lands he had discovered, or might
discover, and applied to pope Martin V. to ratify the donation. He engaged,
that in all their expeditions the Portuguese should have mainly in view the
extension of the Roman church and authority of its pontif. Martin granted the
prince's request. In his bull of ratification, which was about the year 1430,
it is declared, that "whatever might be discovered from the said cape to the
utmost India, should pertain to the Portuguese' dominion." Edward, brother to
prince Henry, succeeded to the throne of Portugal 1433, on the death of John I.
Pope Eugene IV. by his bull in 1438, ratified to Edward the grant made by
Martin V. A bull of Nicholas V. dated January 8, 1454, refers to the aforesaid
bulls of his predecessors, Martin and Eugene. It recites the declaration prince
Henry had made of his achievements -- " that for 25 years he had not ceased to
send annually almost an army" of Portuguese, "with the greatest dangers, labors
and charges, in most swift ships, to search out the sea and maritime provinces
toward the southern parts and antarctic pole" -- that these ships "came at
length to the province of Guinea, and took possession of some islands, havens
and sea adjoining" -- that "sailing further, war was waged for some years with
the people of those parts, and very many islands near thereunto were subdued
and peaceably possessed, and still were possessed, with the adjacent sea" --
that "many Guineans and other negroes were taken thence by force, and some by
barter." The bull describes prince Henry as "a true soldier of Christ, a most
courageous defender and intrepid champion of the faith, aspiring from his early
youth with his utmost might to have the glorious name of Christ published,
extolled and revered throughout the world." It recogniseth the exclusive right
of Portugal to the acquisitions and possessions aforesaid, in virtue of the
letters of Martin and Eugene, which granted to the king of Portugal and prince
Henry "free and ample faculty to invade, search out, expugn, vanquish and
subdue all pagans and enemies of Christ wheresoever placed, and their persons
to reduce to perpetual slavery, and all their kingdoms, possessions and goods
to apply and appropriate," etc. Pope Nicholas's letter then goes on to "decree
and declare, the acquests already made, and what hereafter shall happen to be
acquired, after that they shall be acquired, have pertained, and forever of
right do belong and pertain, to the aforesaid king and his successors, and not
to any others whatever." It forbids, on the severest penalties, all Christian
powers from settling in the countries discovered by the Portuguese, or any way
molesting them in their expeditions for the discovery and conquest of unknown
countries. It speaks of prince Henry's plan and his prosecution of it as "a
most pious works, and most worthy of perpetual remembrance, wherein the glory
of God, with the interest of the commonwealth of the universal church are
concerned."

Thus were prince Henry's views and operations sanctioned by the highest
authority at that time acknowledged in Christendom. A right derived from a
source so venerable was then undisputed. The Roman pontif bound princes at his
pleasure; and, as vicar of Christ, was allowed to have at his disposal all the
kingdoms of the earth. This grant of Nicholas was confirmed by his successor,
Calixtus III. August 6, 1458.

On the death of Edward, his son Alphonsus, then in his minority, succeeded to
the throne of Portugal 1438, and died 1481. Prince Henry died 1460, or 1463. At
his death the spirit of discovery languished; but revived with the accession of
John II. son of Alphonsus. John, the year after his accession, (1482) sent an
embassy to Edward IV. of England, to acquaint him with the title acquired, by
the pope's bull, to the conquests in Guinea; and requested him to dissolve a
fleet which some English merchants were fitting for the Guinea trade. The king
of England showed great respect to the ambassadors, and granted all they
required. The king of Portugal assumed, and the king of England gave him, this
style, Rex Portugaliae et Algarbiorum citra at ultra mare in Africa. Pope
Sixtus IV. not long before his death, which was August 12, 1484, confirmed all
the grants made by his predecessors to the kings of Portugal and their
successors. Plantation of colonies, Part I. Sect. 26.


In 1481 John II. sent 100 artificers, 500 soldiers, and all necessaries, to
build a fort in Guinea. The large kingdoms of Benin and Congo were discovered
1484, 1485;" and the cape of Good-Hope 1486. The Portuguese built forts and
planted colonies in Africa; "established a commercial intercourse with the
powerful kingdoms, and compelled the petty princes by force of arms to
acknowledge themselves vassals."

At this period, and by these means, the power and commerce of the Portuguese
in Africa were well established. The wholesome decrees of five successive Roman
pontifs granted, conveyed and confirmed to the most faithful king a right to
appropriate the kingdoms, goods and possessions of all infidels, wherever to be
found, to reduce their persons to perpetual slavery, or destroy them from the
earth, for the declared purpose of bringing the Lord's sheep into one dominical
^old, under one universal pastor. Succeeding kings of Portugal have not
forfeited the large grant by any undutifulness to their holy father. Portugal
long enjoyed the trade to Africa and the East Indies without the interference
of any European power. For more than half a century before she exported any
Negroes from Africa, she made and held many of them slaves in their native
country.

The Portuguese first imported slaves into Hispaniola, It is observable, that
the island which first received slaves from Africa, suffers at this time
(October 1791) the most exemplary and threatening vengeance from them. How
perilous such property!
A. D. 1508, and into their Brazilian colonies 1517. Brazil was discovered A.
D. 15^0, by (...) fleet, fitted out by John II. king of Portugal.
Their sugar works were first set up in these colonies 1580. Their union with
Spain at that time was most unfortunate for them. Hence the Dutch became their
enemies, who took from them their East India and Brazilian conquests, and part
of their African colonies. They recovered Brazil, and their African
establishment 1640; but have never recovered the riches of India.

After the Dutch quitted Brazil, and the gold mines were discovered, the trade
of Portugal improved, and a great importation of slaves took place. "They carry
yearly from Loango to the Brazils 25,000." At Goango "they get abundance." At
cape Lopos they "get a great many." They themselves say, "that they carry over
to Brazil 50,000 and more every year from Melinda" on the Mozambique coast.
Such has been the increase of their Brazilian and African colonies for about a
century past, that they "have taken off since the year 1700 more English goods
annually than Portugal and Spain had before done." Postlethwait, Vol. I. tit.
BRAZIL.
From their greater dominions, and greater extent of territory, in Africa, than
any other European power, this quarter of the world "is not of less
consideration to them, perhaps, than to all the other powers of Europe unitedly
comprehended -- It supplies them with Negroes in abundance, to carry on their
sugar works, mines, and planting business in the Brazils. Ibid. Vol. II. p. 521
-- 524.
They are said to bring annually from the Brazils L. 5,000,000 sterling in
gold, coined and uncoined." Beawes says, (Lex mercatoria) that the trade for
slaves at Senegal "amounts to 15,000 in a common year." (p. 726.) At Sierra
Leona "the trade in slaves is not a little." (p. 728.) At Des Trois Points the
Dutch trade for "many slaves." In the kingdom of Ardres, etc. between three and
four thousand are annually purchased. (p. 729.) On the coast of the kingdom of
Benin, at Sabe, the English, French, Dutch and Portuguese "export annually
above 20,000." (p. 730.) "The number sent from Congo by the Portuguese is
surprizingly great." (Ibid.) "Of all the African coasts, Angola furnishes the
Europeans with the best negroes, and commonly in the greatest quantities.
Though the Portuguese are extremely powerful in the interior parts of this
kingdom; yet the negro trade on the coast is free to other nations. The
English, French and Dutch send yearly a great number of vessels, who carry off
many thousands for their American settlements, and for sale in those of the
Spaniards. There is hardly any year that the Portuguese do not ship off 15,000
for Brazil. The villages of Cambambe, Embaco and Missingo^^o furnish most
slaves to the Portuguese merchants" -- The negro trade at Longs, Malindo and
Cabindo, on the Angolian coast, is not one of the least considerable that the
English and Dutch are concerned in, whether for the number, strength or
goodness of the slaves -- The inhabitants of the American colonies always give
for them an higher price, as more able to sustain the labors and fatigues of
the culture and manufacturing of sugar, tobacco, indigo, and other painful
works." (p. 731.)


"It is difficult to ascertain the number of slaves, which the Portuguese
residing in Africa have in possession. Those who are least rich have fifty, an
hundred, or two hundred belonging to them, and many of the most considerable
possess at least three thousand. A religious society at Loanda have of their
own 12,000 of all nations." (Beawes, lex mercatoria, p. 790, 791.)

Spanish America has successively received her slaves from the Genoese,
Portuguese, French and English. A convention was made at London between England
and Spain, A. D. 1689, for supplying the Spanish West Indies with negro slaves
from Jamaica. Anderson's commerce, Vol. V. p. 120.
The French Guinea company contracted, in 1702, to supply them with 38,000
negroes, in ten years; and if peace should be concluded, with 48,000. In 1713
there was a treaty between England and Spain for the importation of 144,000
negroes in thirty years, or 4,800 annually. Postlethwait* assiento.
If we include those whom the Portuguese have held in slavery in Africa, with
the importations into South-America, twelve millions may be a moderate estimate
from the commencement of the traffic to the present time.

We shall now attend to the importations into the West India islands and the
United States.

The English fitted out three ships for the slave trade in 1562. Anderson's
commerce, Vol. II. p. 156.
For a full century this trade has been vigorously pursued, without
intermission, by England, France and Holland; as it had been long before, and
continued to be, by Portugal.

"The trade of Barbados, in 1661, maintained 400 sail of ships of 150 tons one
with another, and 10,000 seamen. The running cash was computed at L. 200,000 at
least. In 1676 this island had 80,000 negroes. In one hundred years the
inhabitants of Great Britain have received L. 12,000,000 in silver by means of
this plantation. On a parliamentary enquiry into the African trade 1728, it
appeared that in three years only, 42,000 slaves had been imported at
Barbados, Jamaica and Antigua, besides what were carried to their other
islands." Postlethwait, Vol. II. p. 766.


In pursuance of an order from the king of France, a survey was made in 1777,
of the slaves in the French islands, when the number returned was 386,500. St.
Domingo, 240,000 Martinico, 75,000 Guadaloupe, 64,000 St. Lucia, 4,000 Cayenne,
3,500 Total, 386,500


The council of Paris determined, that an annual importation of 20,000 was
necessary to supply the annual decrease. (Anderson, Vol. V. p. 276.)

The number of slaves in the several British West India islands is stated by
Anderson at 410,000. (Vol. VI. p. 921, 922.) A later account makes them
461,669. The account published 1791 stands thus: Jamaica 256,000 Barbados
62,100 Antigua 37,808 Grenada 23,926 Sr. Christophers 20,435 Dominico 14,967
St. Vincent 14,353 Montserrat 10,000 Nevis 8,420 Virgin Islands 6,500 Bermuda
4,919 Bahamas 2,241 Total 461,669




"Since the peace of 1763," says M. le Abbe Raynal, Vol. IV. p. ^98.
"Great Britain has sent annually to the coast of Guinea 195 vessels,
consisting, collectively, of 23,000 tons, and 7 or 8,000 seamen. Rather more
than half this number have sailed from Liverpool, and the remainder from
London, Bristol and Lancaster. They have traded for 40,000 slaves." An average
for each vessel will be 205. Postlethwait informs us, that in 1752 eighty eight
vessels from Liverpool to Africa brought away 25,940 slaves. Vol. I. p. 709,
710. The names of the masters, and number of slaves in each ship are inserted,
296 on an average.
If the Liverpool vessels brought away this number, we may suppose that those
of London and Bristol made up the full number of 40,000.

M. le Abbe Raynal says, (probably without sufficient attention, Vol. IV. p.
99.) "The trade of Africa has never furnished the French colonies more than 13
or 14,000 slaves annually." This importation, he grants, was " insufficient"
for her colonies. It does not correspond to the number of slaves in them. If
the trade had not furnished a sufficiency for themselves, would they have
contracted to supply Spain with 4,000 slaves annually for ten successive years?
" Good judges," says Postlethwait, (Vol. I. p. 726.) "reckon that 30,000
negroes are annually imported into the French sugar islands." But we will
suppose they import 20,000 into these islands. This is the importation which
their council supposed requisite to supply the decrease. The general
computation is five per cent. decrease annually.

The present number of slaves in the West Indies is 930,669. British islands
461,669 French islands 386,000 Other islands 83,000 Total 930,669


There are in the United States 670,633. In this estimate 80,000 slaves are set
to South Carolina, which has made no return.
To this number may be added about 12,000 manumitted Africans. In all
1,613,302. Were the mortality among them as great in the five states south of
Delaware as in the West Indies, the above number could not be kept up but by an
annual importation of 80,000. The probability is, that 70,000 has been the
annual average for a century at least.

In seventy seven years there were imported into Jamaica 535,549. Negroes
imported from Africa into Jamaica, and exported from thence yearly, between the
2d September 1702, and the 31st December 1778.

Years. Ships. Imports. Exports. 1702 5 843 327 1703 14 2740 481 1704 16 4120
221 1705 16 3503 1661 1706 14 ^804 1086 1707 15 3358 897 1708 23 6627 1379 1709
10 2234 1275 1710 15 3662 1^91 1711 26 6724 1532 1712 15 4128 1903 1713 19 4378
2712 1714 24 5789 3507 1715 10 2372 1089 1716 24 6361 2872 1717 29 7551 315^
1718 27 6253 2247 1719 25 5120 3161 1720 23 5064 2815 1721 17 3715 1637 1722 41
8469 3263 1723 30 6824 4674 1724 25 6852 3449 1725 41 10297 3588 1726 50 11703
4112 1727 17 3876 1555 1728 20 5350 986 1729 40 10499 4820 1730 43 10104 5222
1731 45 10079 5708 1732 57 13552 5288 1733 37 7413 5176 1734 20 4570 1666 1735
20 4851 2260 1736 ^5 3^43 1647 1737 35 8995 2240 1738 32 76^5 2070 1739 29 67^7
598 1740 27 5362 495 1741 19 4255 562 1742 22 5067 7^2 1743 38 8926 136^


By the census of the United States, taken 1791, they contain 3,925,247 souls.
Districts. Free white males of 16 years and upwards, including heads of
families Free white males under 16 years, Free white females, including heads
of families All other free persons, Slaves, Total, Maine, 24,384 24,748 46,870
538 None. 96,540 N. Hampshire, 36,086 34,851 70,160 630 158 141,885
Massachusetts, 95,453 87,289 190,582 5463 None. 378,787 Rhode Island, 16,019
15,799 32,652 3407 948 68,825 Connecticut, 60,523 54,403 117,448 2808 2764
237,940 Vermont, 22,435 22,328 40,505 252 16 85,539 New York, 83,700 78,122
152,320 4654 21,324 340,120 New Jersey, 45,251 41,416 82,287 27^2 11,453
184,139 Pennsylvania, 110,788 106,948 206,363 6537 3737 434,373 Delaware,
11,783 12,143 22,384 3899 8887 59,094 Maryland, 55,915 51,339 101,395 8043
103,036 319,728 Virginia, 110,936 116,135 215,046 12,868 292,627 747,610 N.
Carolina, 69,988 77,506 140,710 4975 100,572 393,751 S. Carolina, 80,000
240,000 Georgia, 13,103 14,044 25,739 398 29,264 82,548 Kentucky, 15,154 17,057
28,922 114 12,430 73,677 S. W. Territory 6,271 10,277 15,365 361 3417 35,691 N.
W. Ditto, 5,000 Total, 781,769 764,405 1,488,748 57,709 670,633 3,925,247
Years. Ships. Imports. Exports. 1743 38 8926 1368 1744 38 8755 1331 1745 18
3843 1344 1746 16 4703 1502 1747 33 10898 3378 1748 39 10430 2426 1749 25 6858
2128 1750 16 3587 721 1751 21 4840 713 1752 27 6117 1038 1753 39 7661 902 1754
47 9551 1592 1755 64 12723 598 1756 46 11166 1902 1757 32 7935 943 1758 11 3405
411 1759 18 5212 681 1760 23 7573 2368 1761 29 6480 642 1762 24 6279 232 1763
33 10079 1582 1764 41 10213 2639 1765 41 8931 2006 1766 43 10208 672 1767 19
3248 375 1768 27 5950 485 1769 19 3575 420 1770 25 6824 836 1771 17 4183 671
1772 22 5278 923 1773 49 9676 800 1774 456 18448 2511 1775 16945 5272 1776
19231 1343 1777 5255 492 1778 5674 734 2436 535,54 132,115

On an average 220 slaves in each ship.


Of these, in the states south of Delaware, more than one quarter are negro
slaves. In the four states next north of Maryland are 45,401 slaves. In
New England 3870. There may have been brought into all the West-India-Islands,
and into the United States, from first to last, SEVEN MILLIONS. One million
more must be allowed for mortality on the passage. How many have been destroyed
in the collection of them in Africa, we cannot justly conjecture. It is judged
that Great Britain sustain the loss of twice as many seamen in this, as in all
their other extensive trade.

We suppose, then, that eight millions of slaves have been shipped in Africa
for the West India islands and the United States; ten millions for
South-America; and, perhaps, two millions have been taken and held in slavery
in Africa. Great Britain and the United States have shipped about five
millions, France two, Holland and other nations one; though we undertake not to
state the proportion with exactness. The other twelve millions we set to
Portugal. Twenty million slaves, at L. 30 sterling each, amount to the
commercial value of. L. 600,000,000. Six hundred times ten hundred thousand
pounds sterling traffic in the SOULS OF MEN!!!

By whom has this commerce been opened, and so long and ardently pursued? The
subjects of their most faithful, most catholic, most Christian, most protestant
majesty's, defenders of the faith; and by the citizens of the most republican
States, with the sanction of St. Peter's successor. Unprovoked, without any
pretended injury, these have kindled and kept alive the flame of war through
three quarters of the continent of Africa; that is, all the interior as well as
maritime parts south of Senegal and Abyssinia. These have taught the Africans
to steal, sell and murder one another. On any or no pretense the different
tribes make prisoners of each other, or the chiefs seize their own people, and
drive them, as herds of cattle, to market. The natives are trepanned by one
another, and by the Europeans; forced from their flocks, and fields, and
tenderest connexions. This vile commerce has depopulated the seacoast: It
must now be carried on in the inland parts.

As though it were not sufficient to force the Africans from their country, and
every thing dear to them, they are made to travel in irons hundreds of miles
through their native soil, through sands and morasses, down to the sea shore;
and there stowed, as lumber, for transportation. The cruelty of the captains of
the Guinea ships, in many instances, is not inferior to that of Clive or
Hastings.

The servitude of the greatest part of the slaves after their arrival, the
scantiness of their provision and its bad quality, their tyrannical and
merciless discipline, are well known, and too painful to recollect. It is a law
in Barbados, "that if any slave, under punishment by his master or his order,
suffer in life or limb, no person shall be liable to any fine for the same. But
if any man shall wantonly or cruelly kill his own slave, he shall pay into the
treasury L. 15."

With what reason or truth is it urged, that the condition of the Africans is
meliorated by their slavery? They, not their masters, are the proper judges in
this matter. Wretched as you may suppose their condition was in Africa, the
nefarious commerce of foreigners may have been the principal cause of that
wretchedness. Should foreigners desist from this commerce, and the holders of
slaves propose to transport them back to Africa, how would their mouth be
filled with laughter, and their tongue with singing? Instead of thinking their
condition meliorated by slavery, they most sincerely join in that execration on
their oppressors: Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones
against the stones. The imaginary expectation that death may transport them to
their own country is their chief consolation. Under unlimited power, accustomed
to the most inhuman usage, no example of mercy relenting for them being
exhibited, no marvel that the language of insurgents is, Death or conquest.
Their cries will sooner or later reach the ears of him to whom vengeance
belongs.

Will any one say, that their condition is meliorated by their being taught the
knowledge of GOD and CHRIST? How many of their masters are in a state of brutal
ignorance in this respect? A parish minister Mr. Ramsay.
in the West Indies says, that he "drew up plain and easy instructions for the
slaves, invited them to attend at particular hours on Lord's Day, appointed
hours at home, and exhorted their masters to encourage their attendance. But
inconceivable was the listlessness with which he was heard, and bitter the
censure heaped on him in return. It was suggested, that he aimed to render them
incapable of being good slaves by making them Christians -- Some who approved
of the plan, did not think themselves obliged to cooperate: I stood," says he,
"a rebel convict against the interest and majesty of plantership."

When Archbishop Secker asked what success the missionaries "had in baptizing
and converting negro slaves? how the catechist at Coddrington college in
Barbados proceeded with those slaves that belonged to the college estate," and
whom he presumed had been instructed in Christianity? He was answered, "I found
one old negro, who told me he could say all his catechism. I asked him, if he
did not find himself much happier and better since he became a Christian, than
he was before? Why, Sir, said he, I am old man, and as a driver am not put to
common labor; but Christian not made for negro in this country. How so? What
is your duty toward God? He repeated it. What is your duty toward your
neighbor? -- Ah, master, I don't say that no more. Why so? Because, master, I
cannot say it from my heart, if I think of white man."

Had African slaves the means of Christian instruction, had they been treated
with humanity, still the making slaves of them has been no more than doing
evil that good may come. Christianity and humanity would rather have dictated
the sending books and teachers into Africa, and endeavors for their
civilization. Have they been treated as children of the same family with
ourselves? as having the same Father, whose tender mercies are over all his
works? as having the same natural prerogatives with other nations? Or have they
been treated as outcasts from humanity? The committee of the society in London,
instituted in 1787, for the purpose of effecting the abolition of the slave
trade, reported to the society, January 15, 1788, "that sundry specimens evince
that a trade of great national importance might be opened by once establishing
the confidence of the natives." The sentiments and reasoning of a great
commercial writer on this subject are just and forcible.

"If once a turn for industry and the arts was introduced, [into Africa] a
greater quantity of the European produce and manufactures might be exported
thither, than to any other country in the whole world. No country is richer in
gold and silver. Here is a prodigious number of elephants, which would not only
facilitate the inland intercourses of commerce, but also, in the teeth of these
notable animals, afford a very beneficial branch of commerce. The fruitful rich
lands, every where to be found upon the coasts and within the country, upon the
banks of the rivers near the gold-coast and the slave-coast, would produce all
the richest articles of the East and West India commerce. It is melancholy to
observe, that a country which has 10,000 miles seacoast, and noble, large,
deep rivers, should yet have no navigation; streams penetrating into the very
center of the country, but of no benefit to it; innumerable people, without
knowledge of each other, correspondence, or commerce -- Africa, stored with an
inexhaustible treasure, and capable, under proper improvements, of producing so
many things delightful as well as convenient, seems utterly neglected by those
who are civilized themselves, and its own inhabitants quite unsolicitous of
reaping the benefits which nature has provided for them. What it affords in its
present rude, unimproved state, is solely given up to the gain of others, as if
not the people only were to be sold for slaves to their fellow creatures, but
the whole country was captive, and produced its treasures merely for the use
and benefit of the rest of the world, and not at all for their own. Instead of
making slaves of these people, would it not rather become nations, who assume
the name and character of Christians, to give them a relish for the blessings
of life, by extending traffic into their country in the largest extent it will
admit of, and introducing among them the more civilized arts and customs? While
the slaving trade continues to be the great object of" other nations, and these
"promote the spirit of butchery and making slaves of each other among the negro
princes and chiefs, their civilization, and the extension of trade into the
bowels of the country, will be obstructed."

[POSTLETHWAIT, Vol. I. p. 686; 727.]




The Greeks and Romans, amidst their improvements in philosophy, arts and
sciences, established slavery as far as they extended their conquests. Their
rage for conquest had the world for its object. They made war without having
received any injury. Captives taken in war were exposed to sale. And indeed all
the ancient nations considered conquest as a just foundation for slavery. Some
moderns have undertaken to defend the same principle. In an age and country so
well acquainted with the rights of men, this kind of reasoning merits very
little attention. It is, moreover, wholly inapplicable to the case of African
slavery. Whatever just dominion conquerors may claim over the conquered must be
founded in this, that the latter were the aggressors. Did the Africans first
invade the rights of the nations who have carried on the slave trade? or give
them a foundation of complaint? Were they ever conquered by their foreign
invaders?

But the reasoning is not less unjust than inapplicable. The objects of a just
war are the security of national rights, and indemnification for injuries.
Superior force may enslave, but gives no right. It is inglorious, savage and
brutal to insult a conquered enemy, and reduce him to the lowest servility.

"But did not the Jews make slaves of the Canaanites by the express command of
God?" They did indeed. Those nations had filled up their measure of iniquity.
The Supreme Sovereign devoted them to destruction, and commissioned Israel to
be the executioners of his justice. "Thou may not," said God, "consume them
at once, lest the land become desolate, and the beasts of the field increase
against thee. By little and little will I drive them out from before thee." Of
those nations, remaining in the land, they might purchase bond-servants, and
transmit them as an inheritance to posterity. The Gibeonites, one of these
devoted nations, obtained a league of peace with Joshua, under pretense that
they were a very remote people. When their stratagem was detected, he saved
them alive, because of his league; but he made them all bondmen, hewers of
wood, and drawers of water. (Lev. 25. 44, 45, 46. Joshua chap. 9th) When a like
warrant can be produced, it will authorize a like practice.

"But Ishmael was the son of a bondwoman. His posterity therefore can have no
claim to freedom." This is not a just consequence; nor is this objection
supported by history. The prophecy concerning Ishmael was, "He will be a wild
man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him." His
posterity, the Arabians, have lived in war with the world. The Egyptians,
Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Tartars and Turks have in vain attempted
to subjugate them. They have been and are free and independent.

That the heathen have no right to any possession on earth, is an article of
the Roman faith. The charters of Britain to her late colonies held out the same
language. But is this the language of HIM, whose is "the world, and they that
dwell therein?" who "has made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on all
the face of the earth; and determined the bounds of their habitation?" In
enslaving the pagans of Africa, have the Christians of Europe and America
proceeded on this principle, that the Author of their religion, whose kingdom
is not of this world, has commissioned them to seize on the possessions, and,
what is more, on the persons, of those heathen? Among the enumerated articles
of commerce in mystical Babylon in the day of her fall, slaves and souls of men
closes the account -- intimating that this kind of commerce was the
consummation of her wickedness. Let such as imitate the example, consider the
consequence.

-- "Man's obdurate heart does not feel for man.
He finds his fellow guilty of a skin
Not colored like his own; and having power
TO enforce the wrong, for such a worthy cause
Dooms and devotes him as his lawful prey.
Thus man devotes his brother, and destroys;
And worse than all, and most to be deplored,
As human nature's broadest, foulest blot,
Chains him, tasks him, and exacts his sweat
With stripes, that mercy with a bleeding heart
Weeps when she sees inflicted on a beast.
Then what is man? And what man seeing this,
And having human feelings, does not blush,
And hang his head, to think himself a man?" Cowper.

Our late warfare was expressly founded on such principles as these: "All men
are created equal: They are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
rights; among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Admitting
these just principles, we need not puzzle ourselves with the question, whether
a black complexion is a token of God's wrath? If attempts to account for the
color of the blacks, by ascribing it to climate, or the state of society, or
both, should not be perfectly satisfactory, (and perhaps they are not) shall we
therefore conclude, that they did not spring from the same original parents?
How then shall we account either for their origin or our own? The Mosaic, which
is the only account of the origin of mankind, does not inform us what was the
complexion of Adam and Eve. If we admit the Mosaic account, we cannot suppose
that the Africans are of a different species from us: If we reject it, we have
no account whence they or we sprang. Let us then receive the Mosaic history of
the creation, till another and better appears. According to that, the Africans
are our brethren. And, according to the principles of our religion, they are
children of the freewoman as well as we. This instructs us, that God is no
respecter of persons, or of nations -- has put no difference between Jew and
Greek, barbarian and Scythian. In Christ Jesus, in whom it was foretold "all
nations shall be blessed," those "who sometimes were far off, are brought nigh,
and have access by one Spirit unto the Father." So that they "are no more
strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God." The heathen will all be given him for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession.

Why then should we treat our African brethren as the elder son in the parable
treated the younger, offended at the compassion of their common parent toward
him? Why place them in a situation incapable of recovery from their lost state?
their state of moral death? Did Jesus come to redeem us from the worst bondage?
Shall his disciples then enslave those whom he came to redeem from slavery? who
are the purchase of his blood? Is this doing to others, as he has commanded,
whatsoever we would that they should do to us? Is it to love our neighbor as
ourselves?

On a view of the wretched servitude of the Africans, some may suspect, that
they must have been sinners above all men, because they suffer such things.
This way of reasoning, however common, our Lord has reproved -- particularly in
the instance of the blind man; of those who were slain by the fall of the tower
in Siloam; and of those whose blood Pilate mingled with the public sacrifices.
All mankind are the offspring of God. His government over them is parental.
Children may have the fullest proof that the government of their father is not
capricious and tyrannic, but most wise and kind: At the same time, they cannot
explain many parts of it; but unreservedly submit to his pleasure, having the
fullest confidence in his superior wisdom, his paternal care and affection.

That such as have been educated in slavish principles, justify and practice
slavery, may not seem strange. Those who profess to understand and regard the
principles of liberty should cheerfully unite to abolish slavery.

Our middle and northern states have prohibited any further importation of
slaves. South Carolina passed a prohibitory act for a limited time.
Consistently with the federal constitution the traffic may be stopped in
seventeen years; and a duty often dollars may be laid on every slave now
imported. By an act of the legislature of Connecticut, all blacks and mulattoes
born within the state from March 1784, will be manumitted at the age of 25
years. The act of Pennsylvania liberates them at the age of twenty eight years.
Such provision has been made for the gradual abolition of slavery in the
United States. Could wisdom and philanthropy have advanced further for the time?

In the northern division of the United States, the slaves live better than one
quarter of the white people. Their masters are possessed of property; nor is
harder labor required of the slaves, than a great part of the masters perform
themselves. Might the estate of the masters be exempt from the maintenance of
their slaves, but very few would hesitate to manumit them.

In cooperating with the wise measures and benevolent intentions of the
legislature of Connecticut, we shall do as much as can be desired to case the
condition of slavery, and extinguish the odious distinction. Humane masters,
requiring no more than is just and equal, and affording to their servants the
means of moral and religious instruction, take the only sure course to make
them faithful. Many receive such kind treatment, and have such affection to
their masters, that they wish to abide with them. Nor is it to be doubted but
many others, who may wish to be manumitted, would soon repent their choice.
Still the term slave is odious, be the master's yoke ever so light. And it is
very questionable whether any servant can be profitable who is not a voluntary
one.

The revolution in the United States has given free course to the principles
of liberty. One ancient kingdom, illuminated by these principles, and actuated
by the spirit of liberty, has established a free constitution. The spirit will
spread, and shake the throne of despotic princes. Neither an habit of
submission to arbitrary rule in church and state, nor the menaced interference
of neighboring kingdoms, could prevent, or counterwork, a revolution,
propitious in its aspect on the rights of other nations, and of mankind. No
combination of European potentates can impede the progress of freedom. The time
is hastening, when their subjects will not endure to be told, that no
government shall exist in any nation but such as provides for the perpetuation
of absolute monarchy, and the transmission of it to the families in present
possession. The time is hastening, when no monarch in Europe shall tell his
subjects, Your silver and your gold are mine.

The present occasion will be well improved, if we set ourselves to banish all
slavish principles, and assert our liberty as men, citizens and Christians. We
have all one Father: He will have all his offspring to be saved. We are
disciples of one master: He will finally gather together in one the children of
God. Let us unite in carrying into effect the purpose of the Savior's
appearance. This was to give peace and good will to man, and thus bring glory
to God on high.

Being "one body in Christ, and every one members one of another;" we should
take care "that there be no schism in the body." They who separate themselves,
or separate others, without cause, are schismatics. Christ is not divided. A
religious party is of all others the most odious and dangerous. The terms
express a palpable contradiction. The dire effe^^s of proselyting zeal in
Romish, and even in Protestant, countries would have been prevented, had
Christian liberty been understood, and the exercise of it permitted.

Whether ignorance or learning, weakness or craft, have bound the heaviest
burdens in religion, we need not enquire. Each of them has done much in this
way in ages past. Happily for the present age of light and liberty, the spirit
of bigotry and domination cannot encumber and debase Christianity as
heretofore. The exercise of private judgment, an appeal to the scriptures, and
the cultivation of Christian charity and philanthropy, will display the
excellency of our religion.

To conclude: In vain do we assert our natural and civil liberty, or contend
for the same liberty in behalf of any of our fellow creatures, provided we
ourselves are not made free from the condemnation and dominion of sin. If there
is such a thing as slavery, the servant of sin is a slave -- and self-made. The
captive, prisoner and slave, in an outward respect, may be free in Christ, free
indeed; while he who enjoys full external liberty, may, in regard to his inward
man, be under the power of wicked spirits: These enter and dwell in an heart
garnished to receive them. Jesus Christ, and no other, saves from sin and
wrath. The spirit of life quickens those who are dead in trespasses, and
loses those whom Satan has bound. "If we be dead with him, we believe that
we shall also live with him."

The new Jerusalem is free in a more exalted sense than the church on earth.
True believers, "sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, have the earnest of
their inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession." In that
day of complete redemption, of glorious liberty, may God of his infinite mercy
grant that we may meet all the ransomed of the Lord, with songs and everlasting
joy, saying: "Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that
sits upon the throne; and unto the lamb who was slain, and has redeemed us
to God by his blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.
AMEN."


