INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON SLEEP AND DREAMS; THEIR EFFECTS ON THE FACULTIES OF
THE MIND, AND THE CAUSES OF DREAMS.

SUBMITTED TO THE EXAMINATION OF THE REV. WILLIAM SMITH, S. T. P. PROVOST; THE
TRUSTEES AND MEDICAL PROFESSORS OF THE COLLEGE OF PHILADELPHIA; FOR THE DEGREE
OF DOCTOR OF MEDICINE: ON THE TWENTY-THIRD DAY OF JUNE, A. D. 1791.

BY SAMUEL FORMAN CONOVER, OF THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY, MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL
SOCIETY OF SAID STATE, AND OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL SOCIETY OF PHILADELPHIA.

PRINTED BY T. LANG, No 21, CHURCH-ALLEY.

M DCC XCI.

TO BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF MEDICINE IN
THE COLLEGE OF PHILADELPHIA, etc. etc.

TO CASPER WISTAR, M. D. PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY AND PHYSIOLOGY IN THE COLLEGE
OF PHILADELPHIA, etc. etc.

AND TO BENJAMIN SMITH BARTON, M. D. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY AND BOTANY IN
THE COLLEGE OF PHILADELPHIA, etc. etc.

Men, Who have approved themselves friends to the science of Medicine, Under
whose fostering hands I have been nurtured in the legitimate principles of
their respective branches of medical knowledge, AND Whose humanity, liberality,
and great ability to relieve the distressed, and to smooth the avenues to
death, render them not only respectable in their professions, but also useful
and worthy members of society,

THIS DISSERTATION IS, With all due respect and gratitude, Inscribed, By their
much indebted friend, and devoted servant, and pupil, The Author.

TO THE HON. ELIAS BOUDINOT, L. L. D. REPRESENTATIVE OF THE STATE OF
NEW JERSEY, IN THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:

A Man, Who has distinguished himself as a true patriot, in the late difficult
and important struggle for liberty; Equally conspicuous in disseminating
knowledge in the legal department; And eminently respected for his Political
abilities, Disinterested sentiments, And candid decisions, Which he has
publicly exhibited on the political Theater; AND Which justly rank him among
the worthies of his Country,

THIS DISSERTATION IS, With perfect regard and respect, Inscribed, By his much
obliged friend, and very devoted servant, The Author.

ON SLEEP AND DREAMS.
THE subject of SLEEP, like many other subjects in medicine, cannot be reduced
to the principles of mathematical certainty; but, that it may be illustrated by
a complete induction of the effects of all the exciting powers producing sleep,
I imagine, will not be denied.

"SLEEP, without dreaming," says Mr. Lock, is rest from all study On the Human
Understanding.
of the mind and operation of the animal functions of the body. In " sleep",
when "quite complete," says Dr. Cullen, the motion and mobility of the nervous
power, with respect to the whole of what are called the animal functions,
entirely cease; or, as I would express it, are in a state of collapse, and are
very different from the state of waking, which, in healthy persons, I would
call a state of general and entire excitement First Lines of the Practice of
Physic, vol. iv. page 127.
. That there is a certain degree of excitement, necessarily existing in the
animal system, to constitute perfect and uninterrupted health, is agreed on by
all. There must also be, I conceive, a certain point, or degree, of excitement,
different from the foregoing, favoring profound sleep, which is produced by
certain powers operating on the living property inherent in every animal. This
property has received different names, from different authors. It is called by
Baron Haller the vis insita; by Dr. Cullen, the nervous power; by Mr. John
Hunter, stimulability; and by Dr. Brown, the excitability. The exciting powers
acting on the excitability, producing excitement favorable to health, and
inviting sleep, if carried beyond their proper boundaries, or withheld,
occasion morbid sleep, disease, and even death itself. The sleep-inviting
point, or that degree of excitement necessary to constitute profound sleep,
appears to exist in a kind of indirect debility of the system, or
partially-exhausted excitability to the powers producing it, which it is very
difficult to explain. Sleep, then, is the effect of the actions of the day, at
first always giving more and more excitement, but less and less in proportion
to the continuance of their operation, but in such a sort as always to add some
excitement, till at last the matter comes to a point, where the degree of
excitement necessary to constitute the waking state no longer exists. Every
day's experience teaches us the effects of the exciting powers, in producing
sleep: It teaches us, that, if they are applied in excess, or, though moderate,
are long continued, they run the excitement on to actual indirect debility, and
occasion morbid sleep. And, that sleep may be brought on sooner or later, by
the excessive or deficient application of the causes producing it, is certain.
By all unusual exertions, those unaccustomed to fatigue, etc. will have their
sleep hurried or produced sooner than in common, and it is generally of the
morbid kind.

A MAN of science and of genius, in the pursuit of mental acquirement,
stimulated by the spirit of emulation, or any other exciting emotion, will have
his excitability considerably wasted, and his excitement increased beyond the
point constituting profound sleep, but favoring the waking state; and this
state may be kept up, or rendered more tolerable, a considerable time, by the
assistance of the diffusible, together with the durable, stimuli, given at
proper intervals, and changed frequently in kind, and in quantity, and
accommodated to the excitability then existing in the system, favoring the
waking state See Dr. Brown's Elements of Medicine, in note of xxxi,
.

I THINK it has been sufficiently proven, that the causes producing profound
sleep, or sleep without dreaming, deprive the mind of reflex-sensation. Mr.
Lock (on the Human Understanding, in the first volume) observes, that the soul
does not think during profound sleep, and that this cannot be proven, as there
appears to have been a suspension of time to the sleeping man. The Chevalier
Ramsay observes, It is false to maintain, with the Cartesians, that the soul
thinks always. They never did, nor can, give any solid reason for this
assertion. Experience shows the contrary, when we are in a swoon, or in deep
sleep. To think, know, and feel always, are privileges of a pure and unfallen
state, when the living images shall have a perfect resemblance to him who never
slumbers. This is one of the principal changes made in nature since the fall,
and a law established in the sphere of lapsed souls.

THE reason why children sleep so much, has been supposed, by some, to be owing
to their wanting reflex-sensation. May not the phenomenon of sleep in children
be explained upon other physical causes, and not upon the want of
reflex-sensation? That the excitability of a child is more abundant, cannot, or
will not, I imagine, be denied; and from this I may justly infer, that the
waking and sleeping states of children do more easily run into each other than
they do in adults. Their excitability, therefore, is more susceptible of the
action of stimuli of every kind, and the sleep-inviting point is, consequently,
produced, or brought on, sooner in children, by fewer causes, in a given time,
than in adults.

A PATIENT in a convalescent state of a typhus-fever is considerably
debilitated, and very excitable to any stimulus over-proportioned to the
abundant excitability then existing in the system. The point at which sleep
begins is sooner produced by stimulant powers, and the waking state is likewise
sooner brought back; the intervals between the two stages of sleeping and
waking are of less duration, and sleep is less profound than in a state of
perfect and uninterrupted health This idea may be extended to the female sex,
as their original stamina, and the life they pursue, render them more delicate,
and, of consequence, their excitability more abundant, than in the male. If
these reasons be admitted as physically true, which, I think, will be readily
agreed to, it will help to enforce the validity of the assertion, that the
intellectual faculties of the female are more susceptible to impressions, their
imagination more lively than that of the male; and the reason why there are
more wits among the former than among the latter.
.

THE sudden transition from sleeping to waking, and vice versa, is more
observable in some persons, under certain circumstances, than in others; and
these sudden changes may apply to the abovementioned cases. It has been
observed in other persons, that the approach of sleeping and of waking is more
gradual, and, in these cases, the ears are often awake before the eyes are
opened, or see clearly, and the senses are often awake before the power of
voluntary motion is recovered. From the theory of sleep which I have
endeavored to establish, may not these facts be resolved upon the same
physical causes partially influencing the system, and producing an unequal
excitement and morbid sleep?

IN a typhus mitior, the patient sleeps much, with a kind of stertorous
breathing, and is easily wakened by an address not louder than common;
withholding it, he soon falls into an involuntary sleep. This kind of sleep,
for the most part, is the consequence of a certain degree of debility, produced
by some powers acting with considerable stimulant effect; the reason is, this
sleep depends upon less debility than that which constitutes the disease. How
does it come about, that every thing which stimulates produces that effect by
its stimulant, and not by its sedative, virtue? Let those accustomed to all the
causes producing the sleep-inviting point, be removed from these causes, and
exposed to the directly-debilitating powers, as darkness, silence, cold, rest,
and abstinence; these causes lessening the excitement (and accumulating the
excitability), will increase a disposition to involuntary morbid sleep.

THERE are many facts which may be adduced in proof of this point. Even daily
observation furnishes us with arguments in support of the position. Let us turn
our attention to the industrious labourer, who is fatigued from his daily
pursuits, exposed to the stimulating rays of light, and the noise of the busy
world, who eats and drinks his hard earnings with a good appetite, and lays
down to rest, attended with profound, refreshing sleep. Dr. Zimmerman says, the
soldier sleeps even amidst the thunder of the cannon, when he is worn out with
excessive fatigue A Treatise on Experience in Physic, vol. ii.
. -- Change the order; give him a day's rest, silence, darkness, etc. and he
will fall into sleep of the morbid, restless kind.

THE regular returning time of sleeping and waking, is to be explained upon
principles similar to the foregoing, and not upon the effects of habit. Habit
is the effect of causes producing sleep, and not the cause of sleep; which is
too obvious to need any further explanation.

FROM what has already been said, we may explain the reason why all simple
sounds, as the sound of a gentle cascade, the beating of rain upon a house,
vocal or instrumental music, induce a disposition to sleep. They are to be
resolved, likewise, upon the same physical principles as all other stimuli,
producing partial exhaustion of the excitability, and favoring the
sleep-inviting point, and not upon the effects of sound simply preventing
reflex-sensation, and causing sleep. -- Sound and uninterrupted sleep refresh
the bodily and mental powers, by accumulating, or bringing back, the
greatly-wasted excitability to the stimuli of the preceding day, and preparing,
or fitting it, for the operation of the exciting powers of the succeeding day.

IN the latter part of night, and toward morning, the excitement is
considerably diminished, the body in some degree weakened, and more easily
affected by any stimulus, or hurtful power, that may be applied.

THIS living principle, inherent in the world of animals, upon which all
natural stimuli exert their effects, in supporting the living existence, is not
confined to them alone, but is likewise extended to the vegetable kingdom. The
greatest physiologist Baron Haller.
the world has hitherto produced, did not, indeed, admit of irritability in
vegetables; but the industry and sagacity of the Botanists have shown us, that
there is a very considerable number of vegetables, which exhibit signs of
irritability, more or less obvious in proportion to their age, to their
strength, or to the part to which the irritating cause is applied. This has
been observed in the leaves and flowers of several plants. Mr. Bonnet, of
Geneva, has, I think, incontestibly demonstrated, that the leaves of vegetables
possess the power of voluntary motion. He has shown us that these parts, or
organs, always present their upper surface to the air, and that whenever a
branch is turned out of its natural position, the leaves of that branch
immediately assume a new direction. May we not venture to add, that the
voluntary and involuntary motions of plants are more conspicuous, and
remarkable in the organs of fructification, especially in the stamina and
pistils, than in the leaves, or any other parts, of vegetables; for in many
plants, as soon as these generative organs have arrived at maturity, the
stamina embrace the pistil, with a seemingly-venereal appetite, and discharge
their fecundating influence, from the cells of the antherae, upon the female
organ -- after this the stamina resume their former position, and, in a short
time, pine, wither, and die? The involuntary and voluntary motions of
vegetables, are observable in the Berberis vulgaris, or common berberry, and
many others; the filaments of these plants, when touched by a pin, or any other
mechanical stimulus, are immediately put in motion, and apply themselves to the
pistillum, on which they discharge a portion of their fertilizing dust. The
wonderful irritability of the stamina of the Cistus Helianthemum The Dwarf
Cistns, or Little Sun-Flower.
, is remarkable, chiefly, about sun rise; in the evening the irritability is
nearly extinguished, and on the following morning, this great, unequivocal,
never-failing characteristic of life, returns again, and so on through the
whole course of the vegetable life. All vegetables are more irritable in the
morning than in the evening, to any stimuli that may be applied. The leaves of
many vegetables, in the day, assume an appearance very different, from that
which they do at night time. They are folded up, or contracted in the night;
but in the day time, they are generally expanded; and, hence arises that
particular state of vegetables, which constitutes what Linnaeus and other
naturalists have denominated Somnus Plantarum, or the sleep of plants. During
the continuance of this vegetable-sleep, the appearance of the plant is so much
changed, that the most experienced botanist is sometimes at a loss to know it,
without a very minute examination. In some plants, the inviting sleeping point
may be induced by robbing them of light for a time, but upon the return of
light, they resume their waking state. We may lay it down as a pretty constant
and certain axiom, that the sleep of vegetables, is more or less profound in
proportion to their vigor or debility. Some of these hints on the
irritability, voluntary and involuntary motions of vegetables, were suggested
to me by Benjamin Smith Barton, M. D. Professor of Natural History and Botany
in the college of Philadelphia, etc. etc.


IF the vigor and debility depend upon the effects of stimuli acting on the
irritability in vegetables: If the motions likewise depend upon, and are
subservient to a " vegetable will;" and if sleep more or less profound, depends
upon the application of stimuli, which, I think has been sufficiently proven;
would it be unphilosophical to infer, that vegetables, in time of morbid sleep,
are disturbed with dreams peculiar to themselves?

THE connection of causes and effects, traced in the vegetable world, and
compared with those of the animal kingdom, point out the striking analogy
between the two; and proclaim that Nature is uniformly the same in all her
operations.

AN accurate knowledge of the effects of sleep, upon the human system, will
enable us to see the propriety of fortifying the body, in the morning, with
either the durable or diffusible stimuli, against the noxious quality of the
air at certain seasons of the year; it likewise will further enable us, to
point out the impropriety of the conjugal pair gratifying or indulging the
hymeneal pleasures in the morning. Thus, the temperature and purity of the air,
food and drink, labor of body or of mind, the stimulus of light and sound, the
exercise of passion and emotion, when their stimulus neither stops short of the
proper point, nor goes beyond it, all give a disposition to sleep, of the most
salutary kind.

BEFORE I conclude the subject of sleep, I beg leave to mention a few
remarkable, important, and valuable facts, concerning the Hybernation of
animals, which will, beyond all scruple, help to resolve many phoenomena in
nature, show the great sedative power of cold, and the effects it has in
producing sleep, in many families of the animal kingdom. By the term
Hybernation, is to be understood, that dormant state in which animals of many
different kinds, subsist in winter without food, without any apparent motion,
and without sense, seemingly sound asleep, and not recoverable from it unless
placed in a warmer atmosphere. It is to be observed, that this faculty is
confined to those animals that are the inhabitants of the colder regions of the
earth; at least we know of no instance of Hybernation of animals, which dwell
in the intratropical parts of the earth. This state of torpidity is most
remarkable in the amphibious animals, such as the frogs, the toads, the
lizards, and, I suspect, the serpents. There are likewise several quadrupeds,
which are remarkable for remaining during winter in a torpid state, such as the
bear, the badger, the squirrel, the hedgehog, the dormouse, the bat, etc. The
Count de Buffon, and several other naturalists, ascribe this state to the
coldness of their blood; but, according to Mr. John Hunter's experiments, it
does not appear that the blood of the bear, of the hedgehog, of the badger, or
of the dormouse, is a degree colder, than what we find to be in general the
case, in animals of the same class. It has been found by experiments made by
Mr. Hunter, that a frog receives and digests food, when it is in an atmosphere
in which the thermometer stands at 60. but that it does not digest food when
the cold comes down to 40. It has from thence been supposed, that those dormant
quadrupeds, the bear, the badger, the hedgehog, the dormouse, and perhaps the
squirrel, when the heat of their blood is reduced from 90. and 100. by cold to
70. that then they lose the power of digestion, and that the excretions, as
well as the secretions, are very much diminished. This is the most plausible
explanation of the fact hitherto offered.

DOCTOR Pallas says, the fuslik becomes torpid in a great degree of cold; and
that the heat of this animal is reduced from 103 to 80 of the scale of
Fahrenheit. See Nova Commentaria Academiae Petropolitanae, ^om. xiv.
-- In the hamster, Sulzer has shown us, that, during the summer season, the
pulse beats one hundred and fifty strokes in a minute; but that, if the animal
is examined in the winter months, when in its torpid state, the heart hardly
pulsates fifty times in a minute Natur^esch* des Hamsters, page 16^.
. This last observation does not apply merely to the hamster, but, I believe,
it may be assumed as a fact, that, during the torpid state of all hybernating
animals, the pulsation of the heart is very slow. This remarkably-sedative
power of cold is not confined solely to the inferior animals: the influence of
a cold climate on the human pulse is prodigious. It has been found, for
instance, that the heart of the Greenlander does not beat more than thirty, or
forty, strokes in a minute Blumenbachii Institutiones Physiologicae, p. 78.
sect. de Cord.
.

FROM comparing these facts and experiments, and the fifth and sixth
experiments of William Hewson's Inquiry into the properties of the blood, may
we not venture to draw the following conclusions? 1st. That cold is a great
debilitating or sedative power: 2d. That if the blood of some of the
hybernating animals be actually at rest for a considerable length of time, it
may be rendered fluid by the gradual introduction of heat, and the animal
restored to life. With these facts and observations, I finish the subject of
sleep, and now proceed, in the second place, to the inquiry of Dreams.

FROM the theory of sleep already given, I am enabled to prosecute with more
propriety the subject of Dreams. It has been made to appear, that profound
sleep depends upon causes producing a certain degree of excitement favorable
to the point at which sleep commences, and that dreams are the effects of
morbid sleep, which depend upon the same stimulus either stopping short of the
proper point, or going beyond it. It is in this state of sleep, that the soul
does think (according to Mr. Lock), when the intellectual functions are
partially suspended. Dreams may be explained, likewise, upon the same method of
reasoning, as sleep. Certain powers do exert their effects on the principle of
life, and produce an excitement unfavourable to refreshing sleep, which will be
strictly attended to in the course of this subject; and, I think, the old adage
of philosophers, will apply equally well here, as in many other cases, "that
Nature does nothing in vain."

I PRESUME, from what has been advanced, it will obviously appear, that a
complete excitement of the brain, does necessarily take place in time of
profound sleep, different from that excitement, which takes place, in order to
the proper exercise of the intellectual functions in the waking state, and
that, in time of morbid sleep, there is either a deficiency or an excess of
excitement, with respect to the different functions, in different degrees. In
such an intermediate state of deficiency or excess of excitement in the brain,
there always occurs more or less of dreaming: There are, in this state, false
perceptions, false associations, false judgments, and disproportionate
emotions. In short, the circumstances attending dreaming, are observed to take
place in delirium, only differing in degree.

IN sthenic and asthenic diseases, when attended with delirium, the excitement
in the former is carried beyond that point at which inviting sleep commences,
and, in the latter, stops short of it.

THUS, I conceive, it will evidently appear, that there are two kinds of
delirium, depending upon different degrees of excitement: the one is owing to
an excessive, and the other to a deficient, degree of excitement in the brain.
Further, it may, perhaps, serve to illustrate the analogy between dreaming and
delirium; and the latter is only a bridge for the former to travel over to
Insania, if I may be allowed the expression.

DREAMS affect those most, who are of a debilitated and delicate habit, and
those easily affected by slight and trifling causes. A laboring man seldom
dreams much. The sleep of a laboring man in sweet, whether he eats little or
much, but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep Ecclesiastes,
chap. v. ver. 12.
. Besides these, there are some healthy persons who seldom or never dream at
all. Mr. Lock tells us, he once knew a man that was bred a scholar, and had no
bad memory, who told him, he had never dreamed in his life, till he had that
fever he was then newly recovered of, which was about the five or six and
twentieth year of his age. And, as a farther corroborating circumstance, I have
been informed by a gentleman of my acquaintance, that Dr. William Pit Smith,
of New York, was acquainted with a lady of that city, who, at the age of
twenty-three years, declared, she had never dreamed in her life, and further,
that the idea of dreaming appeared so absurd to her, that she did not believe
there were any such things as dreams. -- I have no doubt, the world affords
many more such instances.

THE dreams of sleeping men are, as I take it, all made up of the waking man's
ideas, though, for the most part, oddly put together Lock on the Human
Understanding, vol. i. page 76. sect. 17.
. That this is not always the case, may, I presume, be proven upon Mr. Locke's
own principles of reasoning, that if all our ideas are derived from sensation
and reflection, which he endeavors to maintain, and if, in time of profound
sleep, the soul does not think, then dreaming most unquestionably must be, in
time of morbid sleep, when the powers of the mind are only partially suspended;
therefore, at that time, the organs of sense are excitable to new impressions
from causes suggested from without, and certainly they may beget new ideas
within, and likewise excite those into action already fixed in the mind,
though, for the most part, incoherent.

It has been observed, in the former part of this dissertation, that the
excitability is more abundant in the latter part of night, and toward morning,
than in the fore part of the evening, consequently more easily affected by any
stimuli, that may be at that time applied. This will, perhaps, enable us to
explain more satisfactorily the phenomenon of dreaming, at the approach of
day, than at any period of the night; for it is generally remarked, that
thieves make choice of what is vulgarly called the dead hour of the night, to
make their depredations, when people are supposed to be fast locked in the arms
of profound sleep.

FURTHER, in support of this subject, I beg leave to adduce the following fact,
from Dr. Beattie's Dissertations Moral and Critical. He observes, that
particular dreams might be accounted for from impressions made in time of sleep
on the organs of sense, particularly those of touch and feeling. A very slight
hint, suggested from without, or in any way suggested, is sufficient for fancy
to work upon, in producing multitudes of visionary exhibitions. I have heard
from good authority, of a gentleman in the army, whose imagination was so
easily affected in sleep with impressions made on the outward senses, that his
companions, by speaking softly in his ear, could cause him to dream of what
they pleased: once, in particular, they made him go through the whole procedure
of a duel, from the beginning of the quarrel to the firing of a pistol, which
they put in his hand for that purpose, and which, by the explosion, awaked him.
I take the liberty of mentioning another fact, which will help to illustrate
the very point in question. It is a fact I obtained of a gentleman of my
acquaintance, of extensive observation and unblemished moral character, who
related his dream in the following words. I imagined I saw, at ten o'clock in
the morning, a moon in the east, shoot from itself like one meteor from
another, fall to the horizon, and assume the appearance of a rising full moon.
Upon the appearance of this singular phenomenon, I thought my dog started in
pursuit of it. Immediately my imagination was changed to the west, where I
fancied I saw a person descending from heaven, in a flame of fire. When it came
in contact with the earth, a very great smoke issued, which seemed to spread
far and wide. This was soon dissipated, and I thought my companions said they
observed a man, who had descended in that flame of fire. They went off to meet
him, and, behold, returned with a person dressed in a sailor's grab: I asked
him from whence he came? he answered, he was taken up in a water spout, in a
river (where he was fishing for his living) about sixty miles from this spot;
and he observed further, that he should have descended much faster, if it had
not been for a large windlass he had hold of in his passage from above. A
complete and judicious induction of the effects of these facts, are sufficient
to prove the astonishing vivacity of the imagination, the absurdity and
incoherence of the ideas in time of dreaming, and that they are not always made
up of the waking man's thoughts.

I SHALL, in the third place, proceed to animadvert upon the effects of dreams
on the faculties of the mind.

DOES not the excessive or deficient degree of excitement, constituting the
morbid state of sleep, wherein certain faculties of the mind are awakened, seem
to argue in favor of the different powers of the mind occupying different
parts of space in the brain? If so, it will help to resolve the causes, why,
sometimes the imagination, the memory, and the judgment, are partially excited,
and sometimes deranged and impaired in dreams, and in diseases. There are
numberless facts that may be adduced, in proof of the effects of diseases and
accidents, in destroying, or impairing, the intellectual faculties. But, this
is rather foreign to the present inquiry. I shall, therefore, confine myself to
the effects of dreams on the faculties of the mind.

"THE imagination, or fancy, seems to be" one of all our mental powers, or
faculties, the least suspended in its operation by sleep. Of the other powers,
or faculties, some are more, others less, affected, and some appear to be, for
a time, wholly suspended. That the memory is at times impaired or partially
excited in sleep, may be proven from this, that a person will dream of
transacting business with a deceased friend, without recollecting any thing of
his death. The judgment is frequently impaired in dreams, as well as in
diseases, and the imagination retains its vigor in tolerable force. That there
is sometimes an association of ideas in sleep, I presume, will not be disputed;
and it may be made to appear from this, that, if I dream of the object of my
affection, it transports my imagination back to the place where she most
commonly resides; but, for the most part, the association of ideas is false and
delusive, in our dreaming moments. Sometimes, the understanding is so deranged,
and has so forsaken us, that we are entirely deprived of the power and freedom
of the will. Hence, in dreams, we seem to experience a false necessity of
running into trouble, pain, and many other perplexities, though, with a
vigorous exertion of that power of the understanding, the will, we should find
a remedy or an antidote to all such harrassing ideas.

BUT sleep has a wonderful power over all our faculties, besides those
mentioned above. Sometimes such a change takes place in the state of the brain,
from the influence of certain powers, that we seem to have entirely lost our
moral faculty. Hence, we sometimes dream of perpetrating crimes without scruple
or remorse; crimes, both repugnant to law and to gospel, and at which we should
shudder when awake. Would it be admitted, if I were to ascribe this to the
desertion of the judgment?

AN attempt to explain all the dreams recorded in the Old and New Testament,
upon the same physical causes as we do those of the present day, would,
perhaps, suggest a hint favorable to deistical principles, throw some
objections in the way, and have a tendency to overturn, and retard the progress
of, the Christian religion, with some weak and wavering minds. Far be it from
me, however, that I should entertain, or even wish to support, an idea, so
unfriendly to the moral science, to the happiness, and to the good order, of
society: For we are warranted by the same sacred history to believe, that
dreams have given information of future events, and that they were revealed to
some persons, for certain purposes, by the Deity. Hence, weak and ignorant
people infer, that they are still prophetical, and ominous of their future
events; but, what can be more absurd than such superstitious notions?
Superstition is one of the worst diseases of the soul. It is generally
unfriendly to happiness, to rational piety, and to sound philosophy See Dr.
Beattie's Dissertations Moral and Critical.
. Then, as nature has done nothing in vain, may I not infer, that dreams are
frequently of service to some people? for, according to the Chevalier Ramsay,
the Deity institutted physical evil for the eradication of moral evil. May not,
then, bodily and mental pain, which are frequently experienced in dreams, be of
use to those persons in the way of physical admonition, and that they may be
serviceable as means of moral improvement? For we find that bodily and mental
pains were the remedies, employed in the Old Testament, for extirpating vice
and promoting virtue See an Inquiry into the Influence of Physical Causes upon
the Moral Faculty, by Benjamin Rush, M. D. professor of the theory and practice
of medicine in the college of Philadelphia, etc, etc.
.

HE is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones
with strong pain Job, chap. xxxiii. ver. 19.
. The wise and the learned will not despise instruction, however mean and
trifling the vehicle may be that conveys it; for great advantages may, perhaps,
be derived even from an extravagant flight of the imagination, or of any other
faculties of the mind, in a dream.

HAVING finished the subject of dreams, and the effects of dreams on the
faculties of the mind, and having also proven that they occur in a state of
morbid sleep, it now remains, in the fourth place, to point out the causes of
dreams. These may be divided into external and internal causes.

FIRST. Under the head of the external causes, I shall consider those which
affect the outward senses, either from an excess or deficiency of their
stimulant powers: And,

SECONDLY. Under the head of the internal causes, I shall mention those which
affect the internal senses likewise, either from their excess, or deficiency,
of stimulant properties, and convey new impressions to the sensorium commune,
and beget new ideas, or excite those into action, already established in the
mind.

FIRST. I shall consider those external causes, which, if applied in excess,
run the excitement beyond that point at which profound sleep commences.

THESE are such as excessive bodily fatigue, too great heat accumulated in the
room, either from the sun, fire, or bed-clothes, excessive eating of rich and
nourishing food, and too free use of fermented, or spirituous, liquors; too
pure or dephlogisticated air; worms in the alimentary passage; a great
abundance and velocity of rich blood; an accumulation of urine in the bladder;
an accumulation of the venereal stimulus; a retention of the perspirable matter
under the cuticle: In short, a retention of any of the excretions, may prove
causes of dreams.

SECOND. I shall mention those external causes whose stimulant effects stop
short of that point, at which sleep of the salutary kind begins.

THESE are such as idleness, cold, any way introduced, darkness, silence, too
long abstinence either from eating or drinking, or, rather, a deficiency of the
stimulant effects of these powers; an uneasy position of the body in time of
sleep; tumors situated externally on, or in the neighborhood of, the trachea;
ligatures on any part of the body; air rendered very impure, from its being
impregnated with any noxious particles; obstructed nares, either from mucous,
or polypi, or any other substance impacted in, and shutting up, their passage;
a penury of blood, and an excessive evacuation of any kind.

I SHALL proceed, in the last place, to take notice of the second head, under
which the internal causes are to be mentioned.

FIRST. I shall mention those internal causes, which operate from their
excessive stimulus, favoring that degree of excitement which constitutes
morbid sleep. These are, long and intense applications of the mind to study or
business of any kind, violent passions of the mind, as love, joy, and anger.

SECOND. I shall conclude this subject, with pointing out those internal
causes, whose stimulus stops short of that point, at which refreshing sleep
commences. These are, a kind of inactivity, sluggishness, or rather a vacancy
of the mind; the depressing passions, as grief, fear, and shame, or rather an
abstraction of confidence.

HAVING concluded this dissertation, I cannot lay down my pen without embracing
this favorable opportunity, of publicly returning my sincere thanks to the
worthy Professors of the College of Philadelphia, and of acknowledging the many
valuable and important truths delivered from their different chairs in this
seminary -- Hoping, that her sons may have treasured up in their minds the true
principles of the science; that they may live as rising monuments, to the honor
of medicine; and not conclude their earthly existence, till after they have
extended their improvements to such a length, as will mark a glorious epoch in
the annals of time.


