MARTIN's CLIO.

THE TRIUMPH OF TRUTH. HISTORY AND VISIONS OF CLIO.

If you have Tears, prepare to shed them now.
If you have Hearts, you will feel the Force of Truth.
-- Facilis descensus averni.
Noctes atque dies patet atri janua ditis;
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras
Hoc opus, hic labor est.
BY JOHN PAUL MARTIN, A.M. M.S.P.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, By ISAIAH THOMAS AND EBENEZER T. ANDREWS, FAUST's STATUE,
No. 45, NEWBURY STREET. MDCCXCI.

IT is to be lamented, that in this country, few pens have been devoted to the
cause of Christianity. In remarking this, I do not consider the numerous
pamphlets and sermons, which have appeared, so far as the design of them was,
to extend the character of the writers, or to support some side of a
theological dispute. Whatever is not addressed to the heart-will never reach
the seat of Religion.

The following is designed to explore the arts of infidels; to trace the
operations of the Spirit of God; to open the leading doctrines of Christianity,
and to extend the Redeemer's kingdom. It may be read by the learned and the
ignorant; may be useful to the gay and the serious, and equally pleasing to the
young and old.

As the time and place of Clio's death, are among the uninteresting parts of
his history, I have not noticed them; and in my connection, have thrown in only
those facts, which his own manuscript left untold.

The printing is calculated for the eye, the language for the ear, and the
sentiments for the heart. That all may take effect, and that this may answer
the valuable objects of its publication, is the sincere wish of

THE AUTHOR.
Boston, October, 1791. N. B. As parts of this will be delivered by the Author,
as an exercise of sacred Oratory, the intervals for the introduction of Music,
are marked as follows, * and the first line inserted, with a reference.



MARTIN 's HISTORY OF CLIO.
CLIO was indebted to Nature, for feelings, exquisitely sensible to all the
occurrences of life. His pulse beat high with joy, when he saw his friends in
prosperity, and tears flowed in streams from his eyes, when he attended scenes
of distress.

To education, he owed a cultivated mind, and to a knowledge of the world, an
accurate acquaintance with the hearts of men. Though he delighted to shed the
secret tear; though he preferred the house of mourning to the house of
feasting; though he indulged rather in that sorrow, which makes the heart
better, than in the laughter of fools; yet he was more often found among the
gay, than the gloomy.

This proceeded, not from levity, but from a certain refinement of soul, which
taught him to avoid scenes of woe, where he might betray a feeling heart, and
expose a flowing eye to senseless sneers and ridicule. With me, his only bosom
friend, has he spent many hours; and has often, from motives of delicacy, waved
subjects most near to his heart, fearing to give me pain: but he was as
ignorant of my heart, as the world was of his; for how often would I gladly
have mingled my tears with his tears, and have paid an united tribute to the
dignity of human nature; but those interesting scenes are past; never to return.

To an excellent family education Clio was indebted for an early acquaintance
with the Christian religion. His parents were the faithful servants of Jesus
Christ, and taught their children to remember their Creator in the days of
their youth, and to believe the great truths of the sacred scriptures.

No pains nor expense were spared to give Clio the best education, which his
country could afford. He was designed for the sacred work of the ministry, and
his father was resolved not to add to the number of blind guides, who, ignorant
themselves, presume to instruct the world.

Though Clio's heart was uncorrupted, though within he was pensive and serious;
yet without he had a certain air of gaiety and volatility, which, however
innocent, had almost proved his ruin: So necessary is it, that the manners and
the heart be congenial. Though idlers, triflers and fools were always Clio's
abhorrence; yet there was a kind of company, with whom he associated, more
dangerous than them all. These were subtle reasoners, whose heads are warm; but
whose hearts are cold; full of sentiment; but void of sensibility. OF SUCH
CHARACTERS, MY YOUNG FRIENDS, BEWARE!

These subtle associates would often ridicule the duties of Christianity; would
call the religion of the New Testament, a scheme, just calculated for people of
weak minds; would say, that revelation had no support but fanaticism; and that
if the clergy were not interested in its promotion, it would fall to the
ground. The train was artfully laid; for Clio, jealous of his character as a
scholar, was unwilling to be ranked among fools and fanatics.

He began to hear with apparent pleasure, of celebrated deists, and was once
persuaded to toast the names of Hume, Voltaire, Bolingbroke and Chubb.

He was young, therefore we are not to wonder, that with him, reasonings, of
which men would have been ashamed, had an influence. He was persuaded to read
the writings of unbelievers, to the neglect of his studies, and even of his
bible, which, till this, he had never omitted, morning nor evening.

His heart often reproved him, conscience beat frequent alarms; but, the PRIDE
OF SCIENCE prevailed, and he began to distinguish himself, with his borrowed
arguments, as a most penetrating casuist.

To my readers, it is not necessary to remark on the delicate and minute
springs of the mind. None was more easily put into operation, than Clio's. He
was on the verge of deism, at the opening of this first vision, which I give in
his own words.

FIRST VISION.
CLIO'S Father on a Death Bed.
IT was evening: the moon shone bright. The stars glittered in the heavens, so
distinctly that I could call them by name. I admired the wonders of God in the
firmament, and adored the Author of existence. This recalled to my mind the
history of creation, and the records of that book, which I had for some time
neglected. For the moment, remorse took possession of my soul. I retired to my
study and took my Bible; but, on opening it, much of its grandeur was lost, and
no part seemed to invite my attention. I laid it down, and took up a book,
entitled "THE RELIGION OF NATURE," in which the author attempts to prove
himself more capable than his Maker, of proposing a system of faith and morals.
However absurd his attempt, the title then promised just what suited my turn of
mind. I soon ran over the contents, and casting my eye upon the chapters,
caught, with a transitory pleasure, the following words: "This proves, that the
writings of Moses are farcical, that the story of Ruth and Esther is
ridiculous; that the account of a theocracy is whimsical; and as to the Psalms
of David and the Prophecies, (as they are called) any man of tolerable genius,
might write better. The Proverbs of Solomon are old sentences, which were
current in his day; and as to the New Testament, there is scarcely a page, but
what contains something incredible and impossible." He went on to ridicule the
doctrine of miracles, and to show, that no man of sense would believe any
thing, unless he knew the reason of it. I did not examine how he attempted to
prove all this, nor what system he proposed in the room of it; but he said
enough to balance all the impressions, with which I sat down, and I retired to
rest in a state of absolute suspense.

My sleep was confused, and toward morning, methought I was transported to the
bedside of my father who appeared to be in his last moments. It was a scene,
which touched me to the heart. How distressed did I feel, at seeing my parent,
the guide of my youth, so near the grave. To me the world had begun to propose
its allurements; all the objects of time and sense seemed to be gilded. I had
not then conceived a thought, that the coloring was all imparted from my own
eye, nor had suspected that when these eyes should, like my father's, lose
their luster, the world would lose its charms.

How fondly, and ost how fatally, are youth deceived! They pursue the shadow of
a moment, and lose the eternal substance.

It seems at this moment a reality, that my father, feeble and almost
breathless, took my hand, and said, "Weep not, my son, I go to a better world.
Trusting in my Savior, 'to die will be everlasting gain.' I expect you to
preach the gospel, and in a few years to see you following me, bringing with
you the seals of your ministry and the crown of your rejoicing. The time will
come, when like me, you must be surrounded by weeping friends, breathing your
last. Keep that hour ever in mind, and you will be faithful to the souls of
men. Avoid subtle reasonings. Preach in its power and extent the doctrines of
the cross, and ever be found bearing about you the blessings of the gospel of
peace. Imitate your divine Savior, go about doing good, visit the sick,
comfort mourners, pour balm into wounds, and point out the Lamb of God, to all
who are enquiring the way to Zion; and, my son, consider that I shall expect
soon to embrace you in a world, where we shall never part."

My father knew the tenderness of my heart, and forebore saying many things,
which he might have added, and soon after appeared calmly to breathe his last,
saying, 'INTO THY HANDS, MY SAVIOR, I COMMIT MY SPIRIT!' Such was the
impression of the moment, that I would have gladly followed, and left the world
to its vanities, and my destructive books to be cankered by their poisons. At
waking, the impression was fresh in my mind, and my pillow was moistened with
tears. Though I found it but a dream of the night, it seemed like a warning
from heaven. The solemn sound of my father's voice still rung in my ears, as if
an angel spoke. I rose and opened my Bible, and with what rapture did I turn
over the leaves of that inspired volume. Then with what contempt did I regard
the feeble reasonings of man, when opposed to the wisdom of God. How could men
leave such fountains of love for streams of pride! How could they prefer the
trifles of a moment, the rattles of an hour, to everlasting riches! Is it
possible that I was ever blind to these sacred truths? And can I now think of
closing these records of redeeming love? No. this shall be the man of my
counsels. Of this gospel I will be the herald. By this shall I be enabled to
become an humble instrument of the Spirit, to lead enquiring souls into the way
of all truth; to administer the blessed comforts of our most holy religion to
the mourners in Zion, and to lead the thirsty soul to the wells of salvation.

How will the spirit of my father be rejoiced to see me arrive at the heavenly
courts, attended by those who, through my ministry, shall be rescued from sin
and death, and brought into the kingdom of Jesus Christ?

As well might Atheists talk of heaven, as Deists hope for future happiness.
Can their systems stand the conflagration? Can their wood, hay and stubble,
built upon the sand, endure that fire which shall try every work? No! Then will
I begin in earnest to build gold, silver and precious stones upon the
foundation of the gospel. On this book will I build my hopes, and on the
munition of rocks, my salvation. "Let all the Heathen writers join," etc.
Watts's 119th Ps. 7th Part.


MARTIN's CONNECTION.
NOTHING could be more pleasing, at this time, than to see Clio firm to his
resolution; but his conviction of the truth resulted from feelings excited by a
vision. I visited him, while under all these impressions, which he has
described. He shed abundance of tears at his former folly, and assured me, that
he was now resolved to be a christian indeed. Knowing the quickness of his
feelings, and convinced, that he relied upon his own strength, I proposed to
him these words, which he has since told me, that he had afterward occasion to
consider as peculiarly prophetic. "The youths shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fall." Had he then waited upon the Lord, his strength
would have been renewed, and he might have mounted, on the wings of the gospel,
as an eagle; but he fell, and great indeed was his fall. It is easy to descend,
but hard to retrack our steps. Youth are easily charmed into the paths of vice.
To them virtue seems a rugged way. Ask the aged Christian, and he will tell
you, from experience, that THE WAYS OF VIRTUE ARE WAYS OF PLEASANTNESS. Ask the
aged sinner, and he will tell you, "I was allured into the paths of vice. In
the spring of life I set out on flowers, and for a little time the path was
delightful. I pursued it with the ardor of youth, farther than I can ever
retrack, for lo! the winter of age is come, and the flowers are no more." Let
youth be warned, that beneath the roses of pleasure are the briars of pain.

Clio had received much excellent advice, had heard the lessons of experience;
his impressions were strong; but his heart was unguarded. His former associates
soon found admission to his room. Wishing to persuade them, he communicated the
suspense of his mind, his vision, and consequent resolution.

They were too artful to ridicule him at once; but began to hint at the
prejudice of education, on which they at length so much refined, as to insist,
that nothing ought to be believed, which we learnt of our parents; that all the
experience to which the aged pretend, was only to make youth revere them, and
imbibe their principles, without examination; that when people began to be old
and gloomy, they saw every thing through a wrong medium. One proceeded so far
as to say, that he despised all old musty lessons of his father; that he would
think for himself, and that he did not want a stronger argument against any
proposition, than that it was maintained by our forefathers.

Clio proposed the following answer: "Do we not grow wiser as we grow older?
and why should not our parents be supposed to do the same. They have passed
through this very time of life, and the sun shone then as bright as now. We are
not to suppose, because many nights have interfered between their youth and
ours, that their days were darker, or their minds less improved than ours. They
have experience, and my father has often told me, that THE EXPERIENCE OF THE
AGED, WAS BETTER THAN SILVER AND GOLD TO THE YOUNG. Can they have any motive to
adopt wrong principles, or to instruct their children in what they do not
believe?"

His seducers had been accustomed to such remarks, and answered them partly
with appearance of argument, and partly with sneers and ridicule: "Solomon,"
they said, "was for pronouncing vanity upon this world, when he was too old to
enjoy it." And they added -- "No subject or object can make a just impression,
except at the very moment of observing it. Our parents may as well judge of the
proportions of a building, at a thousand miles distance, as of our pleasures,
or principles, or religion, at their distance of age."

Clio gave some heed to this remark, not reflecting on the infinite difference
between mere subjects and objects of sense, and those moral principles and
practices, the just conception of which, ever depend upon mature judgment and
experience. SOPHISTRY HAS RUINED ITS THOUSANDS! It Is the engine, which the
enemy of man most successfully employs against the minds of youth.

But these sophists understood Clio's unguarded part, and there plied with
success. "How," said they, "can a young man, of genius and talents, be
dependent for his religion on his nurse, and quote for argument, the prattle of
a fireside? Do not all subjects stand on their own basis? If a religion be
unreasonable, it ought to be rejected; and if there be reasons enough, by them
let it be supported; for MERE HEREDITARY RELIGION IS GOOD FOR NOTHING." This
last remark being perfectly true, gave an air of truth to the preceding ones.

Clio's pride, as a scholar, was now called into exercise, and he considered
himself to have renounced nothing, when he consented to try the truth of the
book by argument. He resolved to defend it against their attacks, and vainly
hoped that these would be among his first converts.

Alas! little did he know his own strength; for as yet he had never proved the
armor of the gospel, nor known the power of the Spirit of God. But this
interesting scene we have in his own words, which introduce the second vision.

SECOND VISION
CLIO'S Father becomes his Guardian Angel.
FOR ever gloomy will appear to me that night, when, with my seducing
associates, I opened the sacred volume, and vainly presumed to establish the
eternal truth of God, upon the feeble reason of man. We had not even attained
maturity of mind; mere youths, just started into being, and indebted for all
our little knowledge to our parents and instructors! yet we presumptuously
arraigned these our best friends, before the very tribunal of knowledge, which
they had erected in our minds, and there ungratefully condemned them as old, as
prejudiced, and unworthy to guide us. ALAS! HOW MANY YOUTHS HAVE BEEN RUINED BY
AN AFFECTED INDEPENDENCE OF THOUGHT! HOW INDEPENDENT ARE SUCH OF REASON, OF
GRATITUDE, OF SENSE AND REFLECTION! -- But the word of God was opened, and mere
children, who ought to have been under a father's rod, were sitting with mock
majesty, to decide upon the truth of revelation. When David was champion of the
armies of Israel, he relied not oll his stone and sling, but in the name of the
Lord, and in the strength of the mighty God of Jacob. But I, alas! had not even
a stone nor a sling; yet might have made some defense against my associates,
feeble as myself, had not they produced against me the mighty Goliahs, the
champions of infidelity, who have long defied the experienced soldiers in the
armies of Jesus. To their helmets of brass and mighty spears, what could I
oppose? The contest was short; I resigned the Bible, renounced the doctrines of
the cross, which I was to have preached, and became more fatally than before, a
victim to subtlety and sophistry.

The event was such as an experienced parent could have foretold. We triumphed
together upon a reunion of sentiment, and I retired to rest.

Not long had my eyes been closed, when the well-known face of my father
presented itself to me. The natural benignity of his countenance was heightened
by celestial smiles. He was apparelled in white, which I have since learned,
were the robes of the Redeemer's righteousness. He had in his right hand a
branch of palm tree, which he told me, was an emblem of victory; not gained by
himself, but presented by the mighty Conqueror. Says he, "I am permitted to
leave yonder world, to visit the son of my hopes: You are designed by the great
Head of the Church, to be a minister of the gospel, and to be instrumental in
turning many from the error of their ways, to the wisdom of the just. By nature
you were formed, both in heart and soul, for the arduous task.

You are to be an officer in the armies of Jesus, and to oppose the weapons,
which his gospel has furnished, against the rebels to his cause and kingdom.
You are to assist in restoring to allegiance, those, who have once declared,
that they will not have Christ to reign over them.

"I appear to you, that you may never be led to doubt the truth of God. Behold,
I have been translated to immortal life, and you shall live for ever: But I
have left you in a world full of error and temptation, and am fearful that you
will, in some unguarded moment, be allured from the new and living way, which
is opened through the veil, into the holy of holies."

How was my heart melted to see the love of my father survive the grave! How
overwhelmed with grief and shame to see him leave the world of glory, and the
hallelujahs of heaven, to visit a poor wretch, who, but a few hours before, had
renounced his Savior and his Bible!

With what sweet serenity, and irresistible eloquence, did he teach me the
character of a Christian preacher, and open to me the doctrines of the New
Testament? With what earnestness did he instruct me how to conduct the thunders
of Sinai to the souls of men? THE LAW WAS THE MASTER WHICH LED ME TO CHRIST.
How did he warn me against that religion, which is seated in the head, and
which has no influence upon the hearts and lives of men? I wave the remarks
which ensued: they were full of tenderness, infinitely full of instruction. To
them am I indebted for a knowledge of my duty.

I dared not to tell him, that I had renounced the gospel, and trampled on the
cross; but he had been my guardian angel, and knew my conduct: yea, he knew the
infirmity of human nature, too well to address me with reproofs.

"I saw," says he, "my son, attempt to defend the word of God, upon principles
of human reason. Your motives were good, and you are now as able to defend by
argument the divinity of revelation, as the oldest Christian. The truth of God
was never submitted to the reason of man. God is a Spirit; his ways are far
above our ways: we see the effect, but in tracing the cause, get lost in a
labyrinth, and cannot see where the windings run. Alas! what is external or
internal evidence without the power of God? The scholar may admire the
reasonings and the eloquence of Paul. The philosopher may trace the effects of
Christianity upon the nations, on which has arisen the sun of righteousness.
Miracles and prophecies may have weight with men, whose minds are not captious;
but, my son, of all these outward evidences beware; they are the subtle
contrivances of Satan. RELIGION SEATED IN THE HEAD IS NOT THE RELIGION OF
JESUS; yet such may amuse the ignorant and unsuspecting. It is true, that some
good christians have been led to defend their Savior, as Peter did, by a human
weapon; but such have been counseled to return the sword into the sheath. The
greater part of those who have introduced evidences, are Deists, subtle
ensnarers of the souls of men. OF SUCH, MY SON, BEWARE!

"Preach the law to those, who are without, and the gospel to the real
followers of the Lamb. If infidelity abounds; yet you are not commissioned to
attack it. Sorely has the cause of religion been wounded by its best friends.
They, from a motive of promoting its interests, have exposed it to ridicule.
Christianity is not a scheme of human reason; it is the wisdom of God. It
cannot be supported on principles of reason. David had surely been slain, had
he relied upon his stone and sling."

The vision was no more; but in the morning, the last word rested in my memory,
and by it I recalled the whole scene. The impression was strong. It produced a
change in my sentiments on the subject of religion, and I resolved no more to
enter the lists against those, who fought with human armor. These were my
reflections. "If Christianity has influenced the lives of men, so has every
other religion. If martyrs have died in its defense, so have they upon all
subjects. If scripture language be sublime, other writings are not infinitely
inferior: And in short, I can find no argument, which Christians have adduced
in favor of their system, more powerful, than the arguments of infidels and
Mahometans. If we ridicule the sensual paradise of this last class, they, in
return, ridicule our sensual Jerusalem. They challenge as much right to derive
their ideas of futurity from earthly pleasures, as we have to derive them from
silver, gold, and precious stones, the objects of sense and avarice." In the
event, my father's advice appeared just, that THE REAL TRUTH OF REVELATION
DEPENDS UPON THE SPIRIT OF GOD.

I rose, and having a large library at my command, employed several weeks in
examining the writings of Leland, Tillotson, Beattie, Lardner, Jennings,
Butler, etc. In the whole, no argument appeared, which was not easily answered;
for none had adduced in proof the Spirit of God; too modest to challenge it
themselves, and too delicate to obtrude it upon the world. At that time, I
lamented their manifest weakness and presumption; but since have had reason to
adore that wisdom, which has denied to the reason of man, the power of God.

My resolutions were again formed; my plans were laid for spreading the gospel.
My Bible was much in my hands. I studied closely its contents, but saw not its
truths by the eye of faith. Human wisdom was still my foundation, and the pride
of science remained; yet, how deceitful is the heart of man! I thought myself a
real Christian, and solemnly promised allegiance, fidelity and perpetual
service to Jesus Christ. "Lord I have made thy word my choice." Watts's 119th
Ps. 8th Part.


MARTIN's CONNECTION.
FEELINGS, ardent as Clio's, could not be long kept in their present state, nor
ought we to wish it; for as yet he had no true love to God, no zeal for the
law, and no genuine belief of the gospel. In fact, though he appeared an
enthusiastic Christian, he was not one of GOD's CHRISTIANS; yet all the attacks
of his companions were, after this, unsuccessful. He saw the fallacy of their
ground, and despised their unfair mode of attacking the gospel.

He found that most of the writings, for and against the authenticity of
revelation, were artful efforts of deism: that a few only were written by
professing Christians, and that these had rather exposed than defended the
cause. He was willing to consider some as good men, who had undertaken to
defend the truth of God by human weapons; but regarded their attempts as no
parts of their religion, nor proofs of their judgment.

He saw that a PRIDE OF SCIENCE had ruined thousands, and little suspected this
root of bitterness in his own heart. He began to prepare for preaching, like
many thousands, who have never drank from the spiritual rock. He went on the
common hackneyed road, believed as his commentator wrote, and made out his
body, rather scheme, of Christianity. He had not resolved what party to join,
concluding, with a good share of human wisdom to wait, till he should know the
prevailing sentiments of the people and the probable place of his settlement.
In fact, he had resolved upon little more, than to be a preacher, instead of
devoting himself to any other profession. He found, that sermons might be
composed so as not to offend any party; would often say, "THAT IF MEN WERE
MORAL, THAT WAS THE GREAT POINT; AS FOR DOCTRINES AND PRINCIPLES, THEY WERE
QUITE SUBORDINATE." His first sermons, therefore, were very pretty
compositions, neatly written, and (...) proper for a periodical paper. His
texts were (...) the Bible indeed; but the sermons were too (...) written to
have any connection with them, and (...) might have preached as well in a
Mohammedan mosque, or Chinese temple, as in a Christian church.

Thus equipped was Clio to preach Jesus Christ, and to be the herald of
salvation. You shall now have his exact words on this part of his life, written
after his real conversion, entitled, a Waking Vision.

THIRD VISION.
CLIO deluded by the Philosophy of SHAFTESBURY.
-- HOW must the spirit of my guardian parent have been affected, at seeing a
stripling go forth, thus miserably prepared for the work of the ministry! Had I
then persisted, he would surely have restrained me.

How was it possible that I, all ignorant of men, and destitute of grace and
gospel truth, as the beasts which perish, should presume to offer myself to
instruct men in the way to heaven? How could I, who was dead, and under the
sentence of the law condemned, teach men to live and be saved? Were my hands
pure enough to handle the word of life? Alas! I had not then tasted that the
Lord was gracious: But I was prevented from this great evil, by a very singular
incident. One of me ^^iends had suggested to me the importance of some
knowledge of men, before I attempted to preach to them, and advised me, very
ignorantly, to go through a course of studies upon human nature, and subjects
of real life. I did not then reflect, that books were but the pictures of life;
that some were very deficient in real likeness; that the fashion of the world
changed; and that if the disorders of the heart remained always the same, yet
the symptoms were perpetually varying. Books I studied for a knowledge of men,
and was peculiarly pleased with the ingenious philosophy of Shaftesbury.

He taught, in most charming language, the dignity of human nature; and on the
rubbish of sin, folly and fashion erected a superb structure of morality. This
was decorated with all the elegancies of his fancy, and presented to the eye,
as having the strictest proportions.

MY YOUNG FRIENDS ENTER NOT THE PORCH OF HIS DOORS, FOR WITHIN ARE THE CHAMBERS
OF DEATH.

Soon will that fabric feel its want of foundation and totter to the ground,
crushing all who shall be found in it.

On closing this book, I thought myself possessed of a key to all hearts; was
persuaded, that MAN, created in the likeness of God; that MAN, the lord of this
lower world; that MAN, so near to angels, was full of dignity; that he needed
no threats and terrors, but that mildness and persuasion, addressed to his
reason and understanding, would be sure of producing effect.

These were the days when I talked learnedly about the moral sense, and the
soft pliability of the human soul; about the natural attraction between the
mind of man, and every thing good, amiable and excellent throughout the
universe. I sought the company of those, who admired the ingenious system, and
wondered at the stupidity of the world, in not seeing its justice. This led me
to ridicule the doctrine of moral depravity.

I even refined upon the system, and pursued it, just as the author could have
wished, first opposing all exercise of punishment on earth, for breach of human
laws. THE LORDS OF CREATION WERE TO BE LED, NOT DRIVEN. But I could not fail to
reflect on the millions of men, who are exceedingly vicious and debased,
abandoned to the meanest vices, to the profoundest ignorance, or the most
horrid crimes.

Men once system-mad are not easily checked. My new doctrine would prove or
disprove any thing. I made it change the whole face of the natural and moral
world. The earth was cultivated, and all the bloom of Eden smiling in the midst
of winter. Men of all classes became moral and industrious. Hills lay low, and
valleys rose at my command; and here I saw clearly, that this principle was
finally to prepare the way for a millennial state. The influence of it began to
be visible in the abolition of slavery, in the increase of institutions of
learning, and in the revolutions of empire.

With shame I reflect on those vagaries of a distempered brain, those whims of
an ungoverned fancy; yet this system of dignity was then in all my discourse;
it regulated my choice of diet; was applicable to all professions, to every
body, and to every business under the sun.

With confidence I intruded it into every body's affairs, and left my own
eternal business undone. While I thought the doctrine my slave, which would go
and come at my command; it was in fact my God. I worshipped it, and paid to it
the homage of all my faculties.

To crown all, Shaftesbury's system (if only his name was omitted) proved the
truth of revelation and elucidated all its doctrines. Once after a retired
walk, having wrought myself into a frenzy of dignity and moral sense, I burst
forth into the following exclamation, "Franklin may boast of snatching
lightning from the clouds, it shall be mine to shine in the moral world with
more distinguished fame. I Will teach men, that though the thunders of the mount,
and the wrath of God must fall, I can render them perfectly harmless. This
system shall be the conductor, and thus all the families of the earth shall be
safe."

I had wrought up the figure to its highest pitch; but was more solicitous to
preserve a parallel between Franklin's glory and mine, than between the thunder
of our clouds, and THE THUNDER OF THE ALMIGHTY GOD.

On returning, I opened my Bible, and between the original and translation, new
modelled the history of the fall, proving that it was an actual rising.

By the first chapter of Isaiah I found, that (otherwise translated) man was
from the crown of his head to the soals of his feet all soundness.

In the New Testament much was wrong; but when I found, that in so many
passages, we were assured, that the wrath of God should be revealed upon all
unrighteousness of man, I concluded not to alter them, but to do better for God
and men, saving the honor of the first, and the souls of the last. I contrived
that when the wrath must come, it should light upon the sins; but leave the
sinner unhurt; and that in the last great day, when sinners were summoned to
appear before the bar of God, the sins should appear, and answer for the deeds,
which they had done in the pure bodies of men; but -- how could sins appear
alone, and where would the man be, in whom those sins were committed? All this
was easily contrived, at that inventive time of life. The soul was to be
separated from the passions; these passions were to accompany the sins; and the
man, who had been an actual sufferer by these passions and their sins, would
see the righteous sentence of God executed upon them.

All these things were proved and illustrated by many texts of scripture. Every
thing bent kindly to my purpose, and I little suspected, that by pushing the
theory a little further, it would, by a like process, prove that there was no
need of a God, a Savior, or a Bible.

At that time my mind was not strong enough to advance thus far, though since I
have done it. Upon this part of my history, I am led to remark the danger of
indulging in theories upon religion, without recourse to the Bible. I was at
that time actually a deist, though I did not suspect it; for I had impiously
made the word of God conform to my system, instead of conforming myself to the
insallible standard of truth.

My Bible was open more than ever; but it was no longer GOD'S BIBLE. I admired
revelation indeed; but it was only those parts of it, which were an exact
transcript of my mind and will, not of God's; and when any doubts arose, I
hushed them by the words INTERNAL EVIDENCE, MORAL SENSE. These were universal
opiates.

My sleeping visions were full of truth, but this waking vision I shall ever
have reason to consider, as a contrivance of Satan, to effect the ruin of my
soul. Shall I add, that so strong was my delusion, that with a new gospel, thus
made by myself, I had the confidence to propose to be recognized, in the usual
form of the country, as a minister of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

MARTIN's CONNECTION.
CLIO proceeds to relate his examination, the questions proposed to him and his
answers, in which he conformed totally to his favorite system. The account is
so long that I must wave it, and hasten to more interesting scenes. Yet the
reader would not pardon me for neglecting what follows, copied from Clio's own
mouth.

CLIO'S Account of his Examination.
"I was prompt and confident in my answers, and upon leaving the room, was
persuaded, that in a few minutes I should be recalled, and presented with a
license, accompanied with many compliments.

"Alas! how little of the Christian did I then feel, expecting that a written
paper would make me a preacher of righteousness; and with what earthly rhapsody
did I look forward to the next Sabbath, when an admiring audience would be
charmed with the eloquence of my tongue, and astonished at my display of
classical knowledge. O! that that hour, which has long since flown with
intelligence of my pride to the recording angel, had been then dark as it now
is; but alas! the time is coming, when all our yesterdays shall advance, in
solemn state, from the shades of time, and rise up in judgment against us.
Though to us they are for ever gone, yet they are ever present to the Ancient
of Days. How often have I wished to seize an hour, which had been witness of my
sins, and prevent its going to appear against me: but all our past hours are
gone, and soon we must follow them.

"These are my present reflections; but then I was looking forward to a long
train of years, each hour of which was to witness my glory, and the triumph of
my genius. But soon was my pride checked, and this oil of gladness turned into
the gall of bitterness. Soon was I made to see my folly, and to feel like my
kindred dust and ashes; for O! when recalled, can I record the scene? My
youthful levity was soon repressed, by the sight of those aged fathers of the
church, who were sitting with solemn dignity and christian meekness waiting my
return. Not to commission me to preach! not to flatter my pride! but to reprove
my folly and presumption. Each look went to my heart, and there remains. At
length, after a short silence, the most aged rose up; tears fell from his eyes,
which I shall ever think, were sacred to the cause of Jesus; and addressed me
in such language, as never before came from the lips of man. Each word was like
the point of a diamond to my soul; at this moment I feel the depth of the
engraving, and there it will remain through eternity. Even angels will see it
with pleasure, and men cannot read it without instruction."

ADDRESS to CLIO, from an aged MINISTER.
MY young friend, our aged hearts leap for joy, when we see the sons of the
prophets rising up to fill our places. We rejoice to see genius and learning,
devoted to the cause of Christianity; but we grieve to see you seduced by
principles, which are poisonous to our profession. If you imagined, that your
sentiments and discoveries were new, you are much deceived. If you expected
that mere human learning would procure our approbation, you mistake our
characters. We challenge no right to commission men to preach. That can be
derived only from the great Captain of our salvation. Men may license you to
preach; but they only give you a human power, and can you in your soul think
that of any avail? We could only examine, whether you could testify to us a
commission from above; for remember, that THOUGH BISHOPS CAN MAKE PRIESTS, AND
COLLEGES CREATE DOCTORS, GOD ALONE CAN MAKE A CHRISTIAN. From the great Head of
the church alone do we derive a right to speak in the name of God.

Have you the witness within your own heart? Has Jesus called you to preach?
Did you ever hear the voice of the great Shepherd? Has the heavenly Dove ever
descended and abode with you? Or did you vainly imagine that the grace of God
arrived through the medium of a diploma?

My son, we reproach you not; from our hearts we wish you grace and blessing;
but we have to render an account, and cannot, without daring impiety, recommend
one to preach a Savior, whom he has not known?

We judge your sentiments dangerous and corrupt, and though we might propose
you to the world, as a scholar, we cannot recommend you as a minister of the
New Testament. Though we are pleased with the promptness of your genius, and
with the amiableness of your manners, yet you seem far from the kingdom of
heaven. The fabric, which you have raised, has no resemblance to the temple of
religion.

I trust, that before you ever preach the gospel, you will pass a scene, of
which you appear to have no conception. From our hearts we pray, that it may
soon arrive, and that you may see BY THE EYE OF SAVING FAITH, THE TRUTHS OF THE
GOSPEL; FOR REMEMBER, THAT THEY ARE SPIRITUALLY DISCERNED.

MARTIN's CONNECTION.
CLIO retired with a mixture of confusion and resentment. A deadly stroke had
been aimed at his pride; yet there was a serious plainness in the address,
which filled him with awe. For several days, he was pensive and irresolute. At
times he would burst out into the bitterest reproaches against his examiners.
He could not bear to renounce his favorite scheme of MORAL SENSE. In its
application to every new subject, something occurred which gratified his pride
of science. He resolved, however, to believe the Bible, and to bring down its
truths to a level with the understandings of men. In this process, he pared off
one incredible after another; till at length the whole Bible was gone. I wave
many things, which now occured; they were too painful to his own mind, when I
last saw him; but one incident cannot be omitted.

One day, sitting and conversing with him, I took occasion to recall the visions
which he had related to me, and the manifest means of Providence in bringing
him to a knowledge of the truth. He seemed much agitated for the moment, then
took up his Bible, clasped it, and threw it upon his table with some vehemence,
then burst into tears. saying, "My friend, I wish never again to converse with
you on this subject. I am now resolved, and neither arguments nor visions shall
move me. THAT BOOK I GIVE TO FOOLS AND FANATICS."

After this, he became a man of the world, was totally careless of religion;
yet he professed to believe in the being of a God, and in the immortality of
the soul. Virgil's account of a future state, he would often say, was far more
rational, than the Bible account; and that if he was honest and tolerably
moral, he should get safe enough to Elysium.

He found, in a converse with the world, that his favorite system often
betrayed him; but could not yet persuade himself to renounce it. -- He was
ready to dispute with Christians, Deists, or Skeptics, and could personate
either of those characters. He had studied accurately the philosophy of the
schools of Athens, and by an happy talent, had so modernised it, that all the
wisdom of enlightened Greece appeared his own.

He understood the system of Berkley, and could reduce to decimal fractions,
infinitely, the least appearance of matter; could even subdivide atoms so
small, that they were invisible to the human eye, and inconceivable by the
human mind; or at pleasure he could prove that the whole earth was one
conjoint, indivisible, immense atom. He could place the earth on a tortoise, or
suspend it in the air; could make it whirl millions of miles in a second, or be
totally at rest. He had discovered the weak side of human nature, and was sure
of being thought learned, when he conversed, so that no one understood him.

His pride of science was now in its zenith, and by all the ignorant, he was
esteemed a prodigy. He did not care to converse with the learned, who
practiced, as he did, the magic power. No credit was to be gained from those
who were in the secret. He well knew the jealousy, and enmity, which generally
subsists between your great metaphysical and unfathomable scholars.

He discovered that the loudest talker, and the boldest asserter was generally
most applauded; and that the laurels of genius were never to be expected from
learned competitors. He reduced these observations to a general principle,
which he applied to all arts and professions, forming a complete "SYSTEM OF
HUMAN NATURE," which I have in manuscript.

I have no occasion to notice his travels, his books, or his company, only so
far, that the reader may trace his pride of science, and the natural
consequences of infidelity; nor must we forget, that even now were perceivable,
in some measure, the effects of a GOOD EARLY EDUCATION. This had an unseen
influence, and was finally improved, by the Spirit of God, for his recovery.

His guardian parent seemed to have forsaken him; his visions were no more; all
his partial convictions and resolutions forgotten, and he was left to himself.
"This earth," he said, "was his present residence, and this life, the only one
which he was absolutely sure of: that he was resolved to live, while he did
live, and if after he died, another life should be given him, he would make the
most of it."

Such conversation often pursued by his friends, at length led him to doubt the
immortality of the soul. This alarmed him. He began the enquiry; but as he went
from the word of God, he soon got involved in total darkness. He could see no
difference in this respect between men and birds, beasts, fishes and insects.
All seemed to be rational for all their purposes of life. No one had returned
from any other world. In fact, having no conception of the nature of the soul,
he was soon in want of premises: this reduced him to a dearth of argument, and
at length he resolved, that the common ideas of immortality were absurd.

His manuscript treatise upon this is long and full of labored sophistry. He
had exerted all the powers of his soul to prove, that he had no soul; but a
doubt occurring, how this principle of life could be annihilated, he fell into
the doctrine of transmigration. This was long a favorite scheme. He illustrated
it clearly (as he thought) by a comparison between the powers and passions of
men, and those of other animals, and fully concluded, that at death, the
innocent and good would be changed into doves; the vicious and bad into
venomous serpents; the idle and useless into insignificant infects. He pursued
the system in this whimsical manner, and for himself resolved to be an eagle.

He was pleased with this change of being, and delighted with this creature of
his fancy; he even spent whole nights in drawing conclusions in favor of it,
from various experiments in anatomy.

I make this short extract, from this part of his manuscript, to show how wild
and distracted men will be in their reasonings, when once they have left the
records of truth.

But steep is the descent to the shades of error. Clio was not to rest here. He
caught by accident a book in an old library, entitled, "MAN A MACHINE," written
by La Metrie. This was the very subject which lay next to transmigration. He
took it up, merely to gratify curiosity; but the old philosopher understood
very well the machinery of man; too well for Clio. From the first page, he was
led to the second, and so on through the book. He made no pause, and no
conclusions; but half convinced, gave it a second reading, again a third. THE
PRIDE OF SCIENCE was touched; he longed to be master of the system; though he
was still unresolved to admit it.

But we often reason ourselves into blindness. He reasoned upon the structure
of the human body, of which he had obtained a most accurate knowledge; upon the
necessary seat of the living principle; showed how the nerves conducted music
to the soul, and how all objects of sense conveyed their impressions. He then
reasoned upon the compartments of the brain, and their appropriate uses; of the
effect, which a disordered state of body has upon the soul; of the operations
of diet; of the circulation of the blood, etc. etc.

These he would throw out to his adversaries, as mere trials of their skill;
then when their arguments were exhausted, he would come out with his main body.

This was fortified on every side, by the arguments against innate ideas. He
would say, if we come into the world without one idea, and if this pretended
soul never receives any, except through the senses, have we any argument that
the soul is capable of receiving ideas without such a medium? Again, if
reflection be destroyed, when a man is stunned, or when one is drowned for a
short time, what is this soul but a part of the body? How can it exist separate
from it? What is it separately? It is nothing and vanity: it has not half the
properties of fixed air. His antagonists being unable to define their terms
against him, were foiled as he was at first, for want of premises.

He would pursue the triumph by remarking how far the opposite doctrine must
carry: that it must prove the perpetual existence of the living principle, both
in brute animals and vegetables; and he would add with emphasis, if we renounce
La Metrie's principle, even the stones of the street would be immortal, and we
might expect to see rocks in a course of ages, rising into rational life, and
haranguing an audience of rivers and forests.

When he was rallied upon these flights, he would coolly lead his antagonists
into the old doctrine of the schools, OF AN UNIVERSAL ATTRACTING PRINCIPLE OF
LIFE, IN THE CENTER OF THE MORAL WORLD; would assert that all living nature was
drawn by it from lower to higher grades, through eternity; here he would lead
them from the lowest vegetable up to the highest existence; and as they could
seldom follow him, through all the mazes of natural history, they were soon
lost and confounded, and the triumph was completely his own.

Clio longed to make this last theory his own; but it would lead him too far
back, and his bent was forward; he was for ANNIHILATION. Long had he left his
favorite system of moral sense, and was too proud to look back.

The ground was now his own, and he could walk through regions of fancy, before
untrod by man.

Alas! how many thousands have left the fair surface of truth and evidence, to
explore mines and caverns! How many have forsaken the cultivated grounds of
knowledge, and the abodes of rational society, to explore deserts, or forests,
in which was never heard the voice of man.

I have recorded these things of Clio so minutely, as this was a most
interesting part of his life; and as it opens a scene, perhaps unparalleled on
our records, of the intricate wisdom of God.

Whatever affords new proofs of an overruling Providence, and shows his
influence upon the minutest actions of men, in operating his purposes of grace,
has a tendency to inspire us with christian gratitude and admiration.

Those, who have not read the ancient systems of philosophy, may here have
noticed some of their leading traits. I wished to pursue them only far enough
to lead the mind of the reader to a conviction of their fallacy and sophistry,
and to conclude with me, that THE WISDOM OF GOD MUST REGULATE AND DIRECT THE
RESEARCHES OF MEN.

Though Clio was now, in his own conception, like a stock or a stone, yet, be
not surprised, that he afterward fell into universal infidelity; and to crown
all, and make the system complete, became an Atheist. His own account now
follows, written near the close of his life. "Fools in their hearts believe and
say." Watts's 14th Ps. 1st Part.


CLIO an ATHEIST.
-- SHOULD my history ever reach the light, may it be a lesson to the youths
who shall follow me!

In early life, I was a victim to the pride of science. The knowledge, which I
derived from my parents, was exerted to prove, that no respect was to be paid
to their parental instruction. My knowledge, derived from the Bible, was
exerted to prove that Bible false. Then all these acquirements were employed as
rebels to my God, my Savior, and my Bible, in supporting the cause of their
bitterest enemy.

I even endeavored to gain the influence of the officers of heaven, that I
might be a secure spy in the camp of Jesus.

At length I impiously renounced my Bible to fools and fanatics. I even
improved the immortal faculties of my soul, to prove that my soul was formed of
dust and ashes, and gloried in the prospect of eternal sleep. I made stocks and
stones my brethren and sisters, and improved the breath which God had breathed
into my nostrils, to convince the world, that my breath was my own. Worse than
all, I improved not only the light of my mind, but even the seven golden
candlesticks, to light me into the glooms of heathenish ignorance and
superstition.

THIS WAS AT A TIME, WHEN I LOVED DARKNESS RATHER THAN LIGHT. WHEN MY EYES
COULD NOT ENDURE THE CELESTIAL GLORY OF THE BRIGHT AND THE MORNING STAR.

Why should I then retain God in my knowledge, when I had denied his wisdom,
his word, his providence and his works? Without these there is no God. I did
not do it. I was a consistent infidel, and pursued my principles to the very
gates of hell. On my principles there was no need of a God; for I then could as
well have conceived of matter self-existent, self-created and eternal, as of a
being with all these attributes, capable of creating it, with all its forms and
modifications. I will not proceed; it is enough that I denied the God who made
me, that I erected atheism upon the foundation of infidelity. I boast not that
I understood the economy of Satan's kingdom, and that I was his master builder;
perhaps the only one, who ever made use of all his materials, in erecting to
the pinnacle, a temple of his worship. The time is come, when I lie low and
feel humble for these distractions. Pity, O! my friends, the weakness of my
youth; but rejoice with me now, since the Spirit of the Lord has touched me.

MARTIN's CONNECTION.
CLIO has so frequently interwoven the early and latter scenes of his life,
that I am often obliged to interrupt his own narration, to preserve a clear
connection in the mind of the reader.

We are now to contemplate Clio in the depth of infidelity. He could get no
farther from moral light. But this was to be his tropic, from which we shall
see him gradually advancing back. With what heart-rending eloquence has Clio
often described to me the state of his mind, at this gloomy period. I must
reluctantly omit to record it, and leave the reader to pursue the thought.

Clio, by a fortunate accident, took up the writings of old Python, master of
the skeptical school in Athens; this he read with pleasure, and became
persuaded to doubt of every thing. He had never reflected, that upon moral
subjects, the world have agreed to adopt certain first principles, which no man
can dispute more fairly, than he can the letters of the alphabet. Old Python
had proposed a great number of the plainest first principles, and challenged
all the other schools, to support any one of them, by abstract reasoning.
Knowing, that this could never be done, he had proceeded to show, that the
great truths in all the sciences were only arbitrary axioms, which owed their
support to the credulity of man; that truth itself was but a relative term, and
that any man of tolerable acuteness might confound any subject, or any
reasoner, by denying his first principle, and obliging him to attempt the proof
of it.

Here Python proceeded to record his victories over the logicians of his day.
Clio was convinced, not reflecting that a true disciple of Python must doubt
the truth of what he wrote. He became a Skeptic, which is one grade better than
an Atheist, for IT IS BETTEK TO DOUBT, WHETHER THERE BE A GOD, THAN TO BELIEVE
THAT THERE IS NO GOD. Clio had some secret wish to live beyond this state of
being, and endeavored to refine so far upon skepticism, that when he actually
died, he might always be in doubt, whether he was or was not dead.

He was struck with the absurdity of this, and turning about to pursue the
principle, among the different doctrines of religion, and systems of philosophy
in the world, he resolved to sap their foundations, and to make them totter. He
ought to have doubted his strength; but here we shall see the Spirit of God,
beginning to operate upon him. We shall see it improving, for his recovery,
those very faculties, which Satan had before employed for his ruin. Even this
pride of science was improved as a leading instrument. Here let us pause a
moment, that we may notice, with all due attention, the wisdom of God; for we
shall soon see, in Clio's conversion, how he improves not only good early
education, but even pride and other perverse passions, to accomplish his
purposes. "Even the wrath of man shall praise God."

Clio was now zealously engaged to attack the systems which he had formerly
advocated, when a doubt arose in his mind, whether his former decisions upon
them had been just. This led him back through all the different subjects, which
we have noticed; recalled to him his visions; doubts increased; he seemed to
see truth on both sides; his mind was perplexed; he retired to rest, and had
the following vision, which is recorded in his own words. "Let mortal tongues
attempt to sing." Watts's 58th Hymn, 1st Book.


FOURTH VISION.
CLIO alarmed in the midst of his Delusions.
-- THOUGH my eyes were closed upon every earthly object, yet I seemed sitting
by my desk, wrapped in thought, and holding in my hand "THE ANALYSIS OF HEATHEN
PHILOSOPHY." At once my father seemed to stand by me and to say, "My son, have
you drank of the waters of oblivion? Is your memory dead to all your past
life?" He paused. I endeavored to conceal the book. Says he, "Is that your
Bible?" My face was like crimson. He continued, "My child, how many sons and
daughters have you made converts to the truth of the gospel?" Great drops of
sweat rolled from my face, and I fainted -- On opening my eyes, my father's
countenance was softened. On my desk lay an open Bible, from which seemed to
proceed rays, filling the room with a blaze of light. I cast my eye upon the
book, and saw St. John's history of the crucifixion. There was a solemn pause
for a few minutes! My father then pointed to the book, saying, "Think you, my
son, that to no purpose the vail of the temple was rent in twain? that the
rocks burst asunder, and that the groans of Jesus were heard from the top of
Calvary?" He then recalled to my mind, the innocence of my early life, the
purity of my thoughts, and indeed every scene, which could have a tendency to
restore me to my duty. He plead with heart-melting eloquence, the tears of a
mother, the fate of infidels, and the joy of angels at the return of a sinner.
He assured me, that he had watched me every moment, since his first appearance;
though he had not been permitted to discover himself till this; that my errors
were to be a lesson to the youths of after times, and that the wisdom and
goodness of God, now to be exhibited, would give joy and triumph to the aged,
who relied on the promises.

He added, "My son, I shall now depart, and you will not see me again, while
you live; but remember that your days are numbered. You have a steep ascent to
climb, but you will have assistance infinitely better than mine. Watch the
motions of the Spirit, and when you shall come into mavelous light, with what
gratitude will you adore him, who has brought you from the depth of darkness!
Your feet will be finally taken from slippery places and set upon the rock; but
first, my son, you will see much distress and affliction. Your hard heart will
be softened; your sensibility restored and improved. You will often despond,
and your eyes will become as fountains of tears. You will be reduced to
poverty, and every kind of distress, and will be sometimes almost wishing that
death would give you relief. Into whatever employment you may be led, during
this scene of trial, be honest and diligent, for if you endure, you will yet be
a minister of the gospel, able to divide rightly the word of truth. Then be
faithful to the death and you shall receive a crown of life."

MARTIN's CONNECTION.
CLIO proceeds to relate the parting scene between his guardian angel and
himself; the impressions of the vision, after he awoke; the (...) fulfillment of
the prophecy, in which he gives a minute detail of all his distresses. He
notices the Providence of God, in saving his life, and preserving him through
many accidents; and the various indirect means, by which the Spirit of God
operated on his heart. He relates how he gradually reacquired a speculative
belief of the gospel. I have waved all these things, and hasten to the time,
when I next saw him after several years separation. Though his principal object
of pursuit was preaching, yet he still suggested some doubts, whether a good
and merciful Being would not finally place all the frail descendants of Adam in
heaven, and in his gloomy moments would suggest some doubts whether we were
absolutely sure of a resurrection. How the truth, upon these two important
subjects, was ushered into his mind, we shall soon see.

In all the future writings of Clio, we shall discover a rising of soul, an
elevation of thought, a manliness of feeling, and a tenderness of heart, which
cannot fail to interest the reader, and to convince us all that "we shall never
look upon his like again." "Awake our souls, away our fears." Watts's 48th
Hymn, 1st Book.


CLIO, an INSTRUCTOR of YOUTH.
-- IT pleased the divine Spirit, by a most singular method, to give me light
on the subject of future rewards and punishments. I was appointed an instructor
of youth. Warm in my imagination, I thought that moral suasion alone was to be
used; that schools were nurseries for heaven, and that as punishments would not
be inflicted in the last, they ought not to be in the first.

I undertook the task, as promising me an honest competence: was faithful to my
employers; the children seemed as my own, and hours were not counted. My heart
was in my business, and I rejoiced in the prospect of presenting to my country,
a long list of useful men, who should rise up to fill the places of the aged
and dying. In my profession was neither brilliancy nor honor; but I fondly
hoped, that those on whom I expended my life and health, would, after I was
cold, rise up and call me blessed. I wished, that on the stone which should
cover my remains, might be inscribed, "Here lies a man, who sacrificed his life
to the infant interests of his country, and found an early grave; but he was
full of days, if we count them by his sorrows, his pains, his miseries, and the
vicissitudes of his life. Here he lies low in death; let the tears of a
grateful public moisten his grave."

I then thought, as I now do, that "HE DESERVES NO STONE TO RECORD HIS NAME,
WHO LEAVES NO ACTION TO ENDEAR HIS MEMORY." -- With a heart warm as the world
is cold, and having ever in view the end of life, I pursued the thought, and
contemplated the serious time, when followed by those who were mine in the
strictest bonds of nature, duty and affection, I should be carried to the house
appointed for all living. Then a long train of parents would follow, leading
the children of my care, all in solemn silence, paying a tribute to my memory,
more durable and precious than monuments of marble.

These I have found vain illusions, mere waking "visions of a baseless fabric;"
yet for the time, they gave joy to my heart, strengthened my hands, and led me
to exertions beyond the powers of nature. In my days, I had not leisure for the
common recreations of lise; my nights were sleeplessly spent in preparations
for the morning; yet my mind was active, my imagination bright, and my soul
feelingly alive to all my duties.

At this crisis, I imprudently denied to nature, the repose which she required,
my health failed, and I became a subject of pain and gloom. All the festivities
of life were courted. I resorted to brilliancy and gaiety, and indulged in
scenes of humor for relief. All was in vain. If I smiled! it was like the
lightning of the heavens, which leaves the eye in more "intimate darkness." It
was a transient gleam of brightness on the face, which brings no warmth to the
heart. How often, that I might not give pain to a friend, have I retired, where
no eye could see me, to commune with my own heart, and to ask from it that
relief which the world could not give.

In moments of gloom, all the painful images which through life have been seen,
all the ghosts of departed actions, appear at once, showing their hideous
specter to the eye of the soul. All the malicious demons, who had aimed cruel
stabs at the reputation, now present anew their poinards, and "grin horribly a
ghastly smile," insulting the wretch's woe.

The whole scene is beyond description; even the half cannot be told you; yet
the whole was mine. They only know the pangs of death, who have felt its sting.

At scenes like these, we ask no tears from marble eyes -- no blood to flow
with quick emotion in marble veins -- no heart of stone to beat -- no iron
breast to heave with sighs, nor tongue of steel to speak; but they who can
feel, will feel, and the tears of sensibility will flow; they will moisten the
manly cheek, and stream from the glistening eye, when the hand which holds this
pen shall be no more.

MARTIN's CONNECTION.
I MIGHT go on, and lead the reader through scenes, more interesting to Clio,
than any which have been related; but this would lead me from the immediate
subject before us.

Clio had tried the experiment of mild government, till he was fully convinced
that it was ruinous; but he had said so much in favor of it, that many had been
persuaded to believe as he had done. To alter his mode was difficult and
painful. If he even gave a harsh word, he offended a friend; if he spared the
rod, he spoiled the child; and if he used the rod, the child was taken from
him. He experienced much ingratitude, and was perplexed beyond measure. It was
not his fault, but misfortune that he lived, surrounded, by many, who had no
conception of the nice and acute springs of a feeling heart. Amidst their
daggers and his own doubts, he was in a most unhappy state, when he had the
following vision.

FIFTH VISION.
Of a SCHOOL.
I RETIRED late to rest, harassed with care: my limbs were indeed reposed; but
my mind was never more wakeful. It was winter, and the season peculiarly
severe; but I seemed instantly conveyed into a beautiful garden, where fruits
and flowers were in perfection. The heat seemed intense, and I resorted to an
arbor for shade. My ears were soon saluted by a concert of the most musical
voices, seemingly of children. My curiosity led me to follow the sound, which
appeared to retire as I advanced. They were sweet notes, and I was desirous to
know what celestial choirs had resorted to this retirement. I walked on hastily
through a vale enamelled with flowers: if I trod upon a rose, it drooped for
the moment, but soon raised its blushing head with improved beauty and
fragrance. I must pause a moment to notice the kindness of Providence, in
giving us such active fancies, capable of enjoying the beauties of nature in
idea, when in truth the season had invested, with frost and snow, the whole
face of the earth. TO FANCY, TO WHIM, AND OFTEN TO FALLACY, ARE WE INDEBTED FOR
HAPPINESS.

I reached the place, from which the sound proceeded, and found a large school
of boys and girls, chanting a morning hymn to the praise of their Creator.
There was an elegance in their appearance, and a serene smile upon their faces,
such as I had never seen among my own children. I entered without hesitation.
The master, who seemed, at first sight, created to take such a charming school,
beckoned me to take a seat by him.

The music ceased, and all fell upon their knees, raising their eyes, in the
act of fervent devotion. The master then addressed the throne of grace, in a
few words, most pertinent and striking. All rose; there was a perfect silence;
all commenced their employments, which they pursued with diligence. If the
master spoke, every ear was attentive and every thing proceeded with perfect
ease and harmony. This, I thought, proves that my former ideas were just; but I
will enquire how this effect is produced.

I proposed my questions, and suggested the embarrassments, which I had
experienced in attempting to form such a school, and added, I shall always in
future, conclude the fault to have been in myself, "Who could even frown on
such innocents? What monsters are they who cruelly inflict punishment on
children?" I am ashamed now to repeat all which I then said; but as I was
closing a labored panegyric on my own sagacity, and knowledge of the effect of
moral truth upon the young mind, every thing seemed changed in an instant. The
master assumed the appearance of an angel, and the children looked like cherubs
and seraphs. The angel then addressed me. To such alone can your principles
apply with truth. These are pure spirits, and this scene is all designed for
your instruction. He then opened to me in clear and explicit terms, the
doctrine of rewards and punishments, and taught me the wisdom of God in
ordaining them, and their fitness to the nature of man. How many poor wretches,
says he, have been disgracefully sent out of this world, into a worse, from the
mere neglect of early discipline and control. Youth is the season, when the
rough and boisterous passion may be subdued, and if this season be neglected,
the life will be like a garden, where the growth of every useful thing is
prevented by a multitude of weeds and brambles.

He then added, "GO AND CONDUCT LIKE A FAITHFUL GARDENER." I waked, fully
impressed with the vision, and for several days revolved over the actual
government of the King of the universe, as it is discovered in his Providence,
and in revelation. At length I established a conviction, that punishments as
well as threats were necessary for man, and that it was vain to expect the
reason to assist my former theory, till this reason should control the
passions. My visions were not the visions of my employers, nor my convictions,
their convictions. They still saw the subject through the perverted medium of
affection, which always refracts the rays of truth.

MARTIN's CONNECTION.
CLIO has said much more upon this subject. He was persuaded, and I forbear to
record the consequences of this persuasion, only this -- Each of his children
was the father's cherub, or the mother's seraph; and he needed the wisdom of an
angel to please and to do his duty. On the last, he resolved, and failing of
the first, was dismissed from employ.

His health soon failed him, and he was confined to his bed, for several
months, except a few hours, when supported in his chair, he wrote the two
succeeding visions, which, out of many, he had selected; for his mind being
much agitated, he was frequently lost in thought, when awake; yet his soul was
more active than ever; his sensibility improved, and though he believed the
immortality of the soul, yet some doubts remained, that were dispelled in a
manner, which the reader will perceive to have all the appearances of a
revelation from heaven. "When God is nigh, my faith is strong." Watts's 16th
Ps. 3d Part.


SIXTH VISION.
IMMORTALITY of the SOUL.
HOW little do I value this emaciated body? It is welcome to return home, if my
soul can have the same privilege. Surely some guardian angel watches my
slumbers, and seizes the moment, when all my passions are asleep, to teach my
reason the most sacred truths. O that my prejudice, error and pride would never
wake!

If this be sickness, let me be sick, till death, for scarcely do I sink into
the arms of sleep, when some unseen power presents to me the sublimest visions.

The last I cannot describe; it surpasses my strength and the powers of my pen.

Could I have written at the instant of the impression, my lines had been full
of fire, they would have warmed every heart, not with poetic fire! No! for the
genuine feelings of the soul, at such entrancing seasons, scorn the aids of
art, and the prison of measured lines. They burst forth with inspiration, and
delight to be arrayed in the slowing robes and charming dignity of prose.

Can that soul be mortal, which is composed of such heaven-wrought materials?
Shall that soul die, which can for a season bid adieu to the senses and the
clay, and soar to scenes immeasurably distant? No! "The dust shall return to
its kindred dust; but the spirit shall return to God who gave it."

At such moments would I have wasted a wish to be sure of immortality? No! I
felt myself already in actual possession of eternal being, full of principles
of life, which death can never destroy, nor the grave diminish.

Such was my confidence, that had the choice been my own, I would never have
been reunited to the forsaken mass. As soon would angels leave their seats of
bliss, their golden harps unstrung, their blessed society forgot, and ask for
human bodies to inhabit this vile earth again. But to them how little is this
world! its pomps, it pleasures and its nonsense all! The crowns of monarchs,
and the wealth of worlds, how trifling in their view!

But heaven is their blessed abode, and there will they rejoice to dwell for
ever. That world will never want for songs, nor God for praise. There shall
daily arrive, from these lower courts, after a triumphant flight from sense and
pain, the spirits of the just. There shall cherubs ever smile, and seraphs ever
burn before the throne of God.

Shall flimsy argument, shall subtle sophistry, and nice-wrought skepticism
unsoul the man, and reduce to a level with the lower creation, the image of
God? Shall not the soul of the mother meet the soul of the child in the world
of glory? Shall not the son, who in youth was sunk into a watery grave, see his
father again? Yes! The graves shall give up their dead, and friends, who parted
with aching hearts, shall meet in a world, where tears shall be wiped from
every eye.

But I must return to the body! must stay yet a little longer; but in prayer
will I watch each rising sun, and swift in duty hail it to its setting.

Days, months and years shall roll on without regret. Fain would I seize the
minutes of my to-morrows, and draw myself to heaven; but I must wait till my
change come. Death will never appal me; for I know, that even in the dark
valley of its shadow, I shall see beams of light from the sun of righteousness.

In sickness I will rejoice; even with present pains will be glad. Each pang
will I regard as the beckoning of an angel; for as the body retires, the soul
advances, and with one effort more I shall be gone.

With a most ardent exertion I sprang; but the body had enchained me. I was
still its prisoner, and could not burst the bands of life. I reached not the
celestial goal. I sprung not into heaven, but back to earth, and found myself
awake, repeating with prodigious energy "LET OTHERS BOAST THAT THEY ARE BRUTES,
I GLORY THAT I AM A MAN. LET OTHERS WISH FOR ETERNAL SLEEP, I SHALL BE FOR EVER
AWAKE. LET OTHERS WASTE THEIR GOLDEN HOURS IN PROVING THAT GOD IS FALSE, I FEEL
SOMETHING WITHIN, WHICH PROVES THAT HIS WORD IS TRUE. THOUGH OTHERS CONSIGN
SOUL AND BODY TO THE DUST, THE CLODS OF THE VALLEY CANNOT COVER MY SOUL. NO!
LEGIONS OF ANGELS CANNOT CONFINE ME TO THE GRAVE. MY BODY WAS DESIGNED FOR THE
DUST; BUT MY SOUL WILL INHERIT THE WORLD OF SOULS! ALAS! WHAT IS LIFE, IF WE
LIVE NOT FOR EVER!"

Vital spark of heavenly flame,
Quit, O quit this mortal frame,
Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
O! the pain, the bliss of dying.
Cease, fond nature, cease thy strife,
And let me languish into life
Hark! they whisper; angels say
Kindred spirit come away:
What is this absorbs me quite?
Steals my senses, shuts my sight?
Drowns my spirits, draws my breath?
Tell me, my soul, can this be death?
The world recedes! it disappears!
Heaven opens on my eyes! my ears
With sounds seraphic ring.
Lend, lend your wings; I mount, I fly,
O death! where is thy sting?
O grave! where is thy victory?
MARTIN's CONNECTION.
BUT with all this confidence, Clio was not yet ready for an angel's wings, nor
could he, with justice, adopt the triumphant song of the dying Christian: but a
scene now opens, which closes and completes the character. He wrote the
following, with four other interesting visions, and a sermon, which he heard
from the angel of charity, just before his death; but at present I quit the
subject, with recording the triumphs of the Spirit of God, over all his doubts
and fears.

SEVENTH VISION.
The TEMPLE of RELIGION.
IN the visions of the night, when deep sleep falls upon man, methought I was
transported into a region beyond mortal view, and there beheld wonders, which
no tongue can relate and no pen describe.

But perhaps a faint description may entertain the inquisitive, may warm the
cold, and lead the minds of the young and the aged, to that most interesting
subject, which excited my thoughts.

I found myself on an extensive plain, surrounded by multitudes of people, all
crowding forward. The throng was prodigious, and each neglectful of his
neighbor, was only solicitous to advance himself.

These were of all ages, sexes, colors, nations and languages on earth.
Astonished at such a mingled group, and wondering at the object of their
zealous pursuit, being unable to retire, and curious to be satisfied, I pressed
forward with the rest.

When, lo! at once my eyes were struck with the sight of a magnificent
building: It was large enough to contain all the families of the earth, and my
first thought was, that the Father of the universe had erected it, that he
might assemble in one place all his children. I was transported with joy at
being so near the door of my father's house. I had passed no valley of the
shadow of death, and imagined that the time was come, when from all the winds
of heaven, were collecting the sons and daughters of the Lord Jehovah.

Elevated with the thought, I contemplated all the promises and prophecies of
our religion; and was, for the time convinced, that this was no other than a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

On our arrival, I perceived that this building was surrounded by numberless
little chapels, into which the multitude crowded with eagerness. They soon
dispersed, and I was left alone to examine the place. I found over each an
inscription. Some were sacred to Mahomet; some to Paul, Apollos and Cephas; and
among the rest, was astonished to find one to the unknown God; but more to see
it crowded by innumerable votaries. While I was musing upon these things, one,
in the likeness of a man, approached me, and said, "Know that this is the
temple of religion. The chapel by which you stand is frequented by those, who
have not God in their knowledge. The others are zealous partisans; their doors
are ever thrown wide open, and there are some always at the entrance, to beckon
in strangers, and to increase their numbers. He then pointed me to several, who
constantly employed some of their number, compassing sea and land, to make
proselytes." As we passed along, I was solicited at every door to enter:
persuasive motives were used to no purpose; for I was anxious to get within the
great temple. As we came round to the door, I perceived it locked, and over it,
in plain letters --

TO GOD AND TO THE LAMB.

I proposed to my guide, why the doors were shut. He replied, "This is a faint,
earthly emblem of the things which shall be hereafter; for in the city which is
to come, there is no material temple, for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb
are the temple of it; but here shall, in no wise, enter any thing that
defiles: for holiness becomes God's house for ever.

Thousands of those, whom you have seen, are daily applying for admission; but
few obtain it. The many plead their zeal in the service of God; but this zeal
is not according to knowledge. They plead their works; but these have been done
to please men, and not with a single eye to the glory of the Giver of life.
They plead their prayers and alms; but these have never come up in memorial
before God; they have not fed the hungry, nor clothed the naked, nor visited
the sick, nor the prisoner. They have not sold their goods, and given to the
poor; they have not comforted the mourner, nor afforded relief to the dying;
but they have lived in luxury and vanity; they have hoarded up the mammon of
this world; they have pampered their lusts and lived deceitfully. They have
harbored malice, envy, hatred, bitterness, and every evil thing: yea, some
have said there is no God, and have denied the Lord that bought them; yet with
all these abominations, they wish to enter this holy temple. But how gladly
would they return to their parties and their lusts, rather than endure the
society of the happy beings within, for here, the high praises of God employ
every tongue and gratitude to the Redeemer fills every heart. Their chapels are
filled with men pleasers, who say, Lord, Lord, merely to be heard of men, and
lift up their eyes to heaven, that they may seem to pray; but he, whose eyes
are as a flame of fire, sees their hypocrisy, and will cause them to fear and
tremble in the day of his wrath.

While he was speaking, the clouds had been gathering, and at this moment, the
war of elements began, and I was almost petrified with fear. Never was a scene
so full of terror; yet my guide was calm and serene, unruffled at the impending
storm. I noticed, as a flash of lightning gleamed across his face, if seemed to
remain, and he shone with the brightness of the sun, and appeared like a
burning seraph. Till this time of life, I had never known such an excess of
fear. The rolling of a distant thunder had always filled me with a solemn
serenity; but now in awful terror, the lightning flashed upon my astonished
eyes, and the thunder, peal on peal, seemed rending heaven and earth, ready to
burst upon my devoted head. I had just breath to cry for mercy. I fainted,
fell, and seemed to be no more -- But I recovered, and at the moment of
standing on my feet, was hasting for shelter, to one of those chapels. All, so
far as I could see, were beckoning me to enter. As I was running toward them,
on a sudden the thunder crashed them to atoms, and sent to instant death all
their votaries! But the great temple was unhurt, and appeared much more august
and magnificent, than when surrounded by those chapels. All was vision, but to
me seemed reality. My guide, seeing the agitation of my soul, by the scenes
which had passed, took me by the hand, and said, "Know that I am the angel of
charity, who am entrusted with the keys of this temple," They, who were in
those chapels, thought themselves safe, and were triumphing over their
neighbors, in the vain imagination, that their own house stood strong, at the
very moment when the thunder burst upon them. They would all have offered you
shelter; but had you believed them, see where you would have been. Adore then
that goodness which struck you to the earth; for had your own strength
permitted, you would have been lying among yon ruins; he, who hears prayer,
heard your feeble cry for mercy, as you fell, and you are now alive, never to
fear again; for behold! here he waved his hand toward the heavens, I cast up
mine eyes, and lo! the clouds were dispersing, the rainbow of the covenant
appeared, and in the midst one like unto the Son of man, "having on his head a
crown of gold, and in his right hand seven stars, and his countenance was as
the sun shined in his strength," and he said with a voice of infinite mildness,
and a look of ineffable tenderness, "In my father's house are many mansions."

At this moment the angel opened the door of the temple, and beckoned me to
enter, saying, Lo! here are they whom no thunders appal. They could look
unmoved at the wreck of nature. They have all passed the scene which you have
endured, and are now perpetually serene. Without you will be exposed to
frequent storms; for those chapels, lo! they are already rebuilt, and will be
again demolished. To me they appeared indeed rebuilt on the old ruins, and the
dead bodies. They seemed larger than before, and all again filled.

The angel again beckoned me to enter. I fell upon my knees, with unspeakable
humility, and consciousness of my demerit, saying, "My heavenly Father, thou
know that I am not worthy to enter under this roof; but I will for ever
remain thus at the steps of thine house." The angel took me by the hand, and
said, "Thy Savior is worthy: thou have given a cup of cold water to a disciple
in his name; he is a faithful Savior, and thou shall not lose thy reward. Then
he led me into THE TEMPLE OF RELIGION, WHERE, WITH FILIAL REVERENCE AND
HEARTFELT AWE, I JOINED THE BLESSED SOCIETY OF THOSE, WHOSE DAYS WERE DEVOTED,
AND WHOSE HEARTS WERE DEDICATED TO THE SERVICE OF GOD AND THE LAMB.

MARTIN's CONNECTION.
I WAS standing by his bed, when he awoke from this vision: his health was at
this time wholly departed, and while awake, he was often the subject of acute
pain. The first words which he pronounced, showed that he had a confused idea
of being still in a school, as he repeated

My children round this temple throng
To see your blessed Redeemer's face,
The son of David be your song,
Let young Hosannahs fill the place.
Upon recovering he seemed insensible to pain; his soul was healed, and he was
calm. There was a divine mildness, and a placid smile on his face. A celestial
luster seemed to sparkle from his eyes, and he ceased to have a mortal look. I
feared, for the moment, that his breath was about to leave him, and was much
affected with the thought; for our souls had been knit together. He recovered,
but the vision had nearly overpowered him. To him, it has had all the effect of
reality, and he afterward assured me, that had I known all, there was no
occasion for alarm; for if he appeared to be dying, it was but a few moments
before, that he received the new breath, which can never leave him: that he
then just commenced to live the life of angels, and to anticipate the
innocence, the knowledge, the holiness and employments of heaven. With his new
breath, he received new language, to record which, is beyond my power. He
talked with ecstacy of the work of redemption, and ever reflected with
Christian gratitude, on the means of the Spirit, in bringing him to a saving
knowledge of the truth.

But when he spoke of the joy, which his arrival in heaven would afford his
father, and how all the ascended heirs of glory would rejoice at the return of
a repenting sinner: When he conversed of those with whom he should spend an
eternity, how would his eyes stream with tears of rapture, Ye, who have
experienced what Clio felt; ye, who are in Christ, his brethren and sisters,
can best conceive his feelings and language.

BY THIS HISTORY, MAY PARENTS BE INDUCED TO TRAIN UP THEIR CHILDREN IN THE WAY
THEY SHOULD GO. MAY YOUTHS BE WARNED NOT TO INDULGE IN VAIN IMAGINATIONS ABOUT
ETERNAL CONCERNS, AND MAY ALL BE PERSUADED TO RELY ON THAT DIVINE SPIRIT, WHICH
RAISED CLIO EVEN FROM THE DEPTHS OF INFIDELITY, INTO THE ELEVATED RANK OF THE
BRETHREN OF JESUS, AND INTO THE DISTINGUISHED HONOR OF THE SONS OF GOD.

THIS work is to be considered as a historical drawing, of an orthodox
Christian. The author has no wish to interest himself in the controverted
points of Christianity. If he has presented the leading features of such a
Christian, his object is compassed. Whenever that shall be improved, as the
subject of a sacred oratorio, the speaker will do well to commence with Watts's
148th psalm, particular meter.

"Ye tribes of Adam join," etc. He may close with Watts's 148th psalm, long
meter.

"Loud hallelujahs to the Lord," etc. And may introduce acceptably, in some
part of the delivery, Watts's 100th psalm, long meter, second part.

"Sing to the Lord with joyful voice," etc. These psalms will enable the
hearers to judge of the comparative powers of eloquence and music.

If Handel's Messiah should be sung, the speaker may close with the following.

POPE's MESSIAH. A SACRED ECLOGUE.
YE nymphs of Solyma! begin the song:
To heavenly themes sublimer strains belong
The mossy fountains, and the sylvan shades,
The dreams of Pindus and the Aonian maids,
Delight no more -- O Thou my voice inspire,
Who touched Isaiah's hallowed lips with fire!
Rapt into future times, the bard begun:
A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin bear a Son!
From Jesse's root behold a branch arise,
Whose sacred flower with fragrance fills the skies
The etherial spirit over its leaves shall move,
And on its top descends the mystic Dove.
Ye heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
And in soft silence shed the kindly shower
The sick and weak the healing plant shall aid,
From storms a shelter, and from heat a shade;
All crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail,
Returning justice lift aloft her scale,
Peace over the world her olive wand extend,
And white-rob'd Innocence from heaven descend.
Swift fly the years, and rise the expected morn;
Oh spring to light, auspicious Babe, be born!
See Nature hastes her earliest wreaths to bring,
With all the incense of the breathing spring:
See lofty Lebanon his head advance,
See nodding forests on the mountains dance,
See spicy clouds from lowly Sharon rise,
And Carmel's flowery top perfumes the skies!
Hark! a glad voice the lonely desert cheers;
Prepare the way! a God, a God appears:
A God, a God! the vocal hills reply,
The rocks proclaim the approaching Deity.
Lo, earth receives him from the bending skies!
Sink down, ye mountains, and, ye valleys, rise!
With heads declined, ye cedars, homage pay:
Be smooth, ye rocks; ye rapid floods, give way!
The Savior comes! by ancient bards foretold;
Hear him, ye deaf! and, all ye blind, behold!
He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,
And on the sightless eye-ball pour the day:
It Is he the obstructed paths of sound shall clear,
And bid new music charm the unfolding ear:
The dumb shall sing, the lame his crutch forego,
And leap exulting like the bounding roe.
No sigh, no murmur, the wide world shall hear;
From every face he wipes off every tear.
In adamantine chains shall death be bound,
And hell's grim tyrant feel the eternal wound.
As the good shepherd tends his fleecy care,
Seeks freshest pasture and the purest air,
Explores the lost, the wandering sheep directs,
By day o'ersees them, and by night protects,
The tender lambs he raises in his arms,
Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms;
Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,
The promised father of the future age.
No more shall nation against nation rise,
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes;
Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered over,
The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
But useless lances into scythes shall bend,
And the broad faulchion in a plow-share end.
Then palaces shall rise: the joyful Son
Shall finish what his short-lived Sire begun;
Their vines a shadow to their race shall yield,
And the same hand that sowed shall reap the field.
The swain in barren deforts with surprise
Sees lilies spring, and sudden verdure rise;
And starts, amidst the thirsty wilds to hear
New falls of water murmuring in his ear.
On rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,
The green reed trembles, and the bulrush nods;
Waste sandy valleys, once perplexed with thorn,
The spiry sir and shapely box adorn;
To leafless shrubs the flow'ring palm succeed,
And odorous myrtle to the noisome weed.
The lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead,
And boys in flowery bands the tiger lead;
The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
And harmless serpents lick the pilgrim's feet;
The smiling infant in his hand shall take,
The crested basilisk and speckled snake,
Pleased the green luster of their scales survey,
And with their forky tongue shall innocently play.
Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise!
Exalt thy tow'ry head, and lift thy eyes!
See a long race thy spacious courts adorn;
See future sons and daughters, yet unborn,
In crowding ranks on every side arise,
Demanding life, impatient for the skies!
See barbarous nations at thy gates attend,
Walk in thy light, and at thy temple bend;
See thy bright altars thronged with prostrate kings,
And heaped with products of Sabaean springs;
For thee Idume's spicy forests blow,
And seeds of gold in Ophir's mountains glow.
See heaven its sparking portals wide display,
And break upon thee in a flood of day.
No more the rising sun shall gild the morn,
Nor evening Cynthia fill her silver horn;
But lost, dissolved in thy superior rays,
One tide of glory, one unclouded blaze
Overflow thy courts: the Light himself shall shine
Revealed, and God's eternal day be thine!
The seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,
Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;
But fixed his word, his saving power remains:
Thy realm for ever lasts, thy own Messiah reigns!

