THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN and LADY's ASSISTANT; PARTLY ORIGINAL, BUT CHIEFLY
COMPILED FROM THE WORKS OF THE MOST CELEBRATED MODERN AUTHORS; CALCULATED TO
INSTRUCT YOUTH IN THE PRINCIPLES OF USEFUL KNOWLEDGE: IN FIVE PARTS, VIZ.
GEOGRAPHY, NATURAL-HISTORY, ELOCUTION, POETRY, -- AND MISCELLANY.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED -- A SHORT SYSTEM OF PRACTICAL ARITHMETIC; WHEREIN EVERY
EXAMPLE IS WROUGHT AT LARGE, AND THE WHOLE, INCLUDING THE MONEY OF THE
UNITED-STATES, RENDERED EASY TO THE MEANEST CAPACITY.

THIS WORK, IS DIVIDED INTO SMALL SECTIONS FOR THE CONVENIENCE OF SCHOOLS.

BY DONALD FRASER, SCHOOLMASTER, NEW YORK.

NEW YORK -- PRINTED BY THO'S GREENLEAF, M,DCC,XCI.

INTRODUCTION.
FROM the many School-books already extant, some Apology may be reasonably
expected for offering a new one to the Public. It will readily be acknowledged,
that the Minds of Youth are greatly all^d by Novelty and V^ri^^y; and that the
(...), however Entertaining (...), become less Pleasing (...).

In the (...) Work, care (...) a^ have seld^ (...); indeed some (...) ^^e^ted
on, have (...), of at all, (...) to i^ (...) of the great^ (...) the (...)
large (...) in their future (...) Life; and of all Sciences it will be (...)
granted, ^at there are (...) Purp^se than G^gr^, N^tural-History, Elocu^, etc.

There can be (...) new expe^e^ o^ any of these Subjects, there having be^n so
many Volumes already written on each of them; nor is it pretended, that much
Novelty, either in Style or Materials, is contained here. The possession of
this Volume will super^ede the Necessity of purchasing a Number of Books, which
is not Convenient for the generality of Parents, nor would it be of much
Utility to Children; all that can, therefore, be attempted at an early Period
of Life, (...), to inculcate the leading Principles, and to awaken the
Curiosity of Youth in such a Manner as to incite them to a farther Pursuit of
these Subjects when their Judgments shall arrive to a greater Maturity.

That a Compilation on these Subjects, together with a Miscellany in Prose and
Verse, from some of the best modern Authors, comprised in one Volume, would be
exceedingly Useful to Schools, has been often suggested by many judicious
Friends, and by several Gentlemen of my own Profession; as their Opinions
coincided with my own, I have, to the best of my Abilities, compiled the
following Work; and thus complied with the Wish of many of those respectable
Characters who have voluntarily contributed to the Undertaking -- To whose
Patronage, as well as to that of a candid Public, it is now submitted.

CONTENTS.
PART I. -- GFOGRAPHY. --
INTRODUCTION Page. 1 Illustration of Geographical Terms Page. 2 General
Description of the Four Quarters of the World Page. 3 Of America ibid. Of
Europe Page. 4 Of Asia Page. 5 Of Africa Page. 6 General description of the U.
States ibid. Eastern, or New England States Page. 9 New Hampshire ibid.
Massachusetts Page. 10 Rhode Island Page. 11 Connecticut Page. 12 New York
Page. 13 New Jersey Page. 16 Pennsylvania Page. 17 Delaware Page. 18 Maryland
Page. 19 Virginia ibid. North Carolina Page. 21 South Carolina ibid. Georgia
Page. 22 Vermont Page. 23 Kentucky Page. 24 Western Territory ibid. Algiers
Page. 25 Amazonia Page. 26 Amboyna ibid. Ahian Page. 27 Antigua ibid. Arabia
ibid. Assyria Page. 28 Austria ibid. Austrian Netherlands Page. 29 Aves ibid.
Azores ibid. Babylon ibid. Bahama Islands Page. 30 Barbados ibid. Barbary
ibid. Batavia Page. 31 Bengal ibid. Bermudas ibid. Bohemia Page. 32 Borneo
ibid. Brazil ibid. Caffraria Page. 33 Chili ibid. China ibid. St. Christopher
Page. 34 Corsica ibid. Crim-Tartary Page. 35 Cuba ibid. Darien ibid. Denmark
Page. 36 Dominica ibid. East Indies ibid. Egypt Page. 37 England ibid. Ethiopia
Page. 38 Ferdinando ibid. Floridas ibid. France Page. 39 Germany ibid. Greece
Page. 40 Greenland Page. 41 Great Britain ibid. Guiana ibid. Guinea Page. 42
Hispaniola ibid. Holland ibid. Honduras Page. 43 Hungary ibid. Jamaica ibid.
Judea or Palestine Page. 44 Japan or Niphon ibid. India Proper Page. 45 Ireland
Page. 46 Italy ibid. Kamtschatka Page. 47 Lapland ibid. Malta Page. 48 Madeiras
ibid. Mexico Old ibid. Morocco Page. 49 Naples ibid. Negritia Page. 50
New-Britain, or Eskimaux ibid. Newfoundland ibid. New Holland ibid. Norway
Page. 51 Nova Scotia ibid. Oeland Page. 52 Paragua or Lapla^a ibid. Persia
Page. 53 Peru ibid. Poland Page. 54 Portugal ibid. Prussia Page. 55 Russia
ibid. Sardinia Page. 56 Scotland ibid. Siberia Page. 57 Sicily ibid. Spain
ibid. Sweden Page. 58 Switzerland ibid. Tartary Page. 59 Terra-Firma ibid.
Tripoli Page. 60 Turkey in Asia ibid. Turkey in Europe Page. 61 Tunis ibid.
United Netherlands Page. 62 Venice Page. 63
PART II. -- NATURAL-HISTORY. --
Introduction to Natural History Page. 64 Of Water ibid. Fire Page. 67 Air
Page. 68 Clouds, Rain, Hail, and Snow Page. 69 Wind Page. 70 Thunder and
Lighting Page. 71 Earthquakes Page. 72 Tides Page. 73 Gold Page. 74 Silver
Page. 76 Copper ibid. Iron Page. 77 Lead Page. 78 Tin ibid. Mercury Page. 79
Diamond Page. 80 The Magnet, or Loadstone Page. 81 The Vine Page. 82 Coffee
Page. 83 Tea ibid. Sugar Cane Page. 84 The Eagle Page. 86 Ostrich Page. 87
Swallow Page. 88 Dottrel Page. 89 Lion ibid. Elephant Page. 91 Zebra Page. 93
Sheep Page. 95 Potto Page. 95 Lamia ibid. Manticora Page. 97 Bison Page. 98
Crocodile ibid. Schunk Page. 100 Racoon Page. 101 Opposum Page. 102 Whale ibid.
Shark Page. 104 The Dart ibid. Cockatrice Page. 105 Silk Worm Page. 106 Polype
Page. 108 Wheat Insect Page. 109
PART III. -- ELOCUTION. --
Definition of Elocution Page. 111 Tropes Page. 112 Figures Page. 113 Delivery
Page. 115 Disposition of a^ Oration Page. 116 Precepts for Delivery Page. 118
St. Paul^^ Oration ibid. To Art Page. 121 Scipio to the Roman Page. 125 In
Praise of Virtue ibid. Character of the virtuous Man Page. 128 The Hermit Page.
129 Independence Page. 131 Generosity Page. 133 The Actor Page. 13^
Miscellaneous Exercises Page. 140 Pathetic Pieces Page. 145
PART IV. -- POETRY. --
On our Savior's Nativity Page. 150 Soliloquy Page. 152 Insufficiency of
Creatures, etc. Page. 154 Ode to Adversity Page. 155 An Address to the Deity
Page. 156 A Prayer, in imitation of Pope's Universal One Page. 158 Content
Page. 159 Choice of a Wife Page. 160 On Beauty Page. 161 A Song Page. 163 The
Winter's Walk Page. 164 A Lady's Answer to a Gentleman, etc. Page. 165 Amanda
and Amator Page. 166
PART V. -- MISCELLANY. --
Chapone's Commentaries on the Old and New Testament Page. 168 Genesis Page.
171 Exodus Page. 175 Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy Page. 177 Joshua Page.
178 Judges, Samuel, and Kings Page. 180 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther
Page. 181 Job Page. 183 Of the Psalms Page. 184 Of the Proverbs, Eccl. Sol.
Song, etc. Page. 187 Of the New Testament Page. 190 The Ex. set by our Sav. and
his Char. Page. 192 A comparative View of the Blessed, etc. Page. 195 Character
of St. Paul Page. 199 Of the Epistles Page. 201 The Epistle of St. James Page.
203 Epistles of St. Peter, and the first of St. John Page. 204 Of the
Revelations Page. 205 Religious Knowledge, etc. Page. 206 Irregular Pleasures
Page. 208 Depending on the Blessings of Heaven Page. 209 Experience to be
anticipated by Refl. Page. 210 A contented Temper the greatest Blessing Page.
21^ On the Death of Christ Page. 213 On Providence Page. 218 Of Neatness,
Decency, etc. Page. 219 The Speaker Page. 221 A Table, of the Inhabitants on
the Earth Page. 222 Arithmetic, Introduction Page. 224 Numeration Table Page.
225 Simple Addition ibid. Simple Subtraction Page. 228 The Multiplication Table
Page. 230 Simple Division Page. 231 Addition Tables Page. 234 Pence and
Shillings Tables Page. 237 Compound Addition Page. 238 Addition of Troy Weight
Page. 238 Addition of Cloth Measure Page. 240 Compound Subtraction ibid.
Avoirdupois Weight Page. 241 Troy Weight ibid. Multiplication, of diverse
Denominations ibid. Division, of diverse Denominations Page. 241 Reduction Page.
245 Single Rule of Three Direct Page. 248 The single Rule of Three Inverse
Page. 254 Rules of Practice Page. 255 Tare and Trett Page. 260 Simple Interest
Page. 262 Rules for reducing Money into sterling Page. 264 Money of the U.
States as estab. by Con. Page. 265 Addition Page. 266 Subtraction Page. 268
Multiplication Page. 269 Division Page. 271 Reduction Page. 273
PART I. A COMPENDIUM OF GEOGRAPHY,
1. EXHIBITING the situation, boundary, and extent, of all the empires,
kingdoms, states, and islands, of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; likewise
the latitude, longitude, number of inhabitants, distance and bearings of most
of their capital cities from London, together with the produce, forces,
revenue, religion, etc. of the several countries described. To which is
perfixed a particular description of the United States.

2. GEOGRAPHY teaches the knowledge of the surface of the globe, as divided
into land and water.

The land is divided into continents, islands, peninsulas, etc.

The waters that encompass the earth are called the ocean; the three principal
oceans are, the Atlantic, contained between Europe and America* the Indian
Ocean, lying between the East Indies and Africa; and the Pacific, lying between
Asia and America: the two first are reckoned to be three thousand miles wide
each, and the last ten thousand.

Illustration of Geographical Terms.
3. THE whole body of the earth and sea is called the Terraqueous Globe; three
fourths of which is water, and one fourth land. The equator, commonly called
the Equinoctial Line, is a great circle, equally distant from the poles, and
divides the globe into two equal parts, called the northern and southern
hemispheres -- The poles are two points on the surface of the terraqueous
globe, and diametrically opposite to each other, denominated the north and
south pole.

4. LATITUDE is the distance of any particular place, south or north from the
equator -- The longitude of any place, is the east or west distance of its
meridian, from some f^xed meridian, where longitude is reckoned to begin. -- A
continent is a large tract of land, containing several countries, etc. -- An
island is any quantity of land surrounded by water. -- A peninsula is a piece
of land encompassed by water, except on one side where it is joined to the
continent, or other land. -- An isthmus is a narrow neck of land, which joins a
peninsula to the continent or other land. -- A promontory is a point of land
running out into the sea, the extremity of which is called a cape. -- An ocean
is a vast body of water; a sea or gulf, a smaller one. -- A lake is a body of
fresh water, surrounded by land. -- A bay is a part of the sea, contained
between two shores. -- A strait is a narrow passage, whereby seas, gulphs, etc.
communicate with the ocean.

General Description of the four Quarters of the GLOBE.
OF AMERICA.
5. THIS vast continent (which is near two thousand miles longer than Europe
and Africa taken together) was first discovered by Christopher Columbus, a
native of Genoa, in Italy, two hundred and ninety-nine years ago.

America is situated between eighty degrees north, and fifty-six degrees south
latitude; and between thirty-five and one hundred and thirty-six degrees of
western longitude from London. It is reckoned to be about nine thousand miles
in length, and three thousand seven hundred in breadth -- Being bounded on the
east by the Atlantic Ocean, which separates it from Europe and Africa; on the
west and south by the Pacific Ocean, which divides it from Asia. Its northern
boundary is unknown, being thought to extend to the north pole -- Some suppose,
that the north east part of Siberia (in Asia) joins the unknown parts of the
continent of America, west of Hudson-Bay; if this be true, it may account for
the first peopling of a country, so far distant from that part of the world in
which man was originally placed Asia.
.

6. AMERICA enjoys all the advantages of the other three quarters of the globe;
being in general extremely fruitful and well watered, with some of the largest
rivers and lakes in the world. This western continent is divided into two
parts, namely, North and South America -- by the isthmus of Darien, which is a
neck of land about sixty miles wide.

OF EUROPE.
7. EUROPE is situated between the tenth degree west, and the sixty-fifth
degree east longitude from London; and between the thirty-sixth, and
seventy-second degrees of north latitude: being bounded on the north by the
Frozen Ocean; on the east by Asia; on the south by the Mediterranean Sea; which
separates it from Africa; and on the west by the Atlantic Ocean which divides
it from America -- it is three thousand miles long, and two thousand five
hundred wide, and contains three empires, seventeen kingdoms, and three
considerable republics.

OF ASIA.
8. THIS quarter of the world is famous for the many remarkable events that
have happened in it. Here the first man and woman (Adam and Eve) were formed.
It was here also that Noah and his family first settled after the deludge. Here
God placed his once peculiar and highly favored people, the Hebrews. In Asia
also, the gracious and miraculous work of our redemption was accomplished by
our blessed Redeemer. It was from hence that the light of the glorious gospel
was carried into all the then known nations of the world, by the disciples and
followers of our Savior. In Asia the first empire was founded by Nimrod, last
king of Babylon, and great grand son of Noah.

9. ASIA is a considerable deal larger than Europe or Africa; being four
thousand eight hundred miles in length, and four thousand and three hundred in
breadth. It is bounded on the north by the Frozen Ocean; on the east by the
Pacific, which divides it from America; on the west by Europe, the
Mediterranean Sea, etc. and on the south by the Indian Ocean, which separates
it from Africa.

OF AFRICA.
10. AFRICA is the largest peninsula in the world; being four thousand three
hundred miles in length, and three thousand and eight hundred in breadth --
This quarter of the world is encompassed on all sides by the sea, except on the
east where it is joined to Asia, by the isthmus of Suez, a neck of land said to
be about sixty miles wide.

A general Description of the UNITED STATES.
11. THIS part of North America was first settled by the English, about one
hundred and eighty years ago, who remained masters of it until 1774, when the
British parliament passed an act, laying certain duties upon all teas, etc.
imported into America; and declared their right of taxing the colonies in all
cases whatsoever: this the Americans considered as a grievance, and being
apprehensive that it was only a prelude to other encroachments upon their
liberty, declared themselves independent of Great Britain on the fourth of
July, 1776, under the title of the THIRTEEN UNITED STATES of AMERICA.

12. EXTENT and BOUNDARY.] These states extend twelve hundred miles in length,
and about one thousand in breadth; bounded on the north by the British
territory of Canada and the Western Lakes; on the south by the Floridas and the
river St. Mary; east, by the Atlantic Ocean and Nova Scotia; and on the west by
the river Missisippi.

13. PRODUCE.] Small grain of all kinds, Indian corn, tobacco, cotton, indigo,
hemp, ^lax, timber of various kinds; mines of iron, copper, coals, lead, etc.
cattle, sheep, venison of various kinds; fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables, etc.
all in great abundance.

14. MANUFACTURES.] Naval stores, powder, cannon, and small arms, iron utensils
of various kinds, tar, turpentine, pot and pearl ashes, linen, woollens,
cottons, potteries, paper, maple sugar, etc. etc.

15. RIVERS.] The largest rivers in the United States are the Missisippi and
the Ohio; the former is said to be above three thousand miles long, and the
latter upwards of one thousand.

16. CAPITAL CITIES.] The most populous cities in the United States are,
Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Charleston (S. C.) and Baltimore: the first
mentioned of which is the present seat of the federal government, and is
situated on the banks of the river Delaware, about one hundred and twenty miles
from the Ocean.

^7. GOVERNMENT, etc.] The government here is democratical -- The executive and
legislative officers of the federal union consist of (...) President,
Vice President The Vice President is President of the Senate, and in case of
the removal of the President of the United States from office, by death,
resignation, or otherwise, the presidentship devolves upon him.
, a Senate and House of Representatives -- The President and Vice President are
elected for four years, the Senators for six, and the Representatives for two.

The United States are excelled by no country upon earth (of the same extent)
in regard to the fertility of its soil -- the number and size of its rivers,
bays, lakes, mountains, etc A particular description of these natural
productions would prove too long for the present plan: the principal object of
which is, ^o give youth some general ideas of the outlines of Geography, and
particularly that of their own stat^, and to serve by way of a remembrancer to
them after leaving school.
.

18. THE Protestant is the prevalent religion throughout the United States --
all sects and denominations enjoy the freedom of following that manner of
worship which to them seems most acceptable to the deity.

Of the Eastern, or NEW ENGLAND STATES.
19. THE states of New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut,
go by the general appellation of New England -- They are five hundred and fifty
miles in length, and two hundred in breadth; bounded on the west and north by
Canada and the state of New York; on the north east by the British territory of
Nova Scotia; and on the south by the Atlantic Ocean and the S^und, which
separates it from Long Island.

20. THIS part of the United States was first settled about one hundred and
seventy years ago, by a company of intrepid adventurers, who emigrated hither
from Old England on account of religious persecution.

NEW HAMPSHIRE.
21. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length about two hundred miles,
breadth one hundred and sixty; bounded on the north by Canada; on the east by
the Province of Main and the Atlantic; on the south by Massachusetts; and on
the west by Connecticut river -- The principal (...) here is Portsmouth,
latitude 43 10 north, longitude 70 20 west; containing about five thousand
inhabitants.

22. RIVERS, SOIL, etc.] The most considerable rivers are Piscataque and
Merrimack -- The lower part of this state is a level ^ountry, the upper part is
broken and mountainous, but in general fertile, producing Indian corn, rye,
fruits, vegetables, good pasturage, cattle, horses, sheep, etc. in great
abundance.

23. CLIMATE.] The air here is very salubrious, and though the inhabitants
experience the extremes of heat and cold in their season, yet it is thought
that few people on earth enjoy a greater degree of health than those of
New Hampshire and New England in general.

MASSACHUSETTS.
24. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length one hundred and fifty miles
(exclusive of the territory of Main) breadth sixty-five; bounded on the north
by New Hampshire and the state of Vermont; by the state of New York on the
west; by Connecticut and Rhode Island on the south; and by the Atlantic Ocean
on the east; chief town, Boston, containing eighteen thousand inhabitants;
latitude 42 24 north, longitude 71 west; distance two thousand seven hundred
miles west from London.

25. RIVERS and ISLANDS.] Of the many rivers that run through this state, the
(...) considerable are, Taunton, Charles, Deerfield, Kennebeck, etc.

To this commonwealth belong the islands of Nantucket, Kappawack, Martha's
Vinyard, etc To this state belongs the extensive territory of Main, which is
about to be erected into an independent state.
.

26. CHARACTER.] The inhabitants of this and the other New England states are a
humane, industrious, and enterprizing race of people; many of whom have a great
turn to maritime matters; the New England sailors are generally allowed to be
as active and hardy a race of men as any in the world.

RHODE ISLAND.
27. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length sixty miles, breadth forty;
bounded on the north and east by the state of Massachusetts; on the south by
the Atlantic; and on the west by Connecticut. Chief towns, Providence, and
Newport; the latter is situated in 41 35 north latitude, and contains near six
thousand inhabitants.

28. ISLANDS, SOIL, etc.] There are several small fertile islands belonging to
this state, the most considerable of which is Rhode Island, on which Newport is
situated. This island is famous for the salubrity of its air, and the exceeding
fertility of its soil; it is about thirteen miles in length, and four in
breadth. The productions here are much the same with those of the adjacent
states.

CONNECTICUT.
29. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, etc.] Length eigthy miles, breadth sixty; bounded on the
north by Massachusetts; on the east by Rhode Island; on the south and west by
the Sound and the state of New York -- The principal cities in this state are
Hartford, New Haven and New London; the two former (...) seat of government. --
New London ^s situated in north latitude 41 35, west longitude 72 50^, distance
two thousand ei^^t hundred miles west from London.

30. RIVERS.] The most considerable rivers in this state are Connecticut, and
House-atonic.

31. CLIMATE, SOIL, etc.] The air here is exceedingly salubrious; the land is
somewhat broken and mountainous, but in many places fertile, producing all
things common to the adjacent (...). The inhabitants of Connecticut, in
general, are a humane, industrious people particularly the females, whose
industry and frugality are well worthy the imitation of all the young ladies in
the union.

NEW YORK.
32. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length about three hundred and fifty
miles, breadth three hundred; bounded on the north by Canada; on the south and
east by the Atlantic Ocean, and the states of Connecticut, Massachusetts, and
Vermont; on the northwest by the river St. Lawrence, Lake Ontario* etc. on the
southwest by the states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania.

CHIEF TOWNS.] New York, Albany, and Hudson; New York is the metropolis
(containing about thirty thousand inhabitants) situate in latitude 40 40 north,
longitude 74 west; distance two thousand eight hundred and forty miles west
from London.

ISLANDS, RIVERS, CATARACT, etc.] To this state belong Long Island, which is
about one hundred and fifty miles in length, and near fifteen in breadth in
some places; Staten-Island, length fifteen miles, breadth seven; York island*
on which the city o^ New York is situated) being fifteen miles long and about
three wide.

PRINCIPAL rivers, the Hudson (or North River) and the Mohawk; the former is
navigable to Albany (which is 160 miles) for vessels of near one hundred tons;
on the Mohawk river is a remarkable Cataract, known by the name of the Cohoes,
where the water falls down seventy feet perpendicular; here the river is said
to be some hundred yards wide.

THERE are several lakes within the boundaries of this state, the most
considerable of which are Oneida, and Chatoque.

33. LITERATURE is in as flourishing a condition here, at present, as in any
state in the union: there are several academies and respectable grammar and
English schools in this state. The principal seminary in this state is Columbia
College, which at present contains about one hundred students; the president
and professors of which are men of reputation and approved abilities.

34. NEW YORK was first settled by the Dutch (about one hundred and seventy-six
years ago) who remained masters of it until they exchanged it with the English
for Surinam, in 1667.

PRODUCE.] Indian corn, wheat, rye, buckwheat, barley, hemp, flax, fruits, and
vegetables in great variety and abundance.

THE following is extracted from Dr. Mitchell's remarks upon the climate of N.
York.

35. "THE state of New York lies between the fortieth and forty-fifth degrees
of north latitude; and on comparing it upon the globe, with the parts of Europe
situated between the same parallels, a stranger might be led to conjecture that
its climate resembled that of the country between Naples and Venice, or Oporto
and Bourdeaux -- yet there is undoubtedly a considerable difference; since it
has been long known, that the temperatures of countries are to be estimated,
not merely by their distance from the equator, but also by their remoteness
from the margin and level of the Ocean.

36. "On Long Island, Indian corn is planted after the beginning, or about the
middle of May: and the new crop is fit for grinding (...) one hundred and fifty
days; but the same kind of grain, brought from Nova Scotia, grows here to
maturity in ninety-six days; while that imported from Carolina, does not ripen
in less than one hundred and ninety. Buckwheat grows from the seed to
perfection, in eighty-four days.

37. "Frost commonly occurs in every month of the year, excepting June, July,
and August; and has now and then happened even in June and August. It comes
frequently about the first of September; and I remember that on the fourth day
of May, 1774, a considerable quantity of snow fell. In the spring, the blossoms
of peach, apple, and other fruit trees, and the sprouting foliage of other
plants, are often hurt by it; yet it is not universal over the face of the
country; but, from causes, which I do not fully comprehend, prevails in low
lands, valies, and plains. -- Droughts of six or eight weeks continuance,
sometimes parch us; and again rain falls to the depth of five or six inches on
a level in four hours.

38. "WINDS are very variable. The sea breezes, which blow from the south, are
exceedingly regular; they are our coolest in summer, and warmest in winter. In
winter the north west winds are the most boisterous and piercing; though the
north east are generally attended with storms of snow and sleet."

NEW JERSEY.
39. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length one hundred and sixty miles,
breadth sixty; bounded on the east, and south, by the Atlantic Ocean; on the
west by the river and bay of Delaware; on the north by the Hudson.

The most populous town in this state is Trenton, which is the seat of
government, situated in 40 20 north latitude, and 74 50 west longitude, from
London.

40. RIVERS.] The most considerable rivers in this state are, the Raritan, the
Hakkensack, and Possaic: on the last mentioned is a remarkable Cataract, where
the water falls down a rock about seventy feet perpendicular.

41. CLIMATE, SOIL, PRODUCTIONS, etc.] The climate here is much the same as
that of the neighboring states: the greater part of the soil in this state is
said to be of a sterile, sandy nature; but in some parts fertile, producing
wheat, barley, rye, oats, Indian corn, fruits, vegetables, etc.

This territory was first settled about one hundred and eighty years ago.

PENNSYLVANIA.
42. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, PRINCIPAL CITY, etc.] Length about three hundred miles,
breadth one hundred and sixty; bounded on the east by the Delaware River; on
the north by the state of New York; on the south by Maryland and Delaware
states; and on the south west by Virginia. Capital city, Philadelphia,
containing upwards of forty thousand inhabitants; north latitude 39 57, and
west longitude 75* 10, distance two thousand eight hundred and sixty miles
south west from London.

RIVERS.] The principal rivers are, Dela^are (on the ba^ks of which
Philadelphia stands) the Skuylkill and Susquehannah.

43. CLIMATE.] Whether we consider Pennsylvania with respect to the salubrity
of its air, the fertility of its soil, or the liberal encouragement given here
to literature, agriculture, and manufactures, it is excelled by none of the
thirteen States.

44. PRODUCE*] The produce of this is much the same with the neighboring
states, viz. Indian corn, small grain of various kinds, hemp, flax, fruits,
vegetables, etc.

This state was set^led some years later than any of the middle states.

DELAWARE.
45. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length ninety-five miles, breadth
about twenty; bounded on the north by Pennsylvania; on the east by the river
and bay of Delaware; on the south and west by Maryland: chief towns, Wilmington
and Dover; the latter is the seat of government, but Wilmington the most
populous, and situated in north latitude 39* 40, and west longitude 75.

46. THE face of the country here, and likewise the soil and productions, are
much the same as those of the adjoining states.

This state was settled some years prior to Pennsylvania.

MARYLAND.
47. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length one hundred and forty miles,
breadth one hundred and ten; bounded on the north by the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; on the east by the state of Delaware; on the south and west by
the Atlantic Ocean and Virginia: chief towns, Annapolis and Baltimore, the
latter of which is the most populous and flourishing; Annapolis is the seat of
government, situated in 39 20 north latitude, and in 76 55 western longitude,
distance two thousand nine hundred miles west from London.

43. CLIMATE, PRODUCTIONS, etc.] The land here is generally level, and the air
serene and healthy.

Produce -- Indian corn, wheat, hemp, flax, fruits, vegetables, etc.

This state was settled about one hundred and fifty years ago, by Lord
Baltimore, a native of Ireland, who brought out with him a number of his
countrymen.

VIRGINIA.
49. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.] Length seven hundred and fifty miles,
breadth two hundred and thirty; bounded by Maryland and Pennsylvania on the
north; by the Atlantic Ocean on the east; by North Carolina on the south, and
by the river Missisippi on the west: chief towns, Richmond and Williamsburg,
the former is the seat of government of late years: Williamsburg is situated in
3^ 30 north latitude, and in 76 40 w^^^in longitude.

50. RIVERS.] No state in the union (nor perhaps any p^rt of the world of its
size) is equal to this for inland navigation; the most c^nsiderable rivers
here, are the Potowmack, James, Rappaha^nock, and York River.

This state abounds with natural curiosities, such as caverns, cataracts, and
springs (some of which possess rare and medicinal virtues a particular
description of which cannot be given here, consistent with the brevity of our
present plan.

51. CLIMATE, etc.] This extensive territory compr^h^nds various climates; the
a^^ in general i^ serene and healthy, particularly in the upper parts of the
state.

PRODUCTIONS, etc.] Indian corn, wheat, rice, tobacco, indigo, cotton, hemp,
flax, fruits, v^getables, etc.

CHARA^T^R.] The Virginians are generally allowed to be a polite, humane, and
hospitable people.

Virginia was settled some years previous to any of the Thirteen States.

NORTH CAROLINA.
52. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, etc.] Length seven hundred and forty miles, breadth one
hundred; bounded on the north by Virginia; on the east by the Atlantic; on the
south by the states of South Carolina and Georgia; and on the west by the
Missisippi; the most considerable town in this state is Newbern.

53. RIVERS, etc.] Of the many rivers in this state, the most considerable are
Cape-Fear, Tennessee, and Roanoke.

The produce, soil, etc. here, is much the same with the adjacent states.

SOUTH CAROLINA.
54. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, etc.] Length two hundred miles, breadth one hundred and
thirty; bounded on the north by the state of North Carolina; on the east by the
Atlantic; by Georgia on the South -- Its western boundary is not exactly known.

The metropolis of this state is Charleston, containing upwards of ten thousand
white inhabitants besides blacks, latitude 32 45 north, and 79 10 western
longitude, distance three thousand miles south west from London.

55. CLIMATE.] Along the seacoast in this and the southern states, in general,
the ai^ is somewhat unhealthy, particularly in the summer season; but in the
back parts quite serene and salutary.

RIVER^, etc.] The principal rivers in this state are, Santee, Pedee, Ediston,
and Broad River.

PRODUCE.] Wheat, rice, barley, Indian corn, tobacco, cotton, indigo, hemp,
flax, fruits, vegetables, etc.

CHARACTER.] In regard to the politeness, hospitality, and wealth of its
inhabitant* this state is inferior to none in the union.

GEORGIA.
56. EXTENT, BOUNDARY, etc.] Length six hundred miles, breadth two hundred and
fifty; bounded by South Carolina on the north; by (...) ^^lantic Ocean on the
east; by the Floridas on the South, and on the west by the Missisippi.

CHIEF TOWNS.] Principal towns, Savannah and Augusta; the latter is a
flourishing inland town, and is the present seat of government; Savannah, the
former capital of the state, is situated in 32 north latitude, and in 81 10
western longitude.

RIVERS.] The principal rivers in this state are, the Savannah and Alatamaha.

CLIMATE, etc.] The climate, soil, producti^, etc. of this state, are similar
to those of ^^uth-Carolina.

Georgia is the most southern and latest settled state in the union, it being
but about sixty years since the first settlement was made here.

VERMONT.
58. THIS state makes the fourteenth pillar of the Union, it having lately
adopted the federal constitution.

EXTENT and BOUNDARY.] Length one hundred and sixty miles, breadth about sixty;
(...) on the north by the British territory of Canada; on the east by
Connecticut river; on the south by the commonwealth o^ ^assachus^^ts, and on
the west by the state of New York.

The soil, and productions here, are much the same as the adjacent states --
This state abounds with small rivers, lakes, etc. The chief town here, is
Bennington, situated in 4^ 15 north latitude, and 75 20 western longitude, from
London. The state of Vermont is said to contain near one hundred thousand
inhabitants.

KENTUCKY.
59. THIS territory was formerly a part of the state of Virginia, but is now
erected into an independent state, and as such to be admitted into the Federal
Union (on the first day of June, 1792) by the name and style of the state of
Kentucky.

60. EXTENT and BOUNDARY.] Length two hundred and sixty miles, breadth about
two hundred; bounded on the north and west by the rivers Ohio and Cumberland;
and on the south and east by the state of North Carolina.

61. CLIMATE, etc.] The climate here is serene and healthy; and the soil
extremely fertile: gentlemen of varacity (who have been there) affirm, that it
will yield from seventy-five to one hundred bushels of Indian corn to an acre,
and from twenty-five to thirty bushels of wheat, or other small grain, to an
acre.

This state contains, at present, about one hundred thousand inhabitants,
though settled but a few years ago.

Of the WESTERN TERRITORY.
62. THE United States possess an extensive territory, situated north west of
the O^io, which, for fertility of soil and inland navigation, is inferior to no
country upon earth; being watered by the great river Missisippi (which forms
its western boundary) the Ohio, and several other valuable rivers.

This Western Territory (which contains more square miles than Great Britain
and France taken together) has lately been erected by Congress into ten
Independent States, which are to be admitted into the Union at some future
period.

A concise View of the several KINGDOMS, STATES, ISLANDS, etc. in the four
Quarters of the Globe The (...) quarter ^f the Globe ar^d in al^ order,
indi^^riminately as they ^^^^ried.
.
ALGIERS,
63. A KINGDOM of Africa, length six hundred miles, breadth four hundred;
capital city, Algiers, containing one hundred and twenty thousand inhabitants;
longitude three degrees sixteen minutes ^ast; latitude thirty-six degrees fifty
minutes north; distance nine hundred and twenty miles south from London;
bounded by the Mediterranean on the north; by Tunis on the east; by Mount Atlas
on the south, and by the empire of Morocco on the west. Produce, corn, cattle,
wine, oil, etc. Governed by its Dey, or King, who is absolute. Revenue, one
hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling. Land forces, nine thousand men, and
a few ships of war. Mahometans.

AMAZONIA,
64. A SPANISH province of South-America, length twelve hundred miles, breadth
nine hundred and sixty; capital town Amazon; longitude seventy degrees fifty
minutes west, latitude ten degrees south; very fertile; but no gold dust being
found here, the inhabitants are still a free people, governed by their own
Monarchs. Pagans. To this country belongs the river Amazon, thought to be the
lar^^^^ in the ^^own world.


AMBOYNA,
65. AN EAST INDIA island, length forty miles, breadth thirty-five; capital of
the same name; longitude one hundred and twenty degrees east, latitude four
degrees and twenty minutes south. Produce, cloves, cinnamon, etc. This, with
all the other valuable spice islands, belong to the Dutch, who expelled the
English in 1622, and have retained it ever since.

AHIAN,
66. A COUNTRY of Africa, length nine hundred miles, breadth four hundred;
chief town Brava; longitude forty degrees fifty minutes east, latitude twelve
degrees north; abounds with all the necessaries of life: gold, wax, ivory, etc.

ANTIGUA.
67. ANTIGUA is a British West India island, length twenty-one miles, breadth
twenty; capital town St. John's; longitude sixty-two degrees five minutes west,
latitude seventeen degrees north. Produce, sugar, cotton, ginger, etc. It
contains seven thousand whites, and twenty thousand blacks. Protestants. The
great^^^ ^ant here is (...) water.


ARABIA,
68. A COUNTRY of Asia, length thirteen hundred miles, breadth twelve hundred;
capital city Mecca (the birth place of Mahomer) longitude forty-one degrees
east, latitude twenty degrees forty minutes north; distance two thousand six
hundred and forty miles south east from London; bounded by Turkey on the north;
by Persia on the east; on the south by the Indian Ocean, and by the Red Sea,
and the ^sthmus of Suez, on the west. The north part is a barren desert; the
southern part pr^^uces spices, drugs, etc. In this country Islands the famous
Mount Sinai, on which the law was delivered to Moses -- It is chiefly subject
to the Turks. Ma^ometans.

ASSYRIA,
69. ANCIENTLY comprehending two thousand miles in length, and eighteen hundred
in breadth; capital city Ni^evah^ spoken of in scripture, which once contained
three million of inhabitants. This Empire lasted twelve hundred years, from
Nimrod, its founder, until the time of Sardanapalus; but is now swallowed up by
the Turks and Persians.

AUSTRIA,
70. A DUCHY of Germany, length one hundred miles, breadth seventy miles;
capital city, Vienna; containing two hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants;
longitude sixteen degrees twenty minutes east latitude forty-eight degrees
twenty minutes north. Produce, corn, cat^^e, wine, etc. subject to the Emperor
of Germany. The reven^e of this, and his other dominions, amounts to seven
millions and an half sterling. For^es, one hundred thousand. Roman Catholics.

AUSTRIAN NETHERLANDS,
71. OR the Ten Provinces, length two hundred miles, breadth one hundred and
thirty; capital city Brussels; containing one hundred and fifty thousand
inhabitants* longitude four degrees eight minutes east, latitude fifty degrees
fifty-one minutes north. Produce, corn, cattle, and fruits in great abundance.
This country, from its great fertility, is reckoned the granary of France and
Germany. This territory, it is (...) Independent Republic. -- The (...) at
pr^^^^^ f^r their (...) ^ependence ^n the L^^ds of Austria.


AVES.
72. AVES, are some small Islands belonging to the Dutch, on the coast of
Terrafirma, in South-America.

AZORES.
73. AZORES, are isles in the Atlantic Ocean; capital city Angra, longitude
twenty-eight degrees five minutes west, latitude thirty-nine degrees ten
minutes north; nine in number; situate between Europe and America; belong to
the Portuguese. Catholics.

BABYLON.
74. ONCE a famous empire and city of Asia; longitude forty-four degrees east*
latitude thirty-two degrees north; situate on the river Euphrates; hereabouts
is supposed to have been the seat of Paradise; but all lies now in ruin.

BAHAMA-ISLANDS,
75. IN the West Indies, five hundred in all; capital St. Andrese; longitude
seventy-three degrees sixty minutes west; latitude twenty-one degrees
twenty-seven minutes north. They are claimed by the Spaniards. St. Salvadore,
one of these islands, was the first land Columbus discovered, when his men
mutinied in despair of finding any.

BARBADOS,
76. A BRITISH West India island; length twenty-one miles, breadth fourteen;
capital Bridgetown; containing thirteen thousand inhabitants; longitude
fifty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes west, latitude thirteen degrees north;
produce, tobacco, cotton, indigo, sugar, rum, oranges, etc. The inhabitants
amount to twenty thousand whites, and eighty thousand blacks.

BARBARY,
77. A LARGE country of Africa; length two thousand miles, breadth seven
hundred; capital city Fez, containing three hundred thousand inhabitants;
longitude six degrees west, latitude thirty-three degrees forty minutes north;
comprehends the countries of Morocco, Fez, Ta^^let, Algiers, Tunis, and
Tripoli: subject to several absolute princes. Mahometants.

BATAVIA,
78. A COLONY belonging to the Dutch, in Java; length seven hundred miles,
breadth one hundred; capital Batavia; longitude one hundred and five degrees
five minutes east, latitude four degrees thirty minutes south; produce, various
kinds of spices, etc. This being the capital of all the Dutch colonies, is
strongly fortified with a stone wall, and garrisoned with twenty thousand land
forces, besides shipping.

BENGAL,
79. A KINGDOM in the East Indies; length four hundred miles, breadth three
hundred; capital Patna; longitude eighty-three degrees east; latitude, eighteen
degrees north; produce, corn, sugar, cane, etc. The British, French, and Dutch,
have factories here.

BERMUDAS,
80. FOUR hundred small islands in the West Indies, belonging to Britain;
capital city St. George; longitude sixty-five degrees west; latitude thirty two
degrees thirty minutes north; produce, flesh, f^sh, fruits, etc. etc. The
inhabitants amount to twelv^ thousand whites, besides blacks. Protestants.

BOHEMIA,
81. AN European kingdom; length three hundred miles, breadth two hundred and
fifty; capital Prague, containing eighty-three thousand inhabitants; longitude
fourteen degrees twenty minutes east, latitude ^^irteen degrees south; produce,
corn, cattle, wines, etc. Subject to the Emperor of Germany. Revenue five
hundred thousand pounds. Catholics.

BORNEO,
82. AN East India island, length eight hundred miles, breadth seven hundred;
capital of the same name; longitude one hundred and eleven degrees twenty-seven
minutes east, latitude four degrees forty-five minutes north; abounds with
gold, diamonds, and beeswax, which last is used here instead of money. The sea
coast is overflowed half the year; the inhabitants here have floating houses.

BRAZIL,
83. A COUNTRY of South-America, belonging to the Portuguese; length two
thousand five hundred miles, breadth seven hundred; capital St. Salvadore;
longitude thirty-eight degrees west, latitude thirteen degrees south; distance
six thousand miles south* Produce, tobacco, indigo, Brazil wood, mines of gold,
silver, and diamonds. Catholics and Pagans.

CAFFRARIA.
84. A COUNTRY of Africa, commonly called the Hottentot country, length eleven
hundred and twenty miles, breadth seven hundred; Cape of Good-Hope the capital;
longitude nineteen degrees thirty-five minutes east, latitude thirty-four
degrees seven minutes south. Produce, vegetables, drugs, etc. The Dutch possess
this country.

CHILI,
85. A KINGDOM of South-America, subject to Spain, length twelve hundred miles,
breadth seven hundred; capital St. Jago; longitude seventy-seven degrees west,
latitude thirty-four south; producing all kinds of grain, gold, etc. Catholics
and Pagans.

CHINA.
86. AN Empire in Asia, length near two thousand miles, breadth twelve hundred;
bounded on the north by the river Amur; by the Pacific Ocean on the east and
south, and by Thibet on the west; capital Pekin; containing two millions of
inhabitants; longitude one hundred and seventeen degrees twenty-eight minutes
east, latitude forty degrees north; distance four thousand five hundred miles
south east; abounds with all the necessaries and comforts of life, especially
the article of tea, which is peculiar to itself. There is a remarkable wall in
this country, built (for the purpose of repelling the attacks of the
neighboring nations) near two thousand years ago, and but little impaired at
this day; if is fifteen hundred miles long, and thirty feet wide. This country
is subject to its own Emper^r, whose revenue amounts to twenty millions
sterling -- Land forces five millions. Pagans.

St. CHRISTOPHERS,
87. AN Atlantic Isle, belonging to Britain, length twenty miles, breadth
seven; capital Basseterre; longitude sixty-two degrees west, latitude eighteen
north. Produce, cotton, indigo, tropical fruits, etc. Exports ten thousand
hogsheads of sugar annually. This is one of the Caribees. -- Protestants.

CORSICA,
88. AN island in the Mediterranean sea, now subject to France, length ninety
miles, breadth forty. Produce, corn, wine, oil, etc. capital city Bastia;
longitude nine degrees forty minutes east, latitude forty-two degrees twenty
minutes north. The inhabitants of this island are famous for their late
struggles for liberty, under their brave countryman Genesis Paol^. Catholics.

CRIM-TARTARY,
89. A TURKISH province; capital Bachaserai; longitude forty degrees east,
la^itude forty-four degrees forty minutes north. Produce, wine, olives, etc.
The Cham is obliged (...) furnish the Turks with thirty thousand (...), who
subsist upon plunder, having ^o pay.

CUBA,
90. A WEST INDIA island, belonging to Spain, length seven hundred miles,
breadth seventy; capital city Havannah; longitude eighty-four west, latitude
twenty-three north. Produce, tobacco, sugar, drugs, etc. It has many fine
harbors in it.

DARIEN,
91. OR new Caledonia, in Terra Firma (South-America) length three hundred
miles, breadth sixty; capital Panama; longitude eighty-one degrees west,
latitude nine degrees north. Produce, gold, silver, etc. The Scots attempted to
fix a colony here, in King William the third's reign; but he to please his
Dutch friends, and others, made it death to assist them, and so they dropped it.

DENMARK,
92. AN EUROPEAN kingdom, situated on the island of Zealand, length two hundred
and forty miles, breadth one hundred and eighty; capital city Copenhagen;
containing one hundred thousand inhabitants; longitude: twelve degrees fifteen
minutes east, latitude fifty-five degrees forty-four minutes north; distance
five hundred miles; bounded on the north by Norway; on the south by part of
Germany; on the east by Sweden, and on the west by the Ocean, Produce, corn,
cattle, tar, pitch, iron, furs, etc. Revenue eight hundred thousand pounds. --
Land forces seventy-two thousand, naval force sixty ships of war. Lutherans.

DOMINICA.
93. A WEST INDIA island, length twenty-eight miles, breadth thirteen; capital
Roleau; longitude sixty-one degrees twenty-one minutes west, latitude sixteen
degrees north. Produce, sugar, coffee, etc. Contains about five thousand
whites, and twelve thousand blacks -- subject to Britain.

EAST INDIES,
94. O^ Indostan, in Asia; length two thousand miles, breadth fourteen hundred;
capital Agra; containing five hundred thousand inhabitants; longitude
seventy-nine degrees east: latitude twenty six north; produce, spiceries, gold,
diamonds, etc. manufactories, silk, chintzes, etc. Greatly resorted to by
Europeans. Several vessels from the United States have made successful voyages
here, of late years.


EGYPT,
95. AN African kingdom; length, five hundred and eighty miles; breadth two
hundred and fifty. Bounded on the south by Nubia; on the north by the
Mediterranean Sea; by the Red Sea, and the isthmus of Suez, on the east; and by
the unknown parts of Africa, on the west. Capital city, Grand Cairo (near which
stands the famous pyramids) longitude thirty two degrees east; and latitude
thirty north; distance nineteen hundred miles; produce, corn, cattle, fruits,
etc. Subject to the Turks. Jews and Mahometans.

ENGLAND,
96. SOUTH part of Great Britain; length three hundred and sixty miles, breadth
two hundred and eighty; capital London; containing one million of inhabitants
(fixed meridian here) latitude fifty-one degrees thirty two minutes north --
Its principal rivers are, the Thames and the Severn. Produce, corn, cattle,
fish, fowl, mines, minerals, etc. Protestants -- though all religions are in a
great measure tolerated.

ETHIOPIA,
97. A COUNTRY of Africa; length two thousand miles, breadth six hundred;
capital Dancala; longitude thirty-four degrees thirty-five minutes east,
latitude fifteen degrees north; comprehends the countries of Abyssinia, Nubia,
etc. Produce, corn, wine, sugar, tropical fruits, etc. Christians, Jews, and
Mahometans.

FERDINANDO,
98. AN island in the Pacific Ocean; length ten miles, breadth six; chief town
Juan-Ferdander; longitude eighty-three degrees west, latitude thirty-three
south. Produce, fruits and herbs. Alexander Selkirk, a native of Scotland,
lived here four years alone, during which time he existed on goats milk and
herbs.

FLORIDA,
99. EAST and west, in North America, belongs to the Spaniards; length five
hundred miles, breadth four hundred and forty; capital St. Augustine; longitude
eighty-one degrees west, latitude twenty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes north.
Produce, Indian corn, rice, indigo, wines, timber, etc. Florida is bounded on
the north by the United States; on the south, by the gulf of Mexico, and on
the west by the river Missisippi.

FRANCE,
100. AN European kingdom; length six hundred miles, breadth five hundred;
bounded by the English Channel and the United Netherlands on the north; by
Germany, Switzerland, and Italy on the east; by the Mediterranean and the
Pyrenean Mountains, which separates it from Spain, on the South; and by the Bay
of Biscay on the west. Its principal rivers are, the Seine, the Rhone, and the
Loire; capital city Paris; containing eight hundred thousand inhabitants;
longitude two degrees twenty-five minutes east, latitude forty-eight degrees
twenty minutes north; distance two hundred and ten miles south east; produces
all the necessaries of life; has several mines of iron, copper, chalk, and
oaker, and extensive manufactories of various kinds. Revenue eighteen millions.
Forces from three to four hundred thousand, and two hundred and sixty-six ships
of war. Religion, Catholic and Protestant. This nation, who for many centuries
back have groane^ under the oppressive yoke of arbitrary power, have lately
made some bold and successful efforts toward obtaining their natural rights,
and are now about establishing a more equitable mode of government. -- The
National Assembly of France has lately abolished all titles of di^tinction, and
gre^^ly curtailed the ancient prerog^ (...) their clergy, king, and nobles.


GERMANY,
101. AN European empire; length six hundred miles, breadth five hundred and
fifty; bounded partly by the Ocean, and by Denmark on the north; by Poland and
Hungary on the east; by the Alps on the South, and by France and the
Netherlands on the west: the principal rivers in this country are, the Danube
(the largest river in Europe) the Rhine, and the Weser; capital city Vienna,
containing two hundred and twenty thousand inhabitants; longitude sixteen
degrees fifteen minutes east, latitude forty-eight degrees fifty minutes north;
distance sixteen hundred miles south east; produce, corn, cattle, wines,
minerals, etc. -- This country is governed by an Emperor (who is elected) and
near three hundred petty princes. Forces about three hundred thousand. Revenue
from five to seven millions sterling. Religion, Catholic, Calvinist, and
Lutheran.

GREECE,
102. OR Romelia, length one thousand miles, breadth nine hundred and eighty;
capital city Constantinople; contains one million of inhabitants; longitude
twenty-nine degrees twenty minutes east; latitude forty-one degrees north;
distance fifteen hundred miles south-east. Produce, corn, cattle, wine, etc.
The present inhabitants of this country are greatly degenerated from their
ancestors; who were famous for their learning and valor. It is now subject to
the Turks, who took its Capital about three hundred and thirty years ago.

GREENLAND,
103. EAST and west, capital Spitsbergen; longitude ten degrees thirty minutes
east; latitude seventy-seven degrees eighty-two minutes north; an excessive
cold barren country. Abounds with, deer, bears and foxes: Has an excellent
whale fishery on its coast.

GREAT BRITAIN,
104. AN European isle and kingdom, metropolis London, comprehending Scotland,
England and Wales; length six hundred miles, breadth above four hundred;
bounded on the west, by the Atlantic Ocean, the Irish Sea, and St. George's
Channel; on the east, by the German Ocean; and on the south by the English
Channel, and Straits of Dover, which separates it from France: Science,
agriculture, and manufactures flourish here. Revenue fourteen millions five
hundred thousand pounds: Forces fifty-eight thousand, and the most powerful
fleet in Europe, consisting of four hundred and sixty-five ships of war.

GUIANA,
105. A COUNTRY in South-America, length seven hundred and eighty miles;
breadth four hundred and fifty; capital Surinam; longitude fifty-seven degrees
west, latitude seven degrees north. Produce, sugar, cotton, tobacco, drugs,
etc. belongs to the Dutch and French. Calvinists and Catholics.

GUINEA,
106. A COAST of Africa; length eighteen hundred miles, breadth four hundred;
capital town Cape-coast Castle; longitude seventeen degrees east, latitude
eighteen degrees South -- Its productions are chiefly gold, ivory, etc.
Governed by a number of petty princes. Pagans.

HISPANIOLA,
107. OR St. Domingo, a West India island, belonging to the French and
Spaniards; length four hundred and fifty miles, breadth one hundred and fifty
miles; capital of the same name; longitude seventy-nine degrees west, latitude
eighteen degrees twenty minutes north. Produce, sugar, cotton, tobacco, indigo,
etc. Catholics.

HOLLAND,
108. ONE of the Seven Provinces of the United Netherlands; length one hundred
miles, breadth thirty; capital city Amsterdam; containing two hundred and forty
thousand inhabitants; longitude four degrees and thirty minutes east, latitude
fifty-two degrees twenty-five minutes north; distance two hundred miles east.

HONDURAS,
109. A PROVINCE in South-America, partly belonging to Spain, but chiefly
inhabited by the Moskitto Indians; chief town Nalodolia; longitude eighty-five
degrees forty-nine minutes west, latitude twelve degrees sixteen minutes north.
The British cut large quantities of logwood here annually.

HUNGARY,
110. AN European kingdom; length three hundred miles, breadth two hundred;
bounded on the north by the Carpathian Mountains; by Transylvania and Turkey on
the east; by Sclavonia on the South; and by Germany on the west; metropolis
Buda, containing fifty thousand inhabitants; longitude seventeen degrees thirty
minutes west, latitude forty-eight degrees north; distance six hundred and
forty miles east. -- Produce, corn, cattle, wines, mines of gold and silver.
Revenue five hundred thousand pounds. Forces sixty-five thousand men; subject
to the house of Austria. Greeks and Catholics.

JAMAICA,
111. A BRITISH West India island; length one hundred and forty miles, breadth
sixty; capital town Kingston, containing twelve thousand inhabitants; longitude
seventy-seven degrees west, latitude seventeen degrees thirty-two minutes
north; distance four thousand four hundred miles south west from London.
Produce, sugar, rum, tobacco, cotton, coffee, etc. This island contains
twenty-five thousand whites, and near one hundred thousand blacks. Religion the
same with the rest of the British dominions.

JAPAN, OR NIPHON,
112. AN empire and isle of Asia; length six hundred miles, breadth two
hundred; capital Jeddo, containing one million of inhabitants; longitude one
hundred and thirty-nine degrees east, latitude thirty-six degrees twenty
minutes north; produces all the necessaries of life; governed by its own
sovereigns. Revenue from twenty to thirty millions. Forces thirty thousand
horse, sixty thousand foot, and five thousand elephants. Pagans.

JUDEA OR PALISTINE,
113. IN the scriptures called Canaan, the Holy Land, Land and of Promise,
anciently inhabited by the Jews, now a province of Asiatic Turkey; length one
hundred and fifty miles, breadth eighty; metropolis Jerusalem, once the most
famous of all the cities in the east, before it was destroyed by Titus
Vespasian; longitude thirty degrees east, latitude thirty-two degrees north;
distance nineteen hundred and twenty miles south east from London. Produce,
corn, cattle, wine, oil, honey, etc.

Palistine was anciently divided into four parts, namely, Idumea, Judea,
Samaria, and Galilee; and in Solomon's time extended from the Euphrates to the
Mediterranean Sea. Judea is peculiarly famous, as being the place of our
Savior's incarnation, miracles, and death. In this country is the river
Jordon, famous for the baptism of Christ our Savior, as also for several
miraculous events recorded in scripture. Christians, Jews, and Mahometans.

INDIA PROPER,
114. OR Mogul empire, in Asia; length two thousand miles, breadth sixteen
hundred; capital city Delly; longitude seventy six degrees east, latitude
twenty-nine degrees north; distance three thousand four hundred miles. Produce,
corn, wine, oil, silk, etc. Here the men marry at fourteen, and the females at
eleven. Revenue forty millions of pounds. Forces two hundred and fifty thousand
horse, and five thousand elephants. Pagans.

IRELAND,
115. AN European island, subject to the king of Great Britain; length two
hundred and eighty miles, breadth one hundred and sixty.

Ireland is separated from Britain by the Irish sea and St. George's Channel.
From Donachadee, in Ireland, to Port Patrick, in the west of Scotland, is only
a passage of twenty-two miles. The principal rivers in Ireland are, the Shannon
and Liffy, on the banks of the latter stands Dublin, the metropolis of Ireland,
which contains one hundred and forty thousand inhabitants; longitude six
degrees twenty-eight minutes west, latitude fifty-three degrees twenty minutes
north; distance two hundred and seventy miles north west. Produce, corn,
cattle, hemp, flax, wool, etc. This country was conquered by King Edward the
first of England, about five hundred years ago. -- Revenue from five to six
hundred thousand pounds. Catholics and Protestants.

ITALY,
116. AN European country; length six hundred miles, breadth near five hundred;
bounded by Switzerland and the Alps on the north; by the gulf of Venice, etc.
on the east; by the Mediterranean Sea on the south, and by the Alps, which
separates it from France, on the west. The principal rivers in Italy are, the
Po^and the Tiber; on the latter stands the city of Rome, the capital of Italy
In Italy there are nine cities, known by these humorous appellations* Rome, the
holy; Naples, the noble; Venice, the wealthy; Genoa, the proud; Milan, the
great; Florence, the fair; Bologna, the fat; Ravenna, the ancient; Padua, the
learned.
; containing one hundred and fifty-two thousand inhabitants; longitude thirteen
degrees east, latitude forty-two degrees north* Italy, from its salubrity and
fertility, is called the Garden of Europe -- It contains the Pope's dominions,
and several other independent states.

KAMTSCHATKA,
117. A NORTHERN coast of Asia, discovered about fifty years ago; capital town
Kamzatkai; longitude one hundred and nineteen degrees east, latitude fifty-two
degrees north; abounds with bears, deer, fish, etc. The natives are a barbarous
people, and live upon venison, fish, and vegetables.

LAPLAND,
118. THE most northern part of Eupope; length five hundred miles, breadth two
hundred and forty; chief town Kola; longitude thirty-five degrees east,
latitude seventy-three degrees north; a barren inhospitable clime, produces no
grain; the inhabitants live upon fish and venison; subject to Sweden, Denmark,
and Russia -- The inhabitants here are an ignorant, rude people, rather Pagans
than Christians.

MALTA,
119. AN i^land in the Mediterranean* length twenty miles, breadth twelve;
chief town Vallette, containing five thousand inhabitants; longitude fourteen
degrees thirty minutes east, and latitude forty-six degrees north: abounds with
vegetables, fruits, etc. Governed by its own Knights.

MADEIRAS.
120. ISLANDS in the Atlantic Ocean; principal town ^onchal^ longitude eighteen
degrees west* latitude thirty-two degrees thirty-three minutes north; the
largest of them are called Ma^^era; here great quantities of that excellent
wine is made, that keeps for any period of time in the h^st climates.

MEXICO, OLD,
121. OR N^w Spain, in South-America length two thousand miles, breadth six
hundred, is separated from South-America by the i^thmus of Darien; metropolis
Mexico, containing eighty thousand inhabitants; longitude one hundred and three
degrees west, latitude twenty degrees north; distance four thousand eight
hundred miles south west from London. Produce, sugar, gold, and silver mines,
fruits of all kinds, cocoa, cochineal, etc. Subject to Spain. Revenue
twenty-four millions.

MOROCCO,
122. AN empire of Africa; length five hundred miles, breadth four hundred and
eighty; bounded on the north by the Mediterranean; on the south by Bildulgered;
on the east by the Kingdom of Algiers, and on the west by the Atlantic Ocean;
metropolis Fez, containing three hundred and twenty thousand inhabitants;
longitude six degrees west; latitude thirty-two degrees thirty minutes north.
Produce, corn, cattle, hemp, flax, Morocco leather, camels, dromedaries,
horses, mules, etc. Revenue three hundred and twenty thousand pounds.
Mahometans.

NAPLES, OR SICILY,
123. A KINGDOM in Italy; length three hundred and forty miles, breadth one
hundred and twenty; capital city Naples, containing three hundred and fifty
thousand inhabitants; longitude fifteen degrees twelve minutes east, latitude
forty-one degrees north. Produce, corn, cattle, wine, oil, etc. Revenue one
million. Forces thirty thousand men, and a small fleet. Catholics.

NEGRITIA,
124. A LARGE country in Africa; length two thousand two hundred miles, breadth
nine hundred; metropolis James's Fort; longitude sixteen degrees east, latitude
seventeen degrees north. Produce, indian corn, tropical fruits, gold, ivory,
etc. Containing sixteen kingdoms. Mahometans and Pagans.

NEW-BRITAIN, OR ESKIMAUX,
125. IN North America, said to be sixteen hundred miles in length, twelve
hundred in breadth; chief town Rupert Fort; longitude eighty degrees west,
latitude fifty one north: abounds with fish, fowl, elks, reindeer, bears,
tigers, buffaloes, beavers, etc. No grain grows here.

NEWFOUNDLAND,
126. A BRITISH Island in north America; length three hundred and fifty miles,
breadth near two hundred; chief town Placentia; longitude fifty-five degrees
west, latitude forty-seven degrees north; distance two thousand miles; a cold
barren country: -- On its banks is carried on an extensive cod fishery.

NEW-HOLLAND,
127. SAID to be the largest isle in the known world; length two thousand
miles, breadth fifteen hundred; longitude one hundred and ten degrees cast,
latitude ten degrees south. The natives are a rude, savage people, devoid of
art or industry.

NORWAY
128. AN European kingdom, subject to the king of Denmark; length near one
thousand miles, breadth two hundred and fifty; bounded by Lapland on the north;
on the east by the Doctrine Mountains, which separates it from Sweden; on the
west by the Ocean, and on the south by the Scaggeracto Sea; capital city
Bergen; longitude five degrees forty minutes east, latitude sixty degrees ten
minutes north. Produce, corn, cattle, timber, gold, silver, copper, iron, lead,
alum, etc. Revenue one hundred and sixty thousand pounds. Lutherans.

NOVA SCOTIA, OR ACADIA,
129. A BRITISH province in North America; length three hundred and fifty
miles, breadth two hundred and thirty; chief town Halifax, containing
twenty-five thousand inhabitants; longitude sixty-four degrees west, latitude
forty-four degrees five minutes north. This country is bounded on the north by
the Gulf of St. Laurence; on the east and south by the Atlantic Ocean, and by
the United States and Canada on the west. Part of this country has lately been
formed into a distinct government from that of Nova Scotia, and is called
New-Brunswick. Produce, corn, cattle, naval stores, fish, fowl, deer, beaver,
etc. It is said to contain one hundred and seventy thousand inhabitants.

OELAND,
130. AN island in the Baltic, subject to Sweden; length sixty miles, breadth
fifty; chief town Bonholin; longitude sixteen degrees east, latitude fifty-one
degrees twenty minutes north. Produce, corn, cattle, timber, etc. The air here
is excessive cold; the inhabitants plow, sow, and make their harvest in three
months time.

PARAGUA, OR LA PLATA,
131. A SPANISH territory in South-America; length fifteen hundred miles,
breadth one thousand; bounded on the north by Amazonia; on the cast by Brazil;
on the south by Patagonia, and on the west by Peru; capital city Bueno-Ayres,
containing thirty thousand inhabitants; longitude sixty degrees west, latitude
thirty-five degrees forty-five minutes south; distance six thousand miles
south-west. Produce, cotton, indigo, tobacco, gold, and silver mines, and
cattle in great abundance. To this country belongs the river La P^^^^, ^a^^
(...) one hundred and fifty ^^les wide, where ^t unites (...) ocean.


PERSIA,
132. AN empire in Asia; length thirteen hundred miles, breadth one thousand
one hundred; bounded by Tartary on the north; by Indostan on the east; by the
Indian Ocean on the south, and by Turkey on the west; metropolis Ispahan,
containing one million of inhabitants; longitude fifty-two degrees fifty
minutes east, latitude thirty-two degrees forty minutes north; distance two
thousand four hundred miles south east -- Produce, corn, wine, oil, etc.
Manufactures silks, carpets, gold and silver lace, etc. Subject to its own
Emperor, or Sophi, who is absolute. Forces, one hundred and fifty thousand.
Mahometans.

PERU,
133. A TERRITORY belonging to Spain, in South-America; length eighteen hundred
and eighty miles, breadth five hundred; bounded by the Cordilleras on the east;
by Terrafirma on the north; by Chili on the south; and by the Pacific Ocean on
the west; capital city Lima, containing sixty thousand inhabitants; longitude
seventy-seven degrees fifty minutes west, latitude twelve degrees fifteen
minutes south; produces all the necessaries of life: famous for the silver
mines of Potosi, which are now pretty well exhausted. Catholics.

POLAND,
134. AN European Kingdom, length seven hundred miles, breadth six hundred and
eighty; bounded by the Baltic, and part of Russia on the north; by Russia on
the east; by Turkey and Hungary on the south; and by Germany on the west;
capital city Warsaw, longitude twenty-one degrees east; latitude fifty-two
degrees fifteen minutes north; produce corn, cattle, naval stores, wax, nitre,
silver, iron, etc. The King's power here is quite limited, and may rather be
called an aristocratical, than monarchical government. Revenue one hundred and
forty thousand pounds: Forces twenty thousand Horsemen. Catholics.

PORTUGAL,
135. AN European Kingdom; length three hundred miles; breadth one hundred and
twenty; bounded on the north and east, by Spain; and on the south and west, by
the Atlantic Ocean; capital city, Lisbon, containing one hundred and fifty
thousand inhabitants; longitude eight degrees fifty three minutes west;
latitude thirty-eight degrees forty minutes north; distance eight hundred and
fifty miles southwest; produce, corn, wine, oil, etc. Government absolute:
Revenue, one million and an half sterling: Forces twenty thousand men, and near
thirty ships of war. Catholics.

PRUSSIA,
136. A KINGDOM in Europe; length about two hundred miles, breadth one hundred;
bounded on the east, west, and south by Poland, and on the north by the Baltic;
metropolis Koningsburgh; longitude twenty-one degrees east, latitude fifty-four
degrees thirty minutes north; produces all the necessaries of life. Revenue
five millions sterling. Forces one hundred and twenty thousand men. Catholics
and Lutherans.

RUSSIA, OR MUSCOVY,
137. A LARGE European empire; length (including the territories that belong to
it in Asia) three thousand miles, breadth near two thousand; bounded on the
north by Lapland; by Crim-tartary and Turkey on the south; by Poland, Sweden,
and the Baltic on the west, and by Chinese, Tartary, and the Caspian Sea on the
east; capital city Petersburg, containing four hundred thousand inhabitants;
longitude thirty degrees east, latitude fifty-nine degrees fifty-seven minutes
north; distance eleven hundred and fifty miles north east from London. The
principal rivers are, the Wolga and the Don. Produce, corn, cattle, naval
stores, mines of silver, lead, and iron. Revenue fourteen millions sterling.
Forces four hundred and fifty thousand men, and sixty-three ships of war.
Christians of the Greek Church.

SARDINIA,
138. AN European isle and kingdom; length one hundred and twenty miles,
breadth sixty; chief town Cogliari; longitude nine degrees fifteen minutes
east, latitude thirty-nine degrees ten minutes north. Produce, corn, wine, oil,
and fruits. Revenue five hundred thousand pounds sterling. Forces forty-five
thousand, and thirty-two ships of war. Catholics.

SCOTLAND,
139. THE north part of Great Britain, anciently called Caledonia; length three
hundred miles, breadth one hundred and fifty; metropolis Edinburgh, containing
one hundred thousand inhabitants; longitude three degrees west, latitude
fifty-five degrees fifty-six minutes north; distance four hundred miles north
from London: produces all the necessaries of life in great abundance; an
extensive salmon and herring fishery, mines of silver and lead; manufactures
linen, lawn, cambricks, and woolens. The principal rivers in Scotland are, the
Frith, the Tay, the Spey, the Clyde, and the Tweed, which last partly separates
North from South-Britain. The most noted Lakes, or Lochs, are, Loch-lomond, and
Lochness; near the latter (opposite to the famous fall of Foyers) stands a
remarkable mountain, on the top of which is a lake of fresh water that never
freezes, and so deep that it never could be fathomed; a few miles from thence
is another lake that is covered with ice all the year round.

SIBERIA, OR SCYTHIA.
140. LENGTH two thousand miles, breadth seven hundred; chief town Tobolski;
longitude sixty-nine degrees east, latitude fifty-eight degrees twenty-five
minutes north; a cold barren country (in Asia) but little cultivated -- Subject
to Russia.

SICILY,
141. An Italian island; length two hundred miles, breadth one hundred and
twelve; capital city Palmero; longitude fourteen degrees east, latitude
thirty-eight degrees thirty minutes north. Produce, corn, wine, fruits, etc.
Famous for the burning mountain, called Aetna -- Subject to Naples. Catholics.

SPAIN,
142. ONE of the largest and most southern kingdoms in Europe; length seven
hundred miles, breadth five hundred; bounded by the Bay of Biscay and the
Pyrenean Mountains on the north; by the Straits of Gibraltar and the Atlantic
Ocean on the south; by the Mediterranean on the east; and by Portugal on the
west; metropolis Madrid, containing three hundred thousand ^nhabitants;
longitude four degrees fifteen minutes west, latitude forty degrees thirty-^i^^
minutes north; distance six hundred and eighty miles south west. Produce, corn,
^tle, wine, oi^ fruits, vast quantities of fine wool, etc. Revenue six millions
sterling. Force^ ^i^ty thousand, and one hundred and thirty ships of war.
Government absolute. Catholics.

SWEDEN,
143. THE la^gest kingdom in Europe; length eight hundred miles, breadth five
hundred; bounded by Russia on the east; by Denmark and Norway on the west; by
Lapland on the north, and by the Baltic on the south* capital city Stockholm,
containing ninety thousand inhabitants; longitude twenty-five degrees east,
latitude fifty-nine degrees twenty minutes north. Produce, corn, cattle, gold,
silver, copper, lead, amathysts, etc. Revenue one million sterling. Forces
sixty thousand men, eighty-five ships of war. Government somewhat absolute of
late years. Lutherans.

SWITZERLAND,
144. A SMALL Republic in Europe; length two hundred and sixty miles, breadth
one hundred and twenty, bounded by Germany on the north; by the Lakes of
Constance and Ferol on the east; by Italy on the south, and by France on the
west; capital city Bern; longitude seven degrees ^ast, latitude forty-five
degree thirty minutes north. Produce, corn, wine, etc. This territory is
divided into thirteen Districts, or Cantons, who hold a general Dic^ or
Congress, on the twenty-fourth of JUL^ annually, at Baden. All the males in
this country are bred to arms. Religion, Calvinist and Catholics, who live in
strict amity together of late years.

TARTARY,
145. AN extensive country in Asia, length four thousand miles, breadth two
thousand four hundred; chief town Bochara; longitude sixty-five degrees fifty
minutes east; latitude forty degrees north; subject to Rusia, China, etc. The
southern part produces corn, cattle, medicinal herbs, vegetables, etc. Toward
the north it is excessively cold, and bu^ little cultivated, being covered with
snow the greater part of the year -- Subject to China and Russia.

TERRAFIRMA,
146. AN extensive territory in South-America, belonging to Spain; length
fourteen hundred miles, breadth seven hundred and fifty; bounded on the north
and east by the Atlantic Ocean; on the west by the Pacific Ocean, and on the
south by Peru and Amazonia; chief town Porto Bello; longitude eighty-two
degrees west; latitude ten degrees south. Produce, corn, fruits, gold, silver,
iron, copper, etc.

TRIPOLI, OR BARCA,
147. A KINGDOM in Africa; length eleven hundred miles, breadth two hundred and
fifty; bounded by the Mediterranean on the north; by the country of the
Beriberies on the south; by Egypt on the east, and by Tunis on the west;
capital city Tripoli; longitude fourteen degrees east, latitude thirty-three
degrees twenty minutes north. Produce, corn, wine, oil, camels, and excellent
horses. Mahometans.

TURKEY, IN ASIA.
148. AN extensive territory, subject to the Grand Signior; length one thousand
miles, breadth eight hundred; bounded on the east by Persia; by the Black Sea,
and Circassia on the north; by Arabia on the south; and by the Hellspont and
Propontis on the west; capital city Aleppo; longitude thirty-seven degrees
east, latitude thirty-five degrees forty minutes north; distance eighteen
hundred and fifty miles south east. Produce, corn, wine, oil, fruits, coffee,
drugs, etc.

PART II. NATURAL-HISTORY.
means it animates and excites all nature, and is one of the principal causes
of vegetation. It is the breath and life of the whole animal world, whether
inhabiting the air, the earth, or the waters.

10. IT would be tedious to reckon up all the benefits of this useful and
delicate element; let it suffice just to mention its wonderful powers in many
engines; its admirable property of conveying smells to our nose, sounds to our
ears, and reflecting the light of the heavenly bodies to our eyes; also its
great use and excellence in contributing by many other ways to the life, the
health, the pleasure of all mankind.

OF THE CLOUDS, RAIN, HAIL, AND SNOW.
11. THE clouds are nothing but vapors raised from the waters, or from moist
parts of the earth, partly by the solar, and partly by the subterraneous heat;
which vapors, being lighter than air, mount upwards, until having reached such
a region of the atmosphere, as is of the same specific gravity with themselves,
they are there suspended. After a while the watery particles which were at
first too thin to be perceived, are so condensed by the cold of superior
regions, as to render them opaque enough to reflect the (...) fermenting with
nitrous acid, they some times take fire, and generate thunder, lightning, and
other fiery meteors. If high in the air, and far from us, they will do
mischief; but if near us, may destroy trees, animals, or men -- And the
nearness or distance may be computed by the interval of time betwixt the flash
and the noise. Dr. Wallis observes, that commonly the interval is about seven
seconds, which, at eleven hundred and forty-two feet in a second (the rate at
which sound travels) gives the distance about a mile and a half; but it is
often nearer, and sometimes farther off. The effects of lightning are sometimes
very surprising; it has melted a sword without hurting the scabbard, and broken
the bones of a man without injuring his flesh, or even his skin. Its uses may
be to purge the air, and purify the noxious vapors which might otherwise grow
pernicious.

OF EARTHQUAKES.
16. AN earthquake is the greatest and most formidable appearance of nature. It
is a ^ehement shake or agitation of that part of the earth where it happens,
accompanied with noise like thunder, and frequently with eruptions of water,
fire, smoke or wind, etc. The same ca^ses that produces evaporations of water,
and all those meteors that roll over our heads, do also produce these other no
less dreadful effects under our feet. For the earth abounding every where with
caverns, veins, and canals, some full of water, others of vapors and
exhalations, and many parts of the earth being replete with nitre, sulphur,
bitumen, vitriol, and other combustibles; these, either from some fire they
meet with, or from their collision against hard bodies, or their intermixture
with other fluids, are kindled, by which means, bursting out into a greater
compass, the place becomes too narrow for them, so that pressing violently on
all sides, the adjoining parts are shaken, a noise is heard like thunder, which
continues until they have either found, or made a vent to discharge themselves.

OF THE TIDES.
17. THE tides are that flux and reflux, or ebb and slow of the sea, which is
observed to happen nearly twice every day -- It flows from south to north for
something more than six hours, during which time it gradually swells, so that
entering the mouth of rivers it drives back their waters toward their heads or
springs; then seeming to rest for about ten minutes, it begins to ebb and
retire back again from north to south for six hours more; and the waters
sinking, the rivers resume their natural course. Then after a pause of ten
minutes more, the sea begins to flow as before, and so alternately. The period
of a flux and reflux is twelve hours and twenty-five minutes; so that the tides
return later and later every day by fifty minutes, now twenty-four hours and
fifty minutes is a lunar day, that is, the Moon passes the earth's meridian
later and later every day by fifty minutes; so that the sea flows as often as
the Moon passes the meridian, both under the arch, above the horizon, and that
below; and ebbs as often as she passes the horizon, both at the eastern and
western points; that is, both at the rising and the setting of it. When the
Moon enters the first and third quarter; that is, at the new and full Moon, the
tides are high and swift, and called spring tides: when she enters the second
and last quarter, the tides are weaker, and are called neap tides. All these
phenomenon of the tides are accounted for from the principles of graviation.

OF GOLD.
18. GOLD is the heaviest, purest, and most ductile of all metals -- It is
chiefly found in mines, though sometimes gold dust is found in the sand and mud
of rivers, particularly in Guinea. The golden ore that is found in the mines is
generally about one hundred and fifty, or one hundred and sixty fathoms deep,
and is dug up in large pieces, which usually contain some other mineral matter,
as antimony, vitriol, sulphur, copper, or silver, particularly the last. The
manner of preparing and separating it is thus; they first break the ore with
iron mallets pretty small, then carry it to certain mills, where it is ground
to powder, after which they p^ss it through several sieves until it is exceeding
fine.

19. THE powder thus prepared, they lay it in troughs, mix with it a sufficient
quantity of water and mercury, and leave it in the fun and air for two or three
days, after which the coarse and muddy earth is drawn out by hot waters, until
nothing remains but a mass of mercury and gold; which are separated by
distillation -- The gold in this state is called Virgin Gold, which they melt
in crucibles, and then cast into plates or ingots.

20. THERE are gold mines in most countries in the world, though in Europe they
are very sparingly scattered. The mines of Peru and Chili, in South-America,
are the richest, though very fine gold is found in many parts of the
East Indies. The weight of gold is to that of water nearly as nineteen to one;
and to that of silver near two to one. The pound weight of gold, or twelve
ounces troy, is divided into twenty-four carets. Of all the properties of gold,
its ductility is the most surprising: a single ounce of gold may be extended,
by the gold-beater's hammer, to a surface of near one hundred and fifty square
feet, and by the gold-wire drawers, it will be extended to upwards of a
thousand, and yet remain so entire, as that the least ^law shall not be
perceived even by the help of a microscope.

OF SILVER.
21. SILVER is a white rich metal, and, except gold, the finest and most
ductile of any: there are silver mines in all parts of the world, but those of
Peru, and some other parts of America, particularly those of Potosi, are by far
the richest.

22. THE silver ores, when first dug, are not of the same quality, color, or
value; some are white or ash color, spotted with red or blue specks; but the
richest, and that which is easiest wrought, is black; for the working of this
nothing is required but to put it in the fire, where the lead evaporating,
leaves the silver pure; but the method of separating silver from the common
^re, is much the same as that of gold; only that, to every fifty hundred weight
of ore, is added one hundred weight of rock salt* The standard of fine silver
is twelve penny-weights, each consisting of twenty-four grains.

OF COPPER.
23. COPPER is a hard, dry, heavy, ductile metal, abounding much with vitriol*
and an ill-digested sulphur, and found in mines, in most parts of Europe, but
particularly in Sweden. It is dug up in large fragments of ore, which are first
beaten small, then ^ashed to separate the coarse and earthy parts from it, then
sme^ed and cast in a kind of moulds to form large blocks called salmons, or
copper cakes. This is the ordinary copper.

24. ROSE copper, is that which is melted once or twice more, and a quantity of
tin and antimony added to each melting, to render it more beautiful: Virgin
copper, is that which is sometimes, but seldom, found pure in mines. Certain
proportions of copper and lapis calaminaries make brass: Certain proportions of
copper and tin, make bell-metal: Copper and brass melted in equal quantities
make bronze for busts and statues; and the rust of copper makes verdigrease.

OF IRON.
25. IRON is a hard, dry, fusible, and ductile metal, consisting of earth,
salt, and sulphur; but all impure, ill mixed, and ill digested; which renders
it very liable to rust. By often heating it in the fire, hammering it, and
letting it cool of itself, it is softened; by extinguishing it when hot, in
water, it is hardened.

26. THE process of making iron is as follows; their first work is to calcine
the ore, which is done in kilns, much like common lime kilns, which they fill
up to the top with fuel and ore intermixed, and set^ing fire to it at the
bottom, let it burn unti^ ^e fuel is entirely consumed. This is do^ without
melting the ore, and ^rves to c^ume the more drossy part of it, and to make it
malleable: after this they ^arry it to the furnaces, where, in a furious fire,
that for months together is not suffered to flacken night or day, it is melted
and ^st into ^ows, or pigs of iron, as they are commonly called; and lastly, it
is taken from the furnace to the forge, where those pigs are wrought into
common bars for use.

OF LEAD.
27. LEAD is a coarse, heavy, soft, metal, containing mercury, some sulphur,
and much bituminous earth. It is found in many countries; when the ore is first
dug out of the mines it is beaten small, washed clean in a running stream, and
then sifted; after which it is melted in a furnace, with a strong charcoal
fire* as it melts it runs through a canal on one side, leaving the earth,
stone, and ^^oss amongst the ashes, and the workmen, with iron ladles, take it
out, and upon sand cast it into what form they please.

OF TIN.
28. TIN is a whitish metal, not so hard as silver, nor soft as lead: the
stannaries, or tin mines, in Cornwall and Devonshire (in Great Britain) furnish
the greatest part of the tin that is consumed in all Europe. The manner of
preparing it, as related in the philosophical transactions, is thus -- The
mineral stone, or ore, being dug and drawn out of the mines, they break it in
pieces with large iron mallets, then bring it to a stamping mill, where it is
pounded with stampers, much like those of paper mills; and the water passing
through it, washes away the earthy parts, and leaves the metalic ones behind.

29. THIS done, they lay it on iron plates, and dry it in a furnace, and grind
it very fine in a crasing mill; then wash it and dry it. In this state it is
called black tin; to reduce it to white tin, its proper color, they carry it to
a furnace filled with charcoal, where it is smelted. After it has passed
through all these preparations, and is become cold, they forge it into plates,
which finishes the process. Six pounds of brass, and fifteen pounds of lead, to
an hundred pounds of tin, makes the composition called pewter.

MERCURY,
30. OR, as it is vulgarly called, quicksilver, is an imperfect metal, neither
ductile nor malleable, but a fluid matter, resembling melted silver; it is
found chiefly in Hungary, Spain, and Peru; the method of separating it is --
first to grind the mineral glebe, or ore, into powder, then pouring a great
quantity of water upon it, they stir it about until the water becomes thick;
then pouring it off, they put on fresh water, and repeat their work until the
water comes off clear; and now all that remains at the bottom of the vessel is
mercury, and other metaline matter. With this they intermix the dross, or
refuse of iron, and putting the whole into large retorts, distill it; by which
means all the heterogeneous metalic, and stony parts, are separated, and the
mercury left pure.

31. THE chief properties of mercury are, that, gold excepted, it is the
heaviest of all metals. It is also the most fluid of all bodies, that is, its
parts cohere the least to each other, and are the most easily separated; it is
extremely volatile, being convertible into fume by a very gentle heat; it
easily enters and closely adheres to gold, less easily to silver, with
difficulty to copper, and to iron not at all.

OF DIAMONDS.
32. THERE are many kinds of precious stones* but the diamond, by the ancients
called adamant, is the most valuable of them all. Its goodness consists in its
water or color, luster, and weight: And its defects a^e flaws, veins, sp^cks of
red, or black sand, and a bluish or yellowish call. Diamonds are found only in
the East Indies, some i^^s in mines, and sometimes in the sand of rivers* It is
the hardest of all gems, in so much that it can only be cut and ground by
itself, and its own substance.

33 THE manner of preparing them is first to rub them hard against each other,
and the dust which is thus rubbed off the stones, serves to grind and polish
them; and this is done by means of a mill, which turns a wheel of soft iron,
sprinkled over with diamond dust mixed with oil of olives: The same dust, well
ground, and diluted with water and vinegar, is used in the sawing of diamonds;
which is performed with an iron or brass wire as fine as a hair.

Of the MAGNET, or LOADSTONE.
34. THIS wonderful stone is usually found-in iron mines: and is produced in
most countries of the world; particularly in China, Bengal, Arabia, England,
Germany, etc. It is a heavy stone, something resembling the ore of iron, only
closer and more ponderous. It is endowed with some surprising qualities and
powers: It attracts iron, which will adhere to it very strongly; which virtue
it also communicates to the iron so attracted: In every magnet there are two
poles, one of which points northward, and the other southward; and if the
magnet be divided into ever so many pieces the two poles will be found in each
piece. It is this property which has rendered it so useful in improving the art
of Navigation; for by the help of a needle, proper^ touched o^ the Loadstone,
the sailor direc^ the course of his ship* to whatever quar^r of the world he
pleases; the property of pointing toward the north, being communicated from
the stone to the needle.

OF VEGETABLES, etc.
1st. Of the VINE.
35. THE Vine is a plant or shrub of the reptile kind, supporting itself by
creeping, or climbing up any thing which stands near it. It is famous for its
fruit called grapes, which it produces in bunches, and from the juice of which
is made that dangerous liquor, wine: I call it dangerous, because men very
often drink it to the loss of their health and reason; but temperately used,
its virtues cheer the heart, and enliven the imagination. The best situation,
for a vineyard, is in a dry soil, on the side of a hill, fronting the south:
The method of making wine, is only to tread or squeeze out the juice; let it
stand some time with the husks to ferment, and then tun it up in vessels. There
are various kinds of wine which are generally denominated from the places where
the vines grow; thus Port comes from Portugal, Madeira from the Madeira
Islands, Burgundy and Champaign are the product of those provinces in France.

OF COFFEE.
36. COFFEE berries are the fruit of a tree which grows very plentifully in
Arabia Felix, and is cultivated also in Turkey and some parts of the Levant. The
size of these berries is something bigger than ou^ largest peace, the flower is
like the white jessamin flower, and the leaf like that of the bay. The berries
are of a pale color, and imported to us as they are gathered from the tree; but
before they can be used to make the liquor which we (...) Coffee, they must be
toasted until they ^^come of a deep brown color; and then ground in a mill to
powder. The custom of drinking Coffee is scarce of an hundred years standing in
England* or America; some say Dr. Harvey was the first who used it* others that
one Pasqua a Greek servant* brought into England by Mr. Daniel Edwards, a Turkey
Merchant, in one thousand six hundred and fifty-two, was the first who
introduced it, and opened the first Coffee-house in England.

OF TEA.
37. THE tea tree grows in China, Japan, Siam, and other parts of the
East Indies. It delight^ (...) valleys and stony soil. That which is imported
to us, and of which we make tea, is only the leaves, which are gathered by the
natives in March or April, held over the steam of boiling water to moisten
them, and then laid on copper plates, and dried before the fire, which curls
them up in the manner we see. Its seed is usually sown in places exposed to the
south, and the tree bears three years after sown. The root is somewhat like
that of the peach tree; the leaves are about an inch and a half long, narrow at
the point and jagged all round -- Its flower resembles the wild rose, which,
when blown, is succeeded by a cod not exceeding the size of a hazel nut,
containing two or three seeds, from whence the plant is propagated. The tree is
said to be of various heights, even from one foot to a hundred.

OF THE SUGAR CANE.
38. THE sugar cane is produced in many parts of the West Indies, particularly
the Caribee Islands, as Barbados, Jamaica, Ne^is, etc. It usually grows five
or six feet high, and is about half an inch in diameter. The stem or stock, is
divided by knots a foot and a half apart -- At the top it puts forth a number
of long green leaves, from the middle of which arise the flower and the seed:
when ripe, which is commonly in about ten months, it is found quite full of
white juicy pith, from which is expressed the liquor whereof sugar is made.

39. THE process of making sugar is as follows; after the canes are cut, they
are carried in bundles to the mills, which consists of three wooden rollers,
covered with steel plates, and are wrought either by water, or wind, or cattle,
or slaves. The liquor, when the canes are pressed and broke between the
rollers, runs through a little cannal into the sugar house, and is conveyed
into a copper, heated by a slow fire, just to make it fimmer, where it receives
its first separation. With the liquor is here mixed a quantity of ashes and
quicklime; the effect of which mixture, assisted by the action of fire, is,
that the unctuous parts are separated from the rest, and raised to the top, in
form of a thick scum, which is constantly taken off with a scimmer -- This
done, it is farther purified in a second, third, fourth, and fifth boiller, in
which last it is brought to the consistence of a syrup. Then in a sixth boiller
the syrup receives its full coction, and here all the impurities left by the
former lees are taken away by a new lee, and a water of lime and alum is cast
into it. In this last copper, there is scarce sound one third of what was in
the first, the rest being wasted in scum. By thus passing a number of coppers,
the sugar juice is purified, thickened, and rendered fit to be converted into
any kind of Sugar.

OF BIRDS.
40. If we consider the nature and formation of birds in general, many
reflections will naturally arise, and confirm in our minds the wisdom and
goodness of God, in so wonderfully adapting their power to the uses and ends
they were ordained to serve and pursue.

1st. OF THE EAGLE.
41. THERE are many sorts of Eagles, but that called the Golden-Eagle is chief,
and is commonly reckoned the king of birds. He is found in the deserts of
Arabia, and in the remotest parts of Scythia: He is a bird of great strength,
exceeding bold, and very voracious and fierce, in devouring his prey. He is of
a large size, near four feet long from the point of the bill to the end of the
tail; and betwixt the points of each wing, when extended, near six feet; his
beak is very strong, crooked and sharp, so also are his talons or claws.

42. THEIR common prey are hares, rabbits, ki^s, lambs, etc. But when pressed
by hunger, they will seize on larger animals. His sight is so exceeding sharp
and piercing, that he can see his prey upon the ground, though at ^ver so great
a height in the air, and darts upon it with a surprising rapidity. And as his
eye is of such great use in spying out his prey, nature has contrived to
preserve it with uncommon care, having instead of one, provided it with four
lids or covers. They build their nests generally on the sides of high and,
inaccessible rocks, or on the tops of old decayed large trees, and seldom lay
above two eggs at a time. They live to a prodigious age, some say three hundred
years, but that is probably a mistake.

OF THE OSTRICH.
43. THIS is generally thought to be largest, at least it is one of the tallest
birds in the world, being full as high as a man on horseback. It is found both
in Africa and Arabia, particularly in the sandy deserts of Arabia. The head and
bill resemble those of a duck, their wings are not large enough in proportion
to their body to raise them up from the ground, but serve as sails or oars to
cut through or impel the air, and add great swiftness to their feet, which are
shod with a horny substance, enabling them to tread firmly, and to run a long
time without hurting themselves.

44. THEY are frequently hunted with gray hounds, and when in danger of being
taken, suddenly stop, and let down one of their wings, and covering their whole
body with it, suffer the dog to get his mouth full of feathers, then taking to
their heels again, before the dog can disengage himself from the feathers, they
are got a considerable way before him.

45. What is most remarkable of this bird is, that she lays her eggs in the
sand, and entirely forgetting them, suffers them to be hatched by the heat of
the sun, and quite contrary to all other creatures whatsoever, appears utterly
distitute of parental affection.

OF THE SWALLOW.
46. THIS is one of the most noted of those we call birds of passage, as it is
a domestic bird, dwelling altogether in towns and villages, and building its
nests even in our houses. Of these nests the architecture, the materials, and
their manner of using them, are altogether surprising -- She wants neither
sticks, nor ^ay, nor ligaments of any sort; but wetting her breast and her
wings on the surface of the water, and then shaking the moisture over the dust,
tempers and works it up with her bill into a kind of mortar or cement, with
which she erects a dwelling, equally secure and convenient, and with such
wonderful exactn^ss and regularity, as is not to be imitated by the heart of
man.

47. CONCERNING the migration of some birds, of their disappearance at the end
of summer, naturalists are very much divided; some supposing that they take
wing by consent about the end of September, and fly to some warmer climate; and
others, that they hide themselves in rocks, or caves, or under the surface of
the water, where they have sometimes been found in great numbers hanging
together like bees in a swarm. And that this is the truth of the matter appears
probable also from hence, that at the beginning of the spring season, they are
generally found near rocks or watery places, flying weakly about, as it were to
try their wings after their first revival from their winter sleep.

OF THE DOTTREL.
48. THE dottrel is something less than the plover: it is a very foolish bird,
but excellent meat; and with some accounted a great delicacy. It is taken in
the night (...) by the light of a candle, by imitating the gestures of the
fowler; for if he stretches out an arm, that also stretches out a wing; if he a
^oot, that likewise; in brief, whatever the fowler does, the same does the
bird, and so being intent upon men's gestures, it is deceived, and covered with
the net spread for it. It is accounted a foolish bird, when to a proverb, we
call a foolish, dull person, a dottrel.

Of Quadrupeds, or Four-footed Beasts*
1st. OF THE LION.
49. THE lion, justly styled by all writers* the king of beasts, is generally
of a dun color* but not without some exceptions, as black, white, and red, in
Ethiopia, and some other parts of Africa and Asia. The hair of some of them is
curled, and some long, shagged, and thin. His head is vastly large and strong,
his nose thick, his mouth very wide, his eyes are red, fiery, and hollow, not
very round, nor long, looking awry; his sore feet have five distinct claws on
each foot, and the hinder but four; all crooked, sharp, and exceeding hard. His
sight and smelling are very acute, and he sleeps with his eyes open. He cannot
endure fire.

50. WHEN other wild beasts hear his terrible roaring noise, all are surprised
wi^^ fear, and dare ^ot stir; though he is not without his fear of some
creatures, such as (as is reported the great dogs of India, etc. with which
they hunt and k^ll lions. He is most commonly taken by nets, and other snares.
Lions are thought to be long lived, because many of them have been taken
toothless; but this is no certain sign, as it may proceed from their corrupt
breath, or other causes.

51. THE lioness, the female of the same kind, is found in the same countries,
with the same nature and properties; but has no mane at all, which is proper to
the male only, to whose shoulders and neck it is a great ornament.

52. THE jackall, or wild dog (commonly called the lion's provider) though not
much bigger than a fox, yet is so fierce and ^old, that it seizes on such
beasts, as cows, nogs, sheep, etc. and sometimes it will attack a man. It is
reported, that when this creature seizes his prey, he makes an hideous noise,
which gives notice to the lion, who immediately comes, if within hearing; at
whose sight the jackall goes a little aside, until the lion has fully satisfied
his hunger, and marches off, and then returns to feed on what the lion has
left. His head is like a fox's, and his body like a badger's.

OF THE ELEPHANT.
53. THE elephant is bred in the hot east and south countries; that of India is
the largest, being about thirteen feet high, and seven broad, and is much the
largest of all land animals. It is, for the most part, of a mouse color, or
black. The skin is so hard, that a sharp sword cannot penetrate through it,
especially upon the back. The most tender part being under the belly. Its eyes
are like swines.

54. IT has four teeth on each side, with which it grinds its meat like meal,
besides these, it has two others, which hang out beyond the ^est, in the male
downwards, in the female upwards; those of the male are the largest; those of
the female are smaller, but sharper. One of them it keeps always sharp, to
revenge injuries; and with the other it roots up trees and plants for its meat.
The tooth of the male of this beast grows to be ten feet long; some elephant's
teeth have been seen, that they say have weighed, single, three hundred pounds
weight. The teeth of the female are reckoned more precious than those of the
male. These they lose once in ten years; which falling off, they very carefully
bury in the earth (as is thought) on purpose that men may not find them. The
two teeth hanging out beyond the rest are ivory.

55. THE elephant's tongue is very small, but broad; his trunk, through which
he draws breath, serves as an hand to receive his food; it is crooked, gristly,
and flexible. At the root, next to the nose, in the trunk, are two passages,
one into his body and head, by which he breaths, and the other into his mouth,
whereby he takes in his food. With this he fights in war, and can take up a
small piece of money from the ground. It has joints in its legs, which it can
bend at pleasure. Its feet are round like a horse's, and vastly broad.

56. IT is a great lover of wine, and will drink (if fame be true) about
fourteen gallons at a time, of either wine or water. It goes with young,
according to some writers, three years, and others, but two; and brings forth
but one at a time, and that but a little bigger than a calf, and grows until
thirty. When it crosses a river the (...) takes her young up with her snout,
with which she grasps it, and carries it safe over.

57. THE female is more strong and courageous than the male, and will bear ^
greater burden; but in war the male is (...) ^^^ceful, because ^aller. When it
is most loaded it will go swift; and can carry a wooden tower upon his back,
and thirty men, with their ammuniton and provisions of war. It is one of the
most docile of all animals, and may be taught to do many things. If it receives
no hurt, it will live an hundred years, and sometimes two hundred. The blood of
the elephant is observed to be the coldest of all animals.

OF THE ZEBRA.
58. 1st. There are three animals of the horse kind. The horse, which is the
most stately and courageous; the ass, which is the most patient and humble; and
the zebra which is the most beautiful, but at the, same time the wildest animal
in nature -- Nothing can exceed the delicate regularity of this creature's
color, or the lustrous smoothness of its skin; but on the other hand nothing
can be more timid and untameable.

59. ^d. IT is chiefly a native of (...) s^^thern parts of Africa; and th^^^
are (...) ^^rds of them often seen s^^^ing in (...) extensive plains that ^e
toward the (...) Good Hope. However, their (...) is such, that they will
suffer nothing to come near them; and their ^^iftness so great t^^t they
readily leave every pu^suer f^r behind. The zebra, in shape, rather resembles
the mule than the horse or the ass -- It is rather less than the former, and
yet larger than the latter: its ears are not so long as those of the ass, and
yet not so small as in the horse kind: like the ass its back is straight, its
le^s finely placed, and its ^^^l tusted at the end like the horse; its s^^n is
smooth and close, and its hind quarters round and fles^^.

60. 3d. BUT its greatest beauty lies in the amazing regularity and elegance of
its colors. In the male, they are white and brown, in the female, white and
black: those colors are disposed in alternate stripes over the whole body, and
with such exactness and symmetry, that one would think nature had employed the
rule and compass to paint them. These stripes, which like so many ribbands are
laid all over its body, are narrow, parallel, and exactly separated from each
other. It is not here as in other party colored animals, where the tints are
blended into each other; every stripe here is perfectly distinct, and preserves
it color round the body or the limb, without any diminution. In this manner
are the head, the body, the thighs, the legs, and even the tail and ears
beautifully ^^reaked, so that at a little distance one would be apt to suppose,
that the animal was dressed out by a^^, and not th^^ admirably adorned by
nature.

61. 4th. SUCH is the beauty of this creature, that it seems by nature fitted
to satisfy the pride and the pleasure of man, and formed to be taken into his
service. Hitherto, however, it appears to have disdained servitude, and neither
force nor kindness have been able to wean it from its native independance and
ferocity: but this wildness might, perhaps, in time be surmounted; and it is
probable the horse and the a^s, when first taken from the forest, were equally
obstinate, f^erce, and unmanageable.

OF THE SHEEP.
62. A SHEEP is a creature universally known, being one of the chief for human
food -- The wool ^s of great use for clothing. Most countries have plenty of
this creature, but none exceed the English sheep. They seldom live ten years,
though a creature of a moderate size and well covered; and sharing but a very
small proportion of gall, yet their coat is exceedingly curled, beyond that of
any other animal -- It is a creature subject to diseases, and seldom lives out
its full course. She goes with young about twenty weeks.

63. THE African sheep are (...) like ours, but not near so big; the (...) have
no wool; but that want is suppli^^ with hair, so that here the world seems
inverted, the sheep being hairy and the men woolly. They are but a dry and
indifferent sort of meat.

OF THE POTTO.
64. THE potto (so called by the negroes, but by the English sluggard, from its
lazy sluggish nature; a whole day being little enough for it to advance ten
steps forward is said, when he climbs a tree, not to leave it until he has
eaten up, not only the fruit, but the leaves also, and then descends fat and in
good case; but before he can get up another tree, he becomes very lean, at
least, if he does not perish with hunger. It is such a horrible ugly creature,
that scarce any thing besides can be found so disagreeable.

OF THE LAMIA.
65. THE lamia, concerning which there are many fictions stories, is (according
to the opinion of some writers) the creature mentioned in the 34th chap. of
Isaiah, called in the Hebrew lilith; as also the same which is mentioned in the
4th of Lamentations. It is thought to be the swiftest of all four-footed
creatures; so that its prey (...) seldom or eve^ escape it; and by its f^^^^d
it distroys men, for when it sees a man it lays open its breast, and entices
him to draw near, and when it has him within reach, it falls upon him and
devours him. It is said to be bred in Le bia, and to have a face and breasts
like a very beautiful woman. It has no voice but that of hissing like a serpent
-- Its hinder parts are like a goats, its fore legs like a bears; its body is
sealed all over -- It is said they sometimes devour their own young.

OF THE MANTICORA.
66. THE manticora, or (according to the Persians) mantiora, a devourer, is
bred among the Indians; having a triple row of teeth beneath and above, and in
bigness and roughness like a lions; as are his feet; his face and ears like a
man's; his tail like a scorpions, armed with a sting, and sharp pointed quills
-- His voice is like a small trumpet or pipe -- He is so wild that it is very
difficult to ^ame him; and ^s swift as an heart. With his tail he wounds the
hunters, whether they come before or behind him -- When the Indians take a
whelp of this beast, they bruise its buttocks and tail, to prevent its bearing
the short quills; then it is tamed without danger.

OF THE BISON.
67. THE bison, or wild ox, is bred chiefly in the northern parts of the world,
viz. Muscovy, Scythia, etc. It is as big as a bull or ox, being maned about the
back and neck like a lion; and his hair down under his chin, or nether lip,
like a large beard; and a rising, or little ridge, down along his face, from
his forehead to his nose, very hairy; his horns are large, very sharp, and
turning ^^wards his back, like those of a wild goat on the Alps. It is of such
great strength, that it can (if some writers may be believed) toss an horse and
horseman. With his tongue, which is hard and rough, like a file, it can draw a
man to him, whom, by licking, he can wound to death. Its hair is red, yellow,
or black; its eyes very large and fierce. It smells like a m^sk cat. Its flesh
is very fat in summer time but not good to eat, being strong. The blood is
thought to be the purest in the world, excelling in color, any purple.

OF THE CROCODILE.
68. THE crocodile is a creature that lives on land and water. Its color is
like to saffron, that is, between yellow and red, but more inclining to yellow.
The belly is somewhat whiter than the other parts. Its body is rough, being
covered all over with a certain bark, or rind, so thick, firm, and strong, that
it will not yield and especially upon the back) unto a cart wheel, when the
cart is loaded; and in all the upper parts, and the tail, it is impenetrable by
a dart, or spear; but the belly is softer, wherein it receives wounds more
easily. The covering of its back is distinguished into diverse divided shells,
standing up far above the flesh; b^^ on the belly it is more smooth.

69. THE head of this beast is very broad, and his s^out like a swines. When it
eats, or biteth, it never moves the under chap. The opening of the mouth
reaches to the place of his ears. Its teeth are white, long, sharp, a little
crooked, and hollow. It h^^ sixty joints, or bones, on the back, wh^^^ are tied
together by so many ligaments. The tail is near as long as the whole body, and
the same is also rough, and armed with hard skin on the upper part, and the
sides; but beneath it is smooth and tender. It has fins upon the tail, by the
benefit whereof it swimeth; as also by the help of its feet, which are like a
bears, except that they are covered with scales instead of hair. Its nails arc
very sharp and strong.

70. IT is doubtful whether it has any place of excrement, except the mouth.
By reason of the shortness of its legs, his pace is very slow; and therefore it
is not very difficult for a man to escape from him by f^ight; especially if he
does not go straight forward, but turns and winds out of the direct path; for
the crocodile's body is so hard and stiff that it cannot easily turn and wind
after him. It brings forth young every year, and lays its eggs (which are about
as big as a gooses) in the earth or dry land. -- During the space of three
score days it lays every day an egg; and within the like space of time they are
hatched into young ones, by sitting or lying upon them by course, the male one
while, and the female another; which is in a moderate and temperate season:
otherwise they perish and come to nothing. So soon as the young ones are
hatched they instantly fall into the water. The crocodile is thought to live
sixty years.

71. SOME have thought that the alligator (of which there are many in Georgia
and South Carolina are a distinct species of the crocodile; but it is the
received opinion of naturalists, that it is ^o other than a crocodile not
arrived to its full growth. There are many crocodiles in Egypt, about the river
Nile, in the West Indies, etc. Those about the Nile are much the largest; some
of them being according to very credible testimony) not less than thirty feet
long.

OF THE SKUNK.
72. THIS most singular animal inhabits the American woods, and is remarkable
for the peculiar fluid which it emits, when pursued ^s enemies, f^r the sake of
defe^^ing itself. Its flesh, when properly dressed* is very good eating. Its
(...) is cove^^^ with a co^rse kind of hair or fur. Mr. Carver, has given a
particular account of this animal, in his travels; but an accurate diffection
of it was made lately by Dr. Mitchell, who sound the odoriferous matter to be
contained in two bags situated in the posterior parts of the body, and
surrounded by the circular muscles in such a manner that by their contr^ction,
the ^^^id is forced out with great velocity and to a considerable distance. The
urinary organs are totally distinct from these bags. This pecu^^ar substance
medically administered is said to be good for a^as, and other spasmodi^
disorders; and from its analogy to musk, ambergris and civet, it is highly
probable that it possesses no small degree of virtue. [ See American M^^^^m.]

OF THE RACOON.
73. THIS Animal, is in shape and size, somewhat like a fox; its fur, or (...),
is also like that animals; the males have a large whitish stripe, and the
females a smaller one, that runs across the forehead: this little animal is
very difficult to catch, from its great d^^^^rity in (...) up (...) to (...)
its pursuers.

OF THE OPPOSUM.
74. THE opposum is in shape and size something like the badger, but rather of
a lighter color; its feet and tail, resemble those of a rat; the skin of its
belly, or rather its false belly, is very large, and so rarely constructed that
it can open and shut it at pleasure, like the mouth of a purse; in this strange
repository, it secures its offspring while young; who will naturally run
thither when apprehensive of any danger. The three last described animals, are
peculiar to America.

OF FISHES.
1st. OF THE WHALE.
75. OF all the inhabitants of the water, the whale is the largest,
particularly those found in the north seas, which are some of them 200 feet in
length, and of a bulk proportionable. Its head is about one third part of its
whole length, on the top of which is a bump, called the hovil, in which are two
spout holes, from whence, either in sport, or when wounded, he throws the water
with such force, that it roars like a hollow wind, or the sea in a storm, and
may be heard at the distance of a league. His eyes are not much bigger than
those of an ox, and placed near the corner of his mouth.

76. THE flesh is coarse, hard, and lean, the fat lying only between the flesh
and skin; that which we call the whale bone is found in the mouth and throat;
in every whale perhaps 500 pieces, each fifteen feet long. They never have more
than two young ones at a time, and how long they go with young is uncertain.
The ^^ug, called spermaceti, is the brain of the ^^ale refined and purified by
several meltings. All that the fishermen concern themselves with, is the
blubber, or fat, the whale bone, and the brain; the lean part of the carcass is
left upon the ice, for the bears, who are very fond of it.

77. THE manner of taking them is with a harpoon, or harping iron, which is a
large iron spear, or javelin, five or six feet long, with a triangular point,
barbbed like an arrow. This the harpooner throws at the head of the whale with
all his force, a line being fastened to it, and if he is so lucky as to
penetrate the flesh, immediately they let out the line, and the whale dives to
the bottom with great swiftness; but coming up again for breath, they wound him
a fresh, until growing faint, with the loss of blood, they at length venture so
near him as to thrust a long lance under his gills into his breast, which soon
dispatches him.

OF THE SHARK.
78. THE Shark is very large, and reckoned the boldest of all fish^^
Rod^l^tias, says, that he saw a middling one, that weighed near ten hundred
weight. Gillius says, that he was very credibly informed, that a fish of this
sort, not weighing less than four thousand ^et pounds, being dissected, had a
whole man found in his belly; and that the people of Marseilles told him, they
had cau^ht one in which they found a man armed with a coat of mail. The head
and mouth of this fish are large in proportion to the body; the number of its
teeth varies according to its age; it having been observed, by men worthy of
credit, that this kind breeds new teeth every year, as long as it lives: It has
three rows of teeth, hard, strong, and sharp; it is common in the West Indies,
etc. and very destructive to those who divert themselves by swiming, for it
sometimes bites a man asunder, at other times, takes away a limb, etc. it is
often catched by sailors. When it seizes its prey, it turns itself on its back.

OF SERPENTS.
OF THE DART.
79. THE dart is so called from his saying like an arrow, from the tops of
trees, and hedges, upon men, by which means he stings and wounds them to death.
It is bred in Lybia, Rhodes, Italy, Sicily, Germany, and some other countries.
(...) in thickness about the bigness of a man's larger, and proportionable in
length. The top of the back is black, and (...) two black lines in the middle
from head to tail. The body is of an ash color, full of r^und black spots, no
bigger than the seed of lentiles, each spot having a circle about it, like an
eye; the belly is white, of this kind some think was the viper which came upon
the hand of St. Paul -- Some also conjecture, that of this sort were the fiery
serp^nts sent by God Almighty to annoy the rebellious Israelites in the
wilderness.

OF THE COCKATRICE.
80. THE Cockatrice is called the king of serpents, not from his bigness, for
he is much inferior in this respect, to a great many serpents; but because of
his majestic pace, for he does not creep upon the ground like other serpents,
but goes half upright, for which cause all other serpents avoid him* and it
seems, nature designed him for that pre-eminence, by the crown or coronet upon
his head. Writers differ concerning the production of this animal, some are of
opinion, that it is brought forth by a cocks egg, which is generated of the
putrefied feed of an old cock, and sat upon by a snake or toad, and so becomes
a cockatrice.

81. IT is said to be about half a soot in length; the hinder part like a
serpent, the fore part like a cock. Others are of opinion, that the cock that
lays the egg sits upon, and hatches it himself. These monsters are bred in
Africa, and some other parts of the world. Authors differ about the bigness of
it; some say it is a span in compass, and half a foot long; others will have it
to be three or four feet long, and some the thickness of a man's wrist, and
proportionable in length. The eyes of a cockatrice are red. Its poison is so
strong, that there is no cure for it. As all other serpents are afraid of the
fight and hissing of a cockatrice, so is the cockatrice itself very fearful of
a weasel, which, after it has eaten rue, will set upon, and destroy the
cockatrice. Besides this little animal, it is said, there is no other creature
in the world able to contend with it. The poison insects the air to such a
degree, that no other creature can live near him. It kills, not only by his
touch, but by fight and hissing.

OF INSECTS.
OF THE SILKWORM.
82. THE silkworm is produced from a small egg, not much bigger than a
mustardseed, is of a pale ash color, and feeds on mulberry leaves, or for the
want of those, on the leaves of lettuces. During its continuance in this form,
it suffers four sicknesses, each lasting about three days, wherein it seeds not
at all, but grows thicker, shorter, and clearer, and in each sickness changes
its skin. Soon after this it begins to wind itself up into a silken bag or
case, about the size of a pigion's egg, in which state it lies enclosed about
fifteen or twenty days without any food, and seemingly without life or motion,
and is there transformed into an aurelia, or chrysalis, and eating itself a
passage out of the end of its silken sepulcher, becomes a moth, which is its
last state, the state in which it lays its eggs and dies. These eggs are kept
for about ten months, until the proper season returns, which is the beginning
of May, and then hatch of themselves into silk worms.

83. THOSE who keep these insects, never suffer them to eat their way out of
their habitation, because that spoils their work; but toward the end of their
continuance in that state, they wind the silk from off them, and the enclosed
worm assumes its new state of a moth, as well as if it had continued the whole
time in its silken covering. The quantity of silk generally wound from one of
these balls or cases, is about nine hundred and thirty yards; but so extremely
fine is the thread, that the weight of it is not above two grains and an half.

OF THE POLYPE.
84. THIS wonderful creature was but very lately disco^^^ed, and the accounts
of it are so extremely surprising, that many people, for a time were do^btful
of their truth, and with great difficulty gave credit to them. It is a small
insect ^ound in ^itches, or watery places; its ^^^ly is a kind of h^llow tube,
or trunk* at the interior end of which is placed several a^ms, with which it
seizes its prey. It genera^ly fastens itself, at the posterior end, to some
plant or leaf, from which it sus^ends and contracts, or extends its body and
arms at pleasure.

85. THEY are vo^acious animals, and will swallow a wo^m twice or th^ice their
own length. If the wo^m comes end ways, it is sw^^^^ed in that manner;
otherwise it goes (...) double* and makes several foldings in (...) ^^omach*
which extends wider, fully large for its reception. The worm soon dies there,
and after it has be^^^ squeezed or sucked, is ^^ded by the (...) They produce
their young by a kind of v^getation from the inter^o^ p^rts of their (...)* it
is common to see five or six growing (...) time, and when one d^ops off,
another co^^s in its place.

86. BUT the most su^prising part of the history of this insect is, that cut it
into what parts you plea^e, each part becomes a comp^ete polype. If you cut it
in two, the head part produces a tail, and the t^^l part produces a head and
arms, sometimes in twenty-four hours space, if the weather is warm, but
generally in two or three days. If you cut it in three, the head and tail parts
produce as before, and the middle produces both a head and a tail. If you cut
it length way through the head, stomach, and body, each part is a half pipe,
with half a head, half a mouth, and some of the arms; the edges of these half
pipes gradually round themselves and unite, beginning at the tail end, and the
half mouth and half stomach of each becomes complete, and in a few hours they
will devour worms as long as themselves. If you take a polype, and turn it
inside out as you would a stocking, the out side will become the in, and the
inside will become the out, and the creature will eat and live as well as ever.

OF THE WHEAT INSECT.
87. TH^^ insect has for several years been very destructive to the wheat of
New York, and several of the other states. It is shaped like a s^y, and from an
opinion that it was brought into this country by the Germans, at the beginning
of the late war, has been called the Hessian Fly. It breeds five or six times a
year, and makes dreadful work in the green and growing wheat, by gnawing and
sqeezing the straw, and thereby disabling it to transmit the nutritive juices
to the blade. Col. Morgan, of New Jersey, has been very diligent in his
enquiries, into the history of this destructive insect; and has published
several valuable communications respecting it; but its more particular and
accurate [ See American Magazine] history, has been given by Dr. Mitchell, who
has not long since, forwarded specimens of it to some eminent naturalists [ See
Gazette of the United States.] in Europe, that it may be thoroughly examined,
and properly classified. It is clear from this gentleman's account, that it
does not, like the Weavil, prey upon the grain, but only upon the plant; and
that the best way to guard against its attacks, is to manure the land richly,
and sow the seed as late as the season will admit. The insect for two years,
has been rather on the decline, but it is doubtful, whether the country will
ever get entirely rid of it.

PART III. OF ELOCUTION.
ELOCUTION consists ^n a proper choice, and arrangement of words, as well as of
ideas; and enables us to convey our sentiments with accuracy, energy, and
conviction.

THE component parts of elocution are -- composition, elegance, tropes,
figures, etc.

1. COMPOSITION regards grammatical accuracy and propriety, by imitating the
phrase and order of words made use of by the most approved authors, in the
style we would wish to write, whether it be the humble or sublime, etc. or
whether the subject be philosophical, oratorical, or poetical.

2. ELEGANCE consists in the purity, accuracy, and politeness of language; and
is chiefly acquired by studying the correctest writers, conversing with men of
taste and refinement, and by frequent and accurate compositions.

3. A TROPE, is the accurate and elegant adorning of a word, by changing its
plain and native sense to a relative and improved one.

Examples of Tropes; taken from Scripture.
4. METAPHOR. Metaphor is the changing of a word, or sentence, from a natural
to a figurative sense.
-- The Lord is my rock; that is, my support. I am the true vine; that is, the
Savior. Then shall the trees of the wood sing out, at the presence of the Lord
-- The lion of the tribe of Juda.

5. METONYMY. Metonymy implies a changing, or the putting of one name or thing
for another.
-- They have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them; that ^s, the writings
of Moses and the Prophets, For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye do show the Lord's death until he come; that is, the contents of this
cup. But the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison.

6. IRONY. Irony implies, speaking contrary to what we think, by way of
ce^ision, or mockery to him we argue or talk with.
-- Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes* but, know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment. Go and cry unto the God^ whom ye have chosen; let them deliver you in
the time of your tribulation. And it came to pass, at noon, that Elijah mocked
them [the Prophets of Baal] and said, cry aloud; for he is a God; either he is
talking, or he is pursuing, or he is on a journey, or, peradventure, he
sleeps, and must be awaked.

7. A FIGURE is a certain mode of adorning speech, so as to convey our ideas
(or express the passions) in a more emphatical manner than that which is
natural and common.

Examples of Figures; taken from Scripture.
8. APOSTROPHE. Apostrophe signifies a digression; by which things animate or
inanimate, persons pres^ntor absent, are addressed or appealed to, as if they
were sensible or present.
-- I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy; why art thou
cast down, my soul! hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him. Come now, and
let us reason together -- ^aith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow; though they be ^^d like crimson, they shall be as
wool.

9. CLIMAX. Climax implies a gr^tion from one thing to another; as I (...), I
(...), I conque^ed.
-- And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also; knowing that
tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and
hope makes not ash^ed. For I am per^^aded, that neither de^h, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, ^or powers, (...) present, nor thi^ to come, (...),
nor depth, nor a^ other (...) able to separate (...) from the love (...) which
is in Christ su^r Lord ^ro man glory (...) m^n, for all (...); w^ether ^l, or
Apo^s (...), world, or life, or death (...) or things to come; (...) are yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

10. PARABLE. A parable implies a continued similitude* or comparison.
-- ^s snow in summer, and rain in winter, (...) is honor not seemly for a
fool. B^essed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly; he
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his
fruit in his season: his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does
shall prosper. The ungodly are not so, but are like the chaff which the wind
drives away. He that passes by, and meddleth with strife, belonging not to
him, is like one that takes a dog by the ear. Solomon.

OF PRONUNCIATION.
11. PRONUNCIATION, or the ornaments of utterance and gesture, consists in the
judicious and elegant management of the voice and countenance; and a graceful
action of the body and hands. The following quotation, taken from Dr. Blair's
lectures, contain some excellent observations on this branch of eloc^tion.

12. "WHEN speaking in public, one should study to preserve as much dignity as
possible in the whole attitude of the body. An erect posture is generally to be
chosen; standing firm, so as to have the fullest and freest command of all his
motions; any inclination which is used, should be forward toward the hearers,
which is a natural expression of earnestness. As for the countenance, the chief
rule is, that it should correspond with the nature of the discourse, and when
no particular emotion is expressed, a serious and manly look is always best.
The eyes should never be fixed close on any one object, but move easily round
the audience.

13. IN the motions made with the hands, consists the chief part of gesture in
speaking. The ancients condemned all motions performed with the left hand
alone; but I am not sensible that these are always offensive, though it is
natural for the right hand to be more frequently employed. Warm emotions demand
the motion of both hands corresponding together: but whether one gesticulates
with one or both hands, it is an important rule that all his motions should be
free and easy. Narrow and straitened movements are generally ungraceful, for
which reason motions made with the hands are directed to proceed from the
shoulder, rather than from the elbow.

14. PERPENDICULAR movements too, with the hands, that is, in a straight line
up and down, which Shakespeare, in Hamlet, calls, "sawing the air with the
hand," are seldom good. Oblique motions are in general the most graceful. Too
sudden and nimble motions, should be likewise avoided. Earnestness can be fully
expressed without them. Shakespeare's directions on this head are full of good
sense; "Use all gently," says he, "And in the very torrent and tempest of
passion, acquire a temperance that may give it smoothness."

OF DISPOSITION.
15. DISPOSITION signifies, the proper ranging of the parts of an oration, in
an accurate and methodical ^ner.

16. THE component parts of an oration, or declamation, are the following, viz.

Exordium, or introduction to the whole subject.

THE narration, or a brief history of our subject, in as plain, pleasing, and
short a manner as possible.

THE proposition, or sum of the whole matter or subject in dispute.

THE confirmation, which tends to corroborate our subject, with all the force
of arguments that we can procure, from reason and invention.

THE rhetorician's mode of ranging their subject, is somewhat similar to that
of the Military General's in arranging their troops; that is, they place the
strongest in the front, the weakest in the center; and reserve a few of their
best to the last; to vanquish their adversary, or cover the retreat, as
occasion may require.

THE refutation, or confutation, which answers all our antagonists arguments,
by making them appear to be false or absurd.

THE peroration, or conclusion of the whole, which by suming up the principal
arguments made use of, should tend to move the passions of our audience, so as
to persuade them to acknowledge the force and conviction of them.

17. THE following Precepts, if duly observed will greatly assist the Young
Student, in the delivery of an Oration: "VARY your tone, just as your subjects
go;
"(...) not, nor pitch your voice too high nor low:
"Strai^ not, nor speak your words too fast nor slow.
"What ever different point your words demand,
"In joy, grief, hope, or fear; with art command.
"Your body's gesture, countenance, and hand.
"Adorn with tropes and figures, your oration;
"By voice and action, grace pronunciation.
"These rules of old discovered, not devised,
"Are nature st^, but nature m^thodiz'd*
"Follow then nature, and your judgment f^ame
"By her just standard, which is still the same:
"Un-erring nature, still divinely bright,
"One clear unchang^, and universal light."


ORATIONS AND HARANGUES. ST. Paul's inimitable Oration, or Defense, before King
Agrippa and F^st^s, the Roman Governor in Judea, as recorded in the
New Testament* Acts 26.
18. EXORDIUM. I think myself happy, King Agrippa, in as much as I shall answer
for myself this day before thee, touching all the things whereof I am accused
of the Jews; especially, because I know thee to be expert in all customs and
questions which are among the Jews; wherefore I beseech thee to hear me
patiently.

19. NARRATION. -- My manner of life from my youth, which was at first among
mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews which knew me from the
beginning (if they would testify) that after the straitest sect of our
religion, I lived a Pharisee. And now I stand, and am judged for the hope of
the promise made by God unto our fathers; unto which promise our twelve tribes,
instantly serving God, day and night, hope to come; for which hope's sake, King
Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews.

20. PROPOSITION. -- Why should it be thought, a thing incredible with you,
that God should raise the dead? when God himself has given assurance of it unto
all men, in that he has raised Christ from the dead.

21. CONFIRMATION. -- As for my own part, most noble Festus, I own, I once
verily thought, that even I myself ought to do many things contrary to the name
of Jesus of Nazareth. Which things I also did in Jerusalem. I punished the
saints, often, in every, synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being
exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them, even unto strange cities. In
pursuit of which, as went to Damascus, with authority and commission from the
chief priests, at midday, O King, I saw, on the way, a light from Heaven,
above the brightness of the sun, shinin^ round about me, and them which
journeyed with me. And when we were all fallen to the earth I heard a voice
speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? It is hard for thee to ki^ against the pricks. And I said, Who art the
Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom the persecutest. But rise and stand upon thy
feet; for I have appeared unto thee, for this purpose, to make thee a minister
and a witness both of these things which thou have seen, and of these things in
which I will appear unto thee. Whereupon, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient
to the heavenly vision: But showed first to them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem,
and throughout all the coast of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they
should repent and turn to God.

22. REFUTATION. For these causes the Jews caught me in the temple, and went
about to kill me -- Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue until
this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no other things than those
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come: that Christ should suffer,
and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should show
light unto the people, and to the Gentiles.

23. PERORATION. THIS, most excellent auditors, is the real truth: Believe me,
I am no pestilent fellow, nor mover of sedition; but always endeavor, as much
as in me lies, to preserve a conscience void of offense toward God and toward
man: Neither can the Jews prove the things whereof they now accuse me. Nor am
I, Festus, beside myself; but speak thus freely before the king, because he
knows these things to be true, yea, I am fully persuaded the king knows them
all to be true; for they were not done in a corner. King Agrippa, believe
thou the prophets? I know that thou believe. And would to God, that not only
thou, but also all that hear me this day, were altogether such as I am, except
these bonds.

To ART.
24. O ART! thou distinguishing attribute and honor of human kind! who art not
only able to imitate nature in her graces, but even to adorn her with graces of
thine own! possessed of thee, the meanest genius grows deserving, and has a
just demand for a portion of our esteem: Devoid of thee, the brightest of our
kind lie lost and useless, and are but poorly distinguished from the most
despicable and base. When we inhabited forests in common with brutes, nor
otherwise known from them than by the figure of our species, thou taughtest us
to assert the sovereignty of our nature, and to assume that empire, for which
Providence intended us. Thousands of elegancies, pleasures and joys, owe their
birth to thee; without which, life itself would be but an insipid possession.

25. WIDE and extensive is the reach of thy dominion. No element is there
either so violent or so subtle, so yielding or so sluggish, as, by the powers
of its nature, to be superior to thy direction. Thou dreadest not the fierce
impetuosity of fire, but compellest ^s violence to be both obedient and useful.
By it thou softenest the stubborn tribe of minerals, so as to be formed and
molded into shapes innumerable. Hence weapons, armor, coin; and, previous to
these, others of thy works and energies: Hence all those various tools and
instruments, which empower thee to proceed to farther ends more excellent. Nor
is the subtle air less obedient to thy power; whether thou willest it to be a
minister to our pleasure, or utility. At thy command it gives birth to sounds,
which charm the soul with all the powers of harmony. Under thy instruction, we
cross the seas; while that yielding element, where, otherwise, we sink (even
water itself) (...) by thee taught to bear us; the ^^st ocean promotes that
intercourse of nations, which ignorance would imagine it was destined to
intercept. To say how thy influence is seen on earth, would be to teach the
meanest what he knows already. Suffice it but to mention, fields of arable and
pasture; lawns, groves, and gardens; cottages, villages, castles, towns,
palaces, temples, and spacious cities.

26. NOR does thy empire end in subjects thus inanimate: Its power also extends
through the various race of animals; who, either patiently submit to become thy
slaves, or are sure to find thee an irresistible foe. The faithful dog, the
patient ox, the generous horse, and the mighty elephant, are content, all, to
receive their instructions from thee, and readily to lend their natural
instincts or strength, to perform those offices, which thy occasions call for.
If there be found any species which are serviceable when dead, thou suggestest
the means to investigate and take them: If any be so savage as to refuse being
tamed, or of natures fierce enough to venture an attack, thou teach us to
scorn their brutal rage, to meet, repel, pursue, and conquer.

27. SUCH, O art! is thy amazing influence, when thou art employed only in
these inferior subjects, on nature inanimate, or at best irrational: But
whenever thou causest a subject more noble, and employest thyself in
cultivating the mind itself, then it is th^^ becomest truly amiable and divine*
the ever ^lowing source of those sublimer beauties, of which no subject, but
mind alone is capable Then it is thou art enabled to exhibit to mankind the
admired tribe of poets and orators; the sacred train of patriots and heroes;
the godlike list of philosophers and legislators; the forms of virtues and
equal polities, where private welfare is made the same with public, where
crowds themselves prove disinterested, and virtue is made a national and
popular characteristic.

28. Hail! sacred source of all these wonders! thyself instruct me to praise
thee worthily, through whom, whatever we do is done with elegance and beauty;
without whom, what we do is graceless and deformed. Venerable power! by what
name shall I address thee? shall I call thee ornament of mind, or art thou more
truly mind itself? it is mind thou art, most perfect mind; not rude, untaught,
but fair and polished: In such thou dwell; of such thou art the form; nor is
it a thing more possible to separate thee from such, than it would be to
separate thee from thy own existence.

HARRIS. SCIPIO TO THE ROMANS.
29. ON this day, tribunes and Roman citizens! I gained a signal victory, in
Africa, over Hannibal and the Carthaginians. Since then, such a day ought to be
free from strife and litigation, I shall immediately go from hence to the
capitol to pay my adorations to the highest Jove, to Juno, Minerva, and the
other Deities who preside over the sacred citadel; and I shall return them
thanks, that both on this day, and many times beside, they have inspired me
with the spirit and ability of doing essential service to the republic. Let
such of you, too, as have leisure, accompany me; and pray the Gods that you may
ever have leaders like myself. For, as from the term of seventeen years, to the
decline of life, you have always out gone my age by the honors conferred on me,
so I have anticipated your honors by my actions.

LIVY. IN PRAISE OF VIRTUE.
30. VIRTUE is of intrinsic value and good desert, and of indispensible
obligation; not the creature of will, but necessary and immutable; not local or
temporary, but of equal extent and antiquity with the divine mind; not a mode
of sensation, but everlasting truth; not dependent on power, but the guide of
all power.

31. VIRTUE is the foundation of honor and esteem; and the source of all
beauty, order, and happiness in nature. It is what confers value on all the
other endowments and qualities of a reasonable being, to which they ought to be
absolutely subservient, and without which the more eminent they are, the more
hideous deformities, and the greater curses they become. The use of it is not
confined to any one stage of our existence, or to any particular situation we
may be in, but reaches through all the periods and circumstances of our beings.

32. MANY of the endowments and talents we now possess, and of which we are too
apt to be proud, will cease entirely with the present state; but this will be
our ornament and dignity in every future state to which we may be removed.
Beauty and wit will die, learning will vanish away, and all the arts of life be
soon forgot; but virtue will remain for ever.

33. THIS unites us to the whole rational creation, and fits us for conversing
with any order of superior natures, and for a place in any part of God's works.
It procures us the approbation and love of all wise and good beings, and
renders them our allies and friends. -- But what is of unspeakably greater
consequence is, that it makes God our friend, assimilates and unites our minds
to his, and engages his almighty power in our defense: Superior beings of all
ranks are bound by it no less than ourselves. It has the same authority in all
worlds that it has in this. The farther any being is advanced in excellence and
perfection, the greater is his attachment to it, and the more he is under its
influence. To say no more, it is the law of the whole universe; it stands first
in the estimation of the Deity; its original is his nature; and it is the very
object that makes him lovely.

34. Such is the importance of virtue -- Of what consequence, therefore, is it,
that we practice it! there is no argument or motive, which is at all fitted to
influence a reasonable mind, which does not call us to this. -- One virtuous
disposition of soul is preferable to the greatest natural accomplishments and
abilities, and of more value than all the treasures of the world. If you are
wise, then study virtue, and contemn every thing that can come in competition
with it. Remember, that nothing else deserves one anxious thought or wish.
Remember, that this alone is honor, glory, wealth, and happiness. Secure this,
and you secure every thing; lose this, and all is lost.

PRICE. DESCRIPTIVE PIECES.
Character of the Virtuous Man.
35. HE who, in his youth, improves his intellectual powers in the search of
truth and useful knowledge; and refines and strengthens his moral and active
powers, by the love of virtue, for the service of his friend, his country, and
mankind; who is animated by true glory, exalted by sacred friendship for
social, and softened by virtuous love for domestic life; who lays his heart
open to every other mild and generous affection, and who, to all these adds a
sober masculine piety, equally remote from superstition and enthusiasm -- that
man enjoys the most agreeable youth; and lays in the richest fund for the
honorable action, and happy enjoyment of the succeeding periods of life.

36. HE who, in manhood, keeps the defensive and private passions under the
wisest restraint; who forms the most select and virtuous friendships; who seeks
after fame, wealth and power, in the road of truth and virtue; and if he cannot
find them in that road, generously despises them; who, in his private character
and connections, gives fullest scope to the tender and manly passions, and in
his public character and connections, serves his country and mankind, in the
most upright and disinterested manner; who, in fin^, enjoys the goods of life
with the greatest moderation, bears its ills with the greatest fortitude; and
in those various circumstances of duty and trial, maintains and expresses an
habitual and supreme reverence and love of God; that man is the worthiest
character in this stage of life; passes through it with the highest
satisfaction and dignity; and paves the way to the most easy and honorable old
age.

37. FINALLY, he who, in the decline of life, preserves himself most exempt
from the chagrins incident to that period; cherishes the most equal and kind
affections; uses his experience, wisdom and authority, in the most fatherly,
and venerable manner; acts under a sense of the inspection, and with a view to
the approbation of his maker; is daily aspiring after immortality, and ripening
a pace for it; and having sustained his part, quits the stage with a modest and
graceful triumph; this is the best, this is the happiest old man. Therefore
that whole life of youth, manhood, and old age, which is spent after this
manner, is the best and the happiest life.

FORDYCE. THE HERMIT.
38.
AT the close of the day, when the hamlet is still,
And mortal^ the sweets of forgetfulness prove
When naught but the torrent is heard on the hill,
And naught but the nightingale's heard in the grove.
'Twas then, by the cave of a mountain, reclined,
An hermit his nightly complaint thus began:
Though mournful his voice, his heart was resigned.
39.
HE thought as a sage, but he felt as a man.
Ha! why thus abandoned to darkness and woe,
Why thus, lonely Philomel, ^lows thy sad strain*
For Spring shall return, and a lover bestow,
And thy bosom no trace of misfortunes retain.
Yet, if pity inspire thee, ah! cease not thy lay,
Mourn, sweetest complainer, man calls thee to mourn:
O sooth him, whose pleasures like thine pass away,
Full quickly they pass -- but they never return.
40.
NOW gliding remote, on the verge of the sky,
The moon half extinguished her crescent displays:
But lately I marked when majesty on high,
She shone, and the planets were lost in her blaze.
Roll on, thou fair orb, and with gladness pursue,
The path that conducts thee to splendour again.
But man's faded glory no change shall renew,
Ha, fool! to exult in a glory so vain!
It Is night, and the landscape is lovely no more;
I mourn, but, ye woodlands, I mourn not for you;
For morn is approaching, your charms to restore,
Perfumed with fresh fragrance, and glitt^ing with dew.
Nor yet for the ravage of winte^ I mourn;
Kind nature the embryo blossom will save,
But when shall spring visit the mouldering ^urn!
O, when shall it dawn on the night of the grave!
BEATTIE. INDEPENDENCE.
41.
HAIL! Independence, hail! Heaven's next best gift,
To that of life and an immortal soul!
The life of life! that to the banquet high
And sober meal gives taste; to the bowed roof
Fair dreamed repose, and to the cottag^ charms.
Of public freedom, hail, thou secret source
Whose streams from every quarter confluent form
My better Nile that nurses human life.
By rills from thee deduced irriguous fed,
The private field looks gay, with nature's wealth
Abundant flow, and blooms with each delight
That nature craves. Its happy master there,
The only freeman, walks his pleasing round:
Sweet featured peace attending; fearless truth;
^^^m resolution; goodness, blessing, all
That can rejoice; contentment, surest friend;
And, still fresh stores from nature's book derived,
Philosophy, companion ever new.
42.
THESE cheer his rural, and sustain, or fire,
(...) into action called his busy hours.
Mean-time true judging moderate desires,
Economy and taste, combined, direct
His clear affairs, and from debauching ^iends
Secure his little kingdom. Nor can those
Whom fortune heap^, without these virtues, reach
That truce with pain that animated ease,
That self-enjoyment springing from ^ithin
That independence, active, or retired,
Which make the soundest bliss of man below:
But, lost beneath the rubbish of their means,
And drained by wants to nature all unknown
A wandering, tasteless, gaily, wretched train,
Though rich, are beggars, and though noble, slaves.
43.
BRITON's! be firm! nor let corruption sly,
Twine round your heart indissoluble chains;
The steel of Brutus burst the grosser bonds
By Caesar cast over Rome; but still remained
The soft enchanting fetters of the mind,
And other Caesar's rose. Determined, hold
Your independence; for, that once destroyed,
Unfounded, freedom is a morning dream
That flits aerial from the spreading eye.
THOMSON. ON GENEROSITY.
44. I CONSIDER a generous mind as the noblest work of the creation, and am
persuaded, wherever it resides no real merit can be wanting. It is, perhaps,
the most singular of all the moral endowments: I am sure, at least, it is often
imputed where it cannot justly be claimed. The meanest self-love, under some
disguise, frequently passes upon common observers for this god-like principle;
and I have known many a popular action attributed to this motive, when it ^owed
from no higher a source than the suggestions of concealed vanity, good nature;
as it has many features in common with this virtue, is usually mistaken for
it: The former, however, is but the effect, possibly, of a happy disposition of
the animal structure, or, as Dryden calls it, of a certain "milkiness of
blood;" whereas the latter is seated in the mind, and can never subsist where
good sense, and enlarged sentiments, have no existence.

45. IT is entirely founded upon justness of thought, which, perhaps, is the
reason this virtue is so little the characteristic of m^nkind in general; a man
whose mind is warped by the selfish passions, or contracted by the narrow
prejudices of sects or parties, if he does not want honesty, must undoubtedly
want understanding. The same clouds that darken his intellectual views,
obstruct his m^^^l ones; and his generosity is extremely circumscribed, because
his reason is exceedingly limited.

46. IT is the distinguishing pre-eminence of the christian system, that it
cherishes this elevated principle in one of its noblest exertions. Forgiveness
of injuries, I confess, indeed, has been inculcated by several of the Heathen
moralists; but i^ never entered into the established ordinances of any
religion, until it had the s^^ction of the great author of ours. I have often,
however, wondered that the ancients, who raised so many virtues and affections
of the mind into divinities, should never have given a place in their temples
to generosity; unless, perhaps, they included it under the notion of fides, or
hon^^* But surely she might reasonably have claimed a separate alter and
superior rites.

47. A principle of honor may restrain a man from counteracting the social
ties, who yet has nothing of that active flame of generosity, which is too
powerful to be confined within the humbler boundaries of m^re negative duties.
True generosity rises above the ordinary rules of social conduct, and flows
with much too full a stream to be comprehended within the precise marks of
formal precepts. It is a vigorous principle in the soul, which opens and
expands all her virtues far beyond those which are only the forced and
unnatural productions of a timed obedience. The man who is influenced singly by
motives of the latter kind, aims no higher than at certain authoritative
standards, without ever attempting to reach those glorious elevations which
constitute the only true heorism of the social character.

MELMOTH. THE ACTOR.
48.
THE player's province, they but vainly try,
Who want these powers, deportment, voice, and eye.
The critic's sight, it is only grace can please,
No figure charms us, if it has not ease.
There are, who think the stature all in all,
Nor like the hero, if he is not tall.
The feeling sense all other want supplies,
I rate no actor's merit from his size.
Superior height requires superior grace,
And what is a giant with a vacant face?
49.
THEATRIC monarchs, in their tragic gait,
Affect to mark the solemn pace of state:
One foot put forward in position strong,
The other, like its vassal, dragged along:
So grave each motion, so exact and slow,
Like wooden monarchs at a puppet-show,
The mien delights us that has native grace,
But affectation ill supplies its place.
50.
UNSKILFUL actors, like your mimic apes,
Will writhe their bodies in a thousand shapes;
However foreign from the poet's art,
No tragic hero but admires a start.
What though unfeeling of the nervous line,
Who but allows his attitude is fine,
While a whole minute equipois'd he stands!
'Till praise dismiss him with her echoing hands.
Resolved, though nature hate the tedious pause,
By perseverance to extort applause,
When Romeo, sorrowing at his Juliet's doom,
With eager madness, burst the canvass tomb,
The sudden whirl, stretched leg, and lifted staff,
Which please the vulgar, make the critic laugh.
51.
To paint the passion's force, and mark it well,
The proper action, nature's self will tell:
No pleasing powers distortions ever express,
And nicer judgment always loathes excess.
In sock or buskin, who o'erleaps the bounds,
Disgusts our reason, and the taste confounds.
Of all the evils which the stage molest,
I hate your fool who over-acts his jest;
Who murders what the poet finely writ,
And like a bungler, haggles all his wit
With shrug, and grin, and jesture out of place,
And writes a foolish comment with his face.
The word and action should conjointly suit,
But acting words is labor too minute,
Grimace will ever lead the judgment wrong,
While sober humor marks the impression strong.
Her proper traits the fixed attention hit,
And bring me closer to the poet's wit;
With her delighted over each scene I go,
Well pleased, and not ashamed of being so.
52.
BUT let the generous actor still forbear
To copy features with a mimic's care;
It Is a poor skill, which every fool can reach,
A vile stage-custom, honored in the breach.
Worse as more close, the disingenuous art
But shows the wanton looseness of the heart,
When I behold a wretch, of talents mean,
Drag private ^oibles on the public scene,
For^aking nature's fair and open road;
To mark some whim, some strange peculiar mode,
Fired with disgust I loath his fervile plan,
Despise the mimic, and abhor the man.
Go to the lame, to hospitals repair,
And hunt for humor in distortions, there!
Fill up the measure of the mo^ly whim,
With shrug, wink, snuffle, and convulsive limb:
Then shame at once, to please a trif^ing age,
Good sense, good manners, virtue, and the stage!
53.
It Is not enough the voice be sound and clear*
It Is modulation that must charm the ear.
When desperate heroines grieve with tedious moan.
And whine their sorrows in a see-saw tone,
The same soft sounds of unimpassion'd woes,
Can only make the yawning heare^s doze.
The voice all modes of passions can express,
That marks the proper word with proper stress.
But none emphatic can that actor call,
Who lays an equal emphasis on all.
54.
SOME, over the tongue the labored measures roll,
Slow and deliberate as the parting toll.
Point every stop* mark every pause so strong,
Their wo^^s, like stage processions, stalk along.
All affectation but creates disgust,
And even in speaking we may seem too just.
In vain for them the pleasing measure flows,
Whose recitation runs it all to pro^e;
Repeating what the poet sets not down,
The verb disjointing from its friendly no^^*
While pause, and break, and ^epetition join,
To make a discord in each tuneful li^e.
55.
SOME placid natures fill the allotted scene,
With lifeless drone, insipid and serene.
While others thunder every couplet over,
And almost crack your ears (...) rant and roar.
More nature often and finer strokes are shown,
In the the lo^ whisper than tempestuous tone.
And Hamlet's hollow voice and fixed am^ze*
More powerful terror to the mind conveys,
Than he* who, swo^n with big impetuous rage,
Bullies the bulky phantom off the stage.
56.
HE, who in earnest studies over his part,
Will find true nature cling about his heart.
The modes of grief are not included all.
In the white handkerchief and mournful drawl.
A single look more marks the interna^ woe,
Than all the windings of the lengthened oh!
Up to the face the quick sensation flies,
And darts its meaning from the speaking eyes.
Love, transport, madness* anger, scorn, despair,
And all the passions, all the soul is there.
LLOYD. MISCELLANEOUS EXERCISES IN ELOCUTION.
57.
EXULTING Science now disdains
The ties of custom's proud control,
And breaks the rude and barbarous chains
That fettered down the freeborn soul:
Extinguished now her vengeful fires,
Lo! superstition slow retires;
Or from some cloister's mouldering fane,
Pours out her muttered curse in vain:
Whilst the warm breast, with generous joy,
Embraces all of human kind;
And scorns each mean and narrower tie,
To climate and to sect confined:
Deaf to the bigot's frantic voice,
Conducts each dubious step by reason's plan,
To her unerring rule conforms its choice,
Nor tamely yields the sacred rights of man:
O ye! whom science chose to guide
Her unpolluted stream along,
Adorn with flowers its cultured side,
And to its taste allure the young;
O say, what language can reveal
The ^xalted p^easures you must feel,
When, fired by you, the youthful breast
Disdains to court inglorious rest;
And to the world's admiring gaze
(Each precept into action brought)
In full reality displays,
The liberal maxims you have taught:
A transport this, superior far
To all the bliss the exulting conqueror feels,
When crowds triumphant hail him from the war,
And conquered nations crouch beneath his wheels.
R -- 58. AS THERE is a worldly happiness, which God perceives to be no other
than disguised misery; as there are worldly honors, which, in his estimation,
are reproach: So there is a worldly wisdom, which in his ^ight, is foolishness.
Of the ^^^ldly ^isdom, the characters are given in the scriptures, and placed
in contrast with those of the wisdom which is from above. The one, is the
wisdom of the crafty; the other, that of the upright: The one terminates in
selfishness; the other, in charity: The one is full of strife and bitter
envying; the other, of mercy and good fruits.

BLAIR. 59. I AM persuaded, that neither death, nor life; nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers; nor things present, nor things to come; nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

ST. PAUL. 60. COMPLAISANCE renders a superior, amiable; an equal, agreeable;
and an inferior, acceptable. It smooths distinction, sweetens conversation, and
makes every one in the company pleased with himself. It produces good nature
and mutual benevolence, encourages the timorous, sooths the turbulent,
humanizes the fierce; and distinguishes a society of civilized persons, from a
confusion of savages. In a word, complaisance is a virtue, that blends all
orders of men together in a friendly intercourse of words and actions, and is
suited to that equality in human nature, which every one ought to consider so
far as is consistent with the order and economy of the world.

GUARDIAN. 61. CHARITY suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not,
charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, does not behave itself unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoiceth not in
iniquity; but rejoiceth in the truth, bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things.

ST. PAUL. 62. SUPPOSE a youth, to have no prospect either of sitting in
parliament, of pleading at the bar, of appearing upon the stage, or in the
pulpit; does it follow, that he need bestow no pains in learning to speak
properly his native language? Will he never have occasion to read, in a company
of his friends, a copy of verses, a passage of a book or news-paper? Must he
never read a discourse of Tillotson, or a chapter of the Whole Duty of Man, for
the instruction of his children and servants? Cicero justly observes, that
address in speakin^, is highly ornamental, as well as useful, even in private
life: The limbs are the parts of the body, much less noble than the tongue, yet
no gentleman grudges a considerable expense of time and money, to have his son
taught to use them properly, which is very commendable. And is there no
attention to be paid to the use of the tongue, the glory of man?

BURGH. 63. IT is pleasant to be virtuous and good, because that is to excel
many others: It is pleasant to grow better, because that is to excel ourselves:
It is pleasant to mortify and subdue our lust, because that is victory: It is
pleasant to command our appetites and passions, and to keep them in due order,
within the bounds of reason and religion, because that is empire.

TILLOTSON. 64. LIFE is short and uncertain; we have not a moment to lose. Is
it prudent to throw away any of our time, in tormenting ourselves or others,
when we have so little for honest pleasures? Forgetting our weakness, we stir
up mighty enmities, and fly to wound as if we were invulnerable. Wherefore all
this bustle and noise! The best use of a short life is, to make it agreeable to
ourselves, and to others. Have you cause of quarrel with your servant, your
master, your king, your neighbor? Forbear a moment, death is at hand, which
makes all equal. What has man to do with wars, tumults, ambushes? You would
destroy your enemy? You lose your trouble; death will do your business while
you are at rest. And after all, when you have got your revenge, how short will
be your joy, or his pain? While we are among men, let us cultivate humanity,
let us not be the cause of fear nor of pain to one another. Let us despise
injury, malice, and detraction; and bear with an equal mind such transitory
evils. While we speak, while we think, death comes up, and closes the scene.

ART OF THINKING. PATHETIC PIECES.
65.
I KNOW thy meaning,
But I have lost my reason, have disgraced
The name of soldier, with inglorious ease.
In the full vintage of my slowing honors,
Sat still, and saw it pressed by other hands.
Fortune came smiling to my youth, and woo^d it,
And purp^e gr^atness met my ripened years.
When fi^^t I came to empire, I was borne
O^ t^des of people, crowding to my triumphs*
The ^^^hing nations, and the willing world,
Re^^iv'd me as its pledge of future peace.
I was so great, so happy, so beloved,
Fate could not ruin me, 'till I took pains,
And worked against my fortune, chid her from me,
And turned her loose: yet still she came again.
My careless days, and my luxurious nights,
At length have wearied her, and now she is gone,
Gone, gone, divorced for ever -- Help me soldier
To curse this madman, this industrious fool,
Who labored to be wretched.
Antony and Venditius. 66.
HE spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
Restored the pleasing burden to her arms:
Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
Hushed to repose, and with a smile surveyed.
The troubled pleasure soon chastis'd by fear,
She mingled with the smile a tender tear.
The softened chief with kind compassion viewed,
And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:
Andromache! my soul's far better part,
Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart;
No hostile hand can ante-date my doom,
'Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
Fixed is the term of all the race of earth,
And such the hard condition of our birth;
No force can then resist, no flight can save;
All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
No more -- but hasten to thy tasks at home,
There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
Me -- glory summons to the martial scene,
The field of combat is the sphere for men --
Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
The first in danger, as the first in fame."
[ Parting of Hector and Andromache.] 67.
I AM not read, --
Nor skilled and practiced in the arts of greatness,
To kindle thus, and give a scope to passion.
The Duke is surely noble; but he touched me
Even on the tenderest point -- the master-string
That makes most harmony or discord to me.
I own the glorious subject fires my breast,
And my soul's darling passion stands ^nfess'd;
Beyond, or love's, or friendship's sacred band,
Beyond myself, I prize my native land.
On this foundation would I build my fame,
And emulate the Greek and Roman name;
Think England's peace, bought cheaply with my blood,
And die with pleasure for my country's good.
[ Gloucester and Hastings. -- Row.] 68.
BUT see -- along the north the tempests swell
Over the rough Alps, and darken all their snows;
Sudden the Goth and Vandal, dreaded names,
Rush as the breach of waters, whelming a^l
Their domes, their villas; down their festive piles;
Down fall their Parian porches, gilded baths,
And roll before the storm in clouds of dust.
Vain end of human strength, of human skill,
Conquest, and triumph, and domain, and pomp,
And ease, and luxury! Oh luxury!
Bane of elevated life, of affluent states,
What dreary change, what ruin is not thine
How does thy bowl intoxicate the mind!
To the soft entrance of thy ros^ ^a^e.
How d^st thou lure the fortunate and great!
Dreadful attraction! while behind thee gapes
The unfathomable gulf, where Ashur lies,
Overwhelmed, forgotten; and high boasting Cham;
And Elam's haughty pomp; and beauteous Greece;
And the great Queen of earth, imperial Rome. DYER.
69.
AMAZEMENT, I perceive, has filled your hearts,
And joy, for that your lost Gustavus 'scap'd
Through wounds, imprisonments, and chains, and death:
Thus sudden, thus unlooked for, stands before ye,
As one escaped, from cruel hands I come,
From hearts that never knew pity; dark and vengeful,
Who qua^^ the tears of orphans, bathe in blood,
And know no music but the growns of Sweden --
Yet ^ot for that, my sister's early innocence,
And ^^other's age, now grind beneath captivity:
Nor that one bloody, one remorseless hour,
Swept my great fire, and kindred, from my side;
For them Gustavus weeps not, though my eyes
Were far less dear, for them I will not weep.
But, oh, great parent, when I think on thee!
Thy numberless, thy nameless, shameful infamies:
My widowed country! Sweden! when I think
Upon thy desolation, spite of rage --
And vengeance that would choke them -- tears will flow.
[ Gustavus and Delecarlians.] PART IV. POETRY.
On our Savior's Nativity.
1.
VICTORIOUS love! how uncontrolled thy power?
How great thy triumph, on that glorious hour?
The high raised thrones above looked down to see
The vanquished god a captive led by thee.
His splendour in mortality disguised,
The principalities of heaven surprised;
The indulgent skies smiled on the happy birth,
While peace and joyful wonder hushed the earth.
2.
Fly rigid winter, with thy horrid face,
And let the soft and lovely spring take place;
Oh! come, thou fairest season of the year,
With garlands decked, and verdant robes appear;
At once produce the summer's various coast,
Whatever sweets her slowr'y stores (...) boast:
Full canisters of Sharon's roses spread,
And dress with art the illustrious infant's bed;
Riffle the gardens, search the painted fields,
For all the blooming glories nature yields.
3.
But O, ye products of the earth! how poor,
To heaven's enameled plains, are all your store!
Perpetual greens, and never fading flowers,
Enriched with soft perfumes the immortal bowers;
And yet he left the bright etherial seats,
For these cold regions, and obscure retreats.
4.
Be hushed ye winds, no angry tempests roar;
But sink in gentle whispers through the grove;
With all Arabia load your balmy wings,
And breathe the fragrance of ten thousand springs
5.
Begin, ye sweet musicians of the air!
Let nature all her ^o^^^ing sounds prepare:
Let tuneful ^rt, her various measures bring,
Each melting tone, and every warbling string,
Let psalteries, ha^ps, and the loud cymbal ri^g;
Let the shall trumpets raise their sprightly voice,
While Carmal, and high Lebanon rejoice.
6.
He comes, O Jacob, thy long promised King!
Celestial envoys the glad tidings bring:
Over Earth's wide compass to the distant main,
With truth, and perfect justice, he shall reign.
The sparkling skies shall tarnish and decay,
The sun be quenched, the stars shall fade away;
But he shall rise with a propitious light,
Stand at high noon, and shine divinely bright.
SOLILOQUY.
1.
HAIL once again, auspicious morn,
On which poor helpless I was born,
To pleasure and to pain:
Of both, it is true, I Have had my share,
For duly mixed they cure despair*
And wantonness restrain.
2.
The being who the whole directs,
Refuses often what man expects;
Often disappoints his fears:
But good and just, supreme and wise,
Whether he gives us or denies,
He still at last appears.
3.
Happy for frail contracted man,
Whose views are boundless, life a span,
To have so sure a guide;
Thrice happy he who can resign,
His all to providence divine;
And trust in naught beside.
4.
He who can temper nature's springs,
Who knows the essences of things;
And all their wondrous ties:
He only has the power and skill,
To order matters as he will;
In earth, in air, and skies.
5.
Near eight times five revolving years,
With all their joys, and cares, and fears,
I speedily have past;
How like a vision or a dream,
Do all these revolutions seem;
How vain from first to last.
6.
Tell me, O my conscious heart,
How well have I performed my part;
On life's amusing stage:
Have I been honest just and true,
And given to all what was their due,
From childhood up to age.
7.
Or have my passions often prevailed,
And I, as often, in duty failed,
Or decency transgressed:
Heaven's blessings have I not abused,
Have I never yet refused,
To succor the distressed.
8.
Alas, though free from grosser crimes,
In recollecting former times,
I find great cause of shame:
Unnumbered follies, I lament,
And for much precious time misspent,
Myself severely blame.
9.
My God, by whom I live and move,
Do thou to me a father prove;
Indulgent, still, and kind:
Thy weak and guilty creature spare,
And to the last thy wonted care;
And mercy let me find.
10.
For all thy goodness heretofore,
Which makes me humbly hope for more,
Thy name be ever blessed:
Through future life, thy grace vouchsafe,
And when I die conduct me safe,
To everlasting rest.
Insufficiency of Creatures to satisfy an Immortal Soul.
1.
TRAVERSE the globe, go fly from pole to pole,
Go far as winds can blow, or waters roll,
All, all is vanity beneath the sun,
To certain death through various paths we run.
2.
See the pale miser, poring over his gold,
See there a gally slave to misery sold;
Ambition groans beneath her own vast weight,
The s^lendid victim of the toils of state.
3.
So in the mantling bowl sweet poison slows,
Love's dearest joys, often terminate in woes:
Even learning ends its vast career in doubt,
And, puz^ling still, makes nothing clearly out.
4.
Where then is sovereign bliss, where does it grow?
No mortal happiness ever dwelt below:
Look at you heaven, go seek the blessing there,
Be heaven thy aim, thy soul's eternal care;
Nothing but God, and God alone you will find,
Can fill a boundless and immortal mind.
ODE TO ADVERSITY.
1.
IF on this roof, high heaven should send,
Thy hand corrective fair,
Submissive teach my soul to bend,
But keep her from despair.
2.
Fate's awful word must sure be just,
Then let me kiss the rod;
Nor worn with woe, at all distrust,
The goodness of my God.
3.
The hand that formed my inmost thoughts,
Must needs be great and wise:
And he who best perceives my faults,
The sit to chastise.
4.
Then, 'till life's latest sands are run,
O teach me, power divine!
To cry -- my God, thy will be done --
What ever becomes of mine.
AN ADDRESS TO THE DEITY.
1.
O THOU who reign'st, "high throu'd above all height,"
Circled with rays of uncreated light,
Whose simple nod, over worlds the scepter sways,
And with a glance eternity surveys!
Whose essence reaches through the immense of space,
And undivided spreads through every place!
Whose smile is heaven, whose kindness gives man breath,
Whose frown's more direful than the sting of death,
Who form'dst all nature, by thy powerful word,
Thou king of kings, and universal Lord!
2.
If I am right, succeed me in my race;
If I am wrong, reclaim me by thy grace;
Shine through these glooms of sin, a heavenly ray,
And guide my footsteps in the perfect way!
Cleanse my vile soul, from all her filthy stains,
With that pure stream that flowed from Jesus' veins.
Be thou my patron, guardian, friend, and guide,
Save me from folly, vanity, and pride.
With pious fortitude, inspire my mind,
To each event, that I may be resigned.
3.
May never my bosom pant for empty fame,
But thy own glory be my constant aim!
All selfish motives banish from my breast,
Which seek their own and not another's rest;
May nobler motives animate my soul,
Reign in my life, and through my actions roll.
May virtuous deeds my fleeting hours employ,
And heavenly knowledge fill my soul with joy.
To bear my passage to the etherial shore,
Grant me thy presence, and I ask no more.
4.
Now for my country would I raise my prayer,
O may Columbia be thy guardian care!
Behold her, FATHER, with propitious smiles,
And save her sons from anarchy and broils;
May truth and patriotism inspire each soul,
And love, and harmony, pervade the whole.
May luxury, an infant empire's bane,
Never prove her ruin, nor her glory stain;
May agriculture, in her virgin prime,
Expand and flourish, through this fertile clime;
May social commerce open her affluent stores,
And wast her treasures, from these western shores,
May heaven born science spacious temples rise
On a firm basis to the lofty skies.
May pure religion rear her sacred fane,
And over this western world, extend her mild d^tain.
A PRAYER.
In Imitation of Pope's Universal Prayer. Written by a Young Lady near
Philadelphia.
1.
IN thee my God and Lord I trust,
And humbly wait thy will;
O! teach me to be wise and just,
And keep me from all ill!
2.
Save me from pride and self-conceit,
From false-hood, fraud and guile,
From envy, malice, and deceit,
From superstition vile.
3.
Teach my soul the steady path
Of virtue to pursue,
To shun each crime which moves thy wrath,
Each mean and selfish view.
4.
Let gentle pity fill my breast
With charity divine,
To aid the needy and distressed,
And make their misery mine;
5.
Let pure devotion warm my heart
With gratitude and love;
For thou each blessing do impart,
And can each passion move.
6.
To vanity, the vice of fools,
Should my weak heart incline;
To sacred virtue's purest rules,
Oh! add thy grace divine.
CONTENT.
1.
WOULD you each earthly bliss enjoy,
Which bounteous heaven does give;
And pleasure which can never cloy,
They in content all live.
2.
Would you have peace and ease and rest
Obedient to your call:
Or be with health or honor blessed,
Content supplies them all.
3.
Would you be cured of every woe,
Of fear, of pain and grief;
Of pining sorrow, anxious care,
Content will give relief.
4.
Her choicest gifts should nature poar,
In blessings on your head;
You Will never know an happy hour
If rich, content be ^ed.
5.
To gain the prize, we need a guide,
But few the way can tell;
For with ambition, passions, pride,
Content will never dwell.
6.
Within that heart where virtue reigns,
With, lowly humble mind;
Where passion, mild reason strains,
Content you will always find.
7.
Passion, by reason's strength control,
Never let it bear the sway;
For should it in your bosom rule,
'Twill fright content away.
8.
With care the latent seeds erase;
Of vice which lurks within,
And sow fair virtue in its place,
Content cannot grow with sin.
9.
Cherish with care the gentle guest,
Never let her quit your heart;
Harbor no crime within your breast,
Lest soft content depart.
CHOICE OF A WIFE.
1.
FREE as my life may be from care,
I feel sometimes for you, ye fair,
Through interest, love, and duty:
Duty's observing how ye live,
My interest is the joys you give,
And much I love your beauty.
2.
Yet, fearing you should me mistake,
Know, I a vast distinction make,
In those whom I admire;
Fine shapes, and face, most men approve,
But those who merit Ranger's love,
Must other ways inspire.
3.
Must more in sense, than person shine,
Tender their hearts, with souls sublime,
To scandal quite a stranger;
The muses friend, in science read,
Hate cards, and in industry bred,
Such are the wives for Rangers.
ON BEAUTY.
1.
VICTORIOUS beauty! by what potent charm,
Do thou the soul of all its force disarm;
We bless our chains, abhor our liberty,
And yield the uncontested prize to thee.
Whether we rash or calm designs pursue,
Thine is the glorious motive still in view;
For thee we search the wide creation round,
But thou art no where in perfection found;
Some blemish still remains on mortal pride,
And crowding years, its airy boast deride.
2.
Triumphant beauty sits in Flavia's eyes;
But while we gaze, the trembling luster dies.
Bellaria's completely formed with every grace,
A faultless shape, and enchanting face;
In all his motions, each becoming air,
Great^ess, and native elegance, appear;
Careless and free, in life's deluding bloom,
While envious death threatens a hasty doom,
Some gentle mistress, full of love and truth,
Shall soon lament the dear unrivaled youth.
3.
Thou lovely, fleeting, transitory thing,
From what immense perfection do thou spring?
To what complete original return,
While we thy short appearance vainly mourn!
However our doting thoughts mistake the way
To certain bliss, thine is a friendly ray,
That points the passage to unclouded day.
4.
Ye heavenly forms, in all your pomp appear,
And show us what immortal beauties are,
What life, what rosy bloom, your faces wear!
Put on each smiling grace, and conquering charm,
And all the force of mortal love disarm,
For still our restless thoughts take glorious aims,
Howe'ver seduced by these inferior flames;
The leading passion, the supreme desire,
To things divine and infinite aspire.
5.
Eternal excellence! it is only thee
We search, through nature's bright variety!
Our eager wishes, with impetuous force,
To thee, unknown, direct their endless course.
It Is thee we seek and love, for thee we pine;
The powerful charm, the soft attraction's thine;
To thee these sighs, these tender vows ascend,
The unseen divinity we still attend;
Sick of these fading toys, our thoughts press on
To joys untasted, excellence unknown.
Thou great original of all that is fair,
Whose glories no similitude can bear,
Before the darting splendour of thy eyes,
The pride of all created beauty dies.
A SONG.
1.
THE charms which blooming beauty shows,
From faces heavenly fair,
We to the lily and the rose,
With semblance apt compare.
2.
With semblance apt, for ah! how soon,
How soon they all decay,
The lily droops, the rose is gone,
And beauty fades away.
3.
But when bright virtue shines confessed,
With sweet discretion joined;
When mildness calms the peaceful breast,
And wisdom guides the mind;
4.
When charms, like these, dear fair, conspire,
Thy person to approve,
They kindle generous, chaste desire,
And everlasting love.
5.
Beyond the reach of time or fate,
Thy graces shall endure,
Still, like the passion they create,
Eternal, constant, pure.
THE WINTER'S WALK.
1.
BEHOLD, my fair, where ever we rove,
What dreary prospects rise;
The naked hill, and leafless grove,
The hoary ground, the frowning skies!
2.
Nor only through the wasted plain,
Stern winter, is thy force confessed;
Still wider spreads thy horrid reign,
I feel thy power usurp my breast.
3.
Enlivening hope, and fond desire,
Resign the heart to spleen and care;
Scarce frighted love maintains his fire,
And rapture saddens to despair.
4.
In groundless hope, and causeless fear,
Unhappy man! behold thy doom,
Still changing with the changeful year,
The slave of sunshine and of gloom.
5.
Tired with vain joys, and false alar^
With mental and corporeal strife;
Snatch me, my S^ella, to thy arms,
And screen me from the ills of life.
DR. JOHNSON. To a Gentleman who pays his addresses, to a very agreeable Lady,
yet praises only her beauty.
IF a weak woman may pretend,
Her sexes honor to defend,
I must address myself to you,
Who do not pay the tribute due!
You tell Emelia she is fair,
Admire her eyes, her lips, and hair,
She merits praises more than these,
She has a mind disposed to please.
A soul superior to the arts,
Too often used to conquer hearts;
Why do you then your praise confine,
To beauties she must soon resign;
Your mind should kindred worth approve,
Or where is the charm can fix your love?
I know you think all women vain,
That mental beauties we disdain:
Yet even this fault to you we owe;
If we are vain you make us so.
But they who have the least pretense,
To a refined superior sense,
Will sure despise that short-lived praise,
Which beauty has the power to raise.
AMANDA AND AMATOR. REAL LIFE.
1.
AMANDA's form kind nature could not mend,
Nor more true graces in a female blend;
While by her beauty coldest hearts are fired,
Her mental sweetness seems by heaven inspired.
To social frankness, and habitual ease,
Amanda joins the happy art to please;
No affectation is to her allied,
While conscious virtue is her only pride.
2.
True to her friends, to all mankind the same,
Goodness her title, loveliness her name!
She gains from virtue's friends her due reward,
While envy views her with a forced regard.
Such is Amanda; worthy, kind, and fair;
Few mortal beings may with her compare:
Amator is her friend; and it is his pride,
Since virtue, honor, truth with her reside.
3.
Of social temper, and of mind serene,
Amator relishes each happy scene;
Envying none their riches, or their power,
Contentedly enjoys the passing hour.
Benevolence inspires his manly heart,
To act the worthy, generous, friendly part;
He makes the general welfare life's great end,
And serves with constancy his worthy friend;
The world's his home, mankind his kindred are,
All worthy objects his attention share;
But still his friendship he reserves for those,
In whom the strictest faith he may repose.
4.
IF different sexes may pure friendship claim,
Without fond love, or love's enchanting name,
May not Amator and Amanda be,
True, genuine friends; and yet from censure free. SOCIUS.
PART V. MISCELLANY.
Chapone's Commentaries on the Old and New Testament.
Of the SCRIPTURES as the RULE of LIFE.
1 AS you advance in years and understanding, I hope you will be able to ^ne
for yourself the evidences of the christian religion; and that you will be
convinced, on rational grounds, of its divine authority. At present such
enquiries would demand more study, and greater power of reasoning, than your
age admits of.

2. It is your part, therefore, until you are capable of understanding the
proofs, to believe your parents and teachers, that the Holy Scriptures are
writings inspired by God, containing a true history of facts, in which we are
deeply concerned -- a true recital of the laws given by God to Moses, and of
the precepts of our blessed Lord and Savior, delivered from his own mouth to
his disciples, and repeated and enlarged upon in the edifying epistles of his
Apostles -- who were men chosen from amongst those who had the advantage of
conversing with our Lord, to bear witness of his miracles and resurrection; and
who, after his ascension, were assisted and inspired by the Holy Ghost. This
sacred volume must be the rule of our life. In it you will find all truths
necessary to be believed, and plain and easy directions for the practice of
every duty.

3. YOUR bible, then, must be your chief study and delight: but as it contains
^any various kinds of writing, some parts obscure and difficult of
interpretation, others plain and intelligible to the meanest capacity, I would
chiefly recommend to your frequent perusal, such parts of the sacred writings
as are most adapted to your understanding, and most necessary for your
instruction.

4. OUR Savior's precepts were spoken to the common people among the Jews; and
were therefore given in a manner easy to be understood, and equally striking
and instructive to the learned and unlearned; for the most ignorant may
comprehend them, whilst the wisest must be charmed and awed by the beautiful
and majestic simplicity with which they are expressed. Of the same kind are the
Ten Commandments, delivered by God to Moses; which, as they were designed for
universal laws, are worded in the most concise and simple manner, yet with a
majesty which commands our utmost reverence.

5. I THINK you will receive great pleasure, as well as improvement, from the
historical books of the Old Testament; provided you read them as an history, in
a regular course, and keep the thread of it in your mind as you go on. I know
of none, true or fictitious, that is equally wonderful, interesting and
affecting; or that is told in so short and simple a manner as this, which is o^
a^l histories the most authentic.

6. I SHALL give you some brief directions concerning the method and course I
wish you to pursue in reading the Holy Scriptures. May you be enabled to make
the best use of this most precious gift of God this sacred treasure of
knowledge; may you read the bible, not as a task, nor as the dull employment of
that day only, in which you were forbidden more lively entertainments; but with
a sincere and ardent desire of instruction, with that love and delight in God's
word, which the Holy Psalmist so pathetically felt and described, and which is
the natural consequence of loving God and virtue.

7. THOUGH I speak this of the bible in general, I would not be understood to
mean, that every part of the volume is equally interesting. I have already
said, that it consists of various matter and various kinds of books, which must
be read with different views and sentiments. The having some general notion of
what you are to expect from each book, may possibly help you to understand
them, and will heighten your relish for them.

8. I SHALL treat you as if you were perfectly new to the whole; for so I wish
you to consider yourself; because the time and manner, in which children
usually read the bible, are very ill calculated to make them really acqua^nted
with it; and too many people who have read it thus, without understanding it,
in their youth, satisfy themselves, that they know enough of it, and never
afterward study it with attention, when they come to a maturer age.

OF GENESIS.
1. I NOW proceed to give you some short sketches of the matter contained in
the different books of the bible, and of the course in which they ought to be
read.

2. THE first book, Genesis, contains the most grand, and, to us, the most
interesting events that ever happened in the universe; the creation of the
world, and of man; the deplorable fall of man, from his first state of
excellence and bliss, to the distresses in which we see all his descendants
continue; the sentence of death pronounced on Adam, and on all his race; with
the reviving promise of that deliverance, which has since been wrought for us
by our blessed Savior; the account of the early state of the world; of the
universal deluge; the division of mankind into different nations and languages;
the story of Abraham, the founder of the Jewish people* whose unshaken faith
and obedience under the severest trial human nature could sustain, obtained
such favor in the sight of God, that he vouchsafed to style him his friend, and
promised to make his posterity a great nation; and that in his seed, that is,
in one of his descendants, all the kingdoms of the earth should be blessed.
This you will easily see, refers to the Messiah, who was to be the blessing and
deliverance of all nations.

3. IT is amazing that the Jews, possessing this prophecy, among many others,
should have been so blinded by prejudice, as to have ^xpected, from this great
personage, only a ^poral deliverance of their own nation from the ^ction to
which they were reduced under the Romans -- It is equally amazing, that some
christians should even now confine the blessed effects of his appearance upon
earth, to this or that particular sect or profession, when he is so clearly and
emphatically described as the Savior of the whole world.

4. THE story of Abraham's proceeding to sacrifice his only son, at the command
of God, is affecting in the highest degree; and sets forth a pattern of
unlimited resignation, that every one ought to imitate in those trials of
obedience under temptation, or of acquiescence under afflicting dispensations,
which fall to their lot. Of this we may be assured, that our trials will be
always proportioned to the powers afforded us; if we have not Abraham's
strength of mind, neither shall we be called upon to lift the bloody knife
against the bosom of an only child; but, if the almighty arm should be lifted
up against him, we must be ready to resign him, and all we hold dear, to the
divine will.

5. THIS action of Abraham has been censured by some, who do not attend to the
distinction between obedience to a special command, and the detestably cruel
sacrifices of the Heathens, who sometimes voluntarily, and without any divine
injunctions, offered up their own children, under the notion of appeasing the
anger of their gods. An absolute command from God himself, as in the case of
Abraham, entirely alters the moral nature of the action; since he, and he only,
has a perfect right over the lives of his creatures, and may appoint whom he
will, either Angel or Man, to be his instrument of destruction.

6. THAT it was really the voice of God which pronounced the command, and not a
delusion, might be made certain to Abraham's mind, by means we do not
comprehend, but which we know to be within the power of him, who made our souls
as well as bodies, and who can control and direct every faculty of the human
mind: and we may be assured, that if he was pleased to reveal himself so
miraculously, he would not leave a possibility of doubting, whether it was a
real or an imaginary ^eve^ation. Thus the sacrifice of Abraham appears to be
clear of all superstition; and remains the noblest instance of religious faith
and submission, that was ever given by a mere man: we cannot wonder that the
blessings bestowed on him, extended to his posterity.

7. THIS book proceeds with the history of Isaac, which becomes very
interesting to us, from the touching scene I have mentioned, and still more so,
if we consider him as the type of our Savior. It recounts his marriage with
Rebecca -- the birth and history of his two sons -- Jacob, the father of the
twelve tribes, and Esau, the father of the Edomites, or Idumeans, the
exquisitely affecting story of Joseph and his brethren, and of his
transplanting the Israelites into Egypt, who ther^ multiplied to a great nation.

OF EXODUS.
1. IN Exodus you read of a series of wonders, wrought by the Almighty to
rescue the oppressed Israelites, from the cruel tyranny of the Egyptians, who,
having first received them as guests, by degrees reduced them to a state of
slavery. By the most peculiar mercies and exertions in their favor, God
prepared his chosen people to receive, with reverent and obedient hearts, the
solemn restitution of their primitive laws, which probably he had revealed to
Adam and his immediate discendants, or which at least, he had made known by the
dictates of conscience; but which time, and the degeneracy of mankind, had much
obscured.

2. THIS important revelation was made to them in the wilderness of Sinai,
when, assembled before the burning mountain, surrounded with blackness, and
darkness, and tempest, they heard the awful voice of God pronounce the eternal
law, impressing it on their hearts, with circumstances of terror, but without
those encour^gements, and those excellent promises, which were afterward
offered to mankind by Jesus Christ. Thus were the great laws of morality
restored to the Jews, and through them transmitted to other nations; and by
that means a great restraint was opposed to the torrent of vice and impiety,
which began to prevail over the world.

3. To those moral precepts, which are of perpetual and universal obligation,
were superadded, by the ministration of Moses, many peculiar institutions,
wisely adopted to different ends, either to fix the memory of those past
deliverances, which were figurative of a future and far greater salvation, to
place inviolable barriers between the Jews and the idolatrous nations, by whom
they were surrounded, or to be the civil law by which the community was to be
governed.

4. To conduct this series of events, and to establish these laws with his
people, God raised up that great prophet Moses, whose faith and piety enabled
him to undertake and execute the most arduous enterprises, and to pursue, with
unabated zeal, the welfare of his countrymen. Even in the hour of death, this
generous ardour still prevailed: his last moments were employed in fervent
prayers for their prosperity, and in rapturous gratitude for the glimpse
vouchsafed him of a Savior far greater than himself, whom God would one day
raise up to his people.

5. THUS did Moses, by the excellency of his faith, obtain a glorious
pre-eminence among the saints and prophets in heaven; while, on earth, he will
be ever revered as the first of those benefactors to mankind, whose labors for
the public good have ^ndeared their memory to all ages.

OF LEVITICUS, NUMBERS AND, DEUTERONOMY.
1. THE next book is Leviticus, which contains little besides the laws for the
peculiar ritual observance of the Jews, and therefore affords no great
instruction to us now; you may pass it over entirely, and, for the same reason,
you may omit the first eight chapters of Numbers. The rest of Numbers is
chiefly a continuation of the history, with some ritual laws.

2. IN Deuteronomy, Moses makes a recapitulation of the foregoing history, with
zealous exhortations to the people, faithfully to worship and obey that God,
who had worked such amazing wonders for them: he promises them the noblest
temporal blessings, if they prove obedient; and adds the most awful and
striking denounciations against them, if they rebel or forsake the true God.

3. I HAVE before observed, that the sanctions of the Mosaic law, were temporal
rewards and punishm^nts, those of the New Testament are eternal^ these ^ast, as
they are infinitely more forcible than the first, were reserved for the last,
b^ gift to mankind -- and were revealed by the Messiah in the fullest and
clearest manner.

4. MOSES, in this book, directs the method in which the Israelites were to
deal with the seven n^tions, whom they were appointed to punish for their
pros^igacy and idolatry, and whose land they were to possess, when they had
driven out the old inhabitants: he gives them excellent laws, civil as well as
^^ligious, which were ever after the standing municipal laws of that people.
This ^ook concludes with Moses's song and death.

OF JOSHUA.
1. THE book of Joshua contains the conquests of the Israelites over the seven
nations, and their establishment in the promised land. Their treatment of these
conquered nations m^st appear to you very cruel and unjust, if you consider it
as their own act, unauthorised by a positive command: but they had the mo^^
absolute injunctions, not ^o spare these corrupt people -- "to make no ^ovenant
with them, nor show mercy to them, but utterly to destroy them;" and the reason
is given, "les^ they should turn away the Israelites from following the Lord,
that they might serve other Gods." -- The children of Israel are to be
considered as instruments, in the hands of the Lord, to punish those whose
idolatry and wickedness had deservedly brought destruction on them: this
example, therefore, cannot be pleaded in behalf of cruelty, or bring any
imputation on the character of the Jews.

2. WITH regard to other cities, which did not belong to these seven nations,
they were directed to deal with them according to the common law of arms at
that time. If the city submitted, it became tributary, and the people were
spared; if it resisted, the men were to be slain, but the women and children
saved.

3. YET, though the crime of cruelty cannot be justly laid to their charge on
this occasion, you will observe, in the course of their history, many things
recorded of them, very different from what you would expect from the chosen
people of God, if you supposed them selected on account of their own merit:
their natural character was by no means amiable; and we are repeatedly told,
that they were not chosen for their superior righteousness -- "For they were a
stiff necked people, and provoked the Lord with their rebellions from the day
they left Egypt*" -- "You have been rebellious against the Lord, says Moses,
from the day that I kn^w you, and he vehemently exhorts ^^em no^ to (...)
themselves that their success was, in any d^gree, owing to their own merit."

4. THEY were appointed to be the scourge of other nations, whose crim^
rendered (...) fit objects for divine chastisement. F^ ^he sake of righteous
Abraham, their son^^ (...) and perhaps for many other wi^^ reasons (...)
discovered to us, they were selected from a world overrun with idolatry to
preserve upon earth the pure worship (...) ^ly God, and to be honored with the
(...) of the Messiah amongst them. For this (...) were precluded, by divine
comma^^, from ^^xing with any other people, and defended, by a great number of
peculiar (...) and ^bservances, from falling into the (...) practiced by their
neighbors.

Of JUDGES, SAMUEL, and KINGS^
1. THE book of Judges, in which yo^ will find the affecting stories of Sampson
and Jephtha, carries on the history from the death of Joshua, about two hundred
and fifty years; but the facts are not told in the times in which they
happened, which makes some confusion; and it will be necessary to consult the
marginal dates and notes, as well as the index, in order to get any clear idea
of the succession of events during that period.

2. THE history then proceeds regularly through the two books of Samuel, and
those of Kings: nothing can be more interesting and entertaining than those of
Saul, David, and Solomon: but after the death of Solomon, when ten tribes
revolted from his son Reh^boam, and became a separate kingdom, you will find
some difficulty in understanding distinctly the histories of the two kingdoms
of Israel and Judea, which are blended together; and by the likeness of the
names, and other particulars* will be apt to confound your mind, without great
attention to the different threads there carried together: the index here will
be of great use to you. The second book of Kings concludes with the Babylonish
captivity, 588 years before Christ, until which time the kingdom of Judah had
descended uninterruptedly in the line of David.

OF CHRONICLES, EZRA, NEHEMIAH, AND ESTHER.
1. THE first book of Chronicles begins with a genealogy from Adam, through all
the tribes of Israel and Judah; and the remainder is the same history which is
contained in the books of Kings, with little or no variation, until the
separation of the ten tribes. From that period, it proceeds with the history of
the kingdom of Judah alone, and gives, therefore, a m^^e regular and clear
account of the affairs (...) ^udah, than the books of Kings. You may pass over
the first book of Chronicles, and ^he nine first chapters of the second book;
but by all means read the remaining chapters, as they will give you more clear
and distinct ideas of the history of Judah, th^^ that you read in the second
book of Kings The second of Chronicles ends, like the second of Kings, with the
Babylonish cap^ity.

2. YOU must pursue the history in the book of Ezra, which gives an account of
the return of some of the Jews on the edict of Cyrus, and of the rebuilding of
the Lord's temple.

3. NEHEMIAH carries on the history for about twelve years, when he himself was
Governor of Jerusalem, with authority to rebuild the walls.

4. THE story of Esther is prior, in time, to that of Ezra and Nehemiah; as you
will see by the marginal dates: however, as it happened during the seventy
years captivity, and is a kind of episode, it may be read in its own place.

5. THIS is the last of the canonical books that is properly historical; and I
would therefore advise, that you pass over what follows, until you have
continued the history through the apocryphal books.

JOB.
1. THE story of Job is probably very ancient, though that is a point upon
which learned men have differed: It is dated, however, 1520 years before
Christ. I believe it is uncertain by whom it was written, many parts of it are
obscure; but it is well worth studying for the extreme beauty of the poetry,
and for the noble and sublime devotion it contains.

2. THE subject of the dispute between Job and his pretended friends, seems to
be, wheth^r the providence of God distributes the rewards and punishments of
this life in exact proportion to the merit or deme^i^ of each individual. His
antagonists suppose that it does; and therefore infer, from Job's uncommon
calamities, that notwithstanding his apparent righteousness, he was in realay a
grievous sinner. They aggravate his supposed guilt, by the imputation of
hypocrisy, and call upon him to confess it, and acknowledge the justness of his
punishment.

3. JOB asserts his own innocence and virtue in the most pathetic manner, yet
does not presume to accuse the Supreme Being of injustice. E^^hu attempts to
arbitrate the matter, by alleging the impossibility that so frail and ignorant
a creature as man should comprehend the ways of the Almighty; and therefore
condemns the unjust and cruel inference the three friends had drawn from the
sufferings of Job. He also blames Job for the presumption of acquitting himself
of all iniquity, since the best of men are not pure in the sight of God; but
all have something to repent of; and he advises him to make this use of his
afflictions.

4. At last, by a bold figure of poetry, the Supreme Being himself is
introduced, speaking from the whirlwind, and silencing them all by the most
sublime display of his own power, magnificence, and wisdom, and of the
comparative littleness and ignorance of man. This indeed is the only conclusion
of the argument, which could be drawn at a time when life and immortality were
not yet brought to light. A future retribution is the only satisfactory
solution of the difficulty arising from the sufferings of good people in this
life.

OF THE PSALMS.
1. NEXT follow the Psalms, with which you cannot be too conversant. If you
have any taste, either for poetry or devotion, they will be your delight, and
will afford you a continual feast. The bible translation is far better than
that used in the common prayer book, and will often give you the sen^e when the
other is obscure. In this, as well as in all other parts of the scripture, you
must be careful always to consult the margin, which gives you the corrections
since the last translation, and it is generally preferable to the words of the
text.

2. I WOULD wish you to seek some of the Psalms that please you best, and get
them by heart; or at least make yourself master of the sentiments contained in
them. Dr. Delany's life of David, will show you the occasions on which several
of them were composed, which add much to their beauty and propriety; and by
comparing them with the events of David's life, you will greatly enhance your
pleasure in them. -- Never did the spirit of true piety breathe more strongly
than in these divine songs; which, being added to a rich vein of poetry, makes
them more captivating to my heart and imagination, than any thing I ever read.

3. You will consider how great disadvantages any poem must sustain from being
rendered literally into prose, and then imagine how beautiful these must be in
the original. May you be enabled, by reading them frequently, to transfuse into
your own breast that holy flame which inspired the writer; to delight in the
Lord and in his laws, like the Psalmist -- to rejoice in him always, and to
think "one day in his courts better than a thousand:" But may you escape the
heartpiercing sorrow of such repentance as that of David -- by avoiding sin,
which humbled this unhappy king to the dust -- and which c^st him such bitter
anguish, as it is impossible to read without being moved.

4. NOT all the pleasures of the most prosperous sinners would counterbalance
the hundredth part of those sensations described in his penetential psalms, and
which must be the portion of every man, who has fallen from a religious state
into such crimes when once he recovers a sense of religion and virtue, and is
brought to a real hatred of sin. However available such repentance may be to
the safety and happiness of the soul after death, it is a state of such
exquisite suffering here, that one cannot be enough surprised at the folly of
those, who indulge sin with the hope of living to make their peace with God by
repentance.

5. HAPPY are they who preserve their innocence unsullied by any great or
wilful crimes, and who have only the common failings of humanity to repent of;
these are sufficiently mortifying to a heart deeply smitten with the love of
virtue, and with the desire of perfection.

6. THERE are many very striking prophecies of the Messiah in these divine
songs, particularly in Psalm xxii. Such may be found scattered up and down,
almost throughout the Old Testament. To bear testimony to him, is the great and
ultimate end, for which the spirit of prophecy was bestowed on the sacred
writers; but this will appear more plainly to you, when you enter on the study
of prophecy, which you are now much too young to undertake.

OF THE PROVERBS, ECCLESIASTES, SOLOMON's SONG, THE PROPHECIES, AND THE
APOCRYPHA.
1. THE Proverbs and Ecclesiastes are rich stores of wisdom; from which I wish
you to adopt such maxims as may be of infinite use both to your temporal and
eternal interest. But detached sentences are a kind of reading not proper to be
continued long at a time; a few of them, well chosen and digested, will do you
much more service than to read half a dozen chapters together. In this respect
they are directly opposite to the historical books, which, if not read in
continuation, can hardly be understood or retained to any purpose.

2. THE song of Solomon is a fine poem, but its mystical reference to religion,
lies too deep for common understandings: if you read it therefore, it will be
rather as a matter of curiosity than edification.

3. NEXT follow the prophecies; which, though highly deserving the greatest
attention and study, I think you had better omit for some years, and then read
them with a good exposition, as they are much too difficult for you to
understand without assistance. Dr. Newton on the prophecies will help you much,
when ever you undertake this study, which you should by all means do when your
understanding is ripe enough; because one of the main proofs of our religion
^ts o^ the testimony of the prophecies; and they are very frequently quoted,
and referred to in the New Testament; besides, the sublimimity of the language
and sentiments, through all the disadvantages of antiquity and translation,
must in very many passages, strike every person of taste; and the excellent
moral and religious precepts found i^ them, must be useful to all.

4. THOUGH I have spoken of these books in the order in which they stand, I
repeat, that they are not to be read in that order, but that the thread of the
history is to be pursued, from Nehemiah to the first book of the Maccabees, in
the Apocrypha; taking care to observe the chronology regularly, by refering to
the index, which supplies the deficiencies of this history from Josephus's
antiquities of the Jews. The first of Maccabees carries on the story until
within 195 years of our Lord's circumcision: the second book of the same
narrative is written by a different hand, and does not bring the history so
forward as the first; so that it may be entirely omitted, unless you have the
curiosity to read some particulars of the heroic constancy of the Jews under
the tortures inflicted by their heathen conquerors, with a few other things,
not mentioned in the first book.

5. YOU must then connect the history by the help of the index, which will give
you brief heads of the changes that happened in the state of the Jews from this
time until the birth of the Messiah.

6. THE other books of the Apocrypha, though not admitted as of sacred
authority, have many things well worth your attention; particularly the
admirable book called Ecclesiasticus, and the book of Wisdom. But in the course
of reading, which I advise, these must be omitted until after you have gone
through the Gospels and Acts, that you may not lose the historical thread.

Of the NEW TESTAMENT, which is constantly to be referred to as the rule and
direction of our moral conduct.
1. WE come now to that part of scripture which is the most important of all,
and which you must make your constant study, not only until you are thoroughly
acquainted with it, but all your life long; because, how oftensoever repeated,
it is impossible to read the life and death of our blessed Savior, without
renewing and increasing in our hearts, that love and reverence, and gratitude
toward him, which is so justly due for all he did and suffered for us.

2. EVERY word that fell from his lips is more precious than all the treasures
of the earth; for his are the words of eternal life. They must therefore be
laid up in your heart, and constantly referred to on all occasions, as the rule
and direction of all your actions; particularly those very comprehensive moral
precepts he has graciously left with us, which can never fail to direct us
right, if fairly and honestly applied; such as, "whatsoever you would that men
should do unto you, even so do unto them." There is no occasion, great or
small, on which you may not safely apply this rule for the direction of your
conduct; and whilst your heart honestly adheres to it, you can never be guilty
of any sort of injustice or unkindness.

3. THE two great commandments which contain the summary of our duty to God and
man, are no less easily retained, and made a standard by which to judge our own
hearts, to love the Lord our God, with all our hearts, with all our minds, with
all our strength; and our neighbor (or ^llow creature) as ourselves. Love
works no ill to his neighbor. Therefore, if you have true benevolence, you
will never do any thing injurious to individuals or to society.

4. NOW, all crimes whatsoever are (in their remoter consequences, at least if
not immediately and apparently) injurious to the society in which we live. It
is impossible to love God, without desiring to please him, and as far as we are
able, to resemble him; therefore, the love of God must lead to every virtue in
the highest degree; and we may be sure, we do not truly love him, if we content
ourselves with avoiding fragrant sins, and do not strive in good earnest to
reach the greatest degree of perfection we are capable of. Thus do those few
words direct us to the highest christian virtue. Indeed the whole tenor of the
gospel is to offer us every help, direction, and motive, that can enable us to
attain that degree of perfection on which depends our eternal good.

Of the Example set by our SAVIOR, and his Character.
1. WHAT an example is set before us in our blessed master* -- How is his whole
life, from earliest youth, dedicated to the pursuit of true wisdom, and to the
practice of the most exalted virtue! -- When you see him, at twelve years of
age, in the temple amongst the doctors, hearing them, and asking them questions
on the subject of religion, and astonishing them all with his understanding and
answers -- you will say, perhaps, -- "Well might the S^n of God, even at those
years, be far wiser than the aged; but can a mortal child ^^ulate such heavenly
wisdom* Can such a pattern be proposed to my imitation* Yes certainly; remember
that he has bequeathed to you his heavenly wisdom, as far as concerns your own
good. He has left you such declarations of his will, and of the consequences of
your actions, as you are, even now, fully able to understand, if you will but
attend to them. If then you will imitate his zeal for knowledge, if you will
delight in gaining information and improvement, you may even now become wise
unto salvation."

2. UNMOVED by the praise he acquired amongst those learned men, you see him
meekly return to the submission of a child under those who appeared to be his
parents, though he was in reality their Lord: you see him return to live with
them, to work for them, and to be the joy and solace of their lives; until the
time came, when he was to enter on the scene of public action, for his heavenly
father had sent him from his own right hand, to take upon him the form of a
poor carpenter's son.

3. WHAT a lesson of humility is this, and of obedience to parents! when having
received the glorious testimony from heaven, of his being the beloved son of
the most high, he enters on his public ministry, that an example does he give
us, of the most extensive and constant benevolence. How are all his hours spent
in doing good to the souls of men. Not the meanest sinner is below his notice:
-- to reclaim and save them, he condescends to converse familiarly with the
most corrupt, as well as the most abject. -- All his miracles are wrought to
benefit mankind; not one to punish and afflict them. -- Instead of using the
Almighty power which accompanied him, to the purpose of exalting himself, and
treading down his enemies, he makes no other use of it than to heal and to save.

4. WHEN you come to read of his sufferings and death, the ignominy and
reproach, the sorrow of mind, and torment of body, which he submitted to --
when you conside^ that it was all for our sakes -- "that by his stripes we were
healed," and by his death we were raised from destruction to everlasting life;
what can I say, that can add any thing to the sensations you must then feel? No
power of language can make the scene more touching than it appears in the plain
and simple narrations of the Evengelists -- The heart that is unmoved by it,
can be scarcely human; but the emotions of tenderness and compunction, which
almost every one feels in reading this account, will be of no avail, unless
applied to the true end; unless it inspires you with a sincere and warm
affection toward your blessed Lord; with a firm resolution to obey his
commands; to be his faithful disciple, and ever to renounce and abhor those
sins which brought mankind under divine condemnation, and from which we have
been redeemed at so dear a rate.

5. REMEMBER that the style of christian, or follower of Christ, implies a more
than ordinary degree of holiness and goodness. -- As our motives to virtue are
stronger than those which are afforded to the rest of mankind, our guilt will
be poportionably greater, if we depart from it.

6. OUR Savior appears to have had three great purposes, in descending from
his glory, and dwelling amongst men. The first, to teach them true virtue, both
by his example and precepts. The second, to give them the most forcible motives
to the practice of it. by "bringing life and immortality to light," by absolute
necessity of obedience to God's laws. The third, to sacrifice himself for us to
obtain, by his death, the remission of sins, upon our repentance and
reformation, and the power of bestowing on his sincere followers, the
inestimable gift of immortal happiness.

A comparative View of the Blessed and Cursed at the last Day, and the
Infe^ence to be drawn from it.
1. WHAT a tremendous scene of the last day does the gospel place before (...)
eyes! -- of that day, when you and every one of us, shall awake from the grave,
and behold the Son of God, on his glorious t^^bunal, attended by millions of
celestial beings, of whose superior excellence we can now form no adequate idea
-- When, in presenc^ of all m^nkind of those holy angels, and o^ the great
Judge himself, you must give an account of your past life, and hear your final
doom, from which there can be no appeal, and which must determine your s^te to
all eternity; then think, if for a moment you can bear the thought, what will
be the desolation, shame and anguish of those wretched souls, who shall hear
these dreadful words; "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels." -- Oh! I cannot support even the idea
of your becoming one of those undone, lost creatures! -- I trust in God's
mercy, that you will make a better use of that knowledge of his will, which he
has vouchsafed to you, and of those amiable dispositions he has given you.

2. LET us therefore turn from this horrid, this unsupportable view, and rather
to endeavor to imagine as far as possible, what will be the sensations of your
soul, if you shall hear our Heavenly Judge address you in these transporting
words, "Come thou blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world." Think what it must be to become an object of
the esteem and applause, not only of all mankind assembled together, but of all
the host of Heaven, of our blessed Lord himself, nay, of his and our Almighty
Father. To find your frail flesh changed in a moment, to a glorious celestial
body endowed with perfect beauty, health, and agility; to find your soul
cleansed from all its faults and infirmities; exalted to the purest and noblest
affections; overflowing with divine love and rapturous gratitude! to have your
understanding enlightened and refined; your heart enlarged and purified; and
every power and disposition of body, adapted to the highest relish of virtue
and happiness; Thus accomplished, to be admitted into the society of amiable
and happy beings, all united in the most perfect peace and friendship, all
breathing nothing but love to God, and to each other; with them to dwell in
scenes mere delightful than the richest imagination can paint -- free from
every pain and care, and from all possibility of change or satiety: but, above
all, to enjoy the more immediate presence of God himself; to be able to
comprehend and admire his adorable perfections in a high degree, though still
far short of their infinity, to be conscious of his love and favor, and to
rejoice in the light of his countenance!

3. BUT here all imagination fails: we can form no idea of that bliss, which
may be communicated to us by such a near approach to the source of all beauty
and good: we must content ourselves with believing, "that it is what mortal eye
has not seen, nor ear heard; neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive." The crown of all our joys will be, to know that we are secure of
possessing them for ever: what a transporting idea!

4. CAN you reflect on all these things, and not feel the most earnest longings
after immortality? Do not all other views and desires seem mean and trifling,
when compared with this? And does not your inmost heart resolve, that this
shall be the chief and constant object of (...) wishes and pursuit, through the
whole course of your life?

5. IF you are not insensible to that desire of happiness, which ^eems woven
into your nature, you cannot surely be unmoved by the prospect of such a
transcendant degree of it; and that continued to all eternity; perhaps
continually increasing. You cannot but dread the forfeiture of such an
inheritance, as the most insupportable evil! Remember then -- remember the
conditions on which alone it can be obtained. God will not give to vice,
carelessness, or sloth, the prize he has proposed to virtue.

6. YOU have every help that can annimate your endeavors: you have written
laws to direct you, the example of Christ and his disciples to encourage you,
the most awakening motives to engage you, and you have besides, the comfortable
promise of constant assistance from the Holy Spirit, if you deligently and
sincerely pray for it. -- O! let not all this mercy be lost upon you, but give
your attention to this, your only important concern, and accept with profound
gratitude, the inestimable advantages that are thus affectionately offered you.

7. THOUGH the four gospels are each of them a narration of the life, sayings
and death of Christ; yet as they are not exactly alike, but some circumstances
and sayings omitted in one, are recorded in another, you must make yourself
perfectly master of them all.

8. THE acts of the holy Apostles, endowed with the Holy Ghost, and authorized
by their divine master, come next in order to be read. Nothing can be more
interesting and edifying, than the history of their actions, of the piety,
zeal, and courage, with which they preached the glad tidings of salvation; and
of the various exertions of the wonderful powers conferred on them by the Holy
Spirit, for the confirmation of their mission.

CHARACTER OF ST. PAUL.
1. THE character of St. Paul, and his miraculous conversion, demand your
particular attention -- Most of the Apostles were men of low birth and
education; but St. Paul was a Roman citizen; that is, he possessed the
privileges annexed to the freedom of the city of Rome, which was considered as
a high distinction in those countries that had been conquered by the Romans --
He was educated amongst the most learned sect of the Jews, and by one of their
principal doctors. -- He was a man of extraordinary eloquence, as appears not
only in his writings, but in several speeches in his own defense, pronounced
before governors and courts of justice, when he was called to account for the
doctrines he taught.

2. HE seems to have been of an uncommonly warm temper, and zealous in whatever
religion he professed: this zeal, before his conversion, showed itself in the
most unjustifiable actions, by furiously persecuting the innocent christians;
but though his actions were bad, we may be sure his intentions were good;
otherwise we should not have seen a miracle employed to convince him of his
mistake, and to bring him into the right way.

3. THIS example may assure us of the mercy of God toward mistaken
consciences, and ought to inspire us with the most enlarged charity and good
will toward those whose erroneous principles mislead their conduct: instead of
resentment and hatred against their persons, we ought only to feel an active
wish of assisting them to find the truth; since we know not whether, if
convinced, they might not prove, like St. Paul, chosen vessels to promote the
honor of God, and of true religion.

OF THE EPISTLES.
1. NEXT follow the Epistles, which make a very important part of the New
Testament; and you cannot be too much employed in reading them. They contain
the most excellent precepts and admonitions, and are of particular use in
explaining more at large, seve^al doctrines of christianity, which we could not
so fully comprehend without them.

2. THERE are, indeed, in the Epistles of St. Paul, many passages hard to be
understood: such in particular are the first eleven chapters to the Romans; the
greater part of his Epistles to the Corinthians and Galatians, and several
chapters of that to the Hebrews. Instead of perplexing yourself with th^se more
obscure passages of scripture, I would wish you to employ your attention
chiefly on those that are plain; and to judge of the doctrine taught in the
other parts, by comparing them with what you find in these. It is through the
neglect of this rule, that many have been led to draw the most absurd doctrines
from the holy scriptures.

3. LET me particularly recommend to your careful perusal, the xii, xiii, xiv,
xv, chapters of the epistle to the Romans. In the xiv chapter, St. Paul has in
view, the difference between the Jewish and Gentile (or Heathen) converts, at
that time: the former were disposed to look with horror on the latter, for
their impiety in not paying the same regard to the distinctions of days and
meats that they did; and the latter, on the contrary, were inclined to look
with contempt on the former, for their weakness and superstition.

4. EXCELLENT is the advice which the Apostle gives to both parties: he exhorts
the Jewish converts not to judge, and the Gentiles not to despise; remembering,
that the kingdom of heaven is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost -- Endeavor to conform yourself to this advice, to
acquire a temper of universal candor and benevolence; and learn neither to
despise nor condemn any persons on account of their particular modes of faith
and worship: remembering always, that goodness is confined to no party; that
there are wise and worthy men among all the sects of christians; and that to
his master, every one must stand or fall.

5. I WILL enter no farther into the several points discussed by St. Paul in
his various epistles; most of them too intricate for your understanding at
present, and many of them beyond my abilities to state clearly. I will only
again recommend to you, to read those passages frequently, which, with so much
fervor and energy, excite you to the practice of the most exalted piety and
benevolence. If the effusions of a heart, warmed with the tenderest affection
for the whole human race; if precept, warning, encouragement, example, urged by
an eloquence which such affection could only inspire, are capable of influenc^
(...) your mind, you cannot fail to find, in such parts of his epistles as are
adapted to your understanding, the strongest persuasives to every virtue that
can adorn and improve your nature.

THE EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES.
1. THE Epistle of St. James is entirely practical, and exceedingly fine; you
cannot study it too much. It seems particularly designed to guard christians
against misunderstanding some things in St. Paul's writings, which have been
fatally perverted to the encouragement of a dependence on faith alone, without
good works. But the more rational commentators will tell you, that by the works
of the law, which the Apostle asserts to be incapable of justifying us, he
means not the works of moral righteousness, but the ceremonial works of the
Mosaic law, on which the Jews laid the greatest stress as necessary to
salvation. But St. James tells us, that "if any man among us seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's
religion is vain;" and that "pure religion, and undefiled before God and the
Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their afflictions, and to
keep himself unspotted from the world." Faith in Christ, if it produce not
these effects, he declares is dead, or of no power.

EPISTLES of St. PETER, and the first of St. JOHN.
1. THE Epistles of St. Peter are also full of the best instructions and
admonitions, concerning the relative duties of life; amongst which are set
forth the duties of women in general, and of wives in particular. Some part of
his second epistle is prophetical; warning the church of false teachers, and
false doctrines, which would undermine morality and disgrace the cause of
christianity.

2. THE first of St. John is written in a highly figurative style, which makes
it, in some parts, hard to be understood: but the spirit of divine love, which
it so fervently expresses, renders it highly edifying and delightful. That love
of God and man, which this beloved Apostle so pathetically recommends, is in
truth the essence of religion, as our Savior himself informs us.

OF THE REVELATIONS.
1. THE book of Revelations contains a prophetical account of most of the great
events, relating to the christian church, which was to happen from the time of
the writer, St. John, to the end of the world. Many learned men have taken a
great deal of pains to explain it; and they have done this, in many instances,
very successful^y; but I think it is yet too soon for you to study this part of
scripture, some years hence, perhaps, there may be no objection to your
attempting it, and taking into your hands the best expositions, to assist you
in reading such of the most difficult parts of the new testament, as you cannot
now be supposed to understand.

2. MAY heaven direct you in studying this sacred volume, and render it the
means of making you wise unto salvation: May you love and reverence, as it
deserves, this blessed and invaluable book, which contains the best rule of
life, the clearest declaration of the will and laws of the Deity, the reviving
assurance of favor to true penitents, and the unspeakably joyful tidings of
eternal life and happiness to all the truly virtuous, through Jesus Christ, the
Savior and deliverer of the world. Amen.

Religious Knowledge of great Consolation and Relief amidst the Distresses of
Life.
1. CONSIDER it in the light of consolation; as bringing relief to us, amidst
the distresses of life. Here religion incontestibly triumphs; and its happy
effects in this respect, furnish a strong argument to every benevolent mind,
for wishing them to be farther diffused throughout the world. For without the
belief an^ ^^pe afforded by divine revelation, the circumstances of man are
extremely forlorn.

2. HE finds himself placed here as a stranger in a vast universe, where the
powers and operations of nature are very imperfectly known; where both the
beginnings and issues of things are involved in mysterious darkness; where he
is unable to discover with any certainty, whence he sprung, or for what purpose
he was brought into this state of existence; whether he be subjected to the
government of a mild, or of a wrathful ruler; what construction he is to put on
many of the dispensations of his providence; and what his fate is to be when he
departs hence. What a disconsolate situation to a serious enquiring mind! The
greater degree of virtue it possesses, its sensibility is likely to be the more
oppressed by this burden of laboring thought. Even though it were in one's
power to banish all uneasy thought, and to fill up the hours of life with
perpetual amusement; life so filled up would, upon reflection, appear poor and
trivial. But these are far from being the terms upon which man is brought into
this world.

3. HE is conscious that his being is frail and feeble; he sees himself beset
with various dangers: and is exposed to many a melancholy apprehension, from
the evils which he may have to encounter, before he arrives at the close of
life. In this distressed condition, to reveal to him such discoveries of the
Supreme Being as the christian religion affords, is to reveal to him a father
and a friend; is to let in a ray of the most chearing light upon the darkness
of the human estate. He who was before a destitute orphan, wandering in the
inhospitable desert, has now gained a shelter from the bitter and inclement
blast. He now knows to whom to pray, and in whom to trust; where to unbosom his
sorrows; and from what hand to look for relief.

4. IT is certain that when the heart bleeds from some wound of recent
misfortune, nothing is of equal efficacy with religious comfort. It is of power
to enlighten the darkest hour, and to assuage the severest woe, by the relief
of divine favor, and the prospect of a blessed immortality. In such hopes the
mind expatiates with joy; and when bereaved of its earthly friends, solaces
itself with ^^e thoughts of one friend who will never forsake it. BLAIR.

IRREGULAR PLEASURES.
1. BY the unhappy excess of irregular pleasures in youth, how many amiable
dispositions are corrupted or destroyed! How many rising capacities and powers
are suppressed! How many flattering hopes of parents and friends are totally
extinguished! Who but must drop a tear over human nature, when ^e beholds that
morning which rose so bright, overcast with such untimely darkness; that good
humor, which once captivated all hearts; that vivacity which sparkled in every
company; those abilities which were fitted for adorning the highest stations,
all sacrificed at the shrine of low sensuality, and one who was formed for
running the fair career of life, in the midst of public esteem, cut off by his
vices at the beginning of his course, or sunk for the whole of it into
insignificancy and contempt! These, O sinful pleasure, are thy trophies! It is
thus, that cooperating with the foe of God and man, thou degradest human
honor, and blastest the opening prospects of human felicity. BLAIR.

The Necessity of depending for Success on the Blessings of Heaven.
1. LET me recall your attention to that dependence on the blessing of heaven,
which, amidst all your endeavors after improvement, you ought continually to
preserve. It is too common with the young, even when they resolve to tread the
path of virtue and honor, to set out with presumptuous confidence in
themselves. Trusting to their own abilities for carrying them successfully
through life, they are careless of applying to God, or of deriving any
assistance from what they are apt to reckon the gloomy discipline of religion.
Alas, how little do they know the dangers which await them? Neither human
wisdom nor human virtue, unsupported by religion, are equal for the trying
situations which often occur in life.

2. BY the shock of temptation, how often have the most virtuous intentions
been overthr^wn! Under the pressure of disaster, how oft^^ has the greatest
constancy sunk! Destitute of the favor of God, you are in no other situation
with all your boasted abilities, than orphans left to wander in a trackless
desert, without any guide to conduct them, or any shelter to cover them from
the gathering storm. Correct, then, this ill founded arrogance. Expect not that
your happiness can be independent of him who made you. By faith and repentance
apply to the redeemer of the world. By piety and prayer seek the protection of
the God of Heaven. BLAIR.

Experience to be anticipated by Reflection.
1. IT is observed, that the young and ignorant are always the most violent in
pursuit. The knowledge which is forced upon them by longer acquaintance with
the world, moderates this impetuosity. Study then, to anticipate, by
reflection, that knowledge which experience buys at too dear a price. Inure
yourselves to frequent consideration of the emptiness of those pleasures which
excite so much strife and commotion among mankind. Think how much more of tr^e
enjoyment is lost by the violence of passion, than by the want of those things
which give occasion to that passion.

2. PERSUADE yourselves, that the favor of God, and the p^ssession of virtue,
form the chief happiness of the rational nature. -- Let a contented mind, and a
peaceful life, hold the next place in your estimation. -- These are the
conclusions which the wise and thinking part of mankind have always formed. To
these conclusions, after having run the race of passion, you will probably come
at last. By forming them betimes, you would make a seasonable escape from that
tempestuous region, through which none can pass without suffering misery,
contracting guilt, and undergoing severe remorse.

BLAIR. A contented Temper the greatest Blessing and most material requisite to
the proper Discharge of our Duty.
1. A CONTENTED temper is one of the greatest blessings that can be enjoyed by
man, and one of the most material requisites to the proper discharge of the
duties of every station. For a fretful and discontented temper renders one
incapable of performing aright any part in life. It is unthankful and impious
toward God; and toward men, provoking and unjust. It is a gangrene which
preys on the vitals, and infects the whole constitution with dis^ase and
putrefaction. subdue pride and ^y, and you will take the most effectual method
of eradicating this distemper.

2. YOU will no longer behold the objects around you with jaundiced eyes. You
will take in good part, the blessings which providence is pleased to bestow,
and the degree of favor which your fellow creatures are disposed to grant you.
Viewing yourselves with all your imperfections and failings in a just light,
you will rather be surprised at your enjoying so many good things, than
discontented, because there are any which you want. From an humble and
contented temper will spring a cheerful one. This, if not in itself a virtue,
is at least the garb in which virtue should be always arrayed.

3. PIETY and goodness ought never to be marked with that dejection which
sometimes takes rise from superstition, but which is the proper portion only of
guilt. At the same time, the cheerfulness belonging to virtue, is to be
carefully distinguished from that light and giddy temper which characterises
folly, and is so often found among the dissipated and vicious part of mankind.
-- Their gaity is owing to a total want of reflection; and brings with it the
usual consequences of an unthinking habit, shame, remorse, and heaviness of
heart in the end.

4. THE cheerfulness of a well regulated mind, springs from a good conscience
and the favor of heaven, and is bounded by temperance and reason. It makes a
man happy in himself, and promotes the happiness of all around him. It is the
clear and calm sunshine of a mind illuminated by piety and virtue. It crowns
all other good dispositions, and comprehends the general effect which they
ought to produce on the heart.

BLAIR. ON THE DEATH OF CHRIST.
1. THE redemption of man is one of the most glorious works of the Almighty. If
the hour of the creation of the wo^ld was great and illustrious; that hour,
when, from the dark and formless mass, this fair system of nature arose at the
divine command; when, "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy;" -- no less illustrious is the hour of the restoration of the
world; the hour, when, from condemnation, and misery, it emerged into happiness
and peace. With less external majesty it was attended, but is, on that account,
the more wonderful, that, under an appearance so simple, such great events were
covered.

2. IN the hours of Christ's death, the long series of prophecies, visions,
types, and figures, was accomplished. This was the center in which they all
met; this the point toward which they had tended and verged, throughout the
course of so many generations. You behold the law and the prophets standing, if
we may so speak, at the foot of the cross, and doing homage. You behold Moses
and Aaron bearing the ark of the covenant; David and Elijah presenting the
oracle of testimony. You behold all the priests and sacrifices, all the rites
and ordinances, all the types and symbols, assembled together to receive their
consummation. Without the death of Christ, the worship and ceremonies of the
law would have remained a pompous, but unmeaning institution. In the hour when
he was crucified, "the book of the seven seals" was opened. Every rite assumed
its significancy; every prediction met its event; every symbol displayed its
correspondence.

3. THIS was the hour of the abolition of the law, and the introduction of the
gospel; the hour of terminating the old, and beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worship throughout the earth. -- Viewed in this light,
it forms the most august era, which is found in the history of mankind.

4. WHEN Christ was suffering on the cross, we are informed by one of the
Evangelists, that he said, I thirst; and they filled a sponge with vinegar and
put it to his mouth. "After he had tasted the vinegar, knowing that all things
were now accomplished, and the scripture fulfilled, he said, it is finished;"
that is, this offered draught of vinegar was the last circumstance predicted by
an ancient prophet that remained to be fulfilled. The vision and the prophecy
are now sealed: the Mosaic dispensation is closed. "And he bowed his head and
gave up the Ghost." -- Significantly was the veil of the temple rent in this
hour; for the glory then departed from between the Cherubims. The legal high
priest delivered up his urim and thummim, his breast plate, his robes, and his
incense; and Christ stood forth as the great high priest of all succeeding
generations. By that one sacrifice, which he now offered, he abolished
sacrifices for ever. Altars on which the fire had blazed, for ages, were now to
smoke no more. Victims were no more to bleed. "Not with the blood of bulls and
goats, but with his own blood; he now entered the holy place, there to appear
in the presence of God for us."

5. THIS was the hour of association and union to all the worshippers of God.
When Christ said, "it is finished," he threw down the wall of partition which
had so long divided the Gentile from the Jew. He gathered into one all the
faithful out of every kindred and people. He proclaimed the hour to be come,
when the knowledge of the true God should be no longer confined to one nation,
nor his worship to one temple; but over all the earth, the worshippers of the
father should "serve him in spirit and in truth." From that hour, they who
dwelt in the "utmost ends of the earth, strangers to the covenant of promise,
began to be "brought nigh." In that hour the light of the gospel dawned from a
far on the British islands.

6. THIS was the hour of Christ's triumph over all the powers of darkness; the
hour in which he overthrew dominions, and thrones, "led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men." The contest which the kingdom of darkness had long
maintained against the kingdom of light, was now brought to its crisis. The
period was come, when "the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the
serpent." For many ages the most gross superstition had filled the earth. --
"The glory of the incorruptible God was" every where, except in the land of
Judea, "changed into images made like to corruptible man, and to birds and
beasts, and creeping things." The world, which the Almighty created for
himself, seemed to have become a temple of idols. Even to vices and passions
altars were raised; and, what was entitled religion, was, in effect, a
discipline of impurity. In the midst of this universal darkness, Satan had
erected his throne^ and the learned and polished, as well as the savage
nations, bowed down before him. -- But at the hour when Christ appeared on the
cross, the signal of his defeat was given. -- His kingdom suddenly departed
from him; the reign of idolatry passed away -- He was beheld to fall like
lightning from heaven." In that hour the foundation of every Pagan temple
shook; the statue of every false God tottered on its base. The priest fled from
his falling shrine; and the Heathen oracles became dumb for ever.

7. DEATH also, the last foe of man, was the victim of this hour. The
formidable appearance of the spectre remained, but his dart was taken away;
for, in the hour when Christ expiated guilt, he disarmed death, by securing the
resurrection of the just* -- When he said to his penitent fellow-sufferer, "To
day thou shall be with me in Paradise," He announced to all his followers the
certainty of heavenly bliss. He declared, The Cherubims to be dismissed, and
the flaming sword to be sheathed, which had been appointed at the fall, to keep
from man the way of the Tree of Life. Faint before this period, had been the
hope, and indistinct the prospect, which even good men enjoyed of the heavenly
kingdom. Life and immortality were now brought to light. From the hill of
Calvary, the first clear view was given to the world of the everlasting
mansions. Since that hour, they have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Christ. Under trouble they sooth their minds; amidst temptations
they support their virtue; and in their dying moments enable them to say, "O
death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory?

BLAIR. OF PROVIDENCE.
1. THAT great prophet Moses, it is said, was called up, by a voice from
heaven, to the top of a mountain; where, in a conference with the Supreme
Being, he was permitted to propose to him some questions concerning his
administration of the universe. In the midst of this divine colloquy, he was
commanded to look down on the plain below.

2. At the foot of the mountain there issued out a clear spring of water, at
which a soldier alighted from his horse to drink. -- He was no sooner gone,
than a little boy came to the same place, and finding a purse of gold, which
the soldier had dropped, took it up and went away with it. Immediately after
this came an infirm old man, weary with age and traveling, and having quenched
his thirst, sat down to rest himself by the side of the spring: the soldier,
missing his purse, returns to search for it, and demands it of the old man, who
affirms that he had not seen it; and appeals to heaven in witness of his
innocence: the soldier, not believing his protestations, kills him.

3. MOSES fell on his face, with horror and amazement, when the divine voice
thus prevented his expostulation: be not surprised Moses, nor ask why the judge
of the whole earth has suffered this thing to come to pass: the child is the
occasion that the blood of the old man is spilt; but know, that the old man,
whom thou saw, was the murderer of that child's father.

FRANKLIN. OF NEATNESS, DECENCY, etc.
1. NEATNESS, cleanliness, and decency, to which we may add dignity of
countenance, and demean^^r, seem to have something refined and moral in them.
At least we generally esteem them indications of an orderly, genteel, and
well-g^verned mind, conscious of inward worth, or the respect due to one's
nature. Whereas nastiness, ^lovenliness, aukwardness, and indecency, are shrewd
symptoms of something mean, careless, and deficient; and betray a mind
untaught, illiberal, unconscious of what is due to one's self or to others. How
much cleanliness conduces to health needs hardly to be mentioned; and how
necessary it is to maintain one's character and rank in life, and to render us
agreeable to others as well as to ourselves, is as evident.

2. THERE are certain motions, airs and gestures, which become the human
countenance and form, in which we perceive a comeliness, openness, simplicity,
and gracefulness; and there are others, which, to our sense of decorum, appear
uncomely, affected, disingenuous, and awkward, quite unsuitable to the native
dignity of our face and form. -- The first are in themselves the most easy,
natural, and commodious; gives one boldness and presence of mind, a modest
assurance, an address both awful and alluring; they bespeak candor and
greatness of mind, raise the most agreeable prejudices in one's favor, render
society engaging, command respect, and often love, and give weight and
authority both in conversation and business; in fine, they are the coloring of
virtue, which show it to the greatest advantage in whomsoever it is; and not
only imitate, but in some measure supply it, where it is wanting. Whereas the
last, viz. rudeness, affectation, indecorum, and the like, have all the
contrary effects; they are burdensome to one's self, a dishonor to our nature,
and a nuisance in society.

3. THE former qualities, or goods, are best attained, by a liberal education,
by preserving a just sense of the dignity of our nature, by keeping the best
and politest company, but above all, by acquiring those virtuous and ennobling
habits of mind which are decency in perfection, which will give an air of
unaffected grandeur, and spread a luster, truly engaging, over the whole form
and deportment. PRECEPTOR.

THE SPEAKER.
1. A CORRECT speaker does not make a movement of limb or feature, for which he
has not a reason. If he addresses heaven, he looks upward -- If he speaks to
his fellow creatures, he looks round upon them; and the spirit of what he says,
or is said to him, appears in his look. If he expresses amazement, or would
excite it, he lifts up his hands and eyes. If he invites to virtue and
happiness, he spreads his arms, and looks benevolent. If he threatens the
vengeance of heaven against vice, he bends his eyebrows into wrath, and
menaces with his arm and countenance. He does not needlessly saw the air with
his arm, nor stab himself with his finger. He does not clap his right hand upon
his breast, unless he has occasion to speak of himself, or to introduce
conscience or some thing sentimental. He does not start back, unless he wants
to express horror or aversion. He does not come forward, but when he has
occasion to solicit. He does not raise his voice, but to express some what
peculiarly emphatical. He does not lower it, but to contrast the raising of it.
His eyes, by turns, according to the humor of the matter he has to express,
sparkle fury; brighten into joy; glance disdain; melt into grief, frozen
disgust, and hatred; languish into love, or glare distraction.

DRUMMOND. A TABLE, Exhibiting the real, and supposed number of inhabitants
existing upon the face of the earth.
Kingdoms, etc. No. Inhabitants. Sweden, 3.000.000 Russia, 20.000.000 Denmark,
2.000.000 Poland, 8.000.000 Germany, 26.000.000 Prussia, 2.000.000 France,
24.000.000 United Netherlands. 2.300.000 Gt. Britain and Ireland, 12.000.000
Switzerland, 1.560.000 Bohemia, 3.000.000 Italy, 16.000.000 Portugal, 2.200.000
Hungary, 4.500.000 Spain, 10.000.000 Turkey, 9.000.000 Total in Europe
145.560.000
Brought forward, 145.560.000 Assia is supposed at 450.000.000 Africa, at
150.000.000 America, About Four Millions of which are said to be in the United
States.
at 160.000.000 Total, 905.560.000
A CONCISE SYSTEM OF PRACTICAL ARITHMETIC.
INTRODUCTION.
ARITHMETIC is the art or science of numbering; for as magnitude is the subject
of Geometry, so is multitude, or numbers, the subject of Arithmetic; the whole
art of which, depends chiefly, upon the thorough knowledge of the five
following Rules (all the other rules being compounded of them) viz. Numeration,
Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division:

The NUMERATION TABLE.
1 Units, 21 Tens, 321 Hundreds, 4 321 Thousands, 54 321 Tens of Thousands, 654
321 Hundreds of Thousands, 7 654 321 Millions, 87 654 321 Tens of Millions, 987
654 321 Hundreds of M^llions.

Note. The last line in the Numeration Table* is read thus; Nine hundred and
eighty-seven million, Six hundred and fifty-four thousand, Three hundred and
twenty-one. Here you see, that Units occupy the first place, toward the right
hand; Tens the second; Hundreds the third; Thousands the fourth; Tens of
thousands the fifth; Hundreds of thousands the sixth; Millions the seventh;
Tens of millions the eighth; and Hundreds of millions the ninth, and last place.

SIMPLE ADDITION.
Simple addition teaches to add several numbers of one kind together, so as to
make of them one total sum.

RULE. Begin at the right hand, or units rank, and carry 1 for every 10
contained in each rank, to the next row, and set down what is over; under the
last rank, set down the whole amount.

Note. You must place Units under Units, Tens under Tens, and Hundreds under
Hundreds, etc.

Example 1. Example 2. miles. yards. 384 652 794 478 463 696 646 678 ^287 2504

In reckoning the second Example here, I say 8 and 6 is 14, and 8 is 22, and 2
is 24; there are two tens in this row, and four over; I set down the 4 under
the Units place, and carry 2 to the next row, and then say, the 2 that I carry,
and 7, makes 9, and 9 is 18, and 7 is 25, and 5 is 30; this rank comes out an
even number of tens, and nothing over, therefore I put down 0, in the place of
tens, and carry 3, for the 3 tens, to the next row; again, the 3 that I carry
and 6 is 9, and 6 is 15, and 4 is 19, and 6 is 25; this being the last row, I
set down the wh^le amount, viz. Two Thousand Five-hundred and Four Yards.

SIMPLE SUBTRACTION.
Simple subtraction teaches to take a lesser number from a greater, and shows
the difference betwixt them.

RULE. Place the lesser number under the greater, taking care that each figure
in both lines (of the same local value) stands in its proper place; namely,
units under units, tens under tens, etc.

Note. -- What you stop at in addition, you must borrow in subtraction.

Example 1. -- ^

In this example, after placing the lesser number under the greater, as the
rule directs, I say, 4 from 1 I cannot, but 4 from 11 (here I borrow 10 from
the next row, which I add to the 1) and there remains 7; then the 1, that I
borrowed, and 9, make 10 (having borrowed 10 in the units place, I must here
pay 1 to the tens row, as an equivalent for it) again 10 from 4 I cannot, but
10 from 14 (borrowing and paying as before) and there remains 4; then I say,
the 1 that I last borrowed, and 5, is ^ from 7, and 1 remains: Here the work is
done, and the difference between the two given numbers is 147.

Example 2. Example 3. Pounds. Yards. From 2500 From 1776 Take 1791 Take 1688
Rem.. 709 Rem... 88

To prove Subtraction, add the remainder to the lesser number, and the sum will
be equal to the greater.

SIMPLE MULTIPLICATION.
Multiplication serves instead of several additions. There are three things
particularly to be observed, in this rule; viz. The Multiplicand, or sum
multiplied, the multiplier or sum multiplied by, the product or answer. The
multiplicand and multiplier, when taken together, are sometimes called Factors.

RULE I. Let the factors be placed one under another, taking care to place,
units under units, tens under tens, etc.

RULE II. When the multiplier consists of more places than one, there must be
made as many several products as there are figures in the multiplier: let the
first figure of every product stand directly under the multiplying figure: add
these several products together, and their sum will be the total product.

RULE III. Ciphers at the right of either, or both factors, may be omitted in
the operation, but must be annexed to the product.

RULE IV. When the multiplier is any composite number (as 6 times 6 is 36)
multiply by those parts one after another, and the last product will be the
total product sought. Multiplication is proved, by inverting the factors; but
the most certain method of proving it, is by division.

THE MULTIPLICATION TABLE.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 3 6 9 12 15 18 21
24 27 30 33 36 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 5 10 15 20 25 ^^ 35 40 45 50
55 60 6 12 18 24 3^ ^^ 42 48 54 60 66 72 7 14 21 28 3^ ^^ 49 56 63 70 77 84 8
16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 88 96 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 90 99 108 10 20 30
40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 11 22 33 44 ^^ 66 77 88 99 ^10 1^1 132 12 24 36
4^ ^^ 72 84 96 10^ 120 132 144

Examples in Multiplication.
Example 1. ^

EXAMPLE II. Multiply 144 by 36, ^

EXAMPLE III. ^

In the f^rst example here, I begin at the right hand figure, and say, 4 times
4 is 16; here I put down 6 under the multiplying figure, and carry 1; then 4
times 6 is 24, and ^ that I carry is 25; in this line are 2 tens and ^ over; I
set down the 5, and carry 2 to the next row for the two tens; lastly 4 times 5
is 20, and the 2 that I carry makes 22. I set down the whole here, and find the
total of 564, multiplied by 4, to be 2256, as in the work.

SIMPLE DIVISION.
Division teaches to find how often one number is contained in another; there
are three certain parts in division viz. The dividend, or sum given to be
divided; the divisor, or sum divided by; the quotient, or answer to the work:
if any thing remains after the operation is done, it is called the remainder*
and if placed over the divisor thus, 53/75 forms a fraction.

To find how often the divisor is contained in the dividend;

RULE:
FIRST seek mentally; second multiply the divisor, into the last figure placed
in the quotient; third subtract; fourth bring down the next figure, or period.

To prove division, multiply the quotient by the divisor, and to that product
add the ^^mainder; the sum will be equal to the dividend.

EXAMPLE I.
Divide 788 dollars equally amongst 4 men.

^

In this Example, I say, the four's in 7 once, and 3 remains, which being
placed before the next figure in the dividend, makes 38; again, the four's in
38; 9 times 4 is 36, taken from 38, and 2 remains, this 2 prefixed to 8, the
last figure in the dividend, makes it 28; lastly, the four's in 28, 7 times;
here the operation is finished, and each man's share of the dividend, is, One
hundred and ninety-seven dollars.

EXAMPLE II.
Divide 98884 by 96.

^

EXAMPLE III.
Divide 64800, by 1800 ^

In the third and last example here, I cut off two ciphers from the dividend,
and also from the divisor; then I seek how often 18, the divisor, is contained
in 64, the two first figures of the dividend; the answer is, 3 times 18 is 54,
taken from 64 and ten remains; to this 10 I annex 8, the last figure in the
dividend, which makes a new dividend of 108; again I ask how many times 18 in
108, the answer is 6 times; for 18, the divisor, being multiplied by 6, the
last figure placed in the quotient, is just 108, and nothing over.

TABLES, In ADDITION, of diverse Denominations.
OF MONEY.
4 Farthings make 1 Penny, 12 Pence 1 Shilling, 20 Shillings 1 Pound.

Note. L. stands for pounds, s. for shillings, d. for pence, qr. for farthings.

TROY WEIGHT.
24 Grains make 1 Penny-weight, 20 Penny-wt. 1 Ounce, 13 Ounces 1 Pound.

Note. By this weight, is weighed, Gold, Silver, Jewels, Liquor, etc.

CLOTH MEASURE.
2 Inches make 1 Quarter. 4 Nails 1 Quarter. 4 Quarters 1 Yard. 3 Quarters 1
Flemish Ell. 5 Quarters 1 English Ell. 6 Quarters 1 French Ell.

APOTHECARIES WEIGHT.
20 Grains make 1 Scruple. 3 Scruples 1 Dram. 8 Drams 1 Ounce. 12 Ounces 1
Pound.

AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.
16 Drams make 1 Ounce. 16 Ounces 1 Pound. 28 Pounds 1 Quarter of an hundred
with. 4 Quarters 1 Hundred or 112 Pounds.

LONG MEASURE.
3 Barley corns make 1 Inch. 4 Inches 1 Hand. 12 Inches 1 Foot. 3 Feet 1 Yard.
6 Feet 1 Fathom. 5 Yards 1 Rod, pole, or perch. 40 Poles 1 Furlong. 8 Furlongs
1 Mile. 3 Miles 1 League. 69 Miles English and American measure.
1 Degree.

LAND MEASURE.
9 Square Feet make 1 Yard. 30 Yards 1 Pole, 40 Poles 1 Rood. 4 Roods 1 Acre.
640 Acres 1 Mile Square.

TIME.
60 Seconds make 1 Minute. 60 Minutes 1 Hour. 24 Hours 1 Day. 7 Days 1 Week. 4
Weeks 1 Month. ^3 Months 1 day and 6 hours 1 Year.

WINE MEASURE.
4 Quarts 1 Gallon. 10 Gallons 1 Anchor of Brandy, etc. 18 Gallons 1 Runlet. 31
Gallons 1 Barrel, or a hogshead. 42 Gallons 1 Tierce 63 Gallons 1 Hogshead. 2
Pipes or 1 Tun 4 Hogshs.

DRY MEASURE.
2 Pints make 1 Quart. 4 Quarts 1 Gallon. 2 Gallons or 8 quarts 1 Pe^k. 4 Pecks
or 32 quarts 1 Bushel 8 Bushels 1 Quarter 32 Bushels 1 Chaldron.

Note. This measure, is used in the measuring of all kinds of Grain, Salt,
Coals, etc.

MOTION.
60 Seconds make 1 Prime Minute. 60 Minutes 1 Degree. 30 Degrees 1 Sign. 12
Signs make the whole circle of the Zodiac.

PENCE TABLE.
d. s. d. 20 is 1 and 8 30 2 6 40 3 4 50 4 2 60 5 0 70 5 10 80 6 8 90 7 6 100 8
4

SHILLINGS TABLE.
s. L. s. 20 is 1 0 30 1 10 40 2 0 50 2 10 60 3 0 70 3 10 80 4 0 90 4 10 100 5
^

If the learner commits these tables (...) ^emory, they will enable him to
calculate (...) in compound addition, with greater facility.

COMPOUND ADDITION.
Is the adding of several numbers together (having diverse denominations, as
pounds, shillings, pence, and farthings; dollars, dimes, etc.) into one total
sum.

1. OF MONEY.
Example 1. Example 2. Example 3. L. s. d. L. s. d. L. s. d. 9 12 4 17 10 6 996
12 6 8 10 5 44 14 4 644 10 4 9 4 ^ 16 12 3 788 18 8 7 6 6 50 15 9 475 15 2 34
13 6 129 12 10 2905 16 9

In the first example here, I begin at the right hand, or pence rank, and say,
6 and 3 is 9, and 5 is 14, and 4 is 18d. (or 1s. 6d.) I set down 6 under the
pence line, and carry 1, for the 1s. to the next rank, and say, the 1 that I
carry and 6 is 7, and 4 is 11, and 2 is 13; I come down the next rank, saying,
13 and 10 is 23, and 10 is 33; here I set down 13 under the shillings line, and
carry 1 to the next, or pounds row; again, the 1 that I carry, and 7, is 8, and
9 is 17, and 8 is 25, and 9 is 34; here the operation is finished, and the sum
total is, 34l. 13s. 6d. As the brevity of the present plan will not admit of
giving examples in the different additions, suffice it to observe here, that
the operations throughout the several additions (whether of weight, measure, or
time, etc.) is similar to that made use of in addition of money; for example,
if 4C. 3qrs. and 26lb. and 2C. 2qr. 8lb. were given to be added together, I
would say, 26lb. and 8 is 34lb. here (agreeable to the ^able of av^irdupois
weight) is 1qr. and 6lb. over, I set down the 6 odd pounds under the pounds
line, and carry 1 to the next row, which is quarters; again, the 1 that I
carry, and 2, is 3, and 3 is 6; here is 1C. and 2qr. over, I set down the 2qr.
and carry 1 to the place of hundreds, then say, ^ that I carry, and 2 is 3, and
4 is 7C. so that the total of these sums, when added together, is 7Cwt. 2qr.
and 8lb. avoiraupoi^ weight. In the same manner any sum, in addition, of diverse
denominations, may be done; respect being had to the different addition tables.

^ition, both simple and compound, may be proved, by add^ the several sums
downwards from the top to the bottom; if the total agr^es with the sum, when
reckoned from the bottom to the top, the sum is right.




ADDITION OF TROY-WEIGHT.
10 12 20 24 lb. oz. pw. gr. 9 10 5 14 5 11 14 13 6 4 7 5 8 9 6 10 6 4 5 6 Ans.
37 3 19 0

ADDITION of CLOTH-MEASURE.
10 4 4 yd. qr. n. 7 2 2 9 3 2 8 1 2 5 2 0 7 3 2 Ans. 39 1 0

COMPOUND SUBTRACTION.
Compound subtraction teaches to find the difference between any two given
numbers of diverse denominations.

10 20 12 10 20 12 10 20 12 4. Examples, L. s. d. L. s. d. L. s. d. q. Borrowed
5 2 4. 64 10 3. 560 6 4. Paid 3 12 3. 45 12 6. 196 10 6. Unpaid 1 10 1 18 17 9
363 15 9

In the first example here, I say, 3 from 4 and 1 remains; again, 12 from 2, I
cannot, therefore I must borrow 1 pound or 20 shillings (from the pounds line)
and say, 12 from 20 and there remains 8, to which I add the 2 in the upper
line, which makes 10; I put down the 10 in the shillings row, and then say, the
1 that I borrowed and 3 makes 4; lastly 4 from 5 and 1 remains; here the work
is finished, and the balance unpaid is one pound ten shillings and one penny,
as in the work.

AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.
10 20 4 28 16 16 Tons. C. qrs. 1b. oz. dr. From 64 10 2 12 2 4 Take 19 17 1 10
4 14 Rem. 44 13 1 1 13 6

TROY WEIGHT.
10 12 20 24 lb. oz. pwt. gr. From 144 2 12 18 Take 99 1 7 23 Rem. 45 1 4 19

Note. In the same manner the other subtractions are done; respect being had to
the different addition tables, as before observed.

MULTIPLICATION, Of Diverse Denominations.
RULE.
Multiply the price by the quantity, beginning at the right hand, or lowest
denomination. When the multiplier is more than 12, it must be apportioned into
component parts* thus suppose the multiplier to be 39, in that case, I multiply
the price of the given article, by 6 twice, which makes 36, and then by 3; I
add these two products together, which gives me 39, for 36 and 3 is 39. See 2d
Example.

EXAMPLES.
What comes 6 pieces of linen to, at L. 5 -- 12 s. -- 6 d. per Piece?

^

39 Weeks board, at 1 17 4 per. week.

^

What cost 1200 bushels of wheat at 5 s. -- 6 d. per bushel?

^

In 6 pieces of linen, each 25yds, 2qrs. 3^. how many yards.

^

In 4 ^ogshheads of Sugar, each 10C. -- 2 ^r^. 7lb. how many hundred weight.

^

What cost, 144 hogsheads of rum, at L. 12 -- 10 s. per hogshead?

^

In the first example here, I begin at the right hand or pence line, and say, 6
times 6, is 36 pence, I set down 0 in the place of pence, and carry 3 (for the
3 s. contained in the 36 d.) to the shillings line, then 6 times 1^ is 72, and
3 is 75 s. or L. 3 15 s. here I set down 15 s. in the shillings place, and
carry 3 to the pounds row; again I say, 6 times 5 is 30, and 3 that I carry
makes 33L. Here the operation is finished, and the 6 yards of cloth, I find,
amounts to thirty three pounds, fifteen shillings.

DIVISION, Of Diverse Denominations.
RULE.
Begin at the left hand or highest denomination, and reduce the remainder in
every line mentally (if any there be) set down the quotient figure of each line
under its respective denomination.

EXAMPLES.
Divide L. 10 -- 10 s. -- 10 d. equally among 7 persons.

^

Divide L 151 -- 10 s. -- 6 d. equally among 24 men.

^

In the first example here, I say, the sevens in 10, once, and 3 remains,
namely, L. 3 or 60 s. which being added to the 10 s. in the shillings row,
makes 70 s. here, is 10 times 7 and nothing over; I set down 10 in the place of
shillings; again the seven^ in 10 once and 3 pence over, which 3 being 12
farthings, added to the 2 in the farthings line, makes 14, then I say, the
sevens in 14, twice; here the work is finished, and each persons share of the
given sum, is, L. 1 10 s. 1 d.

OF REDUCTION.
Reduction, is the application of Multiplication and Division; in reducing
numbers of one kind, or denomination, into other numbers of a different
denomination, but retaining still the same value. Great names are brought into
small, by multiplication; and small names into greater ones by division: In all
reductions, whether ascending, or descending, care must be taken to multiply or
divide, by as many of the lesser, as makes one of the greater denomination.

EXAMPLES.
In L. 25 12 s. 6 d. how many pence?

^

In the first example in reduction, I multiply the pounds by 20, taking in the
12s. in the shillings line, which gives a product of 512 s. again I multiply
the shillings by 12, and take in the 8 d. in the pence row: the operation being
finished, I find the number of pence contained in L. 25 12 s 6 d. to be six
thousand, one hundred and fifty, as in the work.

In 6150 pence how many Pounds?

^

In 9C. -- 1qr. -- 12lb. of Tobacco, how many pounds weight?

^

In 1048 lb. how many Cw^.

^

AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.
In 7 C. 2 qrs. 8 lb. of sugar, how many pounds weight?

^

In 848 lbs. how many Cwt.

^

And proof of the foregoing.

In this example I multiply the 7 by 4, and take in the 2 in the quarters line;
again I multiply the 30 quarters by 28 (the pounds in a quarter) and take in
the 8 pounds in the pounds row: here the operation is done; and the answer is
eight hundred and forty-eight pounds; contained in 7C. 2qr. 8lb. as appears in
the work.

The Single Rule of Three Direct,
Commonly called the Golden Rule, from its manifold and excellent performance
in arithmetic, and the different branches of mathematics.

In this rule, by three terms given (or proposed) we find out a fourth, which
bears such proportion to the third number, as the second does to the first:
from this correspondence of its parts, it is called the Rule of Proportion; of
which there are two sorts, namely, Direct, and Inverse Proportion.

OF DIRECT PROPORTION.
When more requires more, or less requires less; that is, when the third number
is greater than the first, and requires the fourth, to be greater than the
second; or when the third number is less than the first, and requires the
fourth to be less than the second; it is then called Direct Proportion.

RULE.
In stating your question, let the first and third terms ^e of one name or
kind, and the second (or middle) term of the same kind with the answer required.

Note. 1. If any of the given terms be of diverse denominations, as pounds and
shillings, hundreds, quarters, etc. they must be reduced to the lowest name
mentioned.

Note 2. The fourth term (or answer) in direct proportion, is found by
multiplying the second and third terms together, and dividing their product by
the first. The fourth number so found bears the same proportion to the second,
as the third does to the first number, and is always of the same kind or
denomination with the middle number.

EXAMPLES. IN DIRECT PROPORTION.
If 6 yards of linen cost L. 1 7 s. what cost 28 yards?

^

If a piece of linen, containing 25 yards, cost L. 5 6 s. 8 d. What cost 3
yards.

^

If 10 hats cost L. 7 what cost 45?

^

If an hundred weight of Sugar, cost L. 3 12 s. What c^st 7lb.

^

If 7lb. of Sugar cost 4 s. 6 d. What cost an hundred weight.

^

If 1 oz. of Silver cost 9 s. what cost half a dozen of Spoons, that weighs 15
ozs.

^

If I pay L6. 19 s. 6 d. for 15 oz. of silver* what cost ^ oz.?

^

In the first example in Direct Proportion, the first and third numbers, are of
the same name or kind, nam^ly yards; the second or middle number being of
different denominations, I reduce it into the lowest name mentioned, viz.
shillings; I then multiply the second number, 27, by the third number 28, which
gives a product of 756, this sum divided by 6, the first number, produces a
product of 126s. which is the fourth number, or answer, viz. 6l. 6s.

The Single Rule of Three Inverse.
Inverse proportion is when more requires less, or less requires more, that is,
when the third term is greater than the first, and requires the fourth term to
be less than the second; less requires more again, when the third term is less
than the first, and requires the fourth to be greater than the second.

To find the fourth number, or answer, in inverse proportion, multiply the two
first numbers together, and divide their product by the third, the quotient is
the answer, in the same name with the middle number, and bea^s the same
proportion to it, as the third do^s to the first number.

If 100L. in 12 months, gain 7L. interest, what sum will gain the same, in 5
months?

^

If 240L. in 5 Months, gain 7L. interest, what principal will gain the same in
12 months?

^

MERCHANTS ACCOUNTS. Or Rules of Practice,
So called, from their manifold uses and brevity in finding the value of any
quantity of goods; by the given price of one integer.

Note. That any question in the Rule of Three, Direct, when the first term in
the stating is an Unit, is more briefly done by the Rules of Practice.

Questions in Practice may be proved by the single Rule of Three.

THE TABLES.
Aliquot parts of a Pound s. d. of a shilling. d. of an C^t* qrs. l^. 10 i^ 6 7
6 8 4 1/^ 2 i^ 5 3 1 3 4 1/^ 2 1/^ 2 6 1/^ 1 1/^ 1/^ 16 1/^ 2 1 1/^ 1 1/^^ ^^
1/^ 1 8 1/^^ 8 1/^^ 1 1/^^ 7 ^/^^

CASE I. When the price of an integer is less than a shilling.
RULE.
Find the aliquot parts of that price con^^ined in a shilling, which must be
divisors to the given sum.

Or thus. If the given price be not the aliquot part of a shilling, then first
take some part of it that is an aliquot part; and for the remaining part of the
price, let it be taken out of the foregoing part or parts, and then add the
quotients together; the total will be the answer in shillings.

EXAMPLE I. [In PRACTICE.]
^

Here I say, 6d. is the of a s. I therefore divide the quantity given by 2, and
then take of the quotient for the 3d. (3d. being the one half of 6d.) I add
both lines together, which g^ves me 18^^ -- o^ L.9 for Ans.

EXAMPLE II.
^

CASE II.
When the price of an integer is shillings and pence.

RULE I.
If the shillings and pence, be the aliquot part of a pound, it may be done at
once, as ^s. 6d. is the eighth of a pound.

RULE II.
If the shillings and pence be not the aliquot part of a pound, or if there be
shillings, pence, and farthings, multiply the given quantity by the shillings,
and take parts with the rest, and add them together; the total will be the
answer in shillings.

^

CASE III.
When the price of an integer is pounds, shillings, and pence.

RULE.
1. If the shillings and pence be the aliquo^ part of a pound, multiply the
given integers by the pounds, and divide by the said parts; those numbers so
found out, added together, will be the sum required.

2. If the shillings and pence be not the aliquot parts of a pound; or if there
be shillings pence and farthings given with the pounds, the reduce the pounds
into shillings and m^ltiply the integers by the said shillings, ne^ take parts
with the rest of the price, and add them together, the total will be the answer
in shillings.

^

CASE IV.
When both the Integer, and the quantity given, are of several denominations?

RULE. Multiply the price by the Integers, and take parts with the parts of the
Integer.

^

TARE AND TRETT.
Tare is an allowance made to the buyer, for the weight of the cask, hogshead,
bale, etc. that contain the goods; and is sometimes at so much per cask, or
hogshead, etc. or at a certain rate per cent.

Trett is an allowance of 4lb. on the 104lb. granted on sundry sorts of goods
for waste, dust, etc. Subtle is what remains after the deduction of the tare.

When the tare is at so much per cwt. to find the nett weight,

RULE.
When the tare is an aliquot part or parts of a cwt. divide the whole gross by
the said part or parts, and the quotient thence arising gives the tare of the
whole, which subtract from the gross, the remainder is the nett.

EXAMPLE I.
What is the nett weight of 6 barrels of beef, containing 15Cwt. 1qr. 12lb.
gross, tare, 25lb. per barrel.

^

What is the nett weight of 12 barrels of sugar?

^

In 80^wt. 3qr. 20lb. Gross, tare. 38lb. trett 4lb. per 104lb. how many lbs.
nett.

^

OF SIMPLE INTEREST.
Simple interest, is an allowance made by the borrower to the lender, for the
use o^ any sum of money for some space of time agreed upon; and is commonly at
a certain rate per cent, as 6. or 7 l. for the use of 100 l. for one year.

To find the interest of any given sum for one year.

RULE. Multipl^ the principal by the rate per cent. and divide the product by
100, the quotient is the interest required; which, multiplied b^ the given
number of years, gives the inte^^st for any determined space of time.

What is the interest of L450. for one year; at 6 per cent.

^

Here I multiply the principal, viz. L.450 by 6, the rate per cent. and then
divide by 100, as the rule directs; the quotient is L.27, which is the real
interest of L.450, at L.6 per cent. for a year.

What is the interest of L. 1000 for 2 years, at L.6 per cent.

^

Answer, L. 165 interest for 2 years.

There are some other cases in simple and compound interest, which are omitted
here, -- as are also, rebate and discount, loss and gain, exchange, etc. all of
which are readily done by the rule of three, and rules of practice.

Rules for reducing the Currencies of the different States in the Union, into
Sterling, or English Money.
To reduce Virginia currency (or any of the New England states) into sterling
-- subtract one fourth from the given sum; the remainder is sterling. When you
want to bring New York, or North Carolina currencies, into sterling -- multiply
by 9, and divide by 16; the quotient will be the answer in sterling.

The currencies of the following states, viz. New Jersey, Delaware,
Pennsylvania, and Maryland; are brought into sterling; by multiplying their
respective currencies by 3, and dividing by 5.

To reduce the currencies of South Carolina, and Georgia into sterling subtract
the one 28th part, from the given sum.

MONEY, OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, As established by Congress, August 8,
1786. and confirmed by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States, 1789.
THOUGH this Money is perhaps the plainest, and the easiest calculated
currency, of any standard of coins hitherto extant; yet, from the novelty of
it, some persons (unacquainted with Decimal Fractions) may be led to think,
that it is above their ability: For the benefit of such, the following examples
are added, subtracted, multiplied, etc. in the same manner as the like rules
are done, in common Arithmetic.

The denominations of the United States Money, are as follow: 10 Mills make 1
Cent, 10 Cents make 1 Dime, 10 Dimes make 1 Dollar, 10 Dollars make 1 Eagle.


Note. E. stands for Eagle, Dl. for Dollar, Dm. for Dime, Cn. for Cent, and Ml.
for Mills.

OF ADDITION.
This money may be added, in the same manner that whole numbers are, in common
Arithmetic; namely, by carrying 1 for every 10, that you find in each row, to
the next denomination toward the left hand; under the last row, set down the
whole amount.

EXAMPLE I.
Dl. Dm. Cn. Ml. 4 7 2 6 8 2 3 4 7 8 6 5 9 7 4 2 30 5 6 7

Here I begin at the right hand, or units rank, and say, 2 and 5 is 7, and 4 is
11, and 6 is 17; here I set down 7, and carry 1 (for the one ten) to the next
row, and say the 1 that I carry, and 4 makes 5, and 6 is 11, and 3 is 14, and 2
is 16; I put down 6, and carry 1 as before, to the next row, saying 1 and 7 is
8, and 8 is 16, and 2 is 18, and 7 is 2^; here I set down 5 and carry 2 to the
next rank, there being 2 tens in this row; again the 2 that I carry and 9 is
11, and 7 is 18, and 8 is 26, and 4 is 30; this being the last row, I set down
the whole am^unt; namely, thirty Dollars (or three Eagles) five Dimes, six
Cents, and seven Mills.

EXAMPLE II.
E. Dl. Dm. Cn. 9 7 6 4 8 4 8 8 6 6 9 8 24 9 5 0

EXAMPLE III.
E. Dl. Dm. 17 6 6 49 4 4 8 8 5 75 9 5

SUBTRACTION.
EXAMPLE I.
From 25 Dollars, 6 Dimes, and 2 Cents; take 16 Dollars, 5 Dimes, and 4 Cents.

Dl. Dm. Cn. From 25 6 2 Take 16 5 4 Rem. 9 0 8

In the first example here, after placing the lesser number under the greater
(taking care to place Cents under Cents, and Dimes under Dimes, etc.) I say 4
from 2 I cannot, but 4 from 12 (borrowing 10 from the next row which I add to
the upper figure) and there remains 8, then the 1 that I borrowed and 5 is 6
(for having borrowed 10 in the units place, I must here pay 1 as an equivalent
for it; again 6 from 6 and 0 remains; in the next row, I say, 6 from 5 I
cannot, but 6 from 15 (borrowing 10 as before) and 9 remains; lastly, I say,
the 1 that I borrowed and 1 makes 2 from 2 and 0 remains; here the example is
finished, and the remainder or difference, I find to be 9 Dollars, 0 Dimes, and
8 Cents, -- as in the work.

EXAMPLE II.
E. Dl. Dm. From 40 4 5 Take 24 6 8 Rem. 15 7 7

EXAMPLE III.
Dl. Dm. Cn. Ml. From 60 1 2 4 Take 44 4 6 6 Rem. 15 6 5 8

MULTIPLICATION.
EXAMPLE I.
What amounts 6 yards of cloth to, at 4Dls. 5Dms. 4^ns ^

I begin at the right hand row here, and say, 6 times 4 is 24, I (...) ^^wn 4
under the cents row, and carry 2 ^^r the 2 (...) to the next, or dimes row,
then 6 times 5 is 30, and 2 that I carry is 32, here I set down 2 under the
Dimes rank, and carry three for the three tens; lastly, 6 times 4 is 24, and 3
is 27; here the operation is finished, and I find the price of the cloth to be,
twenty-seven Dollars, two Dimes, and four Cents.

EXAMPLE II.
What is the value of 46 barrels of flour, at 6 Dl. 4 dm. and 2 cents per
barrel?

^

What amounts the price of 700 bushels of wheat to, at, 7 dimes 5 cents per
bushel?

^

DIVISION.
EXAMPLE I.
Divide 25 dollars 6 dimes and 2 cents equally among 6 persons.

^

In this example, I (...), the (...) in 25.4 times 6 is 2^* from 25 and 1
(...), that is 1 dollar (...) 10 dimes, which b^^^g added to the 6 d^^^s in the
next row make 16; then the ^ix's in 16, 2 times ((...)) 6 i^ 12, from 16, and
their remains 4, which being reduced in your mind, make 40 cents: this together
with the 2 cents in the next row, makes 42; then I say the six's in 42, 7
times; here the work is ended; and each person's share is four dollars, two
dimes, and seven cents.

EXAMPLE II.
Divide 462 dollars, 7 dimes, and 5 cents, equally among 25 men.

In this example I divide by 5 twice; being the component parts of 2^.

^

Here each man's share, is, eighteen dollars, five dimes, and one cent.

EXAMPLE III.
If (...) varies of linen cost 12 dollars and 3 dimes, (...) cost 1 yard?

^

Four dimes, and one cent ^or 3s. and 3d. New York currency nearly* per yard.

REDUCTION.
In 54 Eagles, 6 Dollars, 5 Dimes, and 4 Cents; how many mills?

^

Here I multiply, by as many of the lesser denomination, as make one of the
greater (which is here, in a ten fold proportion) taking in the odd numbers in
each row.

In 546, 540 Mills, how many Eagles?

^

Proof of the foregoing Example, namely, Fifty-four Eagles, Six Dollars, Five
Dimes, and Four Cents.

FINIS.
SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States.
A.
Robert Affleck, merchant. Nicholas N. Anthony, tanner and currier. Jacob J.
Arden, butcher. Andrew Aitken, cordwainer. Elizabeth Albeck. William Allen.
Arthur Adams, cabinet-maker. Abijah Abbot, grocer. William Ash, windsor
chair-maker. John Ashfield, baker. Nicholas Anthony, tanner and currier.
Francis Arden, butcher. Thomas Arden, merchant. Nicholas Antwerp. Jeronimus
Allstyne, blacksmith. John B. Andreese, cordwainer. Nicholas Anderson, baker.
George Appleby, brewer. Richard Anderson. John Atkenson. James Arden, merchant.
John Annelly, gun-smith. Thomas Anderson. Thomas Atkinson, merchant, Amwell,
Hunterton county, New Jersey, 12 books. Joseph Atkinson, merchant, Amwell,
Hunterton county, New Jersey, 12 books. John Archer. State V^n Aulen. Anna^ias
Archer, tavern keeper. William Allen, gun-smith. James Aymar, jun.
Tobacconists. John Aymar, Tobacconists.
B.
Rev. Abraham Beach, D. D. Rev. James Birkby. Rev. Jacob Brush. Dr. Samuel
Bradhurst, 2 books. James Boyd. Nancy Barker. Elizabeth Bolden. Frances Ann
Bogart. Robert Boyd* sheriff of the city and county. George Bond, attorney at
law. John Burt, hair dresser. Cornelius J. Bogart, attorney at law. Cornelius
Bogart. Gardener Baker, cordwainer. William Beekman. Peter Byva^k, merchant.
William Bryar, tobacconist. Robert and Peter Bruce, grocers. John Blanchard*
tavern keeper. Nicholas Bayard, Esquire. 2 books. Joseph Blackwell. Josiah Blakely,
china and glass store. Robert Benson, clerk of the city and county. William P.
Broadwell, saddler. David Barclay. William Berry. Anthony J. Blanchard,
Elizabeth Bean. Henry Bettner, grocer. James Black. Samuel Borrowe. James
Barrow, merchant. Isaac Bates. Michael Boil. Simeon A. Bayley. Andrew Brown,
merchant. Robert Burkett. Thomas Burling, cabinet maker. John Brasch, baker.
Abraham Brasher. Jacob Blank, wheelwright. William Buckle, merchant. Alexander
Bell, carpenter. William Buchanan. Henry Burtsell. James Boyd. Josiah Brown,
schoolmaster, Long Island. Joseph Blackwell. John Blanchard. John Broom,
merchant. John Brown. Edmund Brown. Thomas Bruen. James Bradley. Samuel
Bonsail, grocer. John Burt. Richard Brown. William Brown. James Berry. John
Boardman. Alpheus Brooks. Jasper D. Blagge, 2 books.
C.
William Constable, merchant, Jacob Crockezon, grocer. Nicholas Carmer, sail
maker. William Cowley, store-keeper. Dr. James Cogswell. John Cozine, attorney
at law. Garret Cozine, currier. Francis Child, tavernkeeper. Evandre Child.
John Cameron. Jameson Cox, deputy sheriff, 2 books. John Campbell, inspector.
Isaac Cock, grocer. Matthew Caldwell. Isaac Cromwell, grocer. George Cummings,
porter house. Archibald Currie, storekeeper. James Cornwall. L. M. Cutting,
attorney at law. Duncan Campbell, tayl^r. Peter Cole, tanner and currier. Dan
Carpenter, comb maker. Robert Carter, joiner and coach maker. John Cross, shop
keeper. James Cave, carpenter. James Carter, grocer. Cornelius Cooper. Robert
Cox. David Corswell. Thomas Cadle, store keeper. Catharine Cox. William
Collins. Bernard Cleodon, tavern keeper. Cornelius Crygier, jun. James
Carpenter, tailor. Donald Cameron, tailor. John Cregier, Yonkers. Nicholas N.
Carmer. Samuel Cady. James Crookshank. John Campbell. E. Caldwell,
schoolmaster. Dr. -- Cowan. Benjamin Crookshank, cabinet maker. Rev. Robert
Cleod. George Cox, carpenter. Samuel Clark, carpenter. Edmund Washburn. Peter
Cortelyou, Long Island.
D
Thomas Drake, grocer. Richard Drake, hatter. Elisha Dubois. William Depeyster,
merchant. Capt. James Deas. John Delanoy, schoolmaster. E. Dunscomb, attorney
at law. James Donaldson. Robert Dodds, silk dyer and scourer, 2 books Daniel
Dunscomb, jun. Joshua Drake, Newtown, Sussex county, New Jersey, 2 books. Isaac
Demilt, hatter. William Douglass, joiner. Thomas Demilt. Joseph Donaldson.
Thomas Dwight. James Duff^e, grocer. George Douglass, merchant* Ga^et Debow.
John Dewint, merchant* David D^meray. Jonathan Douglass. Hanah Dewal. Patrick
Doughty. Aaron Devon, carpenter. John Du^field, Long Island.
E.
William I. Ellsworth, pewterer. John Ellsworth, hatter. Nicholas Egbert,
Readington, Hunterdo^* county, New Jersey, 12 books. Peter Erben. William
Edgar, merchant. Benjamin Egbert, store-keeper. Abraham Eckert, grocer.
F.
Dr. Collin Frazer. James Fraser. C. Joseph Field. Samuel Falkingham. John
Fenno, printer, Philadelphia* John Forrester, shopkeeper. Joseph Fuller,
carpenter. John Forsyth, tailor and habit maker. Philip Friday, 2 books. John
Forbes. Theodorus Fowler, merchant. Joseph Fisher. Leonard Fisher, barber, etc.
etc. Gabriel Furman, broker. Duncan Ferguson, shopkeeper. James Fraser. George
Fox, tailor. John Fox, grocer. Joseph Ficher. Duncan Forbes, grocer. Michael
Fullum, grocer. John Fuller, carpenter. John Ferrers.
G.
Rev. John D. Gross, D. D. professor of Mor. P. etc. Columbia College. Thomas
Greenleaf, printer. John G. Glove^, merchant. John Glover, merchant. George
Gilbert. Peter Garres^* school master. William Golden, store-keeper. David
G^reath, merchant. James Gr^nt, watch-maker. James G^t, grocer. William Gran^,
tailor. Alexander S. Glass. David Gelston, merchant. John Graham, store-keeper.
William Gray, cordwainer. Robert Gourley, store-keeper. Lowis A. Gautiere, ship
wright. James Gibson. Benjamin Green. Col. Griffin, Williamsburgh, Virg. John
Golden, Morristown. Robert Graham, writing-master and accomptant, 3 books. N.
Gouvernour, merchant. ^. Greenwood, dentist. Dr. John A. Graham.
H.
Alexander Hamilton, secretary of the treasury of the United States. Robert
Harpur, deputy secretary of the state of New York. William Henson, tailor. John
Hopkins, drover. John II. ^le^, dancing master George (...), ^hop-keeper*
Robert Harris. Thomas Hamilton. (...) Hill. Frederick Heerman, druggist.
Matthias Howser. Jonas Humbert, baker. James Hardy, teacher of the Greek and
Latin languages. Daniel Hitchcock, carpenter. Miles Hitchcock, schoolmaster.
Luther Harris. Jeremiah Hallet, merchant. John Harrison, printer. William
Henderson, insurance office. Leake Hunt, Esquire. John Hawkins. Hoysted Hacker,
pilot, etc. Julia Henry. Hugh Henderson, merchant. Christopher B. Hazard,
tanner and currier. George Hog, cabinet-maker. John Haviland. James Hill.
Joseph Henry, store-keeper. Benjamin Haight, saddler. John R. Harrington.
Theodorus James Hamilton, grocer, 12 book^. Robert Hunter, vendue-master. ^et
Harsin, baker. ^^ristopher Hoffman. Wiliiam Henderson. Mrs. (...) Hunt. Robert.
Hyslop, store-keeper. Robert Hodge, printer and stationer. Gideon Harpur,
carpenter. Thomas Hamilton. Nathaniel Hill, cordwainer. John Howserman. Michael
D. Henry, attorney at law. Isaac Heyer. John B. Hicks. Eden Hunt. John Hirtell,
jun. Thomas Hays, cordwainer. Robert Harris Burtin. Dr. Peter Huggeford. Daniel
Hawxhurst, glover ard breeches maker. Oliver Hull. John Hardy, cabinet-maker.
Thomas Hearne, schoolmaster, New Jersey.
I. J.
Hon. John Jay, chief justice of the United States, etc. Hon. William Samuel
Johnson, L. L. D. President of Columbia College. Benjamin S. Judah, merchant.
Robert Johnson, cordwainer. Benjamin Joyce, silk dyer, etc. Henry Johnson,
schoolmaster, 2 books. Matthew Jarvis. Hon. Ralph Izard, South Carolina. John
Jackson, merchant. John Ireland. Elbert H. Jones. Edward Jones. David Johnson.
Andrew Inderweek, bake* John Johnson. Sally Jackley. Isaac Jones, store-keeper.
Jeremiah Johnson, Long Island.
K.
Hon. Henry Knox, secretary of war. John Kemp, L. L. D. Prof. of Mat. etc. in
Columbia College. John H. Kipp, merchant. Robert Kenedy. Capt. Samuel Kelly,
grocer. Henry H. Kip, inspector of pot ashes. Thomas F. Kipp, sail-maker. David
Keech, ship-wright. Abraham King, grocer. Godfred Kent. Cornelius King,
butcher. John M'Kinlay, retailer. John Keese, N. P. and counselor at ^aw.
Oliver L. Ker. Peter Kemble, merchant. Richard Kip, uphol^terer. John Kevan.
L.
Rev. I. H. Livingston, D. D. Rev. William Lynn. John Ludlow, attorney at law.
Robert Lenox, merchant. Jacob I. Lansing. Henry Lalor, hatter. -- Lacaze. Isaac
H. Levy, merchant. John Leverige, cordwainer. William S. Livingston, attorney
at law. I. R. Livingston. Brockholst Livingston, attorney at law. William
Livingston. Edward Livingston, attorney at law. Edward Livingston, carpenter.
Leonard Lespinard, brewer. Edward Loyde, tailor. William Lalor, store-keeper.
Capt. George Leycraft. George Leycraft. Charles Langral. Matthew Lasher.
Abrabam Lot, Esquire. Andrew Lot. Christopher Lot, store-keeper. Enock Lockwood.
James W. Lent, grocer. Thomas Lawrence. George Lion. Enoch Lenox. Elizabeth
Lewis. Jacob Leonard, hair dresser.
M.
Rev. John Mason, D. D. Rev. Benjamin Moore, D. D. Rev. John M'Knight, M. A.
Rev. Thomas Morrell. Hon. James Madison, jun. Virginia. Jacob Morton, attorney
at law. Alexander Macomb, merchant, 2 books. Genesis William Malcom. Dr. S. L.
Mitchel, Q County L* -- Island. Robert Gozeman, Carpe^ter. Alexander Mowatt.
Hawxhurst and Demilt, merchants. John M'Vicker, merchant. Jeremiah Marshall.
Joseph Mallonbury. John Myers, Merchant. William Maxwell, merchant. Daniel
M'Cormick, merchant. William Mooney, uph^er. Barnet M^oney, ^a^ter. James
Mon^gomery. Benjamin Miller, tobacconist. Charles Miller. Alexander M'Donald,
teacher of the French and English languages. White Matlock, brewer. Philip
Milledoler, tobacconist. David Morris. James M^rchie. Mangle Minthorn. P^ay
Munroe, attorney at law. Angus M'Quear. Alexander Mitchel. James Moore, Baker.
Neil M'Leod. Mynard Murseiles, Albany. Benjamin M'Dowl. Angus M'Lane. Willi^m
M'Catchi^. H. Mulligan, tailor. Andrew Morris. Archibald M'Intyre,
hair-dresser. Peper M'Intyre, hair-dresser. James M'Cready, cordwainer. Donald
M'Lean, retailer. Peter Mabie. George M'Donald. Alexander M'Donald,
storekeeper. Archibald M'Arture. Jacob Morrel. William Morton, printer. Edward
Marrennet. John Morrison, dyer. George M'Kay, grocer. John M'C^lan, merchant.
Hugh M'^^in, cordwainer. William Martin, grocer. Robert M'Mennomy. John
M'Kiernan, schoolmaster. A. G. Mappa, type founder. James M'Farran,
store^keeper. John Murray, merchant. William M'Kean, brewer. Archibald
M'Cullum, saddler. James M'Master, grocer. Anthony Morss, cordwainer.
N.
Lewis Nichols. William Neilson, merchant. Charles Naylon, storekeeper. Lewis
Nichols, cabinet maker. John Newton. William Not, carpenter. Malcom Niven,
schoolmaster. Bryan Nowlan. Christian Nestle, ship wright. William Newton,
store keeper. Hannah Nichols. Francis de-Neber.
O.
Peter Ogilvie, judge of the court of probates. John O'Brien. John Ogilvie,
carpenter.
P.
Right rev. Samuel Provoost. Richard Platt, broker. Daniel Phoenix, merchant,
and city treasurer, 2 books. Abraham Prall. Andrew Picken, dancing master.
Robert Piggot, schoolmaster. Abner Page. James Parks, schoolmaster. George
Parker. Elijah Pell. Jabez Peck, teacher of languages. Valentine Peter's. David
Post. Joseph Pell. Henry Pope. Mrs. Parker.
Q.
James Quackenbush, storekeeper. G. Quackenboss, Washington county.
R.
Rev. John Rogers, D. D. Nicholas Romayne, M. D. B. Roman, schoolmaster.
Abraham Russell, mason, 2 books, Alexander Ross, Baker. James Rose, hair
dresser. Robert Ross, carpenter. John Rudd, grocer. Cornelius Roosevelt,
merchant. Jacob Reed, Broker. William Reed. John Roe. William Rollinson,
engraver. Thomas Roberts, storekeeper. John Ramkin. James Renwick, merchant.
Charles Robertson, merchant. Michael Ritter, hardware store. John Ritter,
schoolmaster. George Rose. William Ramey. Richard Roseman, tinman. John
Ramage, miniature painter. Jacob Rose. Henry Room. John Reid, book-binder and
stationer. Richard Rogers. James Robinson, carpenter. Henry R^^^^, Esqu^re.
Robert R^per^, hatter. Michael Roberts, jeweller and stationer. Messrs. Remsen
and Wickham. William Read. William R^^^h. Francis Ro^ch. Daniel R^tor. Barnabus
Reeve, tailor. Anna Rap^lj^* Frederick Resler, soap-boiler, and chandler.
Charles Ramsay. Abraham Richards. Bernard Rhinelander. John Rankin, grocer. --
Read. Hugh Rose.
S.
Lewis A. Scott, secretary of the state of New York. Comfort Sands, merchant.
John Shaw, merchant. William Strahan, William Seton, merchant. Thomas Smith.
Thomas R. Smith, James Stuart. Hayman Solomon. Thomas Smith. Gerrard
Steddiford* vendue-master. John Swartwout, store-keepe, Henry Solinger. Joseph
Stringham. William Sim. Thomas Sanders. William Shedden, merchant. John Stake,
grocer. John Shute. John Stagg. Anthony Simmons, hair-dresser. Joseph Smith,
New Jersey. Solomon Simpson, merchant. Hasting Stackhouse, grocer. John
S^anford, A. M. John Sullivan, grocer. J. Seaman, jun. ironmonger. Sullivan
Sutherland. Thomas Smith. James Saidler, insurer, and broker. Augustus Sacker,
attorney at law. Garret S^hanck, gold and silver-smith. William Steymets,
tailor. Jacob Smith, chair-maker. John Sticklin, cordwainer. Simon Simonson,
cordwainer. Reuben Silvester. John Striker, ^allow chandler. John Sheyer.
Doctor John Shyer. John Sigison, cordwainer. George Speth, oil miller. Robert
Smith. Daniel Sier. Henry Sanders. Henry Shute. James R. Smith, merchant, 2
books. Valentine Shimeal. Daniel Stanbury, tanner and currier. Benjamin Strong.
Oman Salmon. Anthony Simmore. John Slidell. Charles Stuart.
T.
Sir John Temple, British consul. Robert Troup, attorney at law. James Tillary,
M. D. Daniel Tooker, tanner and currier. John Tout, store keeper. James Teller.
Moses Tailor, tailor. Abraham Tailor, tailor. Jacob Tyler, teacher of
mathematics. John Tabele, merchant. John Tailor. Stephen Thorn, grocer.
William Thomson, jun. Malachi Treat, physician. Walter Townsend. Robert
Torrens, South Carolina. Thomas Thorn. John Tailor. William Turner, jun.
Robert Tree, hair-dresser. Joseph Trow. Thomas Tom, grocer. John Turner,
merchant. William Turnbull, merchant.
U.
John Utt, Cooper. Peter Ustic, nail manufactory.
V.
Richard Varick, mayor of New York. Samuel Van Steenbergh, English teacher.
William Valleau. John Van Gelder, tailor. Andrew Van Tyle, merchant. Isaac
Vervalen, tavern-keeper. Abraham Varick. Henry Van Solinger, druggist. Isaac
Van Hook. Elijah Vincent, East-Chester. William I. Vredenburgh. William Van
Wagen. Beekman M. Van-Beuren, shopkeeper. Daniel C. Verplanck. Nicholas, V.
Antwerp, ironmonger. Thomas Vail, grocer. Michael Van Court, K. C. Long Island.
W.
Peter Wilson, professor of languages, Columbia College. Joseph Winter,
attorney at law, 2 books. Israel Wilks. John Wilks, notary public. Charles
Wilks. James Warner. T. Wainwright, druggist. George Webster, grocer. Jonathan
Willis, merchant, Newton, New Jersey, 12 books. Isaac Wilson, schoolmaster,
New Jersey, 2 books. John I. Wilmurt, watch-maker. Isaac Whippo, broker, Jesse
Wicks, city marshal. Jacob Wilkins, grocer. George Warner, sail maker. Benjamin
Wallace, merchant, Albany, 2* books. William Wood, baker. James Weeks, tailor.
James Weandle, cordwainer. John Watkins, attorney at law. James Warner,
saddler. William Wilmerding, store keeper. William Wilcox, attorney at law.
George Weissenfels. Gilbert Woodhull. John Walker, carpenter. John Wilson. John
Woods, baker. Henry Will, pewterer. Gilbert C. Willet, brewer. John Woods. Mr.
Waldron. Charles Weissenfels. Isaiah Wool, mason. Benjamin Waldron. Jacob
Wilso. Charles Warner, coach-maker. James Woodhull, grocer. Stephen S. Weeks.
Abraham Wilson. William Wilson, tailor. E. Walker. I. Wortman. William Walton,
jun. Abraham M. Walton. Hercules Wendover.
Y.
Joseph Young, physician. John You Will, ironmonger. George Young.
Z.
Ludowick Zuricher, painter and glazier. Samuel Zeller, baker.
Several Gentlemen in different Parts of the United States, who hold
Subscription Papers for this Work, have not made their Returns in Time, to be
inserted with the foregoing List.

FINIS.

