THE CHARACTER AND WORK OF A SPIRITUAL WATCHMAN DECRIBED.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT HINESBURGH, FEBRUARY 23, 1791. AT THE ORDINATION OF THE
Rev. REUBEN PARMERLEE

BY LEMUEL HAYNES, Pastor of a Church in Rutland.

LITCHFIELD, (CONNECTICUT) PRINTED BY COLLIER AND BUEL.

HEBREWS XIII. 17. "For they watch for your souls as they that must give
account."
NOTHING is more evident, than that men are prejudiced against the gospel. It
is from this source, that those who are for the defense of it, meet with so
much contempt. It is true, they are frail, sinful dust and ashes, in common
with other men; yet on account of the important embassy with which they are
entrusted* it is agreeable to the unerring dictates of inspiration, to esteem
them very highly in love for their works sake. 1 These. v.13.

To illustrate this sentiment, was the design of the Apostle in this verse:
"Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves." He was far from
inculcating any thing that might seem to confront what the Apostle Peter has
enjoined, 1 Pet. v.3. Neither as being lords over God's heritage. The word
signifies to lead, guide, or direct. ^^^se's paraphrase.


Our text contains an important motive, to excite to attention and respect,
that is due to the ministers of Christ, on account of their relation to him;
and that is the aspect their work has to a judgement-day: For they watch for
your souls, as they that must quickly give account. They are amenable to their
great Lord and Master for every sermon they preach, and most give an account of
the reception they and their work meet with, among their hearers. -- Under the
influence of such a thought, let us take notice of a few things, supposed by
the work, assigned to ministers in the text. -- Say something with respect to
their character. -- Whence it appears that they must give account. -- When they
may be said to be properly influenced by such considerations.

I. There are several ideas suggested by the work assigned to gospel ministers
in the text: which is, to watch for souls. This supposes,

1. That the ^^^l is of vast importance; else why so much attention paid to it,
as to have a guard to inspect it? All those injunctions we find interspersed
through the sacred pages, to watchmen to be faithful, are so many evidences of
the worth of men's souls. What renders them so valuable, is the important
relation they stand in to their Maker. The perfections of the Deity are more
illustrated in the redemption of fallen men, than they would have been the
salvation of apostate angels; else why were the latter passed by, while God
chose the former as the objects of his attention? God has from eternity
appointed a proper number, for the display of his mercy and justice; means are
necessary to fit them for the Master's use; so that the soul in this view, is
of infinite importance.

2. Watchmen over the souls of men implies that they are prone to neglect them,
or to be inattentive to their souls. When one is set to inspect, or watch over
another, it supposes some kind of incapacity that he is under to take care of
himself. The scripture represents mankind by nature as fools, madmen; and being
in a state of darkenss, etc.

Men in general are very sagacious with respect to temporal affairs, and
display much natural wit and ingenuity, in contriving and accomplishing evil
designs; but to do good, they have no knowledge. Jer. iv.22. This is an
evidence that their inability to foresee danger, and provide against it, is of
the moral kind. Was there a disposition in mankind, correspondent to their
natural powers, to secure the eternal interest of their souls in the way God
has proscribbed, watchmen would in a great measure be useless.

3. The work and office of gospel ministers, suggests the idea of enemies
invading; that there is a controversy subsisting, and danger approaching. When
soldiers are called forth, and sentinels stand upon the wall, it denotes war.
The souls of men are environed with ten thousand enemies, that are seeking
their ruin. Earth and hell are combined together to destroy. How many already
have fell victims to their ferocity! The infernal powers are daily dragging
their prey to the prison of hell. Men have rebelled against God, and made him
their enemy; yea, all creatures, and all events, are working the eternal misery
of the finally impenitent sinner.

4. We are taught in the text and elsewhere, that the work of a gospel minister
is not with the temporal, but the spiritual concerns of men: They watch for
souls. Their conversation is not to be about worldly affairs, but things that
relate to Christ's kingdom, which involves the everlasting concerns of men's
souls. When a minister's affections are upon this world, his visits among his
people will be barren; he will inquire about the outward circumstances of his
flock; and perhaps, from pecuniary motives, rejoice at such prosperity: But as
though that was of greatest concern, he will have nothing to say -- with
respect to the health, and prosperity of their souls: Have no joys or sorrows,
to express, on account of the fruitful or more lifeless state of the inward man.

II. Let us say something with respect to the character of a spiritual watchman.

Natural endownments, embellished with a good education, are qualifications so
obviously requisite in an evangelical minister, that it is needless we insist
upon them at this time; and that the interest of religion has, and still
continues, greatly to suffer for the want of them, is equally notorious.

In the early ages of christianity, men were miraculously qualified and called
into the work of the gospel ministry; but we are far from believing, that this
is the present mode by which ordinary ministers are introduced.

1. It is necessary that those who engage in this work, love the cause in which
they profess to be embarked; that the love of Christ be shed abroad in the
heart: Hence our blessed Lord, by those repeated interrogations to Simon
whether he loved him, has let before us the importance of this qualification in
a spiritual Shepherd. The sad consequences of (...) those into the army, who
are in heart enemies to the commonwealth, have often taught men to be careful
in this particular. The trust reposed in a watchman is such, as renders him
capable of great detriment to the community. He that undertakes in this work
from secular motives, will meet with disappointment. What a gross absurdity is
this, for a man to commend religion to others, while he is a stranger to it
himself! "The pious preacher will commend the Savior, from the personal fund
of his own experience." Being smitten with the love of Christ himself with what
zeal and fervor will he speak of the divine glory! Love to Christ will tend to
make a minister faithful and successful. The importance of this point, urges me
to be copious on the subject, were it not too obvious to require a long
discussion.

2. Wisdom and prudence are important qualifications in ministers; hence that
injunction of the great preacher, Mat. x.16. Be ye therefore wise as serpents,
and harmless as doves. He is a man of spiritual understanding, whose soul is
irradiated with the beams of the Son of Righteousness, -- has received an
auction from the holy one, -- is taught by the word and spirit, and walks in
the light of God's countenance. He has seen the deceit of his own heart, --
knows the intrigues of the enemy, -- sees the many snares to which the souls of
men are exposed, -- and not being ignorant of the devices of satan, he will
endeavor to carry on the spiritual campaign, with that care and prudence, that
he shall not get advantage. He knows that he has a subtle enemy to oppose, and
human nature, replete with enmity against the gospel; and will endeavor, in
every effort, to conduct with that wisdom and circumspection, as shall appear
most likely to prove successful.

3. Patience is another qualification very necessary in a spiritual watchman.
His breast being inspired with love to the cause, he will stand the storms of
temptation; will not be disheartened by all the fatigues, and sufferings, to
which his work exposes him; but will endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.

4. Courage and fortitude, must constitute a part of the character of a gospel
minister. A sentinel, who is worthy of that station, will not fear the
formidable appearance of the enemy, nor tremble at their menaces. None of these
things will move him, neither will he count his life dear unto him, to defend a
cause so very important. He has the spirit of the intrepid Nehemiah, "Should
such a man as I flee?" He stands fast in the faith; quits himself like a man,
and is strong.

5. Nor must we forget to mention vigilance, or close attention to the business
assigned him, as an essential qualification in a minister of Christ. A man does
not answer the idea of a watchman, unless his mind is engaged in the business.
The word, which we have rendered watch, in the text, signifies, in the
original, to awake, and abstain from sleeping. Legh's Critica Sacra.
Indeed all the purposes of a watch set upon the wall, are frustrated, if he
sleeps on guard; thereby himself, and the whole army, are liable to fall an
easy prey to the cruel depredations of the enemy. The spiritual watchman is not
to sleep, but to watch the first motion of the enemy, and give the alarm; lest
souls perish through his drowsiness and inattention.

Some further observations with respect to the work of a gospel minister, will
be made in their place. We pass, --

III. To show, That ministers must give recount to God of their conduct, more
especially as it respects the people of their charge.

This solemn consideration is suggested in the text: -- It Is the design of
preaching, to make things ready for the day of judgment, 2 Cor. ii.16. To the
one we are the savor of death unto death; and to the other, the savor of life
unto life: We are fitting men for the Master's use, -- preparing affairs for
that decisive court. This supposes, that things must be laid open before the
great assembly at the day of judgment; or why is it that there are so many
things that relate therefore, and are preparatives therefore.

The work of a gospel minister has a peculiar relation to futurity: An
approaching judgment is that, to which every subject is pointing, and which
renders every sentiment to be inculcated, vastly solemn, and interesting.
Ministers are accountable creatures in common with other men; and we have the
unerring testimony of scripture, that God shall bring every work into judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Eccle.
xii.14. If there is none of our conduct too minute to be cognizable, we may
well conclude, that such important affairs, that relate to the work and office
of gospel ministers, will not pass unnoticed.

Arguments may be taken from the names given to the ministers of Christ, that
they must give account. They are called soldier, ambassadors, servants,
stewards, angels, etc. Which points out the relation they and their work stands
in to God: That they are sent of God, and are amenable to him that sent them;
as a servant or steward, is to give account to his Lord and Master, with
respect to his faithfulness, in the trust reposed in him. God tells Ezekiel, If
watchmen are not faithful, and souls perish through their neglect, that he
would require their blood at the hands of such careless watchmen. It is
evident, that primitive ministers were influenced to faithfulness from a view
of the solemn account they expected to give at the day of judgment. This gave
rise to those words, Acts iv.19. 'But Peter and John answered and said unto
them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to Hearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye.' If God's omniscience is a motive to faithfulness, it must
be in this view, that he will not let our conduct pass unnoticed, but call us
an account.

It was approaching judgment that engrossed the attention of St. Paul, and made
him exhort Timothy, to study to approve himself unto God. This made the beloved
disciple speak of having boldness in the day of judgment, 1 John, iv.17.

The divine glory is an object only worthy of attention; and to display his
holy character, was the design of God in creation; as there was (...) other
beings existing antecedent thereto, to attract the mind of Jehovah; and we are
sure that God is pursuing the same thing still, and always will. He is in one
mind, and who can turn him? Job xxiii.13. There is no conceivable object that
bears any proportion with the glory of God; and for him ever to aim at any
thing else, would be incompatible with his perfections The day of judgment is
designed to be a comment on all other days; at which time God's government of
the world, and their conduct toward him, will be publicly investigated, that
the equity of divine administration may appear conspicuous before the assembled
universe. It is called a day when the son of man is revealed. Luke xvii.30. The
honor of God requires that matters be publicly and particularly attended to;
that evidences are summoned at this open court: Hence the saints are to judge
the world. 1 Cor. vi.2.

It will conduce to the mutual happiness of faithful ministers and people, to
have matter laid open before the bar of God, as in the words following our
text, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief. The apostle speaks of
some ministers and people who should have reciprocal joy in the day of the Lord
Jesus; -- which supposes, that ministers, and the people of their charge, are
to meet another day as having something special with each other. The connection
between ministers and people is such, as renders them capable of saying much
for, or against, the people of their charge; and of hearers making the same
observations with respect to their teachers; and in this way the mercy and
justice of God will appear illustrious.

Since, therefore, the work of gospel ministers has such a near relation to a
judgment day; -- since they are accountable creatures, and their work so
momentous; -- since it is a sentiment that has had so powerful influence on all
true ministers in all ages of the world: Also their connection is such as to
render them capable of laying many things relating to the people of their
charge. Above all, since the displays of divine glory are so highly concerned
in this matter; we may without hesitation adopt the idea in the text, That
ministers have a solemn account to give to their great Lord and Master, how
they discharge the trust reposed in them.

IV. We are to inquire, what influence such considerations will have on the
true ministers of Christ; or when they may be said to preach and act as those
who must give account.

Those who properly expect to give account, will be very careful to examine
themselves with respect to the motives by which they are influenced, to
undertake in this work. He will view himself acting in the presence of an
heart-searching God, who requires truth in the inward part, and will shortly
call him to an account for all the exercises of his heart. He will search every
corner of his soul, whether the divine honor, or something else, is the object
of his pursuit. He has been taught, by the rectitude of the divine law, that
God will not pass by transgression, but will judge the secrets of men. The work
will appear so great, that nature will recoil at the thought, like Jeremiah,
"Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak; for I am a child." Or with the great
apostle, "Who is sufficient for these things." The true disciple of Jesus will
not thrust himself forward into the ministry, like a heedless usurper; but with
the greatest caution, and self-diffidence.

2. A faithful Watchman will manifest that he expects to give account, by being
very careful to know his duty, and will take all proper ways which are in his
power, to become acquainted with it. He will study, as the apostle directs
Timothy, to show himself approved unto God. He will give attendance to Reading,
Meditation and Prayer; will often call in divine aid, on account of his own
insufficiency. As a faithful soldier will be careful to understand his duty; so
the spiritual Watchman, will adhere closely to the word of God for his guide
and directory.

3. A minister that watches for souls as one who expects to give account, will
have done to plese but God. When he studies his Sermons, this will not be the
enquiry, "How shall I form my discourse so as to please and gratify the humors
of men, and get their applause?" but "How shall I preach so as to do honor to
God, and meet with the approbation of my Judge?" this will be his daily request
at the throne of grace. This will be ten thousand times better to him than the
vain flattery of men. His discourses will not be calculated to gratify the
carnal heart, but he will not shun to declare the whole counsel of God.

The solemn account that the faithful minister expects to give another day,
will direct him in the choice of his subjects; he will dwell upon th^^^ things
which have a more direct relation to the eternal world. He will not entertain
his audience with empty speculations; or vain philosophy; but with things that
concern their everlasting welfare. Jesus Christ, and him crucified, will be the
great topic and darling theme of his preaching. If he means to save souls, like
a skilful physician, he will endeavor to lead his patients into a view of their
maladies, and then point them to a bleeding Savior as the only way of
recovery. The faithful Watchman will give the alarm at the approach of the
enemy, will blow the trumpet in the ears of the sleeping sinner, and endeavor
to awake him.

4. The pious preacher will endeavor to adapt his discourses to the
understanding of his hearers. "He will not be ambitious of saying fine things
to win applause, but of saying useful things, to win souls." He will consider
that he has the weak as well as strong, children as well as adults to speak to,
and that he must be accountable for the blood of their souls, if they perish
through his neglect. This will influence him to study plainness more than
politeness; also he will labor to accommodate his sermons to the different
states, or circumstances of his hearers; he will have comforting and
encouraging lessons to see before the children of God; while the terrors of the
law are to be proclaimed in the ears of the impenitent. He will strive to
preach distinguishing, that every hearer may have his portion. -- The awful
scenes of approaching judgment, will have an influence on the Christian
preacher with respect to the manner in which he will deliver himself. He will
guard against that low and vulgar style, that tends to degrade religion; but
his language will in some measure correspond with those very solemn and
affecting things that do engage his heart and tongue. He will not substitute a
whining tone in the room of a Sermon; which, to speak no worse of it, is a sort
of satire upon the Gospel, tending greatly to depreciate its solemnity and
importance, and to bring it into contempt; but the judgment will appear so
awful, and his attention so captivated with it, that his accents will be the
result of a mind honestly, and engagedly taken up with subject vastly
important. "Such a preacher will not come into the pulpit as an actor comes
upon the stage, to personate feigned character, and forget his real one; to
utter sentiments, or represent passions not his own. Fordyce.
It is not to display his talents; but like one who feels the weight of eternal
things, he will not address his hearers as though judgments was a mere empty
sound; but viewing eternity just before him, and a congregation on the
frontiers of it, whose eternal state depends upon a few uncertain moments; Oh!
with what zeal and fervor will he speak! How will death, judgment; and eternity
appear as it were in every feature, and every word! Out of the abundance of his
heart, his mouth will speak. His hearers will easily perceive, that the
preacher is one who expects to give account. He will study and preach with
reference to a judgment to come, and deliver every Sermon in some respect, as
if it were his last, not knowing when his Lord will call him, or his hearers to
account. -- We are not to suppose that his zeal will vent itself in the
frightful bellowings of enthusiasm; but he will speak forth the words of truth
in soberness, with modesty, and christian decency.

5. They who watch for souls as those who expect to give account, will
endeavor to know as much as may be the state of the souls committed to their
charge, that they may be in a better capacity to do them good. They will point
out those errors and dangers which they may see approaching; and when they see
souls taken by the enemy, they will exert themselves to deliver them from the
snare of the devil. The outward department of a faithful minister will
correspond with his preaching: he will reprove, rebuke, warning his people from
house to house. The weighty affairs of another world will direct his daily walk
and conversation, in all places, and on every occasion.

A FEW PARTICULAR ADDRESSES.

First, To him who is about to be set apart to the work of the Gospel Ministry
in this place.

DEAR SIR,

FROM the preceding observations, you will easily see, that the work before you
is great and solemn; and I hope this is a lesson you have been taught
otherwise; the former acquaintance I have had with you, gives me reason to hope
that this is the case. You are about to have these souls committed to your
care; you are to be placed as a Watchman upon the walls of this part of Zion; I
doubt not but that it is with trembling you enter upon this work. The relation
that this day's business has with a judgment to come, renders the scene
affecting. Your mind I trust has already anticipated the important moment, when
you must meet this people before the bar of God. The good profession you are
this day to make is before many witnesses; saints and wicked men are beholding;
the angels are looking down upon us; above all, the great God with complacency
or disapprobation, beholds the transactions of this day; he sees what motives
govern you, and will proclaim it before the assembled Universe. Oh! solemn, and
affecting thought! The work before you is great, and requires great searching
of heart, great self-diffidence, and self abasement. How necessary that you
feel your dependence upon God; you cannot perform any part of your work without
his help; under a sense of your weakness, repair to him for help. Would you be
a successful Minister, you must be a praying dependant one; do all in the name,
and strength of the Lord Jesus. Would you be faithful in watching for the souls
of men, you must be much in watching your own heart. If you are careless with
respect to your own soul, you will be also with respect to others. Although the
work is too great for you, yet let such considerations as these revive your
desponding heart. That the cause is good, better than life you may well give up
all for it. It Is the curse of God. and that which will prove victorious, in
spite of all opposition from men or devils -- that God has promised to be with
his Ministers to the end of the world -- that the work is delighted; Paul
somewhere blesses God for putting him into the work of the Ministry -- that the
campaign is short, your warfare will soon be accomplished -- that the reward is
great, being found faithful, you will receive a crown of glory, that fades not
away.

Secondly, We have a word to the church and congregation in this place.

MY BRETHREM AND FRIENDS,

THE importance of the work of a gospel Minister, suggests the weighty concerns
of your souls;. As Ministers must give account how they preach and behave; so
hearers also are to be examined how they hear and improve. You are to hear with
a view to the day of judgment, always remembering, that there is no sermon or
opportunity that you have in this life, to prepare for another world, that
shall go unnouced at that decisive court. Your present exercises, with respect
to the solemn affairs of this day, will then come up to public view.

God, we trust, is this day sending you one to watch for your souls: should not
this excite sentiments of gratitude in your breasts? Shall God take so much
care of your souls, and you neglect them? How unreasonable will it be for you
to despise the pious instruction of your watchmen? You will herein wrong your
own souls, and it will be an evidence that you love death. You will bear with
him in not accommodating his sermons to your vitiated tastes, because he must
give account. His work is great, and you must pray for him; as in the verse
following the text, the Apostle says, "Brethren, pray for us." Is it the
business of your minister to watch for your souls, with such indefatigable
assiduity, you easily see how necessary it is that you do what you can to
strengthen him in this work. That you administer to his temporal wants, that he
may give himself wholly to these things. The great backwardness among people in
general with respect to this matter at present, has an unfavourable aspect.
"Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? Who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? or who seedeth a flock, and eats not of the
milk of the flock." 1 Cor. ix.7.

Doubtless this man is sent here for the rise and fall of many in this place.
We hope he will be used as a mean of leading some to Christ; while on the other
hand, we even tremble at the thought, he may fit others for a more aggravated
condemnation. Take heed how you hear.

A few words to the Assembly in general, will close the subject.

WHAT has been said about the character and work of gospel ministers, shows us
at once that it is a matter in which we are all deeply interested. The greater
part of the people present, I expect to see no more, until I meet them at that
day, which has been the main subject of the foregoing discourse. With respect
to the characters of the people present, we can say but little about them; only
this we may observe, they are all dying creatures, hastening to the grave, and
to judgment: There must we meet you, -- there an account of this day's work
will come up to view, -- there each one must give account concerning the right
discharge of the work assigned him: The preacher must give account, and you
that hear also. Let me say to such as are yet in their sins, and proclaim it
from this part of the wall of Zion. That the enemy of your souls is at hand, --
that destruction awaits you. Oh! flee! flee! to Christ Jesus; bow to his
sovereignty; know this, that except you are born again, and become new
creatures, in the dispositions of your mind, you cannot be saved. Shall
ministers watch and pray for your souls night and day, and you pay no attention
to them? Since they are so valuable, having such a relation to God, did men
regard divine glory, they would regard their souls, as being designed to
exhibit it. Be instructed, then, to delay no longer, but by repentance toward
God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, make peace with him, before you are
summoned before his awful bar. Let me bear testimony against a practice too
common on such occasions as this: Many people think it a time for carnal mirth
and dissipation, than which nothing can be more provoking to God, nor
inconsistent with that day, and strict account that such an occasion tends to
excise in the mind. May all, both ministers and people, be exhorted to
diligence in their work, that finally we may adopt the language of the blessed
Apostle, -- "As also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we are your
rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the day of the LORD JESUS.

AMEN.

