A SERMON, DELIVERED AT CONCORD, BEFORE The Hon. General Court OF THE STATE OF
NEWHAMPSHIRE, AT THE ANNUAL ELECTION, HOLDEN ON THE FIRST WEDNESDAY IN JUNE,
M.DCC.XCI.

BY THE REV. ISRAEL EVANS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN CONCORD.

CONCORD: PRINTED BY GEORGE HOUGH, FOR THE HONORABLE GENERAL COURT.

M,DCC,XCI.

State of Newhampshire. In the House of Representatives, June 3, 1791.
VOTED, THAT Mr. Foster, Mr. Parker, and Mr. Macgregore, with such of the
honorable Senate as they may appoint, be a Committee to present the Reverend
Mr. Evans with the thanks of the General Court, for his excellent Discourse
delivered yesterday before the Court, and request a copy of the same for the
Press.

Sent up for concurrence, NATH. PEABODY, Speaker.
In Senate, the same day. Read and concurred: Mr. Dow, joined. J. PEARSON,
Sec'ry.

GALATIANS V. I. Stand fast, therefore, in the Liberty wherewith CHRIST has
made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of Bondage.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
WE have numbered more than twenty-seven years since your opposition to a
foreign system of heavy oppression began. The year 1764 has been rendered
memorable, on the one side by the folly and injustice of a hated stamp act,
and, on the other, by the resisting energy of the patriot sons of Freedom. From
that period, the genius of American liberty, by combating distress, misery, and
hosts of enemies, waxed strong in her own defense, and has crowned more than
THREE MILLIONS of mankind with national independence. -- Instructed in the
school of Freedom, the inhabitants of these confederate States combined their
strength in the protection of the rights of men. THEY KNEW AND THEY FELT THAT
FREEMEN WILL BE FREE. By their exertions, under the favor of a righteous
providence, they have established a wise constitution of federal government:
they have reached the consummation of every patriot's wish, the glory and
felicity of their country; and now enjoy a free system of political happiness,
such as gives pleasure, and even transport, to the enlightened patriots of many
nations; and has made, perhaps, no small advancement of joy among the
benevolent hosts of Heaven: for, to every benevolent and virtuous being, the
freedom and happiness of the human race is a most pleasing consideration. --
But there are some men, with the means of public prosperity in their
possession, who do not realize the value of Freedom: they partake of the common
blessings of a free people, and yet are not conscious of national felicity. --
This, however, does not lessen the real worth of Liberty; for in every
situation of life, it is the richest inheritance. In true Liberty is included,
Freedom, both moral and civil; it has nothing in contemplation but the
happiness of mankind, and therefore it is the principal glory of man; and, in
this world, there can be nothing more dignified, or more exalted. Without civil
and religious Liberty, man is indeed a poor, enslaved, wretched, miserable
creature; neither his life, nor his property, nor the use of his conscience, is
secured to him; but he is subjected to some inhuman tyrant, whose will is his
law, and who presumes to govern men without their consent. -- But let not this
gale of honest zeal carry us beyond the recollection of our text.

IN the discussion of the text, it may be observed, that the word LIBERTY, in
this place, does principally imply a freedom from the injunctions of the
ceremonial law. This freedom our Savior purchased for all Christians; and in
this freedom the apostle Paul exhorted the Galatians, and all the followers of
Christ, to stand fast. When we consider the age, and state of the world, in
which the Jews lived, and their fondness of show, idolatry, and superstition,
we shall find that their religion was well suited to their genius and temper.
The religion of the Jews had a very pointed allusion to the character and
office of the Messiah, and was therefore wisely enjoined. But those typical and
ritual services, after the coming of Christ, having fulfilled their design,
became unnecessary. "These, said the apostle Paul, were a shadow of things to
come; but the body is of Christ, who has abolished the law of commandments
contained in ordinances." Without the external pomp and show of the Jewish
religion, the gospel recommends the worship of God in spirit and truth. The
doctrines of the gospel are calculated to promote good will and liberty among
men; and where their genuine influence has been extended, mankind have been
rendered more happy: they have been instructed, civilized, humanized, and made
free. "The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and
without hypocrisy." -- The true spirit of the Gospel contains the true spirit
of Liberty. We may be assured, that under this benevolent institution, useful
liberty of every kind is recommended by the spirit of our text.

ALTHOUGH my text, in the original meaning, did not respect civil so much as
religious liberty, yet I hope I shall not seem to misuse it by making it the
foundation of a discourse on Liberty in general.

A FEW observations on the nature of religious Liberty, shall constitute the
first part of this discourse.

I. RELIGIOUS Liberty is a divine right, immediately derived from the Supreme
Being, without the intervention of any created authority. It is the natural
privilege of worshipping God in that manner which, according to the judgment of
men, is most agreeable and pleasing to the divine character. As the conscience
of man is the image and representative of God in the human soul; so to him
alone it is responsible. In justice, therefore, the feelings and sentiments of
conscience, and the moral practice of religion, must be independent of all
finite beings. Nor has the all-wise Creator invested any order of men with the
right of judging for their fellow creatures in the great concerns of religion.
Truth and religion are subjects of determination entrusted to all men; and it
is a privilege of all men to judge and determine for themselves.

RELIGIOUS Liberty secures every man, both in his person and property, from
suffering on account of his peculiar sentiments in religion; and no practice
which flows purely from this fountain of natural right can justly be punished.
But when a man adopts such notions as, in their practice, counteract the peace
and good order of society, be then perverts and abuses the original Liberty of
man; and were he to suffer for thus disturbing the peace of the community, and
injuring his fellow-citizens, his punishment would be inflicted not for the
exercise of a virtuous principle of conscience, but for violating that
universal law of rectitude and benevolence which was intended to prevent one
man from injuring another. To punish men for entertaining various religious
sentiments, is to assume a power to punish them for doing what God gave them an
unalienable right to do. For neither the principles of reason, nor the
doctrines of the gospel, which are the perfection of reason, have empowered any
man to judge for himself and for another man also: this is religious tyranny;
this is to control another man's conscience: and to control any man's
conscience is to contradict that true principle of eternal justice which Jesus
Christ published to the world: Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them.

SUFFER me a little to illustrate this maxim of primitive justice. We will
suppose, that some man should endeavor to prove, that he had a right to
determine what our religious principles and sentiments ought to be; but how
would he be pleased when his own arguments should be turned against himself?
Should this man, who was unwilling to allow us the free exercise of rational,
accountable creatures, be forced, in the change of human affairs, to reside
among a people very different from him in matters of religion; he however
behaving himself as an honest and peaceable man, and, as a good subject of
civil society, serving the interest of the country; would he not think it very
unjust and tyrannical to be persecuted for his religious opinions --
imprisoned, deprived of his property, and finally condemned to die, only
because he could not with a clear conscience worship as they did? Only the
Supreme Governor of mankind has a perfect right to receive the homage of the
human mind; it is his peculiar prerogative to control the consciences of men
by his infinitely wise and equitable laws. True religion must therefore be
founded in the inward persuasion and conviction of the mind; for without this
it cannot be that reasonable service which is pleasing to God. The human
understanding cannot be convinced by external violence of any kind; nor can the
immaterial spirit be influenced by the laws of men, unless they correspond with
the goodness, justice, and mercy, of our blessed Creator, our most bountiful
Benefactor, and our all wise and righteous Judge. -- Here joy and gratitude
prompt me to say, Oh happy people, who live in this land and in this age of
religious Liberty! here every man has equally the freedom of choosing his
religion; and may sit every man under his vine, and under his figtree; and, on
the account of religion, none shall make them afraid. Let us, my friends and
fellow-citizens, Stand fast, therefore, in the religious Liberty wherewith God
and Christ has made us free.

II. WITH submission to the professional knowledge of my political Fathers, I
will now venture to make some observations on the nature and principles of
civil Liberty. These observations shall be included within the following
particulars.

1. IN this happy land of light and liberty, it is a truth fully established,
that all men are by nature equally free. From this principle of natural Liberty
we derive an indefeasible right of being governed by our own civil
constitutions. WE THE PEOPLE are the source of all legislative authority. Upon
this just, benevolent, pleasing, and even delightful principle, the
constitutions, the laws, and the governments, of these federal States, will
stand fast. All men who understand the nature, and feel the spirit, of such
principles, are self-instructed to be their own Legislators, either in one
collected body, or by representation. When all the people can assemble, and
personally contribute their aid in framing constitutions and laws for the
government of themselves, then their liberty is most natural and most perfect.
But since great loss of time, much expense, and many inconveniences, would
attend this mode of legislation, the people have agreed, in free States, to
select from the whole body, some of their brethren, whom they invest with
legislative power. What shall be transacted by these delegates or
representatives, consistently with the constitution of the people, must be
acknowledged as the act of the people. In conformity to this plan, the people
keep as near the possession of natural Liberty, as is convenient and really
useful; and while they are truly virtuous, they will enjoy as much perfect
Liberty as is necessary to preserve peace, establish justice, and secure
political happiness. -- I shall only add further, under this particular, that
when a free people have, according to their constitution, determined to
legislate by representatives, they should take great care that the
representation may be fully adequate to the importance and welfare of the
people; the elections should also be perfectly free, and sufficiently frequent.

2. THE elections should be conducted agreeably to the principles of justice
and honor. The privilege of electing freely, or being freely elected, is one
of the fairest features in the pure image of natural Liberty. A free and
unbiassed election of the best and the wisest men, is a certain evidence of the
flourishing state of Liberty. -- On the other hand, when elections are under
dishonest influence, and men can be sold and bought, it is a most lamentable
sign that Liberty is either in a deep sleep, or in a dangerous decay. When this
birthright of the people is bartered for something as mean as a mess of
pottage -- when they neglect and despise this natural and constitutional right
-- they then lose their share and influence in that government of which they
were the original foundation. Having neglected that security which at first
existed in themselves, and having counteracted the very design of that social
compact which was intended to secure them from every species of political
injury, they turn TRAITORS to their God who made them free; and for want of
exercising that natural power which their Creator gave them, their glory will
depart: and, having the hearts of slaves, they will wear the livery and endure
the misery of slaves. -- But I am not willing to spend time in representing
this horrible image of slavish misery. This assembly is the image and
representation of a free state. I have the honor, I have the felicity, of
speaking before men who are too well acquainted with the blessings of Liberty
to neglect or despise any of the natural or constitutional rights of freemen.

3. THE public happiness of a people is promoted, not only by the freedom of
elections, but also by the wisdom and goodness of the laws. A wise and a good
representation will produce good laws. Good and wise men, who are clothed with
the natural power of their constituents, will study to unite closely the
interest of the country and the power of the laws; and where the representation
is good, the laws will appear to carry with them the voice and common consent
of the people. The laws made after this manner, are the laws of the people, and
prove that they are free, and that they virtually legislate for themselves. --
I leave this particular, after observing, that the public happiness should be
the first duty and the prime object of all legislators; and that, in every free
and virtuous state, this is the pole star of legislation.

4. IT is the duty of the people, in conformity to the principles of Liberty,
to choose men to superintend the executive department of the nation: for no
man, in a free state, can justly claim the authority of an executive
magistrate, without the voice and consent of the people. In the exercise of
their own natural power, by their constitution, they must appoint their chief
magistrate to this place of honor and trust. In this respect, it may be said,
that the people do not only make their laws, but they also execute them, and
govern themselves. These considerations should have a tendency to discourage
all officers of government from feeling themselves independent of their
brethren, THE PEOPLE. With these proper views, they will be more likely to pay
that attention to the wants and feelings of the people, which is necessary to
increase the public happiness. When, therefore, the most exalted characters in
authority feel themselves connected to the whole community by a brotherly,
benevolent attachment; then the lives and the estates of the nation are most
secure. In addition to this, it may also be said, that the administration of
men in power will then be the most useful and honorable, when the affairs of
government are conducted with moderation and justice: for the people have not
appointed men to insult and injure them, but to promote their best interest.
Violence and compulsion will never advance the happiness of freemen. They will
know when they are governed agreeably to their constitutions and laws: they
will know when they enjoy a portion of that civil prosperity which they are
entitled to by their rights and privileges: and they will easily know when they
are treated with civility and kindness. The people should have reason to
believe, that men in office have nothing more at heart than the felicity of the
nation.

5. THE best measures should be adopted to establish esteem and confidence
between the people and their rulers; for without this favorable impression,
there will be but little peace and satisfaction in the public mind. Great care
should be taken not to disturb and irritate the temper of the people; their
patience should never be tortured; but they should have as many reasons to be
pleased with the transactions of government, as possible, consistent with the
public welfare: for good humor and satisfaction greatly contribute to the
peace and happiness of government and mankind. When the people have reasonable
satisfaction and rest of mind, they will be more industrious, and consequently
more virtuous: the produce of the land will be more plentiful; and the strength
and resources of the nation will be in proportion to the pleasure and
encouragement of the mind. A free, willing, industrious, and virtuous people,
well united and well pleased, are the strength of a nation; while the great
wealth of a few luxurious, idle drones, are the great bane of Liberty. -- A
people with that happy temper of mind which I have described, will be
cheerfully obedient to their laws; they will respect and esteem all their good
civil officers; and peace and harmony will be pleasant and lasting. -- The man,
whom every benevolent, free and virtuous citizen respects and loves, suffer me
to adorn my humble page with the name of WASHINGTON, has declared, that, THE
BEST WAY TO PRESERVE THE CONFIDENCE OF THE PEOPLE DURABLY IS TO PROMOTE THEIR
TRUEST INTEREST.

6. THE principles of a free people are directly opposed to taxation without
their own consent by representation. Money should never be extorted by
violence, but received as the gifts and free will offerings, or contributions
of the people, to pay for the security of their persons and property. Let them
be convinced, that the public demands are reasonable and necessary, not merely
for the benefit of civil officers, but for the general advantage of the nation;
and then as a free, enlightened, generous, virtuous people, they will take
pleasure cheerfully to defray the necessary expenses of government. They will
be pleased when they recollect, that for a very small portion of their property
they can be secured in the real possession of all the blessings of true
Liberty. -- But how will their pleasure rise still higher, when they consider,
that by doing justice to their brethren, to whom they have committed the toils
and dangers of public business; when they consider, I say, that by their
contributions they advance not only the great prosperity of the nation, but
include also their posterity in the general happiness. But here let it be
observed, that no requisitions should be made but such as are really and
absolutely necessary for the support and contingencies of government; and of
the expenditure of money the people should have an account. Much the greater
part of mankind toil severely for what property they acquire: it would
therefore be very unjust and cruel to use it for the gratification of pampered
pride and luxury. In a word, that government which improves the interest and
happiness of the people, and manages their public affairs consistently with the
principles of a generous economy, as well as a just and magnanimous policy,
free from a prodigal and dishonest waste of the public wealth; such a
government will furnish the most reasonable satisfaction, and will be the most
valued and the most bravely defended.

III. UNDER this head of discourse, I will endeavor to show when it may be
said that a people stand fast in the Liberty wherewith they are free. With the
prosecution of this design, I will attempt to intermix the spirit and freedom
of an APPLICATION.

1. THE people are in the habit and exercise of Liberty, when they resort to
the first principles of government, and trace their rights up to God the
Creator: when they exercise their natural power of framing any social compact
conducive to the common interest: feel independent of all human power but that
which flows from themselves: disdain the subjection of their consciences to any
authority but the will of God: refuse to be controuled by the will of any man
who claims an independent power of disposing of their lives and estates:
recollect that they entered into society to have their natural rights, which
are the basis of civil rights, secured. To maintain such principles of original
justice, is to stand fast in the righteous Liberty of man. True Liberty suffers
no man to be injured in his person, estate, or character: it encourages and
enables him to improve hi^ happiness; and, within the limits of the public
good, insures to him every blessing to which imperfect human nature can attain.
All the toils, sufferings, treasure and blood of men, are not lost, when they
are the price and purchase of Liberty. Without religious and civil Liberty, we
can have no security of life, or of any of the good things of God: we cannot
practice the sentiments of our consciences: -- but where the rights of man are
equally secured in the greatest degree, there is the greatest happiness -- AND
THAT IS OUR COUNTRY.

2. WHEN you carefully regard the election of your representatives and officers
of government, you will stand fast in your Liberty. It is a darling privilege
of all freemen to elect the best qualified men to represent them in a State or
National Assembly. But do a people stand fast in the discharge of their duty --
are they in the exercise of their civil rights, when they neglect to choose men
of established principles of Virtue and Liberty? Do they wish to have good
laws, and yet neglect to choose men who have proved themselves friends to the
rights of their brethren? Can they reasonably expect that good laws will
proceed from men who fear not God nor regard man? Will men, who feel no
obligations of love and duty to their Creator, be good examples to their
constituents? Will they add any weight to the laws they assisted to make, when
they are so prompt to violate them? Do they not, as far as their influence will
reach, defeat the very laws they voted for? Will a public and patriotic spirit
originate from vicious principles? Is it natural for noble and generous
sentiments to flow from vice? Do not bad principles make men selfish, narrow
the mind, and banish all benevolent propensities of doing good to men? Will not
the very knowledge which unprincipled men may have, degenerate into selfish low
cunning, and serve only to embarrass and perplex the honesty and good common
sense of men who are able and willing to promote the interest of society? -- I
need not tell you, that men under the influence of selfish passions, will
sacrifice the best interest of their country, whenever they can greatly advance
their own importance; and, like a Dean and an Arnold, by the most infamous and
horrible treason, betray that Liberty which they once pretended to defend. --
Do any of the people ask me, as one of their brethren, Who are the men we must
choose, in order to stand fast in our Liberty? First, separate, in your minds,
the most wicked and unprincipled men, from being objects of your choice; and
then, out of the rest, select men of understanding, for of such there will
enough remain, who are actuated by principles of love and obedience to God, and
animated by a generous benevolence to mankind; who really love to see their
brethren free and happy: for in this every benevolent man must take pleasure.
Benevolent principles will produce the noblest acts of public and patriotic
good; they will enable men to discern easily the advantage of the people. "For
when private interest and private views are removed, it will be easy to know
what is the public good." -- Let me beseech all the people to remember, that
their safety and happiness in society depends upon the election of good and
wise representatives. Under the smiles of providence, the prosperity of a free
people is in their own hands; for they have knowledge enough, if well improved,
to advance and secure their welfare. In a few words, choose the men to manage
your public affairs, to whom you would not fear to entrust the most important
concerns of a private nature. -- This is the way to stand fast in your Liberty.

3. THE example of civil officers has great influence on the minds of mankind.
They ought to be punctual in their observation of the laws of the country. As
public men, or private citizens, they should be uniform in the practice of
virtue, and the defense of Liberty. The people call them FATHERS: we are
willing to be their political children, as long as they are good parents. But,
Should not fathers be examples of goodness to their children? Will children do
well, if the parents are wicked and do wrong? Will the children be obedient to
the public laws, if the parents violate them? Will the children love Freedom,
if the parents disregard it? Will the children cultivate a public spirit, if
the parents are selfish? Do fathers love their children, and not strive in all
respects to promote their felicity? It is most reasonable, therefore, to
conclude, that it is the great and indispensible duty of rulers to encourage
the practice of religion by their own influence and example: and I venture to
declare, that no civil officer does the half of his duty, unless he endeavors
to suppress vice and disorder, and so prevent the necessity of punishment.
Mankind very quickly and justly exclaim against the absurdity of allowing those
men to be teachers of religion, who live in the habitual practice of vice and
wickedness: Shall we not, with equal justice, condemn the practice of those men
who break through those restraints which were intended to suppress vice, and
consequently encourage virtue? Should they not be ministers of God for good to
the people, in every possible way? Every man of common sense acknowledges, that
religion is very useful to mankind; and especially the precepts and truths of
the gospel. It is also allowed, that public worship is of particular and
national advantage. To favor and practice virtue is therefore to increase the
public happiness, and to answer the intention of government: and by these means
their own importance and authority will be increased.

4. WHEN the people are submissive to their laws and rulers, upon the
principles already mentioned, their Liberties will be permanent. Where the true
spirit of religion is united to the free and generous spirit of Liberty,
obedience will be a pleasing duty. The author of our benevolent religion has
commanded us to render unto Coesar the things which are Coesar's; and unto God,
the things that are God's. The apostles also say, Submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. Render to all, their dues: tribute, to
whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to
whom honor. Men who are under the influence of reason and religion, will not
blame the necessary measures of government. They will not be factious and
turbulent, but of a reasonable and complying disposition. They will be
influenced by such generous sentiments as the following: Look not every man on
his own things, but every man also on the things of others. We must endeavor
to render ourselves extensively useful, and promote the good of our country; in
which, not only our own happiness, but the happiness of millions, is included.

5. THE Liberties of a people cannot be lasting without knowledge. The human
mind is capable of great cultivation. Knowledge is not only useful, but it adds
dignity to man. When the minds of men are improved, they can better understand
their rights -- they can know what part they are to act, in contributing to the
welfare of the nation. Freemen should always acquire knowledge; this is a
privilege and pleasure unknown to slaves; this elevates the mind of; man; this
creates a conscious dignity of his importance as a rational creature, and a
free agent. The happiness of mankind has been much advanced by the arts and
sciences; and they have flourished the most among freemen. Slavery blots the
image of the Creator, which was at first impressed upon man: it banishes
knowledge, and courts misery. But men, enlightened, pursue with ardour the
knowledge and recovery of their rights. Liberty is enlightened by knowledge;
and knowledge is nurtured by Liberty. Where there is wisdom, virtue, and
Liberty, there mankind are MEN -- In all the dark ages of the world, tyranny
has been established upon the slavish ignorance of mankind. Tyrants, in time
past, secured their domination by darkening the minds of their subjects. In the
present day, they tremble at the approaching light of knowledge and Liberty.
They turn indignant from the glorious illuminations of America and France. They
hear with horror the sound of Freedom and the rights of men. They would still
imbrute the human race, and make mankind forget that they are men: -- Be
assured, my dear countrymen, knowledge is absolutely necessary to secure the
blessings of Freedom. If you wish to see your country not only free in your
day, but also to feast your imaginations with the pleasing prospect of a free
posterity for many ages to come; let me entreat treat you, to encourage and
promote that knowledge which will enable the people successfully to watch all
the enemies of Liberty, and guard against the designs of intriguing men. Unless
the people have knowledge, they may be imposed upon by men who are always lying
in wait to disturb the peace of society, create disorder and confusion, and, in
the tumult, overturn the Liberties of the country. Be always awake to your own
interest, and you will have nothing to fear: but if you sleep, the enemies of
Liberty will awake: -- sleep, and by your death-like slumbers you will give
them life: for Liberty has never yet appeared upon the face of the earth
without meeting enemies to contend with. -- There have been men in America, who
have reprobated what they were pleased to call the inquisitive sauciness of the
people, when they wished to know how the public affairs of the country were
conducted, and how Justice and Liberty might be secured. Nay, some men, still
more unjust and tyrannical, have ventured to say -- blush! ye degenerate sons
of free parents! -- that the people, when in the possession of Liberty, are
unable to use it for their own advantage, and therefore they ought to be
governed against their wills, and without their choice, by men, to be sure,
much wiser than themselves, and more disposed to do them good. This is as much
as to say, that the people ought to be robbed of their natural rights for their
own advantage and happiness. But whoever is acquainted with the history of
despotic power, need not be informed, that a free people will always use their
Freedom more consistently with the principles of justice and reason, than any
men with uncontrouled power. It is a truth, and it is now too late to deny it,
that no man, or body of men, are sit to be entrusted with unlimitted power.
This power they would most certainly abuse, whenever their unjust wills were in
the least opposed. Let the youth be well educated in wisdom and virtue; let
them be instructed in the true principles of Freedom, and they will improve
their Liberty most agreeably to the rational happiness of mankind. In this free
country, knowledge is peculiarly necessary, where no other qualifications are
requisite, for the most important offices of government, but virtue and
ability. I again say, let the children and youth be well educated. In the
earliest stages of life, let a free and public spirit be infused into the
youthful mind. This is the way to exclude from their young breasts all
oppressing and cruel passions. -- Unless the doors of education are open to all
the youth of the country equally, advantages may be taken by some men of
cunning, to tyrannize over the rest, and become masters of their property.
Every parent, and every friend to the Freedom of his country, ought to be
solicitous for the improvement of our youth in the principles of Freedom and
good government, and then the people will stand fast in their Liberty for a
long time; yes, as long as such principles are in their true exercise; and,
with submission to the divine will, as long as they please. -- But what! Shall
I doubt the attention and exertions of my fellow-citizens to this all-important
cause of public prosperity? Shall the children and youth of a free people be
suffered to grow up ignorant of the value of those Liberties you intend to
commit to their trust? Shall they be unfit to take care of those political
blessings which have been secured for them at the great expense of much toil,
treasure, and precious blood? Oh! Liberty, thou friend to mankind, forbid it;
justice, thou guardian of the rights of men, forbid it; ye patriots and fathers
of your country, forbid it: but rather let me say, Oh! thou blessed God, who
take no pleasure in the misery of thy children, forbid it, for the sake of
him who has made us free.

6. THE principles and practice of our peaceable and benevolent religion, are
the foundation on which all the blessings of life and Liberty must stand fast*
Righteousness exalts a nation. True religion will incline a people to love
and honor the MOST HIGH who rules among the children of men. ^he LORD has
said, Them that honor me, I will honor. Religion is intended to unite men
together in the bonds of brotherly love and good will; to prevent bad habits;
to suppress disorder; to calm factious spirits; and to put an end to the
shedding of brothers' blood. The influence and importance of religion should be
felt by men both in their family and national connections. Without it, they can
neither be happy in this world nor in a future state. -- May the benevolent
efforts of all public teachers of true religion, be united with the
affectionate influence of parents, to promote the personal and national welfare
of our country. By instilling good sentiments into the tender minds of children
and youth, you will teach them to stand fast in their Liberty. Good
impressions, made in early life, are very frequently of lasting benefit both to
individuals and the public. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when
he is old he will not depart from it. But, in addition to all your pious
exertions, let me entreat you, never to forget to beseech the Father of mercies
and the God of all grace, to implant in the hearts of our youth, by the divine
Spirit, the true principles of holiness.

I HOPE it has been evident, that, in the whole body of this discourse, I have
endeavored to interweave sentiments of religion and virtue. I cannot,
therefore, suppose it necessary at present, to prosecute this particular
article any farther. Permit me, however, to assure you, that I have not
ventured nor wished to recommend Liberty without Virtue; for this would have
been a recommendation of licentiousness. True Liberty may be summed up in this
declaration: that we have a right to do all the good we can; but have no right
to injure our fellow-men: we have a right to be as happy as we can; but no
right to lessen the happiness of mankind.

THUS far I have attempted to comply with the ^^pointment of the civil Fathers
of this State. In this compliance, my diffidence and fear have given me no
small anxiety, left I should not answer the design of their appointment. I have
not, therefore, been influenced by a presuming expectation of communicating to
this honorable political body, any new information. I feel, nevertheless, in
my mind, a pleasing persuasion, that my Fathers in government will not be
displeased with any sincere and humble attempt to inspire their younger sons
with a just sense of the blessings and privileges they enjoy under the present
legislative and executive authority. In a few years, some of the youth of the
present day must be called to fill the places of the Fathers now in office. --
The thought is serious! Who knows the consequence? Is it not then of the utmost
importance, that the minds of young men should be impressed with the best
sentiments of equal Liberty? Shall we not exhort them to stand fast in their
Liberty, that their country may be free? Shall we not animate the rising
generation, to transmit to their posterity that invaluable inheritance of
Freedom, which they must soon receive from the present race of patriots when
they shall rest from their labors? -- This is a day of joy: it reminds you of
one of the great privileges of freemen: -- it should be a day of gratitude
also. Oh! that you did but feel and realize your happy situation, that you
might send up to Heaven the warmest gratitude of hearts glowing with love and
praise to that blessed Savior who has made us FREE!

FATHERS, brethren, and fellow-citizens, with the happy feelings of a brother
freeman, I congratulate you on the enjoyment of that Liberty which I have been
describing: it involves in it every thing most conducive to your peace and
prosperity on earth: -- clasp it to your bosoms, and religiously swear, that
you will live freemen, or die bravely. I rejoice, that it is in your power,
under God, to stand fast in your Liberty. -- Shall I contrast your present
situation with the deplorable state of man in ages past? Would not this draw a
cloud of grief over the bright sunshine of your happy feelings? We rejoice,
that the earth has been delivered from the hands of those inhuman butchers,
whose unrelenting murders have filled so many bloody pages of history; who
slaughtered millions of the human race, for no other purpose but to extend
their cruel and ambitious power, and oppress and lay waste the world. Tyrants,
who, instead of being transmitted down to us with illustrious names, for being
the most successful destroyers of their fellow creatures, should be named after
the most furious beasts of prey; and, on account of the mischief they have done
to mankind, be classed with tempests, earthquakes, and plagues. We rejoice,
with thankful hearts, that we are not under the power of such plagues of the
human race, who wage war with the peace and happiness of mankind; who think it
an act of heroism to depopulate whole countries to gratify private revenge. We
now see that the patriotic resolutions of our countrymen have not been in vain:
we now see that the treasures expended in the defense of Liberty, have realized
a national interest of more value than ten thousand percent: we now see that
the inexpressible trials and sufferings of a patriot army, have been productive
of the richest fruits; and that the blood of our heroes has been the seed of
Liberty. -- But, we commiserate the deplorable condition of many of our
fellowmen, who now groan under the heavy chains of despotism: we wish the
rights of men may be soon restored to them. --

BUT I return from this digression. I find political happiness not abroad, but
at home. Happy age and country in which we live! We remember no era since the
creation of the world, so favorable to the rights of mankind as the present.
The histories of mankind, with only a few exceptions, are the records of human
guilt, oppression, and misery. Although some shadow of rude Liberty was
contended for by a few small uncivilized tribes of men, yet they were subjected
by those nations who were more powerful. At the beginning of the Christian
era, almost two thirds of mankind were in the most abject and cruel slavery.
The Grecian and Roman nations, notwithstanding their boasted love of Liberty,
were not acquainted with the true principles of original, equal, and
sentimental Liberty. Though an imperfect civilization had made some progress
among them, yet they neither understood the nature, nor practiced the duties,
of humanity. They who are acquainted with the true history of Greece and Rome,
need not be informed, that the cruelty they exercised upon their slaves, and
those taken in war, is almost beyond the power of credibility. The proud and
selfish passions have always endeavored to suppress the spirit of Freedom.
Even Rome herself, while she pretended to glory in being free, endeavored to
subject and enslave the rest of mankind. -- But no longer shall we look to
ancient histories for principles and systems of pure Freedom. The close of the
eighteenth century, in which we live, shall teach mankind to be truly free. The
Freedom of America and France, shall make this age memorable. From this time
forth, men shall be taught, that true greatness consists not in destroying, but
in saving, the lives of men; not in conquering, but making them free; not in
making war, but making peace; not in making men ignorant, but making them wise;
not in fi^^ing them with brutal rage, but in making them humane; not in being
ambitious, but in being good, just, and virtuous. Of France, it may be said, in
the language of Scripture, Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such
things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Or, Shall a nation
be born at once? Behold a nation of freemen, rising out of a nation of slaves!
This gratifies the feelings of humanity and benevolence. We wish to see all men
independent of all things but the laws of God, and the just laws of their
country. And will any man blame me for saying, that, in America, every friend
to justice and the rights of men wishes prosperity to that generous nation, who
are allied to these United States, and who so powerfully aided them in securing
their independence and peace. In the name of the Lord of hosts, let us pray,
that no weapon that is formed against their Freedom, shall prosper.

I ONCE more invite you to join me in gratitude to that best of Beings, by
whose providential goodness and power the lines are fallen unto us in pleasant
places; yea, we have a goodly heritage. Here harvests grow for the free and
cheerful husbandman: here, neither awed by lordly and rapacious injustice, nor
dejected by beholding idleness high fed and fattened on the labors of other
men, they reap and enjoy the pleasing fruits of their honest industry. Ye shall
eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land of safety. Here the people
dwell together as brethren; peace, harmony, industry, and health, unite their
various gifts to make this life a blessing: here poor human nature, in other
parts of the world long depressed by ignorance and enslaving power, seems to
reclaim the primitive blessings of creation, and to rejoice that it was made in
the image of GOD: here conscience assumes her first authority; religion is no
longer enslaved to the wills and laws of men; public and private happiness are
guarded by the laws and government of the people. -- Stand fast, therefore, in
the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with
the yoke of bondage. Let us determine to be free from the unjust power of men,
and free from the slavery and tyranny of sin, and we shall then be truly free.
If the Son, therefore, shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

WITH the words of a celebrated French writer, this discourse will be concluded.

"YE people of Northamerica, let the example of all nations who have gone
before you, and above all that of Greatbritain, serve you for instruction. Fear
the affluence of gold, which brings with luxury the corruption of manners, the
contempt of laws. Fear a too unequal distribution of riches, which exhibits a
small number of citizens in opulence, and a great multitude of citizens in
extreme poverty; whence springs the insolence of the former, and the debasement
of the latter. Secure yourselves against the spirit of conquest. The
tranquillity of an empire diminishes in proportion to its extension. Have arms
for your defense; have none for offense. Seek competency and health in labor;
prosperity in the culture of lands, and the workshops of industry; power in
manners and virtue. Cause arts and sciences, which distinguish the civilized
from a savage man, to flourish and abound. Above all, watch carefully over the
education of your children. It is from public schools, be assured, that come
the wise magistrates, the capable and courageous soldiers, the good fathers,
the good husbands, the good brothers, the good friends, the good men. Wherever
the youth are seen depraved, the nation is on the decline. Let Liberty have an
immovable foundation in the wisdom of your laws, and let it be the
indestructible cement to bind your States together. Establish no legal
preference amongst the different forms of worship. Superstition is innocent,
wherever it is neither persecuted nor protected; and may your duration, if it
be possible, equal the duration of the world!

AMEN.

