Dr. EDWARDS's SERMON ON THE SLAVE TRADE.

THE INJUSTICE AND IMPOLICY OF THE SLAVE TRADE, AND OF THE Slavery of the
Africans: ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE CONNECTICUT SOCIETY FOR
THE PROMOTION OF FREEDOM, AND FOR THE RELIEF OF PERSONS UNLAWFULLY HOLDEN IN
BONDAGE, AT THEIR ANNUAL MEETING IN NEW HAVEN, SEPTEMBER 15, 1791. BY JONATHAN
EDWARDS, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN NEW HAVEN.

Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN. M,DCC,XCI.

At a meeting of the Connecticut Society for the Promotion of Freedom, and for
the Relief of Persons unlawfully holden in Bondage, at New Haven, September 15,
1791,
VOTED, That the President return the Thanks of this Society to the Rev. Doctor
EDWARDS, for his Sermon this Day delivered before the Society, and that he
request a Copy thereof, that it may be printed.

Test. SIMEON BALDWIN, Sec'y.

The injustice and impolicy of the slave trade, and of the slavery of the
Africans.
MATTHEW VII. 12. THEREFORE ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER YOU WOULD, THAT MEN SHOULD DO
TO YOU, DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM; FOR THIS IS THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS.


THIS precept of our divine Lord has always been admired as most excellent;
and doubtless with the greatest reason. Yet it needs some explanation. It is
not surely to be understood in the most unlimited sense, implying that because
a prince expects and wishes for obedience from his subjects, he is obliged to
obey them: that because parents wish their children to submit to their
government, therefore they are to submit to the government of their children:
or that because some men wish that others would concur and assist them to the
gratification of their unlawful desires, therefore they also are to gratify the
unlawful desires of others. But whatever we are conscious, that we should, in
an exchange of circumstances, wish, and are persuaded that we might reasonably
wish, that others would do to us; that we are bound to do to them. This is the
general rule given us in the text; and a very extensive rule it is, reaching to
the whole of our conduct: and is particularly useful to direct our conduct
toward inferiors, and those whom we have in our power. I have therefore
thought it a proper foundation for the discourse which by the Society for the
Promotion of Freedom, and for the Relief of Persons unlawfully holden in
Bondage, I have the honor to be appointed to deliver, on the present occasion.

This divine maxim is most properly applicable to the slave trade, and to the
slavery of the Africans. Let us then make the application.

Should we be willing, that the Africans or any other nation should purchase
us, our wives and children, transport us into Africa and there sell us into
perpetual and absolute slavery? Should we be willing, that they by large bribes
and offers of a gainful traffic should entice our neighbors to kidnap and sell
us to them, and that they should hold in perpetual and cruel bondage, not only
ourselves, but our posterity through all generations? Yet why is it not as
right for them to treat us in this manner, as it is for us to treat them in the
same manner? Their color indeed is different from our's. But does this give us
a right to enslave them? The nations from Germany to Guinea have complexions of
every shade from the fairest white, to a jetty black: and if a black complexion
subject a nation or an individual to slavery; where shall slavery begin? or
where shall it end?

I propose to mention a few reasons against the right of the slave trade -- and
then to consider the principal arguments, which I have ever heard urged in
favor of it. -- What will be said against the slave trade will generally be
equally applicable to slavery itself; and if conclusive against the former,
will be equally conclusive against the latter.

As to the slave trade, I conceive it to be unjust in itself -- abominable on
account of the cruel manner in which it is conducted -- and totally wrong on
account of the impolicy of it, or its destructive tendency to the moral and
political interests of any country.

I. It is unjust in itself. -- It is unjust in the same sense, and for the same
reason, as it is, to steal, to rob, or to murder. It is a principle, the truth
of which has in this country been generally, if not universally acknowledged,
ever since the commencement of the late war, that all men are born equally
free. If this be true, the Africans are by nature equally entitled to freedom
as we are; and therefore we have no more right to enslave, or to afford aid to
enslave them, than they have to do the same to us. They have the same right to
their freedom, which they have to their property or to their lives. Therefore
to enslave them is as really and in the same sense wrong, as to steal from
them, to rob or to murder them.

There are indeed cases in which men may justly be deprived of their liberty
and reduced to slavery; as there are cases in which they may be justly deprived
of their lives. But they can justly be deprived of neither, unless they have by
their own voluntary conduct forfeited it. Therefore still the right to liberty
stands on the same basis with the right to life. And that the Africans have
done something whereby they have forfeited their liberty must appear, before we
can justly deprive them of it; as it must appear, that they have done something
whereby they have forfeited their lives, before we may justly deprive them of
these.

II. The slave trade is wicked and abominable on account of the cruel manner in
which it is carried on.

Beside the stealing or kidnapping of men, women and children, in the first
instance, and the instigation of others to this abominable practice; the
inhuman manner in which they are transported to America, and in which they are
treated on their passage and in their subsequent slavery, is such as ought
forever to deter every man from acting any part in this business, who has any
regard to justice or humanity. They are crowded so closely into the holds and
between the decks of vessels, that they have scarcely room to lie down, and
sometimes not room to sit up in an erect posture; the men at the same time
fastened together with irons by two and two; and all this in the most sultry
climate. The consequence of the whole is, that the most dangerous and fatal
diseases are soon bred among them, whereby vast numbers of those exported from
Africa perish in the voyage: others in dread of that slavery which is before
them, and in distress and despair from the loss of their parents, their
children, their husbands, their wives, all their dear connections, and their
dear native country itself, starve themselves to death or plunge themselves
into the ocean. Those who attempt in the former of those ways to escape from
their persecutors, are tortured by live coals applied to their mouths. Those
who attempt an escape in the latter and fail, are equally tortured by the most
cruel beating, or otherwise as their persecutors please. If any of them make an
attempt, as they sometimes do, to recover their liberty, some, and as the
circumstances may be, many, are put to immediate death. Others beaten, bruised,
cut and mangled in a most inhuman and shocking manner, are in this situation
exhibited to the rest, to terrify them from the like attempt in future: and
some are delivered up to every species of torment, whether by the application
of the whip, or of any other instrument, even of fire itself, as the ingenuity
of the ship-master and of his crew is able to suggest or their situation will
admit; and these torments are purposely continued for several days, before
death is permitted to afford relief to these objects of vengeance.

By these means, according to the common computation, twenty-five thousand,
which is a fourth part of those who are exported from Africa, and by the
concession of all, twenty thousand, annually perish, before they arrive at the
places of their destination in America.

But this is by no means the end of the sufferings of this unhappy people. Bred
up in a country spontaneously yielding the necessaries and conveniences of
savage life, they have never been accustomed to labor: of course they are but
ill prepared to go through the fatigue and drudgery to which they are doomed in
their state of slavery. Therefore partly by this cause, partly by the
scantiness and badness of their food, and partly from dejection of spirits,
mortification and despair, another twenty-five thousand die in the seasoning,
as it is called, i. e. within two years of their arrival in America. This I say
is the common computation. Or if we will in this particular be as favorable to
the trade as in the estimate of the number which perishes on the passage, we
may reckon the number which dies in the seasoning to be twenty thousand. So
that of the hundred thousand annually exported from Africa to America, fifty
thousand, as it is commonly computed, or on the most favorable estimate, forty
thousand, die before they are seasoned to the country.

Nor is this all. The cruel sufferings of these pitiable beings are not yet at
an end. Thenceforward they have to drag out a miserable life in absolute
slavery, entirely at the disposal of their masters, by whom not only every
venial fault, every mere inadvertence or mistake, but even real virtues, are
liable to be construed into the most atrocious crimes, and punished as such,
according to their caprice or rage, while they are intoxicated sometimes with
liquor, sometimes with passion.

By these masters they are supplied with barely enough to keep them from
starving, as the whole expense laid out on a slave for food, clothing and
medicine is commonly computed on an average at thirty shillings sterling
annually. At the same time they are kept at hard labor from five o'clock in
the morning, till nine at night, excepting time to eat twice during the day.
And they are constantly under the watchful eye of overseers and Negro-drivers
more tyrannical and cruel than even their masters themselves. From these
drivers for every imagined, as well as real neglect or want of exertion, they
receive the lash, the smack of which is all day long in the ears of those who
are on the plantation or in the vicinity; and it is used with such dexterity
and severity, as not only to lacerate the skin, but to tear out small portions
of the flesh at almost every stroke.

This is the general treatment of the slaves. But many individuals suffer still
more severely. Many, many are knocked down; some have their eyes beaten out;
some have an arm or a leg broken, or chopped off; and many for a very small or
for no crime at all, have been beaten to death merely to gratify the fury of an
enraged master or overseer.

Nor ought we on this occasion to overlook the wars among the nations of Africa
excited by the trade, or the destruction attendant on those wars. Not to
mention the destruction of property, the burning of towns and villages, etc. it
has been determined by reasonable computation, that there are annually
exported from Africa to the various parts of America, one hundred thousand
slaves, as was before observed; that of these six thousand are captives of war;
that in the wars in which these are taken, ten persons of the victors and
vanquished are killed, to one taken; that therefore the taking of the six
thousand captives is attended with the slaughter of sixty thousand of their
countrymen. Now does not justice? does not humanity shrink from the idea, that
in order to procure one slave to gratify our avarice, we should put to death
ten human beings? Or that in order to increase our property, and that only in
some small degree, we should carry on a trade, or even connive at it, to
support which sixty thousand of our own species are slain in war?

These sixty thousand, added to the forty thousand who perish on the passage
and in the seasoning, give us an hundred thousand who are annually destroyed by
the trade; and the whole advantage gained by this amazing destruction of human
lives is sixty thousand slaves. For you will recollect, that the whole number
exported from Africa is an hundred thousand; that of these forty thousand die
on the passage and in the seasoning, and sixty thousand are destroyed in the
wars. Therefore while one hundred and sixty thousand are killed in the wars and
are exported from Africa, but sixty thousand are added to the stock of slaves.

Now when we consider all this; when we consider the miseries which this
unhappy people suffer in their wars, in their captivity, in their voyage to
America, and during a wretched life of cruel slavery: and especially when we
consider the annual destruction of an hundred thousand lives in the manner
before mentioned; who can hesitate to declare this trade and the consequent
slavery to be contrary to every principle of justice and humanity, of the law
of nature and of the law of God?

III. This trade and this slavery are utterly wrong on the ground of impolicy.
In a variety of respects they are exceedingly hurtful to the state which
tolerates them.

1. They are hurtful, as they deprave the morals of the people. -- The
incessant and inhuman cruelties practiced in the trade and in the subsequent
slavery necessarily tend to harden the human heart against the tender feelings
of humanity in the masters of vessels, in the sailors, in the factors, in the
proprietors of the slaves, in their children, in the overseers, in the slaves
themselves, and in all who habitually see those cruelties. Now the eradication
or even the diminution of compassion, tenderness and humanity, is certainly a
great depravation of heart, and must be followed with correspondent depravity
of manners. And measures which lead to such depravity of heart and manners,
cannot but be extremely hurtful to the state, and consequently are extremely
impolitic.

2. The trade is impolitic as it is so destructive of the lives of seamen. The
ingenious Mr. Clarkson has in a very satisfactory manner made it appear, that
in the slave trade alone Great Britain loses annually about nineteen hundred
seamen; and that this loss is more than double to the loss annually sustained
by Great Britain in all her other trade taken together. And doubtless we lose
as many as Great Britain in proportion to the number of seamen whom we employ
in this trade. -- Now can it be politic to carry on a trade which is so
destructive of that useful part of our citizens, our seamen?

3. African slavery is exceedingly impolitic, as it discourages industry.
Nothing is more essential to the political prosperity of any state, than
industry in the citizens. But in proportion as slaves are multiplied, every
kind of labor becomes ignominious: and in fact in those of the United States,
in which slaves are the most numerous, gentlemen and ladies of any fashion
disdain to employ themselves in business, which in other states is consistent
with the dignity of the first families and first offices. In a country filled
with Negro slaves, labor belongs to them only, and a white man is despised in
proportion as he applies to it. -- Now how destructive to industry in all of
the lowest and middle class of citizens, such a situation and the prevalence of
such ideas will be, you can easily conceive. The consequence is, that some will
nearly starve, others will betake themselves to the most dishonest practices,
to obtain the means of living.

As slavery produces indolence in the white people, so it produces all those
vices which are naturally connected with it; such as intemperance, lewdness and
prodigality. These vices enfeeble both the body and the mind, and unfit men for
any vigorous exertions and employments either external or mental. And those who
are unfit for such exertions, are already a very degenerate race; degenerate,
not only in a moral, but a natural sense. They are contemptible too, and will
soon be despised even by their Negroes themselves.

Slavery tends to lewdness not only as it produces indolence, but as it affords
abundant opportunity for that wickedness without either the danger and
difficulty of an attack on the virtue of a woman of chastity, or the danger of
a connection with one of ill fame. A planter with his hundred wenches about him
is in some respects at least like the Sultan in his seraglio, and we learn the
too frequent influence and effect of such a situation, not only from common
fame, but from the multitude of mulattoes in countries where slaves are very
numerous.

Slavery has a most direct tendency to haughtiness also, and a domineering
spirit and conduct in the proprietors of the slaves, in their children, and in
all who have the control of them. A man who has been bred up in domineering
over Negroes, can scarcely avoid contracting such a habit of haughtiness and
domination, as will express itself in his general treatment of mankind, whether
in his private capacity, or in any office civil or military with which he may
be vested. Despotism in economics naturally leads to despotism in politics, and
domestic slavery in a free government is a perfect solecism in human affairs.

How baneful all these tendencies and effects of slavery must be to the public
good, and especially to the public good of such a free country as our's, I need
not inform you.

4. In the same proportion as industry and labor are discouraged, is
population discouraged and prevented. This is another respect in which slavery
is exceedingly impolitic. That population is prevented in proportion as
industry is discouraged, is, I conceive, so plain that nothing needs to be said
to illustrate it. Mankind in general will enter into matrimony as soon as they
possess the means of supporting a family. But the great body of any people have
no other way of supporting themselves or a family, than by their own labor. Of
course as labor is discouraged, matrimony is discouraged and population is
prevented. -- But the impolicy of whatever produces these effects will be
acknowledged by all. The wealth, strength and glory of a state depend on the
number of its virtuous citizens: and a state without citizens is at least as
great an absurdity, as a king without subjects.

5. The impolicy of slavery still further appears from this, that it weakens
the state, and in proportion to the degree in which it exists, exposes it to
become an easy conquest. -- The increase of free citizens is an increase of the
strength of the state. But not so with regard to the increase of slaves. They
not only add nothing to the strength of the state, but actually diminish it in
proportion to their number. Every slave is naturally an enemy to the state in
which he is holden in slavery, and wants nothing but an opportunity to assist
in its overthrow. And an enemy within a state, is much more dangerous than one
without it.

These observations concerning the prevention of population and weakening the
state, are supported by facts which have fallen within our own observation.
That the southern states, in which slaves are so numerous, are in no measure so
populous, according to the extent of territory, as the northern, is a fact of
universal notoriety: and that during the late war, the southern states found
themselves greatly weakened by their slaves, and therefore were so easily
overrun by the British army, is equally notorious.

From the view we have now taken of this subject we scruple not to infer, that
to carry on the slave trade and to introduce slaves into our country, is not
only to be guilty of injustice, robbery and cruelty toward our fellow-men; but
it is to injure ourselves and our country; and therefore it is altogether
unjustifiable, wicked and abominable.

Having thus considered the injustice and ruinous tendency of the slave trade,
I proceed to attend to the principal arguments urged in favor of it.

1. It is said, that the Africans are the posterity of Ham, the son of Noah;
that Canaan one of Ham's sons, was cursed by Noah to be a servant of servants;
that by Canaan we are to understand Ham's posterity in general; that as his
posterity are devoted by God to slavery, we have a right to enslave them. --
This is the argument: to which I answer:

It is indeed generally thought that Ham peopled Africa; but that the curse on
Canaan extended to all the posterity of Ham is a mere imagination. The only
reason given for it is, that Canaan was only one of Ham's sons; and that it
seems reasonable, that the curse of Ham's conduct should fall on all his
posterity, if on any. But this argument is insufficient. We might as clearly
argue, that the judgments denounced on the house of David, on account of his
sin in the matter of Uriah, must equally fall on all his posterity. Yet we
know, that many of them lived and died in great prosperity. So in every case in
which judgments are predicted concerning any nation or family.

It is allowed in this argument, that the curse was to fall on the posterity of
Ham, and not immediately on Ham himself; If otherwise, it is nothing to the
purpose of the slave trade, or of any slaves now in existence. It being allowed
then, that this curse was to fall on Ham's posterity, he who had a right to
curse the whole of that posterity, had the same right to curse a part of it
only, and the posterity of Canaan equally as any other ^art; and a curse on
Ham's posterity in the line of Canaan was as real a curse on Ham himself, as a
curse on all his posterity would have been.

Therefore we have no ground to believe, that this curse respected any others,
than the posterity of Canaan, who lived in the land of Canaan, which is well
known to be remote from Africa. We have a particular account, that all the sons
of Canaan settled in the land of Canaan; as may be seen in Genesis x. 15 -- 20.
And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth, and the Jebusite, and the
Emorite, and the Girgasite, and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and
the Arvadite, and the Zemorite, and the Hamathite; and afterward were the
families of the Canaanites spread abroad. And the border of the Canaanites was
from Sidon, as thou go to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou go unto Sodom and
Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lashah. -- Nor have we account that any
of their posterity except the Carthaginians afterward removed to any part of
Africa: and none will pretend that these peopled Africa in general; especially
considering, that they were subdued, destroyed and so far extirpated by the
Romans.

This curse then of the posterity of Canaan, had no reference to the
inhabitants of Guinea, or of Africa in general; but was fulfilled partly in
Joshua's time, in the reduction and servitude of the Canaanites, and especially
of the Gibeonites; partly by what the Phenicians suffered from the Chaldeans,
Persians and Greeks; and finally by what the Carthaginians suffered from the
Romans.

Therefore this curse gives us no right to enslave the Africans, as we do by
the slave trade, because it has no respect to the Africans whom we enslave. Nor
if it had respected them, would it have given any such right; because it was
not an institution of slavery, but a mere prophecy of it. And from this
prophecy we have no more ground to infer the right of slavery, than we have
from the prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, or by the
Romans, to infer their right respectively to destroy it in the manner they did*
or from other prophecies to infer the right of Judas to betray his master, or
of the Jews to crucify him.

2. The right of slavery is inferred from the instance of Abraham, who had
servants born in his house and bought with his money. -- But it is by no means
certain, that these were slaves, as our Negroes are. If they were, it is
unaccountable, that he went out at the head of an army of them to fight his
enemies. No West India planter would easily be induced to venture himself in
such a situation. It is far more probable, that similar to some of the vassals
under the feudal constitution, the servants of Abraham were only in a good
measure dependant on him, and protected by him. But if they were to all intents
and purposes slaves, Abraham's holding of them will no more prove the right of
slavery, than his going in to Hagar, will prove it right for any man to cohabit
with his wench.

3. From the divine permission given the Israelites to buy servants of the
nations round about them, it is argued, that we have a right to buy the
Africans and hold them in slavery. See Lev. xxv. 44 -- 47. Both thy bondmen and
thy bondmaids, which thou shall have, shall be of the heathen that are round
about you; of them shall be buy bondmen and bondmaids. Moreover, of the
children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and
of their families, that are with you, which they begat in your land; and they
shall be your possession. And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your
children after you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your
bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel ye shall not
rule one over another with rigor. But if this be at all to the purpose, it is
a permission to every nation under heaven to buy slaves of the nations round
about them: to us, to buy of our Indian neighbors; to them, to buy of us; to
the French, to buy of the English, and to the English to buy of the French; and
so through the world. If then this argument be valid, every man has an entire
right to engage in this trade, and to buy and sell any other man of another
nation, and any other man of another nation has an entire right to buy and sell
him. Thus according to this construction, we have in Lev. xxv. 43, etc. an
institution of an universal slave trade, by which every man may not only become
a merchant, but may rightfully become the merchandise itself of this trade, and
may be bought and sold like a beast. -- Now this consequence will be given up
as absurd, and therefore also the construction of scripture from which it
follows, must be given up. Yet it is presumed, that there is no avoiding that
construction or the absurdity flowing from it, but by admitting, that this
permission to the Israelites to buy slaves has no respect to us, but was in the
same manner peculiar to them, as the permission and command to subdue, destroy
and extirpate the whole Canaanitish nation; and therefore no more gives
countenance to African slavery, than the command to extirpate the Canaanites,
gives countenance to the extirpation of any nation in these days, by an
universal slaughter of men and women, young men and maidens, infants and
sucklings.

4. It is further pleaded, that there were slaves in the time of the apostles;
that they did not forbid the holding of those slaves, but gave directions to
servants, doubtless referring to the servants of that day, to obey their
masters, and count them worthy of all honor.

To this the answer is, that the apostles teach the general duties of servants
who are righteously in the state of servitude, as many are or may be, by hire,
by indenture, and by judgment of a civil court. But they do not say, whether
the servants in general of that day were justly holden in slavery or not. In
like manner they lay down the general rules of obedience to civil magistrates,
without deciding concerning the characters of the magistrates of the Roman
empire in the reign of Nero. And as the apostle Paul requires masters to give
their servants that which is just and equal, (Col. iv. 1.) so if any were
enslaved unjustly, of course he in this text requires of the masters of such,
to give them their freedom. -- Thus the apostles treat the slavery of that day
in the same manner that they treat the civil government; and say nothing more
in favor of the former, than they say in favor of the latter.

Besides, this argument from the slavery prevailing in the days of the
apostles, if it prove any thing, proves too much, and so confutes itself. It
proves, that we may enslave all captives taken in war, of any nation, and in
any the most unjust war, such as the wars of the Romans, which were generally
undertaken from the motives of ambition or avarice. On the ground of this
argument we had a right to enslave the prisoners, whom we, during the late war,
took from the British army; and they had the same right to enslave those whom
they took from us; and so with respect to all other nations.

5. It is strongly urged, that the Negroes brought from Africa are all captives
of war, and therefore are justly bought and holden in slavery. -- This is a
principal argument always urged by the advocates for slavery; and in a solemn
debate on this subject, it has been strongly insisted on, very lately in the
British parliament. Therefore it requires our particular attention.

Captives in a war just on their part, cannot be justly enslaved; nor is this
pretended. Therefore the captives who may be justly enslaved, must be taken in
a war unjust on their part. But even on the supposition, that captives in such
a war may be justly enslaved, it will not follow, that we can justly carry on
the slave trade, as it is commonly carried on from the African coast. In this
trade any slaves are purchased, who are offered for sale, whether justly or
unjustly enslaved. No enquiry is made whether they were captives in any war;
much less, whether they were captivated in a war unjust on their part.

By the most authentic accounts, it appears, that the wars in general in Africa
are excited by the prospect of gain from the sale of the captives of the war.
Therefore those taken by the assailants in such wars, cannot be justly
enslaved. Beside these, many are kidnapped by those of neighboring nations;
some by their own neighbors; and some by their kings or his agents; others for
debt or some trifling crime are condemned to perpetual slavery -- But none of
these are justly enslaved. And the traders make no enquiry concerning the mode
or occasion of their first enslavement. They buy all that are offered, provided
they like them and the price. -- So that the plea, that the African slaves are
captives in war, is entirely insufficient to justify the slave trade as now
carried on.

But this is not all; if it were ever so true, that all the Negroes exported
from Africa were captives in war, and that they were taken in a war unjust on
their part; still they could not be justly enslaved. -- We have no right to
enslave a private foe in a state of nature, after he is conquered. Suppose in a
state of nature one man rises against another and endeavors to kill him; in
this case the person assaulted has no right to kill the assailant, unless it be
necessary to preserve his own life. But in wars between nations, one nation may
no doubt secure itself against another, by other means than the slavery of its
captives. If a nation be victorious in the war, it may exact some towns or a
district of country, by way of caution; or it may impose a fine to deter from
future injuries. If the nation be not victorious, it will do no good to enslave
the captives whom it has taken. It will provoke the victors, and foolishly
excite vengeance which cannot be repelled.

Or if neither nation be decidedly victorious, to enslave the captives on
either side can answer no good purpose, but must at least occasion the
enslaving of the citizens of the other nation, who are now, or in future may be
in a state of captivity. Such a practice therefore necessarily tends to evil
and not good.

Besides; captives in war are generally common soldiers or common citizens; and
they are generally ignorant of the true cause or causes of the war, and are by
their superiors made to believe, that the war is entirely just on their part.
Or if this be not the case, they may by force be compelled to serve in a war
which they know to be unjust. In either of these cases they do not deserve to
be condemned to perpetual slavery. To inflict perpetual slavery on these
private soldiers and citizens is manifestly not to do, as we would wish that
men should do to us. If we were taken in a war unjust on our part, we should
not think it right to be condemned to perpetual slavery. No more right is it
for us to condemn and hold in perpetual slavery others, who are in the same
situation.

6. It is argued, that as the Africans in their own country, previously to the
purchase of them by the African traders, are captives in war; if they were not
bought up by those traders, they would be put to death: that therefore to
purchase them and to subject them to slavery instead of death, is an act of
mercy not only lawful, but meritorious.

If the case were indeed so as is now represented, the purchase of the Negroes
would be no more meritorious, than the act of a man, who, if we were taken by
the Algerines, should purchase us out of that slavery. This would indeed be an
act of benevolence, if the purchaser should set us at liberty. But it is no act
of benevolence to buy a man out of one state into another no better. Nay, the
act of ransoming a man from death gives no right to the ransomer to commit a
crime or an act of injustice to the person ransomed. The person ransomed is
doubtless obligated according to his ability to satisfy the ransomer for his
expense and trouble. Yet the ransomer has no more right to enslave the other,
than the man who saves the life of another who was about to be killed by a
robber or an assassin, has a right to enslave him. -- The liberty of a man for
life is a far greater good, than the property paid for a Negro on the African
coast. And to deprive a man of an immensely greater good, in order to recover
one immensely less, is an immense injury and crime.

7. As to the pretense, that to prohibit or lay aside this trade, would be
hurtful to our commerce; it is sufficient to ask, whether on the supposition,
that it were advantageous to the commerce of Great Britain to send her ships to
these states, and transport us into perpetual slavery in the West Indies, it
would be right that she should go into that trade.

8. That to prohibit the slave trade would infringe on the property of those,
who have expended large sums to carry on that trade, or of those who wish to
purchase the slaves for their plantations, has also been urged as an argument
in favor of the trade. -- But the same argument would prove, that if the skins
and teeth of the Negroes were as valuable articles of commerce as furs and
elephant's teeth, and a merchant were to lay out his property in this commerce,
he ought by no means to be obstructed therein.

9. But others will carry on the trade, if we do not. -- So others will rob,
steal and murder, if we do not.

10. It is said, that some men are intended by nature to be slaves. -- If this
mean, that the author of nature has given some men a license, to enslave
others; this is denied and proof is demanded. If it mean, that God has made
some of capacities inferior to others, and that the last have a right to
enslave the first; this argument will prove, that some of the citizens of every
country, have a right to enslave other citizens of the same country; nay, that
some have a right to enslave their own brothers and sisters. -- But if this
argument mean, that God in his providence suffers some men to be enslaved, and
that this proves, that from the beginning he intended they should be enslaved,
and made them with this intention; the answer is, that in like manner he
suffers some men to be murdered, and in this sense, he intended and made them
to be murdered. Yet no man in his senses will hence argue the lawfulness of
murder.

11. It is further pretended, that no other men, than Negroes, can endure
labor in the hot climates of the West Indies and the southern states. -- But
does this appear to be fact? In all other climates, the laboring people are
the most healthy. And I confess I have not yet seen evidence, but that those
who have been accustomed to labor and are inured to those climates, can bear
labor there also. -- However, taking for granted the fact asserted in this
objection, does it follow, that the inhabitants of those countries have a right
to enslave the Africans to labor for them? No more surely than from the
circumstance, that you are feeble and cannot labor, it follows, that you have
a right to enslave your robust neighbor. As in all other cases, the feeble and
those who choose not to labor, and yet wish to have their lands cultivated,
are necessitated to hire the robust to labor for them; so no reason can be
given, why the inhabitants of hot climates should not either perform their own
labor, or hire those who can perform it, whether Negroes or others.

If our traders went to the coast of Africa to murder the inhabitants, or to
rob them of their property, all would own that such murderous or piratical
practices are wicked and abominable. Now it is as really wicked to rob a man of
his liberty, as to rob him of his life; and it is much more wicked, than to rob
him of his property. All men agree to condemn highway robbery. And the
slave trade is as much a greater wickedness than highway robbery, as liberty is
more valuable than property. How strange is it then, that in the same nation
highway robbery should be punished with death, and the slave trade be
encouraged by national authority.

We all dread political slavery, or subjection to the arbitrary power of a king
or of any man or men not deriving their authority from the people. Yet such a
state is inconceivably preferable to the slavery of the Negroes. Suppose that
in the late war we had been subdued by Great Britain; we should have been taxed
without our consent. But these taxes would have amounted to but a small part of
our property. Whereas the Negroes are deprived of all their property; no part
of their earnings is their own; the whole is their masters. -- In a conquered
state we should have been at liberty to dispose of ourselves and of our
property in most cases, as we should choose. We should have been free to live
in this or that town or place; in any part of the country, or to remove out of
the country; to apply to this or that business; to labor or not; and excepting
a sufficiency for the taxes, to dispose of the fruit of our labor to our own
benefit, or that of our children, or of any other person. But the unhappy
Negroes in slavery can do none of these things. They must do what they are
commanded and as much as they are commanded, on pain of the lash. They must
live where they are placed, and must confine themselves to that spot, on pain
of death.

So that Great Britain in her late attempt to enslave America, committed a very
small crime indeed in comparison with the crime of those who enslave the
Africans.

The arguments which have been urged against the slave trade, are with little
variation applicable to the holding of slaves. He who holds a slave, continues
to deprive him of that liberty, which was taken from him on the coast of
Africa. And if it were wrong to deprive him of it in the first instance, why
not in the second? If this be true, no man has a better right to retain his
Negro in slavery, than he had to take him from his native African shores. And
every man who cannot show, that his Negro has by his voluntary conduct
forfeited his liberty, is obligated immediately to manumit him. Undoubtedly we
should think so, were we holden in the same slavery in which the Negroes are:
And our text requires us to do to others, as we would that they should do to us.

To hold a slave, who has a right to his liberty, is not only a real crime, but
a very great one. Many good christians have wondered how Abraham, the father of
the faithful, could take Hagar to his bed; and how Sarah, celebrated as an holy
woman, could consent to this transaction: Also, how David and Solomon could
have so many wives and concubines, and yet be real saints. Let such inquire how
it is possible, that our fathers and men now alive, universally reputed pious,
should hold Negro slaves, and yet be the subjects of real piety? And whether to
reduce a man, who has the same right to liberty as any other man, to a state
of absolute slavery, or to hold him in that state, be not as great a crime as
concubinage or fornication. I presume it will not be denied, that to commit
theft or robbery every day of a man's life, is as great a sin as to commit
fornication in one instance. But to steal a man or to rob him of his liberty is
a greater sin, than to steal his property, or to take it by violence. And to
hold a man in a state of slavery, who has a right to his liberty, is to be
every day guilty of robbing him of his liberty, or of man-stealing. The
consequence is inevitable, that other things being the same, to hold a Negro
slave, unless he have forfeited his liberty, is a greater sin in the sight of
God, than concubinage or fornication.

Does this conclusion seem strange to any of you? Let me entreat you to weigh
it heartily before you reject it. You will not deny, that liberty is more
valuable than property; and that it is a greater sin to deprive a man of his
whole liberty during life, than to deprive him of his whole property; or that
man-stealing is a greater crime than robbery. Nor will you deny, that to hold
in slavery a man who was stolen, is substantially the same crime as to steal
him. These principles being undeniable, I leave it to yourselves to draw the
plain and necessary consequence. And if your consciences shall, in spite of all
opposition, tell you, that while you hold your Negroes in slavery, you do
wrong, exceedingly wrong; that you do not, as you would that men should do to
you; that you commit sin in the sight of God; that you daily violate the plain
rights of mankind, and that in a higher degree, than if you committed theft or
robbery; let me beseech you not to stifle this conviction, but attend to it and
act accordingly; lest you add to your former guilt, that of sinning against the
light of truth, and of your own consciences.

To convince yourselves, that your information being the same, to hold a Negro
slave is a greater sin than fornication, theft or robbery, you need only bring
the matter home to yourselves. I am willing to appeal to your own consciences,
whether you would not judge it to be a greater sin for a man to hold you or
your child during life in such slavery, as that of the Negroes, than for him to
spend one night in a brothel, or in one instance to steal or rob. Let
conscience speak, and I will submit to it is decision.

This question seems to be clearly decided by revelation. Exodus xxi. 16. He
that steals a man and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall
surely be put to death. Thus death is, by the divine express declaration, the
punishment due to the crime of man-stealing. But death is not the punishment
declared by God to be due to fornication, theft or robbery in common cases.
Therefore we have the divine authority to assert, that man-stealing is a
greater crime than fornication, theft or robbery. Now to hold in slavery a man
who has a right to liberty, is substantially the same crime as to deprive him
of his liberty. And to deprive of liberty and reduce to slavery, a man who has
a right to liberty, is man-stealing. For it is immaterial whether he be taken
and reduced to slavery clan-destinely or by open violence. Therefore if the
Negroes have a right to liberty, to hold them in slavery is man-stealing, which
we have seen is, by God himself, declared to be a greater crime than
fornication, theft or robbery.

Perhaps, though this truth be clearly demonstrable both from reason and
revelation, you scarcely dare receive it, because it seems to bear hardly on
the characters of our pious fathers, who held slaves. But they did it
ignorantly and in unbelief of the truth; as Abraham, Jacob, David and Solomon
were ignorant, that polygamy or concubinage was wrong. As to domestic slavery
our fathers lived in a time of ignorance which God winked at; but now he
commands all men every where to repent of this wickedness, and to break off
this sin by righteousness, and this iniquity by showing mercy to the poor, if
it may be a lengthening out of their tranquillity. You therefore to whom the
present blaze of light as to this subject has reached, cannot sin at so cheap a
rate as our fathers.

But methinks I hear some say, I have bought my Negro; I have paid a large sum
for him; I cannot lose this sum, and therefore I cannot manumit him. -- Alas!
This is hitting the nail on the head. This brings into view the true cause
which makes it so difficult to convince men of what is right in this case. --
You recollect the story of Amaziah's hiring an hundred thousand men of Israel,
for an hundred talents, to assist him against the Edomites; and that when by
the word of the Lord, he was forbidden to take those hired men with him to the
war, he cried out, But what shall we do for the hundred talents, which I have
given to the army of Israel? In this case, the answer of God was, The Lord is
able to give thee much more than this. -- To apply this to the subject before
us, God is able to give thee much more than thou shall lose by manumitting thy
slave.

You may plead, that you use your slave well; you are not cruel to him, but
feed and clothe him comfortably, etc. Still every day you rob him of a most
valuable and important right. And a highway man, who robs a man of his money in
the most easy and complaisant manner, is still a robber; and murder may be
effected in a manner the least cruel and tormenting; still it is murder.

Having now taken that view of our subject, which was proposed, we may in
reflection see abundant reason to acquiesce in the institution of this society.
If the slave trade be unjust, and as gross a violation of the rights of
mankind, as would be, if the Africans should transport us into perpetual
slavery in Africa; to unite our influence against it, is a duty which we owe to
mankind, to ourselves and to God too. It is but doing as we would that men
should do to us. -- Nor is it enough that we have formed the society; we must
do the duties of it. The first of these is to put an end to the slave trade.
The second is to relieve those who, contrary to the laws of the country, are
holden in bondage. Another is to defend those in their remaining legal and
natural rights, who are by law holden in bondage. Another and not the least
important object of this society, I conceive to be, to increase and disperse
the light of truth with respect to the subject of African slavery, and so
prepare the way for its total abolition. For until men in general are convinced
of the injustice of the trade and of the slavery itself, comparatively little
can be done to effect the most important purposes of the institution.

It is not to be doubted, that the trade is even now carried on from this
state. Vessels are from time to time fitted out for the coast of Africa, to
transport the Negroes to the West Indies and other parts. Nor will an end be
put to this trade, without vigilance and strenuous exertion on the part of this
society, or other friends of humanity, nor without a patient enduring of the
opposition and odium of all who are concerned in it, of their friends and of
all who are of the opinion that it is justifiable. Among these we are doubtless
to reckon some of large property and considerable influence. And if the laws
and customs of the country equally allowed of it, many, and perhaps as many as
now plead for the right of the African slave trade, would plead for the right
of kidnapping us, the citizens of the United States, and of selling us into
perpetual slavery. -- If then we dare not incur the displeasure of such men, we
may as well dissolve the society, and leave the slave trade to be carried on,
and the Negroes to be kidnapped, and though free in this state, to be sold into
perpetual slavery in distant parts, at the pleasure of any man, who wishes to
make gain by such abominable practices.

Though we must expect opposition, yet if we be steady and persevering, we need
not fear, that we shall fail of success. The advantages, which the cause has
already gained, are many and great. Thirty years ago scarcely a man in this
country thought either the slave trade or the slavery of Negroes to be wrong.
But now how many and able advocates in private life, in our legislatures, in
Congress, have appeared and have openly and irrefragably pleaded the rights of
humanity in this as well as other instances? Nay, the great body of the people
from New Hampshire to Virginia inclusively, have obtained such light, that in
all those states the further importation of slaves is prohibited by law. And in
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, slavery is totally abolished.

Nor is the light concerning this subject confined to America. It has appeared
with great clearness in France, and produced remarkable effects in the National
Assembly. It has also shone in bright beams in Great Britain. It flashes with
splendour in the writings of Clarkson and in the proceedings of several
societies formed to abolish the slave trade. Nor has it been possible to shut
it out of the British parliament. This light is still increasing, and in time
will effect a total revolution. And if we judge of the future by the past,
within fifty years from this time, it will be as shameful for a man to hold a
Negro slave, as to be guilty of common robbery or theft. But it is our duty to
remove the obstacles which intercept the rays of this light, that it may reach
not only public bodies, but every individual. And when it shall have obtained a
general spread, shall have dispelled all darkness, and slavery shall be no
more; it will be an honor to be recorded in history, as a society which was
formed, and which exerted itself with vigor and fidelity, to bring about an
event so necessary and conducive to the interests of humanity and virtue, to
the support of the rights and to the advancement of the happiness of mankind.

APPENDIX.
SOME objections to the doctrine of the preceding sermon, have been mentioned
to the author, since the delivery of it. Of these it may be proper to take some
notice.

1. The slaves are in a better situation than that in which they were in their
own country; especially as they have opportunity to know the Christian religion
and to secure the saving blessings of it. Therefore it is not an injury, but a
benefit to bring them into this country, even though their importation be
accompanied and followed with slavery. It is also said, that the situation of
many Negroes under their masters is much better, than it would be, were they
free in this country; that they are much better fed and clothed, and are much
more happy; that therefore to hold them in slavery is so far from a crime, that
it is a meritorious act.

With regard to these pleas, it is to be observed, that every man has a right
to judge concerning his own happiness, and to choose the means of obtaining or
promoting it; and to deprive him of this right is the very injury of which we
complain; it is to enslave him. Because we judge, that the Negroes are more
happy in this country, in a state of slavery, than in the enjoyment of liberty
in Africa, we have no more right to enslave them and bring them into this
country, than we have to enslave any of our neighbors, who we judge would be
more happy under our control, than they are at present under their own. Let us
make the case our own. Should we believe, that we were justly treated, if the
Africans should carry us into perpetual slavery in Africa, on the ground that
they judged, that we should be more happy in that state, than in our present
situation?

As to the opportunity which the Negroes in this country are said to have, to
become acquainted with Christianity; this with respect to many is granted: But
what follows from it? It would be ridiculous to pretend, that this is the
motive on which they act who import them, or they who buy and hold them in
slavery. Or if this were the motive, it would not sanctify either the trade or
the slavery. We are not at liberty to do evil, that good may come; to commit a
crime more aggravated than theft or robbery, that we may make a proselyte to
Christianity. Neither our Lord Jesus Christ, nor any one of his apostles has
taught us this mode of propagating the faith.

2. It is said, that the doctrine of the preceding sermon imputes that as a
crime to individuals, which is owing to the state of society. This is granted;
and what follows? It is owing to the state of society, that our neighbors, the
Indians roast their captives: and does it hence follow, that such conduct is
not to be imputed to the individual agents as a crime? It is owing to the state
of society in Popish countries, that thousands worship the beast and his image:
and is that worship therefore not to be imputed as a crime to those, who render
it? Read the Revelation of St. John. The state of society is such, that
drunkenness and adultery are very common in some countries; but will it follow,
that those vices are innocent in those countries?

3. If I be ever so willing to manumit my slave, I cannot do it without being
holden to maintain him, when he shall be sick or shall be old and decrepit.
Therefore I have a right to hold him as a slave. -- The same argument will
prove, that you have a right to enslave your children or your parents; as you
are equally holden to maintain them in sickness and in decrepit old age. -- The
argument implies, that in order to secure the money, which you are afraid the
laws of your country will some time or other oblige you to pay; it is right for
you to rob a free man of his liberty or be guilty of man-stealing. On the
ground of this argument every town or parish obligated by law, to maintain its
helpless poor, has a right to sell into perpetual slavery all the people, who
may probably or even possibly occasion a public expense.

4. After all, it is not safe to manumit the Negroes: they would cut our
throats; they would endanger the peace and government of the state. Or at least
they would be so idle, that they would not provide themselves with necessaries:
of course they must live by thievery and plundering.

This objection requires a different answer, as it respects the northern, and
as it respects the southern states. As it respects the northern, in which
slaves are so few, there is not the least foundation to imagine, that they
would combine or make insurrection against the government; or that they would
attempt to murder their masters. They are much more likely to kill their
masters, in order to obtain their liberty, or to revenge the abuse they
receive, while it is still continued, than to do it after the abuse has
ceased, and they are restored to their liberty. In this case, they would from a
sense of gratitude, or at least from a conviction of the justice of their
masters, feel a strong attachment, instead of a murderous disposition.

Nor is there the least danger, but that by a proper vigilance of the
select-men, and by a strict execution of the laws now existing, the Negroes
might in a tolerable degree be kept from idleness and pilfering.

All this has been verified by experiment. In Massachusetts, all the Negroes
in the commonwealth were by their new constitution liberated in a day: and none
of the ill consequences objected followed either to the commonwealth or to
individuals.

With regard to the southern states, the case is different. The Negroes in some
parts of those states are a great majority of the whole, and therefore the
evils objected would, in case of a general manumission at once, be more likely
to take place. But in the first place there is no prospect, that the conviction
of the truth exhibited in the preceding discourse, will at once, take place in
the minds of all the holders of slaves. The utmost that can be expected, is
that it will take place gradually in one after another, and that of course the
slaves will be gradually manumitted. Therefore the evils of a general
manumission at once, are dreaded without reason.

If in any state the slaves should be manumitted in considerable numbers at
once, or so that the number of free Negroes should become large; various
measures might be concerted to prevent the evils feared. One I beg leave to
propose: That overseers of the free Negroes be appointed from among themselves,
who shall be empowered to inspect the morals and management of the rest, and
report to proper authority, those who are vicious, idle or incapable of
managing their own affairs, and that such authority dispose of them under
proper masters for a year or other term, as is done, perhaps in all the states,
with regard to the poor white people in like manner vicious, idle or incapable
of management. Such black overseers would naturally be ambitious to discharge
the duties of their office; they would in many respects have much more
influence than white men with their country men: and other Negroes looking
forward to the same honorable distinction, would endeavor to deserve it by
their improvement and good conduct.

But after all, this whole objection, if it were ever so entirely founded on
truth; if the freed Negroes would probably rise against their masters, or
combine against government; rests on the same ground, as the apology of the
robber, who murders the man whom he has robbed. Says the robber to himself, I
have robbed this man, and now if I let him go he will kill me, or he will
complain to authority and I shall be apprehended and hung. I must therefore
kill him. There is no other way of safety for me. -- The coincidence between
this reasoning and that of the objection under consideration, must be manifest
to all. And if this reasoning of the robber be inconclusive; if the robber have
no right on that ground to kill the man whom he has robbed; neither have the
slave-holders any more right to continue to hold their slaves. If the robber
ought to spare the life of the man robbed, take his own chance and esteem
himself happy, if he can escape justice; so the slave-holders ought immediately
to let their slaves go free, treat them with the utmost kindness, by such
treatment endeavor to pacify them with respect to past injuries, and esteem
themselves happy, if they can compromise the matter in this manner.

In all countries in which the slaves are a majority of the inhabitants, the
masters lie in a great measure at the mercy of the slaves, and may most
rationally expect sooner or later, to be cut off, or driven out by the slaves,
or to be reduced to the same level and to be mingled with them into one common
mass. This I think is by ancient and modern events demonstrated to be the
natural and necessary course of human affairs. The hewers of wood and drawers
of water among the Israelites, the Helots among the Lacedaemonians, the slaves
among the Romans, the villains and vassals in most of the kingdoms of Europe
under the feudal system, have long since mixed with the common mass of the
people, and shared the common privileges and honors of their respective
countries. And in the French West Indies the Mulattoes and free Negroes are
already become so numerous and powerful a body, as to be allowed by the
National Assembly to enjoy the common rights and honors of free men. These
facts plainly show, what the whites in the West Indies and the Southern States
are to expect concerning their posterity, that it will infallibly be a mungrel
breed, or else they must quit the country to the Negroes whom they have
hitherto holden in bondage.

Thus it seems, that they will be necessitated by Providence to make in one way
or another compensation to the Negroes for the injury which they have done
them. In the first case, by taking them into affinity with themselves, giving
them their own sons and daughters in marriage, and making them and their
posterity the heirs of all their property and all their honors, and by raising
their color to a partial whiteness, whereby a part at least of that mark which
brings on them so much contempt, will be wiped off. In the other case, by
leaving to them all their real estates. It is manifest by the bare stating of
the two cases, that the compensation in the latter case is by much the least.
In the former case, the compensation will include all that is included in the
latter and much more. If therefore our southern brethren and the inhabitants of
the West Indies would balance their accounts with their Negro slaves, at the
cheapest possible rate, they will doubtless judge it prudent, to leave the
country with all their houses, lands and improvements to their quiet possession
and dominion; as otherwise Providence will compel them to much dearer
settlement, and one attended with a circumstance inconceivably more mortifying,
than the loss of all their real estates, I mean the mixture of their blood with
that of the Negroes into one common posterity.

At least it is to be hoped, that these considerations will induce them to
forbear any further importation of slaves, as the more numerous the slaves are,
the more dangerous they will be, and the more deeply tinged will be the color
of their mulatto posterity.

It is not to be doubted, but that the Negroes in these northern states also
will, in time, mix with the common mass of the people. But we have this
consolation, that as they are so small a proportion of the inhabitants, when
mixed with the rest, they will not produce any very sensible diversity of
color.

THE END.

