Dr. Dwight's Election Sermon.

VIRTUOUS RULERS A NATIONAL BLESSING. A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE GENERAL
ELECTION. MAY 12th, 1791.

BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN FAIRFIELD.

Our holy religion makes good men; from thence the transition is easy and
natural to regular citizens, and obedient subjects. Where private virtue cannot
be found, it is in vain to look for public; and laws are of little efficacy
without good examples. The operation of the one is slow and silent; that of the
other is visible and strong, every one sees and feels it. Governor PATTERSON'S
Answer to the Address of the Presbytery of New-Brunswick. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY
HUDSON AND GOODWIN. M. DCC. XCI.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, in said
State, on the second Thursday of May, A. D. 1791.
ORDERED, That James Davenport, Esquire. and Colonel Elijah Abel, return the Thanks
of this Assembly to the Rev. Dr. Dwight, for his Sermon delivered at the
General Election, on the 12th Day of May 1791, and request a Copy thereof that
it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by George Wyllys, Sec.

ELECTION SERMON.
2 SAMUEL, xxiii. 3, 4. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me,
He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises; even a
morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth, by
clear shining after rain.


WHEN our ancestors instituted the solemnities of this day, they gave the world
a fair exhibition of their wisdom and piety. The election of the great officers
of a state is an event highly important, and solemn, and ought to be regarded
with solemn emotions. To inspire such emotions, they justly determined, nothing
would more effectually conduce, than the union of the Legislature in the public
reverential acknowledgement of the presence, and agency, of Him, "whose throne
is prepared in the heavens, and whose kingdom rules over all." Influenced by
that piety, which was their governing characteristic, they were experimentally
convinced, that, as no consideration is so interesting, so none is so
productive of rectitude, in public, or in private life, as the omnipresence,
and omniscience, of that GOD, to whom we must give an account of all our
conduct. Persons of such a character must also have clearly seen, and strongly
felt, that pertinent religious discourses, concerning the duties incumbent on
rulers, delivered at such a time, could not fail of advantageous effects. From
these just and commendable sentiments, the divine service of this anniversary
was instituted by our ancestors; and from the same sentiments, it has been
uniformly celebrated by their descendants.

THE truth of these remarks will, it is presumed, be readily acknowledged, by
those at least, whose authority sanctioned, and whose presence countenances,
the business of this meeting. With equal readiness will it be acknowledged,
that they clearly point out the duty of the preacher. It is visibly his duty to
aim at making such impressions on the minds of his audience, as will most
effectually accomplish the design of the institution. It is his duty to address
his discourse to the peculiar circumstances of those, who summoned him to the
employment; and as far as may be, to awaken in them those reflections, which
cannot fail to produce, in men of consideration, some desirable consequences.

FOR about a hundred and thirty years, has this institution existed; and,
throughout this long period, wise and virtuous men have annually uttered, from
this place, useful truths, and pious exhortations. After the labors of such a
train of respectable characters, the present preacher cannot hope to entertain
his audience with novelty, or instruction. In the humbler office of a monitor,
he may however advantageously remind those, who hear him, of their interest,
and duty; and thus may render to them an office of benevolence, eminently
necessary to so frail, and so forgetful a being, as man.

To a design of this nature, the passage of scripture mentioned as the theme of
the following discourse, is an obvious introduction. The sentiments it
contains, are of high importance, and unfold their truth, and moment, to the
slightest inspection.

IN the first of these verses, it is asserted to be the duty of a ruler to be
just, and to rule in the fear of God. This passage of scripture has been
supposed, perhaps justly, to be a prophecy of the Messiah; according to the
following translation -- There shall be a ruler over men, a just one, ruling in
the fear of God, etc. Should this opinion be adopted, the doctrine may be
fairly derived from it. The justice and piety with which it is prophesied, this
glorious person shall rule over men, are plainly mentioned, as the reason of
that great and general happiness, produced by his government. From the force of
the argument, and the dignity of the example, the doctrine receives as high a
sanction, as it could receive from any precept.
In the second, the beneficent influence of government, formed on these
principles, is declared and described in terms of singular force, and
unrivalled beauty.

ON the first of these assertions, it will be unnecessary to expatiate. Of its
truth, there can be neither denial, nor doubt; and of its importance, a brief
examination of the second will furnish sufficient evidence. The following
observations will therefore be principally confined to this solemn declaration
of the GOD of Israel -- That a just and pious Ruler is an eminent blessing to a
people. Of this doctrine, the text naturally forms the first illustration.

PERHAPS there is not, in the whole sacred volume, a single passage, introduced
with such solemnity and magnificence, as the passage before us. It is ushered
in by two prefaces; both of them conspiring, in a striking manner, to increase
the impression. We are first informed by the recording prophet, that these are
the last words of David -- his solemn farewell to the great kingdom, he had so
long governed; his dying monition to the numerous tribes of future princes,
whom, with the eye of prediction, he saw springing from his loins; his final
benediction to those unnumbered princes, and nations, for whom, throughout the
vast regions, and extended duration, of this world, he knew his instructions
would be recorded. That we may feel the weight of this preface, a singular and
illustrious character of David is subjoined. "David, the son of Jesse, the man
who was raised on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, the sweet Psalmist of
Israel, said," etc.

NOTHING could, with more pertinence, have been prefixed to these remarkable
words, by the prophet who has recorded them. From the character of the author
they derive the highest human sanction. Selected by the wisdom of JEHOVAH from
the whole Israelitish nation, at the divine command, he ascended the throne. In
this dignified station, he gave the clearest proof of the propriety of this
providence. His country had, for ages, been involved in the most distressing
wars. In a period of the deepest calamity, he assumed the direction of its
public affairs, roused its dismayed inhabitants to aims and enterprise, and, in
a little time, subdued all the surrounding nations, from the great sea to the
river Euphrates. With soldiers, whom he raised, officered, and disciplined,
with a heroism and military wisdom wholly unprecedented, and in dangers,
difficulties, and distresses, of which there are few examples, he established
the most respectable empire, at that time in the world.

FOR the government of these extensive dominions, he projected, and executed, a
series of the wisest military, and political measures. Steadily attentive to
all the great objects of policy, he effectually provided for the defense of his
kingdom, for the enlargement of commerce, for the improvement of agriculture,
for the promotion of useful knowledge, and for the regular administration of
justice; and, in all, displayed a strength of genius, and a largeness of heart,
to which we shall not easily find a parrallels. At the same time, he exhibited
an illustrious example of the most distinguished virtue. In his excellent and
splendid institutions for the public worship of the nation; in those glorious
monuments of genius and piety, those perpetual directories of private and
public devotion, the psalms he composed; in the regular, expeditions, and
impartial distribution of civil justice; and in the combined beauties of a
noble personal example; he gained from the voice of heaven that exalted title.
"the man after God's own heart;" and left his memorial to succeeding ages, as a
sweet smelling favor, as an object of the applause, and the imitation, of all
who should come after him.

IT is further to be remembered, that he was advanced to the kingdom, from the
humblest station of private life. Though descended from princes, he was, like the
Messiah, whom he principally typified, born, and educated in the vale of
poverty. In the condition of a subject, he had seen, and felt, all the evils of
unjust and impious rule, exercised by his predecessor. As a subject, he knew
how to feel for other subjects; as a man persecuted, for other objects of
persecution; while, from his long possession of the scepter of government, he
became extensively acquainted with the art of governing with dignity, and
success.

OF such a man, are these the last words, uttered at the close of such a life.

THE preface of David is still more solemn, and affecting. "The spirit of the
Lord," faith he, "spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue." That eternal
spirit "who searches all things, even the deep things of God," speaks
expressly the things, which I now utter, as the sum of his own infinite
knowledge of this great subject, and the effusion of his infinite benevolence
to the children of men. "The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to
me," etc. The father of the universe, the ruler of an infinite empire, declares
to mankind these counsels, as a general conformity to his pleasure and example,
and as the result of his own experience, in the august employment of ruling the
immensity of intelligent beings.

SUCH is the magnificent introduction of this singular passage; and such is the
force, with which it is intended to operate on the mind of every reader.

IN a manner, perfectly suited to so impressive an exordium, is the doctrine
exhibited by the passage itself. And he, i. e. a virtuous ruler, shall be as
the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even a morning, without clouds;
as the tender grass springing out of the earth, by clear shining after rain.
Never were objects of more pleasing and splendid beauty exhibited in
comparison; nor could any conceivable images unfold this subject with superior
energy. The light of the morning is, without a question, the first object in
the natural world, for beauty and glory, and the happiest allusion for the
illustration of scenes, marked with unusual gladness, prosperity, and
splendor. But it is here enhanced with peculiar felicity. It is not only the
morning, but the happiest time of the morning; the time when the sun rises; it
is a morning without clouds; a morning of the spring, when the tender grass is
springing out of the earth, and peculiarly endeared by the remembrance of the
dreariness of winter; a morning succeeding a night of clouds and rain, and
doubly delightful by the contrast it forms, to the melancholy gloom of the
preceding darkness. Thus is the general gladness and solicity, produced by the
benignant influence of a virtuous ruler, most advantageously impressed on us,
by the voice of the infinite God, in the singularly happy allusion to the
universal delight created, through this lower world, by the glorious rising of an
unclouded morning in the spring, when a preceding night of rain and darkness
has ushered it in with increased beauty and splendor; when the new born and
newly freshened verdure has mightily enhanced the general luster of all those
pleasing forms of elegance and grandeur, which the dayspring, in the
magnificent language of the Creator, has stamped on the face of the earth,
turned to the sun, "as clay to a seal," that it may derive from his power an
impression so wonderful and divine.

2. THE conduct of a virtuous ruler, both in his public, and in his private
character, will also happily illustrate the doctrine.

To form satisfactory ideas of the natural, the necessary conduct of a virtuous
ruler, it may be useful to turn our attention, for a moment, to the several
principles, under the influence of which, a ruler may be supposed to aim at the
public good.

A RULER may be supposed to aim at the public good, from the selfish principles
of avarice and ambition; so far as he conceives the public good and his own
private interest to be inseparably connected. With what uncertainty and hazard,
the welfare of a community is entrusted to men, governed solely by these
principles, we may easily determine, by recollecting how often that welfare
will be really separated from the private interest of any individual, and how
much oftener these things will be viewed as separate, by the selfish
affections, and the blassed judgment of that individual. If this mode of
determining should be thought improper, history, filled with the unnumbered and
infinite evils of sceptered ambition, and avarice, will establish the like
determination, with an authority, which can neither be gainsayed, nor resisted.

HONOR constitutes another basis, on which it has been thought, the public
interest might safely rest. Honor, as commonly used, and pride are but
different names for the same odious, treacherous, domineering passion. Of its
usual and natural effects, we may find an impressive list, in the private
history of gambling lewdness, duelling and suicide; and a more splendid one, in
the public annals of imperial luxury, war, and despotism. It is however further
to be remarked, that, as honor, in this sense, is wholly governed by a regard
to the eye of mankind, so it can have no influence in measures, withdrawn from
the inspection of that eye: a class of measures, on which always a great part,
and often the whole of the public good ultimately depends.

BUT it has been urged, that there is another and superior king of honor,
which, in opposition to the false kind, I have mentioned, is called true
honor. This is variously defined. Sometimes it is asserted to be an
instinctive and exquisite sensibility to right and wrong, to that which is
noble or debased; by which the mind is irresistibly, or at least very forcibly,
led to pursue that, which is right and noble, and to shun that which is wrong
and debased. Sometimes it is spoken of, as a governing reverence, felt by a man
for the approbation of his own mind, and a disposition steadily determined to
deserve it. The opinion, contained in the first of these definitions, is fairly
presumed to be chimerical; no satisfactory evidence having been hitherto
offered, of the existence of such a principle. According to the last, honor
will probably be found to differ little from conscientiousness; a principle
which I shall now proceed to consider.

THE natural conscience, then, carefully cultivated by education into habit,
enlivened by a fixed sense of accountableness to God, and strengthened by the
belief of future eternal retribution, as revealed in the scriptures of truth,
forms another, and it must be confessed, a much more solid foundation, on which
to rest the welfare of a community. A habit of conscientiousness is frequently
lasting, and frequently extensive in its effects; and the steady belief of a
certain, endless retribution, beyond the grave, furnishes a guard against
temptation, and iniquity, which is powerful in its operations, and which
extends its influence to the closet, as well as to the house top; to the
conduct, which no human eye sees, as well as to that, which is opened to the
eye of the world.

BUT real or scriptural virtue presents us a still different object of public
as well as private confidence. The great law of righteousness, by which the
Creator requires his intelligent creatures to regulate their affections, is
"Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself;" or, as it respects the actions of
such creatures, "Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so
to them." A cheerful obedience of the heart to this great command, and to that
"other, which is like unto it," is the sum of real, or scriptural virtue.

How fair and sufficient ground of public confidence is displayed by this
principle, a few observations will easily illustrate. The governing disposition
of a ruler, whose heart is conformed to this great law, must necessarily lead
him to a faithful, uniform pursuit of the public interest, in preference to any
private one, and to seek the good of millions rather than his own. Between
selfish and general objects, as there is in reality, so there will be in his
view, no proportion; and between the pleasure of seeking the one, and the duty
of promoting the other, he can admit of no balancing. The principle, by which
he is rendered the object of the public confidence, is superior to that of the
avaricious, and that of the ambitious man, not only because it possesses higher
dignity, and amiableness, but also because his interest can never be separated
by it from that of the community: to that of the man of honor, because it
furnishes a ruling motive to rectitude, in secret, as well as in open measures;
and to that of the man habitually conscientious, and possessed of clear
conviction of accountableness and retribution, because virtuous habits cannot
change; and because, as we daily discern, in the different degrees of
obedience, rendered by the dreading servant, and by the affectionate child,
love is an incomparably more efficacious spring, than fear, of steady,
faithful, and uniform duty.

UNDER the direction of this principle, the magistracy of a ruler will
naturally be such, as to secure the approbation of wisdom, and to command the
applause of virtue. This all amiable disposition, pointing, with a few
variations of human infirmity, to the pole star of public happiness, will
direct the extensive means of usefulness, encircled by his office, to the
noblest purposes. In the laws he enacts, in the judgments he pronounces, and in
the punishments he executes, justice, benignity and mercy will form the great
outlines of his character. It will be his natural, his constant labor, so to
distribute the burdens of the community, that they will rest most easily on
the public shoulder; to husband the public property, with the exactness of
private economy; to treat the creditors of his nation with the scrupulous
fairness of mercantile punctuality; and to pursue, through all its numerous
paths, that righteousness; which nourishes, adorns, and exalts a nation. As a
magistrate, he would blush to project, or to countenance, any measure, which
would disgrace him as a man. If it were proposed to sanction fraud, to
promulgate falsehood, or to establish iniquity, by law, it would present him no
temptation, it would yield him no support, to remember that multitudes, beside
himself, were shares in the guilt and in the infamy.

THE first duty of a ruler, and the first concern of a virtuous ruler, is the
support of religion. Let not my audience from this remark imagine, that I wish
a revival of that motley system of domination which in Europe has so long, so
awkwardly, and so unhappily blended civil and spiritual objects. An infidel
could not, with more regret, see spiritual courts, laws prescribing faith,
binding the conscience, and distinguishing by civil privileges the several
classes of religious, or magistrates usurping the throne of the Creator, and
claiming the prerogatives of the supreme head of the church. The ruler, who
wishes to befriend religion, is forced by no necessity to acts of persecution,
injustice, or party; nor because he is desirous of avoiding such acts, is he by
any necessity restrained from acting at all. Friendship to religion is the
first characteristic of a good man. As such a man must universally desire the
good or mankind, so he must, with the greatest ardency, desire this infinite
good. That elevation to office, which enlarges the means of doing good, will,
in his view, instead of lessening, increase his obligations to "seek first the
kingdom of God, its righteousness," and prosperity. This duty he will
enendeavour to perform, not in the mistaken ways already mentioned, but by
steadfastly opposing immorality, by employing and honoring the just, by
contemning the vicious, by enlarging the motives to righteousness, by removing
the temptations to sin, and, in a word, by that general train of virtuous
measures, which, like a magical charm, unobservedly spreads its influence over
moral things, and, in a gloomy waste of vice and impiety, calls up a new
creation of beauty, virtue, and happiness.

AMONG the means of advancing religion, a personal example is commonly of the
first importance. Even in private life, its effects are great and striking --
In family education, a good parental example instructs more than the wisest
precepts, and regulates beyond the best exerted government. But in a ruler, the
importance of example is not easily measured. So numerous are the persons, who
observe, and imitate his conduct, so distinguished is the brilliancy reflected
on it by office, that in forming an idea of its influence, the most romantic
imagination will easily fall short of the truth. Strongly affected by the
importance of these facts, it will be the daily study of a virtuous ruler, to
act always in such a manner, as to allure others to virtue, and not to vice; to
uphold religion, and not licentiousness; to support the righteous, and not the
enemies of righteousness. Though, during his administration, as at the present
time, "iniquity should abound, and the love of many should wax cold" the
strength of the opposition, the boldness of the ridicule. and the impudence of
the contempt, will, instead of relaxing, confirm his resolution, and redouble
his efforts against the enemies of religion.

THUS to lessen the public distresses, to increase the public happiness, to
discourage vice, to uphold religion, to stand approved at the awful tribunal of
his conscience, and to gain the approbation of him, from whose judgment there
is no appeal, will be the end of his plans and his exertions, his example and
his magistracy.

3. THE peculiar power which a virtuous ruler possesses, of being useful to a
nation, may also advantageously illustrate the doctrine.

THE pertinence of this observation, which is intended principally to be
applied to the ruler of a free people, may be exhibited in the following
manner. An important part of a ruler's ability to be useful consists in his
influence. The influence of any man depends principally on his personal
character. If his actions be such, as to manifest principle, integrity, or
virtue, to the general eye, he becomes, of course, possessed of the general
confidence. In a country where all measures are decided by suffrages, a fixed
belief of the mover's integrity, and steady patriotism, as often commands those
suffrages in favor of the measures, which he proposes, and gives popularity,
and efficacy, to the execution of them, as the nature of the measures. Perhaps
it is not even a strong assertion, to declare, that the confidence, reposed in
the virtue of the first magistrate of this country, has had as much influence,
in procuring the general voice in behalf of our national constitution, and in
sanctioning its operations, as the nature of the constitution, or the wisdom
and justice conspicuous in its operations. As therefore it will frequently
happen, that very important public measures will much depend on this
confidence, or the want of it, for their adoption, or their rejection, and as
the whole wellbeing of a nation may not unfrequently be decided by this
circumstance, it is weight cannot sail of a high estimation.

4. IN the last place, I shall endeavor to illustrate the doctrine by a
summary exhibition of the contrast, formed by a wicked ruler, to a virtuous one.

IN all the important particulars, I have mentioned, a wicked ruler is the
reverse of a virtuous one. His administration commences under the government of
these two noxious principles -- That his own highest interest is distinct from
that of the public -- and that his own interest is, in all things, to be
preferred by him to that of the public. Magistracy is, therefore, in his view,
but a convenient engine for the accomplishment of his selfish wishes; a
courser, put into his hands, merely that he may ride, for business, or for
pleasure. From these governing principles are derived all those evils in public
administration, which distract a community from within, or waste it from
without. Oppressive laws, partial judgments, and cruel executions; burdensome
taxes, and squandered revenues; injurious promotions, causeless ejections from
office, neglect of the worthy, and employment of the worthless; caballing,
electioneering, and corruption; general sufferings, and general murmurs, are in
the number of those evils, which, under the magistracy of such a ruler,
distress the internal state of a people. It will be needless on this occasion
to turn our eyes to be external miseries of war and devastation, naturally
springing from the same fountain; war kindled merely to gratify pride, and
devastation and rapine extended merely to glut the rapacity of avarice, or
cruelty. Our own immediate concern is with the other class of objects; and from
this class, I presume, a sufficient selection has been made.

THE particular course of wicked conduct, pursued by an unprincipled ruler,
will indeed be pointed out by his predominant propensity. As this may happen to
be avarice, ambition, sloth, or sensuality, his conduct will be marked by the
coloring peculiar to it; or should he, as frequently occurs, be governed by
several, or all them, his magistracy will be tinged by the evil disposition, at
the time prevailing; but the tincture will be always deep and poisonous, and
the variegations will be only variegations of foulness, guilt, and dishonor.

IT has been generally agreed by enlightened men, and even by enlightened
infidels and atheists, that religion in a community is essentially necessary to
its wellbeing. This agreement may, I presume, be fairly supposed to be a
sufficient proof of the justness of the opinion. Should higher proof be
demanded, perhaps it may be furnished by a momentary survey of the state of a
people, wholly without religion. Think, for a moment only, of a country,
inhabited by those, who neither feared God, nor regarded man; by men,
insensible to moral obligation, governed by fierce passion, and gross appetite;
men of this world merely, unconcerned with truth, or duty, rewards, or
punishments; men, strangers to veracity, justice, delicacy, and decency; men,
exceptions to the character of human nature, even in the vilest national
condition; an astonishment, a byword, and a hissing, to their fellow creatures;
a nuisance to the universe, and a smoke in the nostrils of their Creator. On
what grounds could be infinitely wise and just God be supposed to continue the
existence of such a nation? What valuable end of being could they be supposed
to answer?

BUT if a nation of profligates would be such a blot in the creation of God,
let it be uniformly remembered, that a profligate ruler is the first and
greatest instrument of national profligacy. That striking and infamous
character of Jeroboam, "that he sinned himself, and made Israel to sin,"
belongs, as the common sense of mankind, recording with an unerring, and
prophetic hand, steadily testifies, to every wicked ruler. Combining in himself
the great springs of action, presiding over all the great interests of a
nation, directing all it is great operations, and diffusing a malignant moral
influence over all the parts of it, he is at once the moving principle and the
regulating power, of the whole machine. Nor can we for a moment hesitate to
believe, that, thus moved, and thus regulated, it must be soon disordered, and
destroyed.

FROM the magistracy, and from the example, of such a ruler, alike, will
corruption and ruin spread through the members of a community, and poison the
streams of health and life. Awed by his power, authority, and measures, the
friends of virtue are necessitated to hide their heads from shame, insult, and
punishment. Called forth, from their lurking places, into office, character,
and distinction, "the wicked walk on every side." Charmed by the splendour of
dignity, by the glare of pomp, and by the dazzling effects of influence, all
seen with a false deceiving gaudry, by the jaundiced eyes of ambition, the
young, the gay, the aspiring, and the brilliant, look up to him, as the
standard of excellence, and pant "to be perfect, as he is perfect." His
sentiments are greedily imbibed, his actions anxiously imitated, and his
speeches repeated with admiration and applause. Example always powerful, and in
a ruler always peculiarly powerful, in a vicious ruler has a redoubled power.
The vicious inclinations which are so commonly the governing ones, are
peculiarly delighted to see the door to vicious indulgence opened by the
example of officed vice, and feel themselves strengthened to every evil
pursuit, by the flattering union of wickedness and dignity. Thus is an
allurement to depravity and corruption presented to youth, especially to the
brightest and most ambitious, against the ruinous effects of which, reason and
religion struggle in vain.

THUS all the valuable interests of a nation, the public and the private
happiness alike, suffer, from the magistracy of an impious ruler. Law no longer
looks with an equal eye on the several classes, and the several concerns, of
the nation. Justice weighs, and distributes, with an uneven balance, and
suffers that sword which was appointed to be the terror of evil doers, to rust
in the scabbard. Religion, opposed by his measures, and discountenanced by his
example, languishes and decays, Irreligion, elevated to distinction, and graced
by office, impudently lifts up her deformed face, and looks down upon humbled
wisdom and piety. The parent trembles for the morals, the character, the
salvation of his children; the husband's heart beats with perpetual alarms, for
the fidelity, the honor, and the happiness of his wife; the wife sickens at
the changed countenance, and warping affections, of her husband; and the wife
and good man is daily excruciated by the sight of his degenerating friends, and
his corrupting country, by the decline of piety and wisdom, by the retreat of
truth and salvation.

THE several sentiments advanced as illustrations of this interesting doctrine,
fraught with truth and evidence in themselves, receive the highest sanction
from the inspired declarations. In the 101st Psalm, David, with the voice of
truth, beautifully unfolds the proper character of a ruler, in a solemn
covenant with his Maker, to "rule in the fear of God." "I will sing of mercy
and judgment, unto thee; O Lord, will I sing. I will behave myself wisely in a
perfect way, I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. I will set no
wicked thing before mine eyes; a froward heart shall depart from me; I will not
know a wicked person. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut
off; him that has a high look, and a proud heart, will I not suffer. Mine eyes
shall dwell upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me; and he
that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. He that works deceit shall
not dwell within my house; he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. I
will destroy all the wicked out of the land, that I may cut off all wicked
doers from the city of the Lord." In the 72d Psalm he also exhibits both the
character of a virtuous ruler, and the blessings of his government, with that
glow of feeling, that splendour of poetry and inspiration, which are not often
to be found even in his writings, and which prove, at once, the peculiar
sincerity of the writer, and the high importance of the subject. In the first
nine chapters, and occasionally through the remaining part, of the book of
Proverbs, Solomon urges the strictest course of piety, and righteousness, upon
his son and successor, with the wisdom of the wisest of men, with the yearnings
of a father's heart, and with the fervor of a man bleeding at every pore, from
the remembrance of his own backslidings. In the description of a corrupt and
impious prince, given to the Israelites by Samuel, 1. Sam. viii. 11, etc. we
have one of the many striking pictures, in the Bible, of the odious character,
and unspeakable miseries, of unrighteous dominion. To appeal to other passages
of either kind will be unnecessary. These prove, beyond dispute, that, Prove.
xxviii. 1^.
as a roaring lion, and as a ranging bear, so is a wicked ruler over the poor
people;" and that Prove. xxix. 4.
"the king by judgment" and righteousness "establishes the land."

HISTORY also yields abundant and unanswerable proof of the doctrine, and of
the sentiments, by which it has been illustrated. In the history of the sacred
volume, a history, which, beside its unquestionable authenticity, possesses the
great advantage of being far better known to every christian audience, than any
other history, and is therefore more happily applied to this design, it seems
to have been a principal intention, throughout several books, to exhibit the
beneficent influence of virtue, and the malignant influence of vice in rulers.
David, Jehoshaphat, Jotham, Hezekiah, Josiah, and Nehemiah, are illustrious
examples of virtuous magistracy. The justice with which they governed, the
heroism, with which they defended, the constancy with which they loved, their
people, were glorious proofs of their benevolence. The encouragement which they
uniformly gave to the friends of religion, and the opposition they uniformly
made to its enemies, by their public conduct and personal example, were equally
glorious proofs of their piety. Under their protection, their countenance,
their auspicious patronage, piety and righteousness, as in a fruitful soil,
cheered by kindly rains, and temperate suns, sprang up, flourished, and yielded
a plentiful and most profitable harvest. While the whole earth beside was one
gloomy scene of ignorance, violence, and profligacy, the country which they
ruled, enjoyed, in a greater degree than could be rationally hoped, peace,
liberty, light, and happiness. Tinged they undoubtedly were with human
imperfections; but they were yet very fair examples of the amiableness, the
excellency, the propitious influence, of "ruling justly, and in the fear of
God."

FROM our own history, which after that of the scriptures, is better known to
us than any other, I might multiply examples, of the like pertinent
application. Perhaps no country has enjoyed the government of so many rulers,
of distinguished virtue, as this. Our rulers have not only been decent, and
unexceptionable, but bold, strenuous, and exemplary, in their virtue. In their
public and private conduct, they have sought, and secured, the general
prosperity, and caused "the righteous to flourish, with abundance of peace."

CORRESPONDENT with their efforts have been the blessings generally enjoyed.
The liberty, the order, the peace, the population, the learning, the piety, of
our State have scarcely known an example. No such exhibition has probably been
given to the eye of time, of the reign of righteousness; no such specimen of
the weight of wisdom and integrity, uncloathed with the ensigns of splendor;
no such proofs of the happy influence of virtuous rule, since authority first
erected her throne among the descendants of Adam.

THE minds of all my audience will, almost of necessity, call upon me to
produce, on such a list, the name of the first Magistrate of the United States
of America. Had not the most evident propriety forced me to mention this great
and illustrious person, I would have avoided making an addition to that burden
of praise, with which he has been so long distressed. But as there are some
persons from whom, on every occasion, infamy instinctively borrows her
examples; so to him, with equal spontaneity, commendation always turns her eye,
whether she scarches for proofs, of private amiableness, or of public dignity
and virtue. The application of this example to the doctrine in hand is, in
every respect, obvious and striking. All persons must feel, and confess it, who
remember, that to the charm of his influence, and to the confidence universally
reposed in his integrity and wisdom, the adoption of our national constitution,
the peace, the order, and the facility, with which it has begun to operate, and
of consequence, our present union, and all its interesting attendants, are, in
a prime measure, to be attributed.

IT may also, with the greatest propriety, be observed, that both the
countries, from which our historical illustrations have been drawn, have, while
thus governed, and thus influenced, been regarded by Heaven, with peculiar
favor. That this might be fairly expected, few persons will dispute; and that
it took place, with regard to Israel, we are assured by God himself. Concerning
our own country, we have not indeed a prophet to testify; but if an uniform
experience may be allowed to decide, there will be left little room for doubt.
If we remember the blessings, which we have received; if we remember the
declarations, on the general subject, in the word of God, if we remember, that
the inhabitants, by their suffrages, have ever created their rulers; we shall
be easily convinced, that the application of the sentiment is as just, to this
country, as to Judea. While, therefore, the steady election of persons,
distinguished by virtue, to the first offices of government; reflects the
highest glory on the wisdom and integrity of the inhabitants of this State, we
have very sufficient reason greatly to attribute, to this conduct, the peculiar
favor of Heaven, which we have always enjoyed.

FROM history, also, we are furnished with the amplest proof, that the
operations of wicked magistracy have ever constituted the first class of human
evils, and stained the name of man with the deepest infamy. The earth has
groaned with the insupportable burden; time has shuddered to rehearse the
tale; and Heaven, as at the deluge, has been often called upon for new feelings
of repentance, that man was made. The names of Ahab, Manasseh, Nero, Caligula,
Heliogabalus, Mary the 1st, and Charles the 2d, with innumerable others, are a
sufficient verification of these remarks; but every page of history, sacred and
profane, must be searched, if we would comprehend the height, and the depth, of
this vast and humiliating subject.

I HAVE only to observe further, concerning the doctrine, that it is applicable
to all rulers, of what office soever, in proportion to the importance of their
offices, and the extensiveness of their influence.

AMONG the several sentiments, naturally deduced from this discourse, two
appear to be peculiarly commended to our attention.

1. How illustrious a character is a virtuous ruler.

ALL things, relating to this subject, unite to unfold, and to complete, the
character of a virtuous ruler. The station, to which he is advanced, is the
first eminence, beneath the sun. The views, excited by it, in the human mind,
are strongly pictured to the eye, by those ensigns of majesty, which have
surrounded it, from the beginning; the throne, the crown, the scepter, the pomp
of attendance, and the other numerous peculiars of royalty. On the ear are
these views impressed by titles of dignity, of awfulness, of sanctity, of
divinity. The services of the body, the treasures of the purse, and the homage
of the heart, have conspired to show, and that, even when mistaken and impious,
the sublime ideas, men have instinctively formed of the dignity of a ruler.

THE vast means of usefulness, within the limits of superior offices in
government, not only render them desirable objects of possession to a person,
who wishes to be useful, but exceedingly enhance their importance in the eyes
of mankind. The human eye beholds, with the most solemn regard, so much
happiness entrusted to the disposal of a single man, such extensive means of
doing good attached to a single office, and is instinctively led to form no
distant resemblance between him who fills that office, in a manner
correspondent with the divine designation, and that glorious Agent, who; in an
office infinitely more elevated, "is good, and does good, and exercises his
tender mercies over all his works." Nor is this resemblance impiously, or
irrationally formed. In the language of inspiration itself, we find the name
Elokim, one of the titles of divinity, applied to those, who are appointed to
be "Ministers of God, for good, to his people." We can therefore scarcely be
surprised, though we may well be displeased, that the mind of man, darkened, as
it has generally been, with ignorance and superstition, and disposed, as it has
ever been, to carry all its conduct into extremes, should attach to supremacy
of dominion some of the attributes of GODHEAD, and render to the persons of
princes, that sacred homage, which is due to JEHOVAH alone.

IN the hands of a virtuous ruler, all these materials of dignity, and all
these means of usefulness, are presented to the considerate eye, with a
peculiar splendor. Such a ruler not only fills the station, which, in this
world, is the nearest approach to that infinite station, filled by the Creator;
but he also acts the character, which is the nearest resemblance to his. Far
from being satisfied with escaping censure, and passing, with quiet decency,
through his administration; far from contenting himself with wishing kindly to
the public weal, he makes it his prime object, he uses his most strenuous
efforts, to promote it. To accomplish extensive good, to make mankind better,
and happier, to give confidence to virtue, to trample vice under foot, to
extend the kinddom of righteousness, to enlarge the general assembly of the
firstborn, to increase the glory of the FATHER, the REDEEMER, and the
SANCTIFIER, of man, is his constant, his favorite, his professional employment.

To a serious mind, the character of such a ruler appears invested with
singular glory. In the view of such a mind, he stands the vicegerent of
JEHOVAH, appointed to execute the noblest purposes. In the view of such a mind,
he is not only elevated to the first earthly distinction, entrusted with the
first means of usefulness, and separated from the rest of men by peculiar
ensigns of dignity; but, by the voice of God, he is entitled to an unrivalled
homage, and secured from opposition, obloquy, and irreverence. A long train of
solemn commands, respecting the virtuous ruler alone, and pointed directly to
great and general happiness, oblige us to love, to fear, to honor him, with a
regard wholly singular, and inferior to that only, which is due to the infinite
Ruler. Awful in his station, and amiable in his character, he is justly
considered as a fellow laborer with the Redeemer, in that glorious kingdom of
righteousness which he came to establish. Temporal good he steadily promotes,
to discharge his duty, to indulge his benevolence, and to furnish daily means
of accomplishing eternal good. To him, the support, the reverence, the
applause, of wisdom and piety are uniformly given; and fervent supplications
ascend daily from that great family, of which he is the common parent, that his
life may be happy, and that his death may be blessed.

VENERABLE, however, as this character always is, in this country it is
peculiarly venerable. It is here a distinction of reason, and rectitude; an
elevation, holding a confessed superiority of intelligence, virtue, and
amiableness. A ruler is here the favorite object of the approbation, and the
choice, of an immense number of wise and good men. He is singled out from other
men, not by conquest, law, or birth; but by the hearts of those, who obey. Free
and unsolicited suffrages raise him to office. In the original bond, therefore,
by which our society was formed, in the covenant interwoven in the very act of
electing, our respect, affection, and allegiance, are pledged to our rulers.
Happy in presiding over a people eminently free, enlightened, virtuous, and
happy, they are ornamented with distinguished glory, and assured of a most
honorary, and to an enlarged mind, a most delightful obedience.

2dly. THE preceding observations strongly urge the duty of ruling virtuously.

To impress the importance of this great duty is the principal end for which
the preacher was summoned to this place; the first use of this solemn
institution. This remark, therefore, cannot be esteemed improper, or
unseasonable. Should it be thought unnecessary, a little reflection may perhaps
persuade us to adopt a contrary opinion.

IT is a humiliating, but just observation, verified by daily experience, that
human nature is much more resolute in perpetrating that, which is wrong, than
in practicing that, which is right. The friends of virtue are often
characteristically distinguished by modesty, and meekness; while the votaries
of vice are as often marked by a brazen front, and an overbearing insolence.
This calamity, at all times existing, in times of degeneracy is predominant. In
such times, vicious men, encouraged by numbers, and feeling bold by increasing
example, naturally indulge their hatred to virtue, and throw off that mask of
decency, which fear and selfishness have before obliged them to wear. As their
audacity gains strength, the confidence of most men's virtue usually
diminishes. When wickedness ascends the throne, when her conduct is fashion,
when her voice is law, and her ministers are elders and nobles in the land,
those, "who have not bowed the knee to Baal" will be unobserved, and unseen.

IN our own country, the present period, tho not a period of the most absolute
declension, will yet furnish a ruler sufficient allurements to a lukewarm
temper and timid administration. A bold and steady course of virtuous measures
will usually produce opposition, and obloquy; and, in a degree, the loss of
suffrages, and the loss of reputation. Cabals will undermine, jealousy
misconstrue, rivalry misrepresent, and enmity blacken. Thus threatened,
alarmed, and wearied, human frailty will be too easily induced to seek the
midway, inoffensive course of magistracy: a course, often leading to political
safety, but oftener conducting away from duty and righteousness.

BUT however frequently timidity and indifference may mark the public, or
private conduct of those, who act in public offices, it is not because they are
not furnished, by Providence, with motives to strenuous virtue, sufficiently
numerous, and sufficiently important.

IN addition to those, already suggested in this discourse, the remembrance of
what has been done, to establish virtue and piety in this land, and of the
blessings, which they have produced, presents to the mind one of the most
powerful, and interesting. Superior to danger, triumphant over persecution, and
glowing with piety, our generous ancestors, that they might leave to their
children this best of all legacies, braved every hazard, and overcame every
difficulty. Heaven, as if to try, to refine, and to beautify their virtues, to
hand down to their descendants a glorious example of meek and matchless
fortitude, and to give the world an illustrious pattern of christianity,
"enduring to the end," led them to seek a refuge in a distant and savage
wilderness, summoned the tempest to meet them, on the ocean, and spread want
and disease before them, on the land. Chastened, but not forsaken, cast down,
but not destroyed, they submitted, yet they endured; they suffered, yet they
overcame. Religion was their constant, their angelic guest, a cheering inmate
of every dwelling, a divine Paraclete of every heart. This heavenly stranger,
since the apostasy of man, and the closure of paradise, had traveled down the
gloomy progress of time, and wandered over this inhospitable globe, shut out
from the greatest part of human society, and, in most regions, but the guest of
a night. Even in Judea, her proper dwelling place, the was often alarmed by
violence, and often thrust out by corruption and idolatry; and when the
Redeemer of men made that land his earthly residence, though, like him, she
went about doing good, yet, like him also, she was shunned, and persecuted, and
"had not where to lay her head." In the company of his apostles, indeed, with
the wisdom, strength, and loveliness, which she had derived from his precepts,
miracles, and example, she gained a noble, but transient triumph, and saw, with
ecstasy, her "still small voice" vanquish, for a season, the sophistry of
philosophers, the power of emperors, and the furious persecution of ignorance
and idolatry. But her transports were soon to terminate. In the midst of her
friends, in the temple where her sacred mysteries were celebrated, arose a new
and most terrible enemy, and with "a deadly wound," pierced her to the heart.
After a long and fatal torpor, she was raised, however, as from the grave, by
the reforming voice of Zuingle, Calvin, and Luther, lifted up her head with
returning strength, and placed her habitation in the western parts of Europe.
But, as if warned by a divine premonition of returning licentiousness, with our
forefathers she sought out this new world, as a last and permament asylum. The
savage, nursed with blood, and trained up to fraud, revenge, and idolatry,
shrunk from her presence. Called into existence, as by a creating voice, towns
and villages, schools and churches, rose up in the wilderness, and the desert
was changed into the garden of God. Let there be peace, she said, and there was
peace. She commanded order, liberty, and happiness, to arise, and it was done.
The land was no more called desolate; but she named it "Beulah, and Hephzibah,"
"an enduring excellency, a joy of many generations."

BY her side, and for her blessings, our progenitors toiled, watched, bled, and
died. In their counsels, she animated and presided; in their wars, she inspired
and overcame; in their government, she influenced, and blessed; and in their
families, she ruled and trained up for endless life.

To watch, to preserve, to extend, to perpetuate this mighty mass of good,
earned by our ancestors, and given as an answer to the prayers, and as a reward
of the obedience, of piety, is the first duty of every magistrate, minister,
and man. Most unnatural children shall we prove, if, with the combined force of
so glorious an example, and in the possession of such hard earned happiness, we
neglect any means, or refuse any efforts, to discharge this duty.

ON the magistrate this burden rests with peculiar weight; for "if the
foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous do?" While, therefore, those
of my audience who hold offices of government may, in pursuing this inestimable
object, assure themselves of the support and the prayers of the ministers of
righteousness, and of all wise and good men, let me, to close with faithfulness
the present duties of my office, summarily address to them the solemn motives
to virtuous magistracy, suggested by this discourse.

ARE you called by the Creator of men, to rule in the several offices of
government, let me entreat you to think solemnly of the dignity, the
importance, the usefulness of this employment. Remember that it is the noblest
of all employments, the first of all the stages of usefulness. Remember that it
is a singular honor to be summoned, by God, to the office, and to the power,
of doing more good, than other men. Think affectingly, and always, of the
inestimable worth of that religion, which the Son of God came from heaven to
teach and to establish which he died on the cross. Often recall to view the
illustrious things, which your fathers have done, to leave the invaluable
inheritance to you; and think, that your children justly demand of you similar
proofs of parental tenderness. Feel, that it is unworthy of the descendants of
such ancestors, to tarnish, or even to lessen, that high moral glory, which
they attained; and that it is eminently cruel, to deprive your children of the
superlative blessings, which those ancestors, with such strenuous duty, such
unexampled distresses, such enduring fortitude, purchased for them, as well as
for you. Call up into realizing view the glory of making a people virtuous and
happy, of promoting the honor and kingdom of Jehovah, and of leaving a name to
the affection, the reverence, and the imitation, of succeeding ages. Think of
the manner, in which virtuous rulers, who have departed, are loved and
mentioned; of the manner, in which you yourselves love and mention them. In all
the temptations, dangers, and distresses, which surround you, you will find
sufficient consolation, and firm support, in the love of good men, in the
applause of conscience, and in the approbation of God. These are satisfactions,
of which you cannot fail, independent solaces with which no stranger can
meddle, and which worlds and ages cannot diminish. In that solemn period, "when
flesh and heard shall fail," when friends shall retire, and the world recede
from your view, when the awakened guilty mind shall open its eyes, with
infinite dismay, upon accumulated crimes, surpassing number, and conception,
and shrink, with inexpressible amazement, from the approaching sentence of
immutable justice. "the rod and the staff" of your Redeemer, your Shepherd, the
testimony of a good conscience, the remembrance of so important a stewardship
faithfully discharged, the consciousness of having steadfastly done good to your
fellow men, "will support and comfort you," will give you peace in so awful an
hour, and firmness in so stupendous a trial. And may He, "who holds the hearts
of rulers in his hand, and turns them as the rivers of water are turned," aid
you to a faithful discharge of the duties of magistracy, to a fixed reliance on
his favor, to a constant fear of his presence, to a steadfast love of mankind,
and to a final attainment of the infinite approbation.

PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.


