THE HISTORY OF THE ADVENTURES OF JOSEPH ANDREWS, AND HIS FRIEND Mr. ABRAHAM
ADAMS. WRITTEN IN IMITATION OF The Manner of CERVANTES, Author of DON QUIXOTE.
BY HENRY FIELDING, ESQUIRE.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY HENRY TAILOR. M.DCC.XCI.

PREFACE.
AS it is possible the mere English reader may have a different idea of romance
from the author of these little volumes; and may consequently expect a kind of
entertainment not to be found, nor which was even intended, in the following
pages; it may not be improper to premise a few words concerning this kind of
writing, which I do not remember to have seen hitherto attempted in our
language.

THE EPIC, as well as the DRAMA, is divided into tragedy and comedy. HOMER, who
was the father of this species of poetry, gave us a pattern of both these,
though that of the latter kind is entirely lost; which Aristotle tells us, bore
the same relation to comedy which his Iliad bears to tragedy. And perhaps, that
we have no more instances of it among the writers of antiquity, is owing to the
loss of this great pattern, which had it survived, would have found its
imitators equally with the other poems of this great original.

AND farther, as this poetry may be tragic or comic, I will not scruple to say
it may be likewise either in verse or prose: for though it wants one particular,
which the critic enumerates in the constituent parts of an epic poem, namely
meter; yet, when any kind of writing contains all its other parts, such as
fable, action, characters, sentiments, and diction, and is deficient in meter
only; i^ seems, I think, reasonable to refer it to the epic; at least, as no
critic has thought proper to range it under any other head, or to assign it a
particular name to itself.

THUS the Telemachus of the archbishop of Cambray appears to me of the epic
kind, as well as the Odyssey of Homer; indeed, it is much fairer and more
reasonable to give it a name common with that species from which it differs
only in a single instance, than to confound it with those which it resembles in
no other. Such are those voluminous works, commonly called Romances, namely,
Clelia, Cleopatra, Astraea, Cassandra, the Grand Cyru^, and innumerable others,
which contain, as I apprehend, very little instruction or entertainment.

Now a comic romance is a comic epic-poem in prose; differing from comedy, as
the serious epic from tragedy: its action bring more extended and
comprehensive; containing a much larger circle of incidents, and introducing a
greater variety of characters. It differs from the serious romance in its fable
and action, in this; that as in the one these are grave and solemn, so in the
other they are light and ridiculous: it differs in its characters, by
introducing persons of inferior rank, and consequently of inferior manners,
whereas the grave romance sets the highest before us; lastly, in its sentiments
and diction; by preserving the ludicrous instead of the sublime. In the
diction, I think, burlesque itself may be sometimes admitted; of which many
instances will occur in this work, as in the description of the battles, and
some other places, not necessary to be pointed out to the classical reader; for
whose entertainment those parodies or burlesque imitations are chiefly
calculated.

Bu^ though we have sometimes admitted this in our diction, we have carefully
excluded it from our sentiments and characters: for there it is never properly
introduced, unless in writings of the burlesque kind, which this is not
intended to be. Indeed, no two species of writing can differ more widely than
the comic and the burlesque: for as the latter is ever the exhibition of what
is monstrous and unnatural, and where our delight, if we examine it, arises
from the surprising absurdity, as in appropriating the manners of the highest
to the lowest, or (...) so in the former, we should ever confine ourselves
strictly to nature, from the just imitation of which will flow all the pleasure
we can this way convey to a sensible reader. And perhaps there is one reason
why a comic writer should of all others be the least excused for deviating from
nature* since it may not be always so easy for a serious poet to meet with the
great and the admirable; but life every where furnishes an accurate observer
with the ridiculous.

I HAVE hinted this little concerning burlesque; because I have often heard
that name given to performances, which have been truly of the comic kind, from
the author's having sometimes admitted it in his diction only; which, as it is
the dress of poetry, does, like the dress of men, establish characters, (the
one of the whole poem, and the other of the whole man) in vulgar opinion,
beyond any of their greater excellencies: but surely a certain drollery in
style, where the characters and sentiments are perfectly natural, no more
constitutes the burlesque, than an empty pomp and dignity of words, where every
thing else is mean and low, can entitle any performance to the appellation of
the true sublime.

AND I apprehend, my lord Shaftesbury's opinion of more burlesque agrees with
mine, when he asserts, there is no such thing to be found in the writings of
the ancients. But perhaps, I have less abhorrence than he professes for it: and
that not because I have had some little success on the stage this way; but
rather, as it contributes more to exquisite mirth and laughter than any other;
and these are probably more wholesome physic for the mind, and conduce better
to purge away spleen, melancholy, and ill affections, than is generally
imagined. Nay, I will appeal to common observation, whether the same companies
are not found more full of good humor and benevolence, after they have been
sweetened for two or three hours with entertainments of this kind, than when
soured by a tragedy or a grave lecture.

BUT to illustrate all this by another science, in which, perhaps, we shall see
the distinction more clearly and plainly: let us examine the works of a comic
history-painter, with those performances which the Italians call Caricatura;
where we shall find the true excellence of the former to consist in the
exactest copying of nature; insomuch that a judicious eye instantly rejects any
thing outre any liberty which the painter has taken with the features of that
alma matter. -- Whereas in the Caricatura we allow all license. Its aim is to
exhibit monsters, not men; and all distortions and exaggerations whatever are
within its proper province.

Now what Caricatura is in painting, Burlesque is in writing; and in the same
manner the comic writer and painter correlate to each other. And here I shall
observe, that as in the former the painter seems to have the advantage; so it
is in the latter infinitely on the side of the writer: for the Monstrous is
much easier to paint than describe, and the Ridiculous to describe than paint.

AND though perhaps this latter species does not in either science so strongly
affect and agitate the muscles as the other; yet it will be owned, I believe,
that a more rational and useful pleasure arises to us from it. He who should
call the ingenious Hogarth a burlesque painter, would, in my opinion, do him
very little honor: for sure it is much easier, much less the subject of
admiration, to paint a man with a nose, or any other feature of a preposterous
size, or to expose him in some absurd or monstrous attitude, than to express
the affections of men on canvas. It has been thought a vast commendation of a
painter, to say his figures seem to breathe; but surely it is a much greater
and nobler applause, that they appear to think.

BUT to return -- The Ridiculous only, as I have before said, falls within my
province in the present work. -- Nor will some explanation of this word be
thought impertinent by the reader, if he considers how wonderfully it has been
mistaken, even by writers who have professed it: for to what but such a
mistake, can we attribute the many attempts to ridicule the blackest
villainies; and what is yet worse, the most dreadful calamities? What could
exceed the absurdity of an author, who should write the comedy of Nero, with
the merry incident of ripping up his mother's belly; or what would give a
greater shock to humanity, than an attempt to expose the miseries of poverty
and distress to ridicule? And yet, the reader will not want much learning to
suggest such instances to himself.

BESIDES, it may seem remarkable, that Aristotle, who is so fond and free of
definitions, has not thought proper to define the Ridiculous. Indeed, where he
tells it is proper to comedy, he has remarked that villainy is not its object:
but he has not, as I remember, positively asserted what is. Nor does the Abbe
Bellegarde, who has written a treatise on this subject, though he shows us many
species of it, once traced it to its fountain.

THE only source of the true Ridiculous (as it appears to me) is affectation.
But though it arises from one spring only; when we consider the infinite streams
into which this one branches, we shall presently cease to admire at the copious
field it affords to an observer. Now affectation proceeds from one of these two
causes; vanity or hypocrisy: for as vanity puts us on affecting false
characters, in order to purchase applause; so hypocrisy sets us on an endeavor
to avoid censure, by concealing our vices under an appearance of their opposite
virtues. And though these two causes are often confounded, (for there is some
difficulty in distinguishing them) yet, as they proceed from very different
motives; so they are as clearly distinct in their operations, for indeed, the
affectation which arises from vanity is nearer to truth than the other; as it
has not that violent repugnancy of nature to struggle with, which that of the
hypocrite has. It may be likewise noted, that affectation does not imply an
absolute negation of those qualities which are affected: and therefore, though
when it proceeds from hypocrisy, it be nearly allied to deceit; yet when it
comes from vanity only, it partakes of the nature of ostentation: for instance,
the affectation of liberality in a vain man, differs visibly from the same
affectation in the avaricious; for though the vain man is not what he would
appear, or has not the virtue he affects, to the degree he would be thought to
have it; yet it sits less aukwardly on him than on the avaricious man, who is
the very reverse of what he would seem to be.

FROM the discovery of this affectation arises the Ridiculous -- which always
strikes the reader with surprise and pleasure; and that in a higher and
stronger degree when the affectation arises from hypocrisy, than when from
vanity: for, to discover any one to be the exact reverse of what he affects, is
more surprising, and consequently more ridiculous, than to find him a little
deficient in the quality he desires the reputation of. I might observe, that
our Ben Johnson, who of all men understood the Ridiculous the best, has
chiefly used the hypocritical affectation.

Now from affectation only, the misfortunes and calamities of life, or the
imperfections of nature, may become the objects of ridicule. Surely he has a
very ill-framed mind, who can look on ugliness, infirmity, or poverty, as
ridiculous in themselves: nor do I believe any man living, who meets a dirty
fellow riding through the streets in a cart, is struck with an idea of the
Ridiculous from it; but if he should see the same figure descend from his coach
and six, or bolt from his chair with his hat under his arm, he would then begin
to laugh, and with justice. In the same manner, were we to enter a poor house,
and behold a wretched family shivering with cold, and languishing with hunger,
it would not incline us to laughter (at least we must have very diabolical
natures, if it would:) but should be discover there a grate, instead of coals,
adorned with flowers, empty plate or china dishes on the side-board, or any
other affectation of riches and finery either on their persons or in their
furniture; we might then indeed be excused for ridiculing so fantastical an
appearance. Much less are natural imperfections the object of derision: but
when ugliness aims at the applause of beauty, or lameness endeavors to display
agility; it is then that these unfortunate circumstances, which at first moved
our compassion, tend only to raise our mirth.

THE poet carries this very far; None are for being what they are in fault,
But for not being what they would be thought.
Where if the meter would suffer the word Ridiculous to close the first line,
the thought would be rather more proper. Great vices are the proper objects of
our detestation, smaller faults of our pity: but affectation appears to me the
only true source of the Ridiculous.

BUT perhaps it may be objected to me, that I have against my own rules
introduced vices, and of very black kind, in this work. To which I shall
answer; first, that it is very difficult to pursue a series of human actions,
and keep clear from them. Secondly, that the vices to be found here, are rather
the accidental consequences of some human frailty or foible, than causes
habitually existing in the mind. Thirdly, that they are never set forth as the
objects of ridicule but detestation. Fourthly, that they are never the
principal figure at that time on the scene; and lastly, they never produce the
intended evil.

HAVING thus distinguished Joseph Andrews from the productions of
romance-writers on the one hand, and burlesque writers on the other, and given
some few very short hints (for I intended no more) of this species of writing,
which I have affirmed to be hitherto unattempted in our language; I shall leave
to my good-natured reader to apply my piece to my observations, and will detain
him no longer than with a word concerning the characters in this work.

AND here I solemnly protest, I have no intention to vilify or asperse any one:
for though every thing is copied from the book of nature, and scarce a
character or action produced which I have not taken from my own observations
and experience; yet I have used the utmost care to obscure the persons by such
different circumstances, degrees and colors, that it will be impossible to
guess at them with any degree of certainty; and if it ever happens otherwise,
it is only where the failure characterized is so minute, that it is a foible
only which the party himself may laugh at as well as any other.

As to the character of Adams, as it is the most glaring in the whole, so I
conceive it is not to be found in any book now extant. It is designed a
character of perfect simplicity; and as the goodness of his heart will
recommend him to the goodnatured; so I hope it will excuse me to the gentlemen
of his cloth; for whom, while they are worthy of their sacred order, no man can
possibly have a greater respect. They will therefore excuse me, notwithstanding
the low adventures in which he is engaged, that I have made him a clergyman;
since no other office could have given him so many opportunities of displaying
his worthy inclinations.

THE HISTORY OF THE ADVENTURES, OF JOSEPH ANDREWS, and his Friend MR. ABRAHAM
ADAMS.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
Of writing lives in general, and particularly of Pamela; with a word by the
bye of Colley Cibber and others.

IT is a trite but true observation, that examples work more forcibly on the
mind than precepts: and if this be just in what is odious and blameable, it is
more strongly so in what is amiable and praiseworthy. Here emulation most
effectually operates upon us, and inspires our imitation in an irresistible
manner. A good man therefore is a standing lesson to all his acquaintance, and
of far greater use in that narrow circle than a good book.

But as it often happens, that the best men are but little known, and
consequently cannot extend the usefulness of their examples a gre^^ (...); the
writer may be called in aid to spread their history farther, and to present the
amiable pictures to those who have not the happiness of knowing the originals;
and so, by communicating such valuable patterns to the world, he may, perhaps,
do a more extensive service to mankind, than the person whose life originally
afforded the pattern.

In this light I have always regarded those biographers, who have recorded the
actions of great an^ worthy persons of both sexes. Not to mention these ^^cient
writers which of late days are little (...) being written in absolete, and, as
they are generally thought, unintelligible languages, such as Plutarch, Nepos,
and others, which I heard of in my youth; our own language affords many of
excellent use and instruction, finely calculated to sow the seeds of virtue, in
youth, and very easy to be comprehended by persons of moderate capacity. Such
are the history of John the Great, who, by his brave and heroic actions against
men of large and athletic bodies, obtained the glorious appellation of the
Giant-killer; that of an earl of Warwick, whose christian name was Guy; the
lives of Argalus and Parthenia; and, above all, the history of those seven
worthy personages, the Champions of Christendom. In all these, delight is mixed
with instruction, and the reader is almost as much improved as entertained.

But I pass by these and many others, to mention two books lately published,
which represent an admirable pattern of the amiable in either sex. The former
of these which deals in male-virtue, was written by the great person himself,
who lived the life he has recorded, and is by many thought to have lived such
a life only in order to write it. The other, communicated to us by an historian
who borrows his lights, as the common method is, from authentic papers and
records. The reader, I believe, already conjectures I mean the lives of Mr.
Colley Cibber, and of Mrs. Pamela Andrews. How artfully does the former, by
insinuating that he escaped being promoted to the highest stations in church
and state, teach us a contempt of worldly grandeur! how strongly does he
inculcate an absolute submission to our superiors! Lastly, how completely does
he arm us against so uneasy, so wretched a passion as the fear of shame! how
clearly does he expose the emptiness and vanity of that phantom, reputation!

What the female readers are taught by the memoirs of Mrs. Andrews, is so well
set forth in the excellent essays or letters prefixed to the second and
subsequent editions of that work, that it would be here a needless repetition.
The authentic history with which I now present the public, is an instance of
the great good that book is likely to do, and of the prevalence of example
which I have just observed: since it will appear that it was by keeping the
excellent pattern of his sister's virtues before his eyes, that Mr. Joseph
Andrews was chiefly enabled to preserve his purity in the midst of such great
temptations. I shall only add, that this character of male-chastity, though
doubtless as desirable and becoming in one part of the human species, as in the
other, is almost the only virtue which the great apologist has not given
himself, for the sake of giving the example to his readers.

CHAP. II.
Of Mr. Joseph Andrews, his birth, parentage, education, and great endowments;
with a word or two concerning ancestors.

MR. Joseph Andrews, the hero of our ensuing history, was esteemed to be the
only son of Gaffer and Gammer Andrews, and brother to the illustrious Pamela,
whose virtue is at present so famous. As to his ancestors, we have searched
with great diligence, but little success; being unable to trace them farther
than his great-grandfather, who, as an elderly person in the parish remembers
to have heard his father say, was an excellent cudgel-player. Whether he had
any ancestors before this, we must leave to the opinion of our curious reader,
finding nothing of sufficient certainty to rely on. However, we cannot omit
inserting an epitaph which an ingenious friend of ours has communicated. Stay,
traveller, for underneath this pew
Lies fast asleep that merry man Andrew;
When the last day's great sun shall gild the skies,
Then he shall from his tomb get up and rise.
Be merry while thou can: for surely thou
Shall shortly be as sad as he is now.
The words are almost out of the stone with antiquity. But it is needless to
observe that Andrew here is writ without an s and is, besides, a Christian
name. My friend moreover conjectures this to have been the founder of that sect
of laughing philosophers, since called Merry Andrews.

To wave therefore a circumstance, which, though mentioned in conformity to the
exact rules of biography, is not greatly material; I proceed to things of more
consequence. Indeed it is sufficiently certain, that he had as many ancestors
as the best man living; and perhaps, if we look five or six hundred years
backwards, might be related to some persons of very great figure at present,
whose ancestors within half the last century are buried in as great obscurity.
But suppose, for argument's sake, we should admit that he had no ancestors at
all, but had sprung up, according to the modern phrase, out of a dunghill, as
the Athenians pretended they themselves did from the earth, would not this In
English sprung from a dunghill.
Autokopros have been justly entitled to all the praise arising from his own
virtues? Would it not be hard, that a man who has no ancestors, should
therefore be rendered incapable of acquiring honor; when we see so many who
have no virtues, enjoying the honor of their forefathers? At ten years old (by
which time his education was advanced to writing and reading) he was bound an
apprentice, according to the statute, to Sir Thomas Booby, an uncle of Mr.
Booby's by the father's side. Sir Thomas having an estate in his own hands, the
young Andrew^ was at first employed in what in the country they call keeping
birds. His office was to perform the part the ancients assigned to the god
Priapus, which deity the moderns call by the name of Jack-o'Lent: but his voice
being so extremely musical, that it rather allured the birds than terrified
them, he was soon transplanted from the fields into the dog-kennel, where he
was placed under the huntsman, and made what sportsmen term Whipper-in. For
this place likewise the sweetness of his voice disqualified him; the dogs
preferring the melody of his chiding to all the alluring notes of the huntsman,
who soon became so incensed at it, that he desired Sir Thomas to provide
otherwise for him; and constantly laid every fault the dogs were at, to the
account of the poor boy, who was now transplanted to the stable. Here he soon
gave proofs of his strength and agility, beyond his years, and constantly rode
the most spirited and vicious horses to water, with an intrepidity which
surprised every one. While he was in this station, he rode several races for
Sir Thomas, and this with such expertness and success, that the neighboring
gentlemen frequently solici^^d the knight to permit little Joey (for so he was
called) to ride their matches. The best gamesters, before they laid their
money, always enquired which horse little Joey was to ride; and the bets were
rather proportioned by the rider than by the horse himself; especially after he
had scornfully refused a considerable bribe to play booty on such an occasion.
This extremely raised his character, and so pleased the lady Booby, that she
desired to have him (being now seventeen years of age) for her own footboy.
Joey was now preferred from the stable to attend on his lady, to go on her
errands, stand behind her chair, wait at her tea-table, and carry her
prayer book to church; at which place his voice gave him an opportunity of
distinguishing himself by singing psalms: he behaved likewise in every other
respect so well at divine service, that it recommended him, to the notice of
Mr. Abraham Adams the curate, who took an opportunity one day, as he was
drinking a cup of ale in Sir Thomas's kitchen, to ask the young man several
questions concerning religion; with his answers to which he was wonderfully
pleased.

CHAP. III.
Of Mr. Abraham, Adams the curate, Mrs. Slipslop the chambermaid, and others.

MR. Abraham Adams was an excellent scholar. He was a perfect master of the
Greek and Latin languages; to which he added a great share of knowledge in the
Oriental tongues, and could read and translate French, Italian, and Spanish. He
had applied many years to the most severe study, and had treasured up a fund of
learning, rarely to be met with in a university. He was besides a man of good
sense, good parts, and good nature; but was at the same time as entirely
ignorant of the ways of this world, as an infant just entered into it could
possibly be. As he had never any intention to deceive, so he never suspected
such a design in others. He was generous, friendly, and brave to an excess; but
simplicity was his characteristick: he did, no more than Mr. Colley Cibber,
apprehend any such passions as malice and envy to exist in mankind, which was
indeed less remarkable in a country parson, than in a gentleman who has past
his life behind the scenes a place which has been seldom thought the school of
innocence; and where a very little observation would have convinced the great
apologist, that those passions have a real existence in the human mind.

His virtue, and his other qualifications, as they rendered him equal to his
office; so they made him an agreeable and valuable companion, and had so much
endeared and well recommended him to a bishop, that at the age of fifty, he was
provided with a handsome income of twenty three pounds a year: which, however,
he could not make any great figure with; because he lived in a dear county, and
was a little incumbered with a wife and six children.

It was this gentleman, who having, as I have said, observed the singular
devotion of young Andrews, had found means to question him concerning several
particulars; as how many books there were in the New Testament? which were
they? how many chapters they contained? and such like; to all which, Mr. Adams
privately said, he answered much better than Sir Thomas, or two other
neighboring justices of the peace could probably have done.

Mr. Adams was wonderfully solicitous to know at what time, and by what
opportunity the youth became acquainted with these matters: Joey told him, that
he had very early learnt to read and write by the goodness of his father, who,
though he had not interest enough to get him into a charity-school, because a
cousin of his father's landlord did not vote on the right side for a
churchwarden in a boroughtown, yet had been himself at the expense of sixpence
a week for his learning. He told hi^ likewise, that ever since he was in Sir
Thomas's family, he had employed all his hours of leisure in reading good
books; that he had read the Bible, the Whole Duty of Man, and Thomas a Kempis;
and that as often as he could without being perceived, he had studied a great
book which lay open in the hall-window, where he had read, as how the devil
carried away half a church in sermon-time, without hurting one of the
congregation; and as how a field of corn ran away down a steep hill with all
the trees upon it, and covered another man's meadow. This sufficiently assured
Mr. Adams, that the good book meant could be no other than Baker's Chronicle.

The curate, surprised to find such instances of industry and application in a
young man, who had never met with the least encouragement, asked him, if he did
not extremely regret the want of a liberal education, and the not having been
born of parents, who might have indulged his talents and desire of knowledge?
To which he answered He hoped he had profited somewhat better from the books he
had read, than to lament his condition in this world. That for his part, he was
perfectly content with the state to which he was called, that he should
endeavor to improve his talent, which was all required of him, but not to
repine at his own lot, nor envy those of his betters. Well said, my lad,
replied the curate, and I wish some who have read many more good books, nay,
and some who have written good books themselves, had profited so much by them.

Adams had no nearer access to Sir Thomas or my lady, than through the waiting
gentlewoman; for Sir Thomas was too apt to estimate men merely by their dress,
or fortune; and my lady was a woman of gaiety, who had been blessed with a town
education, and never spoke of any of her country neighbors by any other
appellation than that of the Brutes. They both regarded the curate as a kind of
domestic only, belonging to the parson of the parish, who was at this time at
variance with the knight; for the parson had for many years lived in a constant
state of civil war, or, which is perhaps, as bad, of civil law, with Sir Thomas
himself and the tenants of his manor. The foundation of this quarrel was a
modus, by setting which aside, an advantage of several shillings per annum
would have accrued to the rector: but he had not yet been able to accomplish
his purpose; and had reaped hitherto nothing better from the suits than the
pleasure (which he used indeed frequently to say was no small one) of
reflecting that he had utterly undone many of the poor tenants, though he had
at the same time greatly impoverished himself.

Mrs. Slipslop the waiting-gentlewoman, being herself the daughter of a curate,
preserved some respect, for Adams; she professed great regard for his learning,
and would frequently dispute with him on points of theology: but always
insisted on a deference to be paid to her understanding, as she had been
frequently at London, and knew more of the world than a country parson could
pretend to.

She had in these disputes a particular advantage over Adams: for she was a
mighty affecter of hard words, which she used in such a manner, that the
parson, who durst not offend her by calling her words in question, was
frequently at some loss to guess her meaning, and would have been much less
puzzled by an Arabian manuscript.

Adams therefore took an opportunity one day, after a pretty long discourse
with her on the essence, (or, as she pleased to term it, the incence) of
matter, to mention the case of young Andrews; desiring her to recommend him to
her lady as a youth very susceptible of learning, and one whose instruction in
Latin he would himself undertake; by which means he might be qualified for a
higher station than that of a footman; and added, she knew it was in his
master's power easily to provide for him in a better manner. He therefore
desired, that the boy might be left behind, under his care.

"La, Mr. Adams," said Mrs. Slipslop, do you, think my lady will suffer any
preamble about any such matter? She is going to London very concisely, and I am
confidous would not leave Joey behind her on any account; for he is one of the
genteelest young fellows you may see in a summer's day, and I am confidous she
would as soon think of parting with a pair of her gray mares; for she values
herself as much on the one as the other. Adams would have interrupted but she
proceeded: And why is Latin more necessitous for a footman than a gentleman? It
is very proper that you clergymen must learn it, because you cannot preach
without it: but I have heard gentlemen say in London, that it is fit for nobody
else. I am confidous my lady would be angry with me for mentioning it; and I
shall draw myself into no such delemy. At which words her lady's bell rung, and
Mr. Adams was forced to retire; nor could he gain a second opportunity with her
before their London journey, which happened a few days afterward. However,
Andrews behaved very thankfully and gratefully to him for his intended
kindness, which he told him he never would forget, and at the same time
received from the good man many admonitions, concerning the regulation of his
future conduct, and his perseverance in innocence and industry.

CHAP. IV.
What happened after their journey to London.

NO sooner was young Andrews arrived at London, than he began to scrape an
acquaintance with his party-colored brethren who endeavored to make him
despise his former course of life. His hair was cut after the newest fashion,
and became his chief care: he went abroad with it all the morning in papers,
and dressed it out in the afternoon. They could not, however, teach him to
game, swear, drink, nor any other genteel vice the town abounded with. He
applied most of his leisure hours to music, in which he greatly improved
himself; and became so perfect a connoisseur in that art, that he led the
opinion of all the other footmen at an opera, and they never condemned or
applauded a single song contrary to his approbation, or dislike. He was a
little too forward in riots at the play houses and assemblies: and when he
attended his lady at church (which was but seldom) he behaved with less seeming
devotion than formerly: however, if he was outwardly a pretty fellow, his
morals remained entirely uncorrupted, though he was at the same time smarter
and genteeler than any of the beaus in town, either in or out of livery.

His lady, who had often said of him that Joey was the handsomest and
genteelest footman in the kingdom, but that it was pity he wanted spirit, began
now to find that fault no longer; on the contrary, she was frequently heard to
cry out, Ay, there is some life in this fellow. She plainly saw the effects
which the town-air has on the soberest constitutions. She would now walk out
with him into Hyde-Park in a morning, and when tired, which happened almost
every minute, would lean on his arm, and converse with him in great
familiarity. Whenever she st^pt out of her coach, she would take him by the
hand, and sometimes, for fear of stumbling, press it very hard; she admitted
him to deliver messages at her bedside in a morning, leer'd at him at table,
and indulged him in all those innocent freedoms which women of figure may
permit without the least fully of their virtue.

But though their virtue remains unsullied, yet, now and then some small arrows
will glance on the shadow of it, their reputation; and so it fell out to lady
Booby, who happened to be walking arm-in-arm with Joey one morning in
Hyde-Park, when lady Tittle and lady Tattle, came accidentally by in their
coach. Bless me, says lady Tittle, can I believe my eyes? Is that lady Booby?
Surely, says Tattle. But what makes you surprised? Why, is not that her
footman, replied Tittle? At which Tittle laughed and cried, An old business, I
assure you, is it possible you should not have heard it? The whole town has
known it this half year. The consequence of this interview was a whisper
through a hundred visits, which were separately performed by the two ladies It
may seen an absurdity that Tattle should visit as she actually did, to spread a
known scandal: but the reader may reconcile this, by supposing with me, that
notwithstanding what she says, this was her first acquaintance with it.
the same afternoon, and might have had a mischievous effect, had it not been
stopped by two fresh reputations which were published the day afterward, and
engrossed the whole talk of the town.

But whatever opinion or suspicion the scandalous inclination of defamers might
entertain of lady Booby's innocent freedoms, it is certain they made no
impression on young Andrews, who never offered to encroach beyond the liberties
which his lady allowed him. A behavior which she imputed to the violent
respect he preserved for her, and which served only to heighten a something she
began to conceive, and which the next chapter will open a little farther.

CHAP. V.
The death of Sir Thomas Booby, with the affectionate and mournful behavior of
his widow, and the great purity of Joseph Andrews.

AT this time, an accident happened, which put a stop to those agreeable walks,
which probably would have soon puffed up the che^ks of same, and caused her to
blow her brazen trumpet through the town; and this was no other than the death
of Sir Thomas Booby, who departing this life, left his disconsolate lady
confined to her house, as closely as if she herself had been attacked by some
violent disease. During the first six days the poor lady admitted none but Mrs.
Slipslop, and three female friends, who made a party at cards: but on the
seventh she ordered Joey, whom, for a good reason, we shall hereafter call
JOSEPH, to bring up her tea-kettle. The lady being in bed, called Joseph to
her, bade him sit down, and having accidentally laid her hand on his, she asked
him, if he had ever been in love? Joseph answered with some confusion, it was
time enough for one so young as himself to think on such things. As young as
you are, replied the lady, I am convinced you are no stranger to that passion;
'Come Joey,' says she, 'tell me truly, who is the happy 'girl whose eyes have
made a conquest of you?' Joseph returned, that all the women he had ever seen,
were equally indifferent to him. 'O then,' said the lady, you are a general
lover. Indeed, you handsome fellows, like handsome women, are very long and
difficult in fixing: but yet you shall never persuade me that your heart is so
insusceptible of affection; I rather impute what you say to your secrecy, a
very commendable quality, and what I am far from being angry with you for.
Nothing can be more unworthy in a young man than to betray any intimacies with
the Ladies. 'Ladies!' madam, said Joseph, I am sure I never had the impudence
to think of any that deserve that name. Don't pretend to too much modesty, said
she, for that sometimes may be impertinent: but pray, answer me this question.
Suppose a lady should happen to like you; suppose she should prefer you to all
your sex, and admit you to the same familiarities as you might have hoped for,
if you had been born her equal, are you certain that no vanity could tempt you
to discover her? Answer me honestly, Joseph; have you so much more sense, and
so much more virtue, than your handsome young fellows generally have, who make
no scruple of sacrificing our dear reputation to your pride, without
considering the great obligation we lay on you, by our condescension and
confidence? Can you keep a secret, my Joey? "Madam, 'says he, I hope your
ladyship cannot tax me with ever betraying the secrets of the family; and I
hope, if you was to turn me away, I might have that character of you. I don't
intend to turn you away, Joey, said she, and sighed, I am afraid it is not in
my power. She then raised herself a little in her bed, and discovered one of
the whitest necks that ever was seen; at which Joseph blushed. 'La!' says she,
in an affected surprise, what am I doing? I have trusted myself with a man
alone, naked in bed; suppose you should have any wicked intentions upon my
honor, how should I defend myself? Joseph protested that he never had the
least evil design against her. 'No,' says she, perhaps you may not call your
designs wicked; and perhaps they are not so. -- He swore they were not. You
misunderstand me, says she; I mean, if they were against my honor, they may
not be wicked; but the world calls them so. But, then, say you, the world will
never know any thing of the matter; yet would not that be trusting to your
secrecy? Must not my reputation be then in your power? Would you not then be my
master? Joseph begged her ladyship to be comforted; for that he would never
imagine the least wicked thing against her, and that he had rather die a
thousand deaths than give her any reason to suspect him. 'Yes,' said she, I
must have reason to suspect you. Are you not a man? and without vanity I may
pretend to some charms. But perhaps you may fear I should prosecute you; indeed
I hope you do; and yet heaven knows I should never have the confidence to
appear before a court of justice; and you know, Joey, I am of a forgiving
temper. Tell me, Joey, don't you think I should forgive you? 'Indeed, Madam,'
says Joseph, I will never do any thing to disoblige your ladyship. 'How,' says
she, do you think it would not disoblige me then? Do you think I would
willingly suffer you? I don't understand you, Madam, says Joseph. 'Don't you?'
said she, then you either are a fool or pretend to be so; I find I was mistaken
in you. So get you down stairs, and never let me see your face again: your
pretended innocence cannot impose on me. 'Madam,' said Joseph, I would not have
your ladyship think any evil of me. I have always endeavored to be a dutiful
servant both to you and my master. 'O thou villain!' answered my lady, Why
did thou mention the name of that dear man, unless to torment me, to bring
his precious memory to my mind, (and then she burst into a fit of tears.) Get
thee from my sight, I shall never endure thee more. At which words she turned
away from him; and Joseph retreated from the room in a most disconsolate
condition, and writ that letter, which the reader will find in the next chapter.

CHAP. VI.
How Joseph Andrews writ a letter to his sister Pamela.

To Mrs. Pamela Andrews, living with squire Booby.
Dear Sister,
SINCE I received your letter of your good lady's death, we have had a
misfortune of the same kind in our family. My worthy master Sir Thomas died
about four days ago; and, what is worse, my poor lady is certainly gone
distracted. None of the servants expected her to take it so to heart, because
they quarrelled almost every day of their lives: but no more of that, because
you know, Pamela, I never loved to tell the secrets of my master's family; but
to be sure you must have known they never loved one another; and I have heard
her ladyship wish his honor dead above a thousand times: but no body knows
what it is to lose a friend till they have lost him.

Don't tell any body what I write, because I should not care to have folks say
I discover what passes in our family: but if it had not been so great a lady, I
should have thought she had had a-mind to me. Dear Pamela, don't tell any body:
but she ordered me to sit down by her bedside, when she was in naked bed; and
she held my hand, and talked exactly as a lady does to her sweetheart in a
stage play, which I have seen in Covent Garden, while she wanted him to be no
better than he should be.

If Madam be mad, I shall not care for staying long in the family: so I
heartily wish you could get me a place either at the squire's, or some other
neighboring gentleman's, unless it be true that you are going to be married to
parson Williams, as folks talk, and then I should be very willing to be his
clerk: for which you know I am qualified, being able to read, and to set a
psalm.

I fancy I shall be discharged very soon; and the moment I am, unless I hear
from you, I shall return to my old master's country-seat, if it be only to see
parson Adams, who is the best man in the world. London is a bad place, and
there is so little good-fellowship, that the next-door neighbors don't know
one another. Pray give my service to all friends that enquire for me; so I rest

Your loving brother, JOSEPH ANDREWS.


As soon as Joseph had sealed and directed this letter he walked down stairs,
where he met Mrs. Slipslop, with whom we shall take this opportunity to bring
the reader a little better acquainted. She was a maiden gentlewoman of about
forty-five years of age, who having made a small slip in her youth, had
continued a good maid ever since. She was not at this time remarkably handsome;
being very short, and rather too corpulent in body, and somewhat red, with the
addition of pimples in the face. Her nose was likewise rather too large, and
her eyes too little; nor did she resemble a cow so much in her breath, as in
two brown globes which she carried before her; one of her legs was also a
little shorter than the other, which occasioned her to limp as she walked. This
fair creature had long cast the eyes of affection on Joseph, in which she had
not met with quite so good success as she probably wished, though, besides all
the allurements of her native charms, she had given him tea, sweetmeats, wine,
and many other delicacies, of which, by keeping the keys, she had the absolute
command. Joseph, however, had not returned the least gratitude to all these
favors, not even so much as a kiss; though I would not insinuate she was so
easily to be satisfied: for surely then he would have been highly blameable.
The truth is, she was arrived at an age when she thought she might indulge
herself in any liberties with a man, without the danger of bringing a third
person into the world to betray them. She imagined, that by so long a
self-denial, she had not only made amends for the small slip of her youth above
hinted at: but had likewise laid up a quantity of merit to excuse any future
failings. In a word, she resolved to give a loose to her amorous inclinations,
and to pay off the debt of pleasure she found she owed herself, as fast as
possible.

With these charms of person, and in this disposition of mind, she encountered
poor Joseph at the bottom of the stairs, and asked him if he would drink a
glass of something good this morning. Joseph, whose spirits were not a little
cast down, very readily and thankfully accepted the offer; and together they
went into a closet, where having delivered him a full glass of ratifia, and
desired him to sit down, Mrs. Slipslop thus began:

Sure nothing can be a more simple contrast in a woman, than to place her
affections on a boy. If I had ever thought it would have been my fate, I should
have wished to die a thousand deaths rather than live to see that day. If we
like a man, the lightest hint sophisticates. Whereas a boy proposes upon us to
break through all the regulations of modesty, before we can make any oppression
upon him. Joseph, who did not understand a word she said, answered, 'Yes,
Madam; -- ' 'Yes, Madam,' replied Mrs Slipslop, with some warmth, Do you intend
to result my passion? Is it not enough, ungrateful as you are, to make no
return to all the favors I have done you: but you must treat me with ironing?
Barbarous monster! how have I deserved that my passion should be resulted and
treated with ironing? 'Madam,' answered Joseph, I don't understand your hard
words: but I am certain, you have no occasion to call me ungrateful: for so far
from intending you any wrong, I always loved you as well as if you had been my
own mother. 'How, sirrah!' says Mrs. Slipslop in a rage: Your own mother? Do
you assinuate that I am old enough to be your mother? I don't know what a
strippling may think: but I believe a man would refer me to any greensickness
silly girl whatsomdever: but I ought to despise you rather than be angry with
you, for referring the conversation of girls to that of a woman of sense.
'Madam,' says Joseph, I am sure I have always valued the honor you did me by
your conversation; for I know you are a woman of learning. 'Yes, but Joseph,'
said she, a little softened by the compliment to her learning, If you had a
value for me, you certainly would have found some method of showing it me; for
I am convicted you must see the value I have for you. Yes, Joseph, my eyes,
whether I would or no, must have declared a passion I cannot conquer. -- Oh!
Joseph!

As when a hungry tigress, who long has traversed the woods in fruitless
search, sees within the reach of her claws a lamb, she prepares to leap on her
prey; or as a voracious pike of immense size, surveys through the liquid element
a roach or gudgeon, which cannot escape her jaws, opens them wide to swallow
the little fish; so did Mrs. Slipslop prepare to lay her violent amorous hands
on the poor Joseph, when luckily her mistress's bell rung, and delivered the
intended martyr from her clutches. She was obliged to leave him abruptly, and
to defer the execution of her purpose till some other time. We shall therefore
return to the lady Booby, and give our reader some account of her behavior,
after she was left by Joseph in a temper of mind not greatly different from
that of the inflamed Slipslop.

CHAP. VII.
Sayings of wise men. A dialogue between the lady and her maid; and a
panegyric, or rather satire, on the passion of love, in the sublime style.

IT is the observation of some ancient sage, whose name I have forgot, that
passions operate differently on the human mind, as diseases on the body, in
proportion to the strength or weakness, soundness or rottenness of the one and
the other.

We hope therefore a judicious reader will give himself some pains to observe,
what we have so greatly labored to describe, the different operations of this
passion of love in the gentle and cultivated mind of the lady Booby, from those
which it effected in the less polished and coarser disposition of Mrs. Slipslop.

Another philosopher, whose name also at present escapes my memory, has
somewhere said, that resolutions taken in the absence of the beloved object,
are very apt to vanish in its presence; on both which wise sayings, the
following chapter may serve as a comment.

No sooner had Joseph left the room in the manner we had before related, than
the lady, enraged at her disappointment, began to reflect with severity on her
conduct. Her love was now changed to disdain, which pride assisted to torment
her. She despised herself for the meanness of her passion, and Joseph for its
ill success. However, she had now got the better of it in her own opinion, and
determined immediately to dismiss the object. After much tossing and turning in
her bed, and many soliloquies, which, if we had no better matter for our
reader, we would give him; she at last rung the bell as abovementioned, and
was presently attended by Mrs. Slipslop, who was not much better pleased with
Joseph than the lady herself.

Slipslop, said lady Booby, when did you see Joseph? the poor woman was so
surprised at the unexpected sound of his name, at so critical a time, that she
had the greatest difficulty to conceal the confusion she was under, from her
mistress; whom she answered, nevertheless, with pretty good confidence, though
not entirely void of fear or suspicion, that she had not seen him that morning.
I am afraid, said lady Booby, he is a wild young fellow. 'That he is,' said
Slipslop, and a wicket one too. To my knowledge he games, drinks, swears, and
fights eternally: besides, he is horribly indicted to wenching. 'Ay!' said the
lady, I never heard that of him. 'O madam,' answered the other, he is so lewd a
rascal, that if your ladyship keeps him much longer, you will not have one
virgin in your house except myself. And yet I cannot conceive what the wenches
see in him, to be so foolishly fond as they are: in my eyes, he is as ugly a
scarecrow as ever I upheld. 'Nay,' said the lady, 'the boy is well enough.' --
La, Ma'm, cries Slipslop, I think him the ragmaticallest fellow in the family.
'Sure, Slipslop,' says she, you are mistaken: but which of the women do you
suspect? 'Madam,' says Slipslop, there is Betty the chambermaid, I am almost
convicted, is with child by him. 'Ay!' says the lady, then pray pay her her
wages instantly. I will keep no such sluts in my family. And as for Joseph, you
may discard him too. Would your ladyship have him paid off immediately? cries
Slipslop, for perhaps, when Betty is gone, he may mend; and really the boy is a
good servant, and a strong healthy, luscious boy enough. This morning, answered
the lady with some vehemence. 'I wish Madam,' cries Slipslop, your ladyship
would be so good as to try him a little longer. I will not have my commands
disputed, said the lady; sure you are not fond of him yourself. 'I Madam?'
cries Slipslop, reddening, if not blushing. I should be sorry to think your
ladyship had any reason to respect me of fondness for a fellow; and if it be
your pleasure, I shall fulfill it with as much reluctance as possible. As
little, I suppose you mean, said the lady; and so about it instantly. Mrs.
Slipslop went out, and the lady had scarce taken two turns, before she fell to
knocking and ringing with great violence. Slipslop, who did not travel
post-haste, soon returned, and was countermanded as to Joseph, but ordered to
send Betty about her business without delay. She went out a second time with
much greater alacrity than before; when the lady began immediately to accuse
herself of want of resolution, and to apprehend the return of her affection
with it is pernicious consequences: she therefore applied herself again to the
bell, and resummoned Mrs. Slipslop into her presence; who again returned, and
was told by her mistress, that she had considered better of the matter, and was
absolutely resolved to turn away Joseph; which she ordered her to do
immediately. Slipslop, who knew the violence of her lady's temper, and would
not venture her place for any Adonis or Hercules in the universe, left her a
third time; which she had no sooner done, than the little god Cupid, fearing he
had not yet done the lady's business, took a fresh arrow with the sharpest po^^
out of his quiver, and shot it directly into her heart: in other and plainer
language, the lady's passion got the better of her reason. She called back
Slipslop once more, and told her, she had resolved to see the boy, and examine
him herself; therefore bid her send him up. This wavering in her mistress's
temper probably put something into the waiting-gentlewoman's head, not
necessary to mention to the sagacious reader.

Lady Booby was going to call her back again, but could not prevail with
herself. The next consideration therefore was, how she should behave to Joseph
when he came in. She resolved to preserve all the dignity of the woman of
fashion to her servant, and to indulge herself in this last view of Joseph (for
that she was most certainly resolved it should be) at his own expense, by first
insulting, and then discarding them.

O Love, what monstrous tricks do thou play with thy votaries of both sexes!
How do thou deceive them, and make them deceive themselves! Their follies are
thy delight! Their sighs make thee laugh, and their pangs are thy merriment!

Not the great Rich, who turns men into monkeys, wheelbarrows, and whatever
else best humors his fancy, has so strangely metamorphosed the human shape;
nor the great Cibber, who confounds all number, gender, and breaks through every
rule of grammar at his will, has so distorted the English, language, as thou
do metamorphose and distort the human senses.

Thou put out our eyes, stoppest up our ears, and take away the power of
our nostrils; so that we can neither see the largest object, hear the loudest
noise, nor smell the most poignant perfume. Again, when thou please, thou
can make a molehill appear as a mountain; a Jew's harp sound like a trumpet,
and a daizy smell like a violet. Thou can make cowardice, brave, avarice
generous, pride humble, and cruelty, tenderhearted. In short, thou turnest the
heart of man inside out, as a juggler does a petticoat, and bring whatsoever
pleases thee out from it. If there be any one who doubts all this, let him
read the next chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
In which, after some very fine writing, the history goes on, and relates the
interview between the lady and Joseph; where the latter has set an example,
which we despair of seeing followed by his sex, in this vicious age.

NOW the rake Hesperus had called for his breeches, and having well rubbed his
drowsy eyes, prepared to dress himself for all night; by whose example his
brother rakes on earth like wise leave those beds, in which they had slept away
the day. Now Thetis, the good housewife, began to put on the pot in order to
regale the good man Phoebus, after his daily labors were over. In vulgar
language, it was in the evening when Joseph attended his lady's orders.

But as it becomes us to preserve the character of this lady, who is the
heroine of our tale; and, as we have naturally a wonderful tenderness for that
beautiful part of the human species, called the fair sex; before we discover
too much of her frailty to our reader, it will be proper to give him a lively
idea of the vast temptation, which overcame all the efforts of a modest and
virtuous mind; (...) then we humbly hope his goodnature will rather pity than
condemn the imperfection of human virtue.

Nay, the ladies themselves will, we hope, be induced, by considering the
uncommon variety of charms, which united in this young man's person, to bridle
their rampant passion for chastity, and be at least as mild as their violent
modesty and virtue will permit them, in censuring the conduct of a woman, who,
perhaps, was in her own disposition as chaste as those pure and sanctified
virgins, who, after a life innocently spent in the gaieties of the town, begin
about fifty to attend twice per diem at the polite churches and chapels, to
return thanks for the grace which preserved them formerly amongst beaus, from
temptations perhaps less powerful than what now attack the lady Booby.

Mr. Joseph Andrews was now in the one and twentieth year of his age. He was of
the highest degree of middle stature. His limbs were put together with great
elegance, and no less strength. His legs and thighs were formed in the exactest
proportion. His shoulders were broad and brawny; but yet his arms hung so
easily, that he had all the symptoms of strength without the least clumsiness.
His hair was of a nut-brown color, and was displayed in wanton ringlets down
his back. His forehead was high, his eyes dark, and as full of sweetness as of
fire. His nose a little inclined to the Roman. His tee^^ white and ^en. His
lips full, red, and soft. ^is beard was only rough on his chin and upper lip;
but his cheeks, in which his blood glowed, were overspread with a thick down.
His countenance had a tenderness joined with a sensibility inexpressible. Add
to this the most perfect neatness in his dress, and an air, which to those who
have not seen many noblemen, would give an idea of nobility.

Such was the person who now appeared before the lady. She viewed him some time
in silence, and twice or thrice before she spoke, changed her mind as to the
manner in which she should begin. At length, she said to him, Joseph, I am
sorry to hear such complaints against you; I am told you behave so rudely to
the maids, that they cannot do their business in quiet; I mean those who are
not wicked enough to hearken to your solicitations. As to others, they may
perhaps not call you rude: for there are wicked sluts who make one ashamed of
one's own sex; and are as ready to admit any nauseous familiarity as fellows to
offer it; nay, there are such in my family; but they shall not stay in it; that
impudent trollop, who is with child by you, is discharged by this time.

As a person who is struck through the heart with a thunderbolt, looks
extremely surprised, nay, and perhaps is so too -- thus the poor Joseph
received the false accusation of his mistress; he blushed and looked
confounded, which she misinterpreted to be symptoms of his guilt and thus went
on:

Come hither, Joseph: another mistress might discard you for these offenses;
but I have compassion for your youth, and if I could be certain you would, be
no more guilty -- Consider, child, (laying her hand carelessly upon his) you are
a handsome young fellow, and might do better; you might make your fortune. --
Madam, said Joseph, I do assure your ladyship, I don't know whether any maid in
the house is man or woman. Oh fie! Joseph answered the lady, don't commit
another crime in denying the truth. I could pardon the first; but I hate a
liar. 'Madam cries Joseph, I hope your ladyship will not be offended at my
asserting my innocence: for by all that is sacred, I have never offered more
than kissing. 'Kissing!' said the lady with great discomposure of countenance,
and more redness in her cheeks, than anger in her eyes, do you call that no
crime? kissing, Joseph, is as a prologue to a play. Can I believe a young
fellow of your age and complexion will be content with kissing? No, Joseph,
there is no woman who grants that, but will grant more; and I am deceived
greatly in you, if you would not put her closely to it. What would you think,
Joseph, if I admitted you to kiss me? Joseph replied, he would sooner die than
have any such thought. 'And yet, Joseph,' returned she, ladies have admitted
their footmen to such familiarities; and footmen, I confess to you much less
deserving them; fellows without half your charms: for such might almost excuse
the crime. Tell me therefore, Joseph, if I should admit you to such freedoms,
what would you think of me? -- tell me freely. 'Madam,' said Joseph, I should
think your ladyship condescended a great deal below yourself. 'Pugh!' said she,
that I am to answer to myself: but would not you insist on more? Would you be
contented with a kiss? Would not your inclinations be all on fire rather by
such a favor? 'Madam,' said Joseph, if they were, I hope I should be able to
control them, without suffering them to get the better of my virtue. -- You
have heard, reader, poets talk of the statue of surprise; you have heard
likewise, or else you have heard very little, how surprise made one of the sons
of Croesus speak though he was dumb. You have seen the faces, in the
eighteen-penny gallery, when through the trap-door, to soft or no music, Mr.
Bridgwater, Mr. William Mills, or some other of ghostly appearance, has
ascended with a face all pale with powder, and a shirt all bloody with ribands;
but from none of these, nor from Phidias, or Praxiteles, if they should return
to life -- no, not from the inimitable pencil of my friend Hogarth, could you
receive such an idea of surprise, as would have entered in at your eyes, had
they beheld the lady Booby, when those last words issued out from the lips of
Joseph. -- 'Your virtue! (said the lady recovering after a silence of two
minutes) I shall never survive it. Your virtue! Intolerable confidence! Have
you the assurance to pretend, that when a lady demeans herself to throw aside
the rules of decency, in order to honor you with the highest favors in her
power, your virtue should resist her inclination? that when she had conquered
her own virtue, she should find an obstruction in yours? 'Madam,' said Joseph,
I cannot see why her having no virtue should be a reason against my having any:
Or why, because I am a man, or because I am poor, my virtue must be subservient
to her pleasures. I am out of patience, cries the lady: Did ever mortal hear of
a man's virtue! Did ever the greatest or the gravest men pretend to any of this
kind! Will magistrates who punish lewdness, or parsons who preach against it,
make any scruple, of committing it? And can a boy, a stripling have the
confidence to talk of his vir^ue? 'Madam,' says Joseph, that boy is the brother
of Pamela, and would be ashamed that the chastity of his family, which is
preserved in her, should be stained in him. If there are such men as your
ladyship mentions, I am sorry for it; and I wish they had an opportunity of
reading over those letters, which my father has sent me of my sister Pamela's;
nor do I doubt but such an example would amend them. You impudent villain,
cries the lady in a rage, do you insult me with the follies of my relation, who
has exposed himself all over the country upon your sister's account? a little
vixen, whom I have always wondered my late lady Booby ever kept in her house.
Sirrah! get out of my sight, and prepare to set out this night; for I will
order you your wages immediately, and you shall be stripped and turned away. --
'Madam,' says Joseph, I am sorry I have offended your ladyship, I am sure I
never intended it. 'Yes, sirrah,' cries she, you have had the vanity to
misconstru^ the little innocent freedom I took in order to try, whether what I
heard was true. OF my conscience, you have had the assurance to imagine, I was
fond of you myself. Joseph answered, he had only spoke out of tenderness for
his virtue; at which words she flew into a violent passion, and, refusing to
hear more, ordered him instantly to leave the room.

He was no sooner gone, than she burst forth into the following exclamation;
Whither does this violent passion hurry us? What meannesses do we submit to
from its impulse? Wisely we resist its first and least approaches; for it is
then only we can assure ourselves the victory. No woman could ever safely say,
so far only will I go. Have I not exposed myself to the refusal of my footman?
I cannot bear the reflection. Upon which she applied herself to the bell, and
rung it with infinite more violence than was necessary; the faithful S^ipslop
attending near at hand: To say the truth, she had conceived a suspicion at her
last interview with her mistress; and had waited ever since in the antichamber,
having carefully applied her ears to the keyhole during the whole time that
the preceding conversation passed between Joseph and the lady.

CHAP. IX.
What passed between the lady and Mrs. Slipslop, in which we prophecy there are
some strokes which every one will not truly comprehend at the first reading.

SLIPSLOP, said the lady, I find too much reason to believe all thou have told
me of this wicked Joseph; I have determined to part with him instantly; so go
you to the steward, and bid him pay him his wages. Slipslop, who had preserved
hitherto a distance to her lady, rather out of necessity than inclination, and
who thought the knowledge of this secret had thrown down all distinction
between them, answered her mistress very pertly, She wished she knew her own
mind; and that she was certain she would call her back again, before she was
got halfway down stairs. The lady replied, she had taken a resolution, and was
resolved to keep it. 'I am sorry for it', cries Slipslop; and if I had known
you would have punished the poor lad so severely, you should never have heard a
particle of the matter. Here Is a fuss, indeed, about nothing 'Nothing!'
returned my lady; Do you think I will countenance lewdness in my house? If you
will turn away every footman, said Slipslop, that is a lover of the sport, you
must soon open the coachdoor yourself, or get a set of mophrodites to wait upon
you; and I am sure I hated the sight of them even singing in an opera. 'Do as I
bid you', says my lady, and don't shock my ears, with your beastly language.
'Marry-come-up,' cries Slipslop, People's ears are sometimes the nicest part
about them.

The lady, who began to admire the new style in which her waiting-gentlewoman
delivered herself, and by the conclusion of her speech, suspected somewhat of
the truth, called her back, and desired to know what she meant by the
extraordinary degree of freedom in which she thought proper to indulge her
tongue. 'Freedom!' says Slipslop, I don't know what you call freedom! Madam;
servants have tongues as well as their mistresses. Yes, and saucy ones too,
answered the lady; but I assure you I shall bear no such impertinence.
Impertinence! I don't know that I am impertinent, says Slipslop. 'Yes indeed
you are,' cries my lady; and unless you mend your manners, this house is no
place for you. Manners! cries Slipslop, I never was thought to want manners nor
modesty neither; and for places, there are more places than one; and I know
what I know. What do you know, mistress? answered the lady. I am not obliged to
tell that to every body, says Slipslop, any more than I am obliged to keep it a
secret.' I desire you would provide yourself, answered the lady. 'With all my
heart,' replied the waitinggentlewoman; and so departed in a passion, and
slapped the door after her.

The lady too plainly perceived that her waitinggentlewoman knew more than she
would willingly have had her acquainted with; and this she imputed to Joseph's
having discovered to her what passed at the first interview. This therefore
blew up her rage against him, and confirmed her in a resolution of parting with
him.

But the dismissing Mrs. Slipslop was a point not so ea^y to be resolved upon:
she had the utmost, tenderness for her reputation, as she knew on that depended
many of the most valuable blessings of life; particularly cards, making
curt'sies in public places, and, above all, the pleasure of demolishing the
reputations of others, in which innocent amusement she had an extraordinary
delight. She therefore determined to submit to any insult from a servant,
rather than run a risk of losing the title to so many great privileges.

She therefore sent for her steward, Mr. Peter Pounce; and ordered him to pay
Joseph his wages, to strip off his livery, and turn him out of the house that
evening.

She then called Slipslop up, and after refreshing her spirits with a small
cordial which she kept in her closet, she began in the following manner:

Slipslop, why will you, who know my passionate temper, attempt to provoke me
by your answers? I am convinced you are an honest servant, and should be very
unwilling to part with you. I believe likewise you have found me an indulgent
mistress on many occasions, and have as little reason on your side to desire a
change. I cannot help being surprised therefore, that you will take the surest
method to offend me: I mean repeating my words, which you know I have always
detested.

The prudent waiting-gentlewoman had duly weighed the whole matter, and found
on mature deliberation, that a good place in possession was better than one in
expectation. As she found her mistress therefore inclined to relent, she
thought proper also to put on some small condescension; which was as readily
accepted: and so the affair was reconciled, all offenses forgiven, and a
present of a gown and petticoat made her as an instance of her lady's future
favor.

She offered once or twice to speak in favor of Joseph: but found her lady's
heart so obdurate, that she prudently dropped all such efforts. She considered
there were some more footmen in the house, and some as stout fellows, though not
quite so handsome as Joseph: besides, the reader has already seen her tender
advances had not met with the encouragement she might have reasonably expected.
She thought she had thrown away a great deal of sack and sweetmeats on an
ungrateful rascal; and being a little inclined to the opinion of that female
sect, who hold one lusty young fellow to be near as good as another lusty young
fellow, she at last gave up Joseph and his cause, and with a triumph over her
passion highly commendable, walked off with her present, and with great
tranquillity paid a visit to a stone-bottle, which is of sovereign use to a
philosophical temper.

She left not her mistress so easy. The poor lady could not reflect without
agony, that her dear reputation was in the power of her servants. All her
comfort, as to Joseph, was, that she hoped he did not understand her meaning;
at least, she could say for herself, she had not plainly expressed any thing to
him; and as to Mrs. Slipslop, she imagined she could bribe her to secrecy.

But what hurt her most was, that in reality she had not so entirely conquered
her passion; the little god lay lurking in her heart, though anger and disdain so
hoodwinked her, that she could not see him. She was a thousand times on the
very brink of revoking the sentence she had passed against the poor youth. Love
became his advocate, and whispered many things in his favor. Honor likewise
endeavored to vindicate his crime, and pity to mitigate his punishment; on the
other side, pride and revenge spoke as loudly against him; and thus the poor
lady was tortured with perplexity, opposite passions distracting and tearing
her mind different ways.

So I have seen, in the hall of Westminster, where sergeant Bramble has been
retained on the right side, and sergeant Puzzle on the left, the balance of
opinion (so equal were their ^ees) alternately incline to either scale. Now
Bramble throws in an argument, and Pu^^^e's scale strikes the beam; again,
Bramble shares the like fate, overpowered by the weight of Puzzle. Her Bramble
hits, there Puzzle strikes; here one has you, there the other has you, 'till at
last all becomes one scene of confusion in the tortured minds of the hearers;
equal wagers are laid on the success, and neither judge nor jury can possibly
make any thing of the matter; all things are so enveloped by the careful
sergeants in doubt and obscurity.

Or as it happens in the conscience, where honor and honesty pull one way, and
a bribe and necessity another. -- If it was our present business only to make
similies, we could produce many more to this purpose: but a simile (as well as
a word) to the wise. We shall therefore see a little after our hero, for whom
the reader is doubtless in some pain.

CHAP. X.
Joseph writes another letter: His transactions with Mr. Peter Pounce, etc.
with his departure from lady Booby.

THE disconsolate Joseph would not have had a^ understanding sufficient for the
principal subject of such a book as this, if he had any longer misunderstood
the drift of his mistress; and indeed that he did not discern it sooner, the
reader will be pleased to apply to an unwillingness in him to discover what he
must condemn in her as a fault. Having therefore quitted her presence, he
retired into his own garret, and entered himself into an ejaculation on the
numberless calamities which attended beauty, and the misfortune it was to be
handsomer than one's neighbors.

He then sat down and addressed himself to his sister Pamela, in the following
words:

Dear sister Pamela,
HOPING you are well, what news have I to tell you! O Pamela, my mistress is
fallen in love with me -- That is, what great folks call falling in love, she
has a mind to ruin me; but I hope I shall have more resolution and more grace
than to part with my virtue to any lady upon earth.

Mr. Adams has often told me, that chastity is as great a virtue in a man as
in a woman. He says he never knew any more than his wife, and I shall endeavor
to follow his example. Indeed, it is owing entirely to his excellent sermons
and advice, together with your letters, that I have been able to resist a
temptation, which he says no man complies with, but he repents in this world,
or is damned for it in the next; and why should I trust to repentance on my
deathbed, since I may die in my sleep? What fine things are good advice and
good examples! But I am glad she turned me out of the chamber as she did: for I
had once almost forgotten every word parson Adams had ever said to me.

I don't doubt, dear sister, but you will have grace to preserve your virtue
against all trials; and I beg you earnestly to pray, I may be enabled to
preserve mine; for truly it is very severely attacked by more than one: but, I
hope I shall copy your example, and that of Joseph my namesake: and maintain my
virtue against all temptations.


Joseph had not finished his letter, when he was summoned down stairs by Mr.
Peter Pounce, to receive his wages; for, besides that out of eight pounds a
year he allowed his father and mother four, he had been obliged, in order to
furnish himself with musical instruments, to apply to the generosity of the
aforesaid Peter, who on urgent occasions, used to advance the servants their
wages: not before they were due, but before they were payable; that is,
perhaps, half a year after they were due, and this at the moderate praemium of
fifty per cent* or a little more; by which charitable methods, together with
lending money to other people, and even to his own master and mistress, the
honest man had from nothing, in a few years amassed a small sum of twenty
thousand pounds or thereabouts.

Joseph having received his little remainder of wages, and having stripped off
his livery, was forced to borrow a frock and breeches of one of the servants:
(for he was so beloved in the family, that they would all have lent him any
thing) and being told by Peter, that he must not stay a moment longer in the
house than was necessary to pack up his linen, which he easily did in a very
narrow compass; he took a very melancholy leave of his fellow servants, and set
out at seven in the evening.

He had proceeded the length of two or three streets, before he absolutely
determined with himself, whether he should leave the town that night, or,
procuring, a lodging, wait till the morning. At last, the moon shining very
bright helped him to come to a resolution of beginning his journey immediately,
to which likewise he had some other inducements; which the reader, without
being a conjurer, cannot possibly guess, till we have given him those hints,
which it may be now proper to open.

CHAP. XI.
Of several new matters not expected.

IT is an observation sometimes made, that to indicate our idea of a simple
fellow, we say, he is easily to be seen through: Nor do I believe it a more
improper denotation of a simple book. Instead of applying this to any
particular performance, we choose rather to remark the contrary in this history,
where the scene opens itself by small degrees; and he is a saga ous reader who
can see two chapters before him.

For this reason we have not hitherto hinted a matter which now seems necessary
to be explained; since it may be wondered at, first, that Joseph made such
extraordinary haste out of town, which has been already shown; and secondly,
which will be now shown, that instead of proceeding to the habitation of his
father and mother, or to his beloved sister Pamela, he chose rather to set out
full speed to the lady Booby's country seat, which he had left on his journey
to London.

Be it known then, that in the same parish where this seat stood, there lived a
young girl whom Joseph (though the best of sons and brothers) longed more
impatiently to see than his parents or his sister. She was a poor girl, who had
formerly been bred up in Sir John's family; whence, a little before the journey
to London, she had been discarded by Mrs. Slipslop on account of her
extraordinary beauty: for I never could find any other reason.

This young creature (who now lived with a farmer in the parish) had been
always beloved by Joseph, and returned his affection. She was two years only
younger than our hero. They had been acquainted from their infancy, and had
conceived a very early liking for each other, which had grown to such a degree
of affection, that Mr. Adams had with much ado prevented them from marrying,
and persuaded them to wait, till a few years service and thrift had a little
improved their experience, and enabled them to live comfortably together.

They followed this good man's advice, as indeed his word was little less than
a law in his parish; for as he had shown his parishoners by an uniform
behavior of thirty-five years duration, that he had their good entirely at
heart; so they consulted him on every occasion, and very seldom acted contrary
to his opinion.

Nothing can be imagined more tender than was the parting between these two
lovers. A thousand sighs heaved the bosom of Joseph; a thousand tears distilled
from the lovely eyes of Fanny, (for that was her name) though her modesty would
only suffer her to admit his eager kisses, her violent love made her more than
passive in his embraces; and she often pulled him to her breast with a soft
pressure, which though perhaps it would not have squeezed an insect to death,
caused more emotion in the heart of Joseph, than the closest Cornish hug could
have done.

The reader may perhaps wonder, that so fond a pair should during a
twelvemonth's absence never converse with one another; indeed there was but one
reason which did, or could have prevented them; and this was, that poor Fanny
could neither write nor read; nor could she be prevailed upon to transmit the
delicacies of her tender and chaste passion, by the hands of an amanuensis.

They contented themselves therefore with frequent enquiries after each other's
health, with a mutual confidence in each other's fidelity, and the prospect of
their future happiness.

Having explained these matters to our reader, and, as far as possible,
satisfied all his doubts, we return to honest Joseph, whom we left just set out
on his travels by the light of the moon.

Those who have read any romance or poetry ancient or modern, must have been
informed, that love has wings; by which they are not to understand, as some
young ladies by mistake have done, that a lover can fly; the writers, by this
ingenious allegory, intended to insinuate no more, than that lovers do not
march like horse-guards; in short, that they put the best leg foremost; which
our lusty youth, who could walk with any man, did so heartily on this occasion,
that within four hours, he reached a famous house of hospitality well known to
the western traveller. It presents you a lion on a sign-post: and the master,
who was christened Timotheus, is commonly called plain Tim. Some has conceived
that he has particularly chosen the lion for his sign, as he does in
countenance greatly resemble that magnanimous beast, though his disposition
favors more of the sweetness of the lamb. He is a person well received among
all sorts of men, being qualified to render himself agreeable to any; as he is
well versed in history and politics, has a smattering in law and divinity,
cracks a good jest, and plays wonderfully well on the French horn.

A violent storm of hail forced Joseph to take shelter in this inn, where he
remembered Sir Thomas had dined in his way to town. Joseph had no sooner seated
himself by the kitchen fire, than Timotheus, observing his livery, began to
condole the loss of his late master; who was, he said, his very particular and
intimate acquaintance, with whom he had cracked many a merry bottle, aye many a
dozen in his time. He then remarked, that all those things were over now, all
past, and just as if they had never been; and concluded with an excellent
observation on the certainty of death, which his wife said was indeed very
true. A fellow now arrived at the same inn with two horses, one of which he was
leading farther down into the country to meet his master; these he put into the
stable, and came and took his place by Joseph's side, who immediately knew him
to be the servant of a neighboring gentleman, who used to visit at their house.

This fellow was likewise forced in by the storm; for he had orders to go
twenty miles farther that evening, and luckily on the same road which Joseph
himself intended to take. He therefore embraced this opportunity of
complimenting his friend with his master's horses, (notwithstanding he had
received express commands to the contrary) which was readily accepted, and so
after they had drank a loving pot, and the storm was over, they set out
together.

CHAP. XII.
Containing many surprising adventures which Joseph Andrews met with on the
road, scarce credible to those who have never traveled in a stage-coach.

NOTHING remarkable happened on the road, till their arrival at the inn to
which the horses were ordered; whither they came about two in the morning. The
moon then shone very bright; and Joseph making his friend a present of a pint
of wine, and thanking him for the favor of his horse, notwithstanding all
entreaties to the contrary, proceeded on his journey on foot.

He had not gone above two miles, charmed with the hopes of shortly seeing his
beloved Fanny, when he was met by two fellows in a narrow lane, and ordered to
stand and deliver. He readily gave them all the money he had, which was
somewhat less than two pounds; and told them he hoped they would be so generous
as to return him a few shillings, to defray his charges on his way home.

One of the ruffians answered with an oath, yes, we'll give you something
presently: but first strip and be d -- n'd to you. -- Strip, cried the other,
or I Will blow your brains to the devil. Joseph remembering that he had borrowed
his coat and breeches of a friend, and that he should be ashamed of making any
excuse for not returning them, replied, he hoped they would not insist on his
clothes, which were not worth much, but consider the coldness of the night. You
are cold, are you, you rascal! says one of the robbers, I Will warm you with a
vengeance; and damning his eyes, snapt a pistol at his head: which he had no
sooner done, than the other levelled a blow at him with his stick, which
Joseph, who was expert at cudgel-playing, caught with his, and returned the
favor so successfully on his adversary, that he laid him sprawling at his
feet, and at the same instant received a blow from behind, with the but-end of
a pistol from the other villain, which felled him to the ground, and totally
deprived him of his senses.

The thief, who had been knocked down, had now recovered himself; and both
together fell to belabouring poor Joseph with their sticks, till they were
convinced they had put an end ^o his miserable being: They then stripped him
entirely naked, threw him into a ditch, and departed with their booty.

The poor wretch, who lay motionless a long time, just began to recover his
senses as a stagecoach came by. The postilion hearing a man's groans, stopped his
horses, and told the coachman, he was certain there was a dead man lying in the
ditch; for he heard him groan. 'Go on, sirrah,' says the coachman, we are
confounded late, and have no time to look after dead men. A lady, who heard
what the postilion said, and likewise heard the groan, called eagerly to the
coachman, to stop and see what was the matter. Upon which he bid the postilion
alight, and look into the ditch. He did so, and returned, That there was a man
sitting upright as naked as ever he was born. -- O J -- sus, cried the lady, A
naked man! Dear coachman, drive on and leave him. Upon this the gentlemen got
out of the coach; and Joseph begged them to have mercy upon him: For that he
had been robbed, and almost beaten to death. 'Robbed,' cries an old gentleman;
Let us make all the haste imaginable, or we shall be robbed too. A young man
who belonged to the law answered, He wished they had passed by without taking
any notice; but that now they might be proved to have been last in his company;
if he should die, they might be called to some account for his murder. He
therefore thought it advisable to save the poor creature's life, for their own
sakes, if possible; at least, if he died, to prevent the jury's finding that
they fled for it. He was therefore of opinion, to take the man into the coach,
and carry him to the next inn. The lady insisted, That he should not come into
the coach. That if they lifted him in, she would herself alight: for she had
rather stay in that place to all eternity, than ride with a naked man. The
coachman objected, That he could not suffer him to be taken in, unless somebody
would pay a shilling for his carriage the four miles. which the two gentlemen
refused to do. But the lawyer, who was afraid of some mischief happening to
himself if the wretch was left behind in that condition, saying, no man could
be too cautious in these matters, and that he remembered very extraordinary
cases in the books, threatened the coachman, and bid him deny taking him up at
his peril; for that if he died, he should be indicted for his murder; and if he
lived, and brought an action against him, he would willingly take a brief in
it. These words had a sensible effect on the coachman, who was well acquainted
with the person who spoke them; and the old gentleman abovementioned, thinking
the naked man would afford him frequent opportunities of showing his wit to the
lady, offered to join with the company in giving a mug of beer for his fare;
till partly alarmed by the threats of the one, and partly by the promises of
the other, and being, perhaps, a little moved with compassion at the poor
creature's condition, who stood bleeding and shivering with the cold, he at
length agreed; and Joseph was now advancing to the coach, where, seeing the
lady, who held the sticks of her fan before her eyes, he absolutely refused,
miserable as he was, to enter, unless he was furnished with sufficient
covering, to prevent giving the least offense to decency. So perfectly modest
was this young man; such mighty effects had the spotless example of the amiable
Pamela, and the excellent sermons of Mr. Adams, wrought upon him.

Though there were several great coats about the coach, it was not easy to get
over the difficulty which Joseph had started. The two gentlemen complained they
were cold, and could not spare a rag; the man of wit saying, with a laugh, that
charity began at home; and the coachman, who had two great coats spread under
him, refused to lend either, lest they should be made bloody; the lady's
footman desired to be excused for the same reason, which the lady herself,
notwithstanding her abhorrence of a naked man, approved; and it is more than
probable, poor Joseph, who obstinately adhered to his modest resolution, must
have perished, unless the postilion, (a lad who has been since transported for
robbing a henroost) had voluntarily stripped off a great coat, his only garment,
at the same time swearing a great oath (for which he was rebuked by the
passengers) That he would rather ride in his shirt all his life, than suffer a
fellow creature to lie in so miserable a condition.

Joseph, having put on the great coat, was lifted into the coach, which now
proceeded on its journey. He declared himself almost dead with the cold, which
gave the man of wit an occasion to ask the lady, if she could not accommodate
him with a dram. She answered with some resentment, She wondered at his asking
her such a question; but assured him she never tasted any such thing.

The lawyer was enquiring into the circumstances of the robbery, when the coach
stopped, and one of the ruffians putting a pistol in, demanded their money of the
passengers; who readily gave it them; and the lady, in her fright, delivered up
a little silver bottle, of about a half pint size, which the rogue, clapping it
to his mouth, and drinking her health, declared it held some of the best Nantes
he had ever tasted: this the lady afterward assured the company was the
mistake of her maid; for that she had ordered her to fill the bottle with
Hungary-water.

As soon as the fellows were departed, the lawyer, who had, it seems, a case of
pistols in the seat of the coach, informed the company, that if it had been
daylight, and he could have come at his pistols, he would not have submitted
to the robbery; he likewise set forth, that he had often met highwaymen when he
traveled on horseback, but none ever durst attack him; concluding, that if he
had not been more afraid for the lady than for himself, he should not have now
parted with his money so easily.

As wi^ is generally observed to love to reside in empty pockets, so the
gentleman, whose ingenuity we have above remarked, as soon as he had parted
with his money, began to grow wonderfully facetious. He made frequent allusions
to Adam and Eve, and said many excellent things on figs, and fig leaves; which,
perhaps, gave more offense to Joseph than to any other in the company.

The lawyer likewise made several very pretty jests, without departing from his
profession, He said, If Joseph and the lady were alone, he would be more
capable of making a conveyance to her, as his affairs were not fettered with
any encumbrance; he would warrant, he soon suffered a recovery by a writ of entry,
which was the proper way to create heirs in tail; that for his own part, he
would engage to make so firm a settlement in a coach, that there should be no
danger of an ejectment; with an inundation of the like gibberish, which he
continued to vent till the coach arrived at an inn, where one servant-maid only
was up in readiness to attend the coachman, and furnish him with cold meat and
a dram. Joseph desired to alight, and that he might have a bed prepared for
him, which the maid readily promised to perform; and being a good-natured
wench, and not so squemish as the lady had been, she clapped a large faggot on
the fire, and furnishing Joseph with a great coat belonging to one of the
hostlers, desired him to sit down and warm himself, whilst she made his bed.
The coachman, in the mean time, took an opportunity to call up a surgeon, who
lived within a few doors: after which, he reminded his passengers how late they
were, and after they had taken leave of Joseph, hurried them off as fast as he
could.

The wench soon got Joseph to bed, and promised to use her interest to borrow
him a shirt; but imagined, as she afterward said, by his being so bloody, that
he must be a dead man: she ran with all speed to hasten the surgeon, who was
more than half dressed, apprehending that the coach had been overturned and some
gentleman or lady hurt. As soon as the wench had informed him at his window,
that it was a poor foot-passenger who had been stripped of all he had, and almost
murdered; he chid her for disturbing him so early, slipped off his clothes
again, and very quietly returned to bed and to sleep.

Aurora now began to show her blooming cheeks over the hills, whilst ten
millions of feathered songsters, in jocund chorus, repeated, odes a thousand
times sweeter than those of our laureat, and sung both the day and the song;
when the master of the inn, Mr. Tow-wouse, arose, and learning from his maid an
account of the robbery, and the situation of his poor naked guest, he shook his
head, and cried, good lack-a-day! and then ordered the girl to carry him one of
his own shirts.

Mrs. Tow-wouse was just awake, and had stretched out her arms in vain to fold
her departed husband, when the maid entered the room. Who Is there? Betty? 'Yes,
Madam.' Where Is your master? He Is without, Madam; he has sent me for a shirt
to lend a poor naked man, who has been robbed and murdered. Touch one, if you
dare, you slut, said Mrs. Tow-wouse; your master is a pretty sort of a man to
take in naked vagabonds, and clothe them with his own clothes. I shall have no
such doings. -- If you offer to touch any thing, I Will throw the chamber pot at
your head. Go, send your master to me, 'Yes, Madam,' answered Betty. As soon as
he came in, she thus began: What the devil do you mean by this, Mr. Tow-wouse?
Am I to buy shirts to lend to a set of scabby rascals? My dear, said Mr.
Towwouse this is a poor wretch. 'Yes' says she, I know, it is a poor wretch;
but what the devil have we to do with poor wretches? the law makes us provide
for too many already. We shall have thirty or forty poor wretches in red coats
shortly. 'My dear,' cries Tow-wouse, this man has been robbed of all he hath'
Well then,' says she, where is his money to pay his reckoning? Why does not such
a fellow go to an alehouse? I shall send him packing as soon as I am up, I
assure you. My dear said he, 'common charity will not suffer you to do that.'
Common charitty, a f -- t!' says she, common charity teaches us to provide for
ourselves, and our families; and I and mine will not be ruined by your charity, I
assure you. 'Well,' says he, my dear, do as you will when you are up; you know
I never contradict you. 'No,' says she, if the devil was to contradict me, I
would make the house too hot to hold him.

With such like discourses they consumed near half an hour, whilst Betty
provided a shirt from the hostler, who was one of her sweethearts, and put it
on poor Joseph. The surgeon had likewise at last visited him, and washed and
dressed his wounds, and was now come to acquaint Mr. Tow-wouse, that his guest
was in such extreme danger of his life, that he scarce saw any hopes of his
recovery. -- 'Here's a pretty kettle of fish,' cries Mrs. Towwouse, you have
brought upon us! We are like to have a funeral at our own expense. Towwouse,
(who notwithstanding his charity, would have given his vote as freely as ever
he did at an election, that any other house in the kingdom should have quiet
possession of his guest) answered, My dear, I am not to blame: he was brought
hither by the stage-coach; and Betty had put him to bed before I was stirring.
'I'll Betty her,' says she -- At which, with half her garments on, the other
half under her arm, she sallied out in quest of the unfortunate Betty, whilst
Tow-wouse and the surgeon went to pay a visit to poor Joseph, and enquire into
the circumstances of this melancholy affair.

CHAP. XIII.
What happened to Joseph during his sickness at the inn, with the curious
discourse between him and Mr. Barnabas the parson of the parish.

AS soon as Joseph had communicated a particular history of the robbery,
together with a short account of himself and his intended journey, he asked the
surgeon, if he apprehended him to be in any danger: To which the surgeon very
honestly answered, He feared he was; for that his pulse was very exalted and
feverish, and if his fever should prove more than symptomatic, it would be
impossible to save him. Joseph fetching a deep sigh, cried, Poor Fanny, I would
I could have lived to see thee! but God's will be done.

The surgeon then advised him, if he had any worldly affairs to settle, that he
would do it as soon as possible; for though he hoped he might recover, yet he
thought himself obliged to acquaint him he was in great danger; and if the
malign concoction of his humors should cause a suscitation of his fever, he
might soon grow delirious and incapable to make his will. Joseph answered, That
it was impossible for any creature in the universe to be in a poorer condition
than himself: for since the robbery, he had not one thing of any kind whatever,
which he could call his own. I had, said he, a poor little piece of gold, which
they took away, that would have been a comfort to me in all my afflictions; but
surely, Fanny, I want nothing to remind me of thee. I have thy dear image in my
heart, and no villain can ever tear it thence.

Joseph desired paper and pens to write a letter, but they were refused him;
and he was advised to use all his endeavors to compose himself. They then left
him; and Mr. Tow-wouse sent to a clergyman to come and administer his good
offices to the soul of poor Joseph, since the surgeon despaired of making any
successful applications to his body.

Mr. Barnabas (for that was the clergyman's name) came as soon as sent for; and
having first drank a dish of tea with the landlady, and afterward a bowl of
punch with the landlord, he walked up to the room where Joseph lay; but finding
him asleep, returned to take the other sna^er; which when he had finished, he
again crept softly up to the chamber door, and having opened it, heard the sick
man talking to himself in the following manner:

O most adorable Pamela! most virtuous sister! whose example could alone enable
me to withstand all the temptations of riches and beauty, and to preserve my
virtue pure and chaste, for the arms of my dear Fanny, if it had pleased heaven
that I should ever have come unto them. What riches, or honors, or pleasures
can make us amends for the loss of innocence? Does not that alone afford us
more consolation, than all worldly acquisitions? What but innocence and virtue
could give any comfort to such a miserable wretch as I am? Yet these can make
me prefer this sick and painful bed to all the pleasures I should have found in
my lady's. These can make me face death without fear; and though I love my
Fanny more than ever man loved a woman, these can teach me to resign myself to
the divine will without repining. O thou delightful charming creature! if
heaven had indulged thee to my arms, the poorest, humblest state, would have
been a paradise; I could have lived with thee in the lowest cottage, without
envying the palaces, the dainties, or the riches of any man breathing. But I
must leave thee, leave thee for ever, my dearest angel! I must think of another
world; and I heartily pray thou may meet comfort in this. -- Barnabas
thought he had heard enough; so down stairs he went and told Tow-wouse he could
do his guest no service; for that he was very lightheaded, and had uttered
nothing but a rhapsody of nonsense all the time he stayed in the room.

The surgeon returned in the afternoon, and found his patient in a higher
fever, as he said, than when he left him, though not delirious; for
notwithstanding Mr. Barnabas's opinion, he had not been once out of his senses
since his arrival at the inn.

Mr. Barnabas was again sent for, and with much difficulty prevailed on to make
another visit. As soon as he entered the room, he told Joseph, He was come to
pray by him, and to prepare him for another world: in the first place
therefore, he hoped he had repented of all his sins. Joseph answered, He hoped
he had; but there was one thing which he knew not whether he should call a sin;
if it was, he feared he should die in the commission of it; and that was the
regret of parting with a young woman, whom he loved as tenderly as he did his
heart strings. Barnabas bad him be assured, that any repining at the divine
will was one of the greatest sins he could commit; that he ought to forget all
carnal affections, and think of better things. Joseph said, That neither in
this world nor the next, he could forget his Fanny; and that the thought,
however grievous, of parting from her for ever, was not half so tormenting, as
the fear of what she should suffer, when she knew his misfortune. Barnabas
said, That such fears argued a diffidence and despondence very criminal; that
he must divest himself of all human passions, and fix his heart above. Joseph
answered, That was what he desired to do. He then questioned him concerning his
forgiveness of the thieves. -- Joseph, with a very heavy sigh, replied, He
feared that was more than he could do: for nothing would give him more pleasure
than to hear they were taken. 'That,' cries Barnabas, is for the sake of
Justice. 'Yes,' said Joseph, but if I was to meet them again, I am afraid I
should attack them, and kill them too, if I could. 'Doubtless answered
Barnabas, it is lawful to kill a thief: but can you forgive them as a christian
ought? Joseph desired to know what that forgiveness was. 'That is,' answered
Barnabas, to forgive them as -- as -- it is to forgive them as -- in short it
is to forgive them as a christian. Joseph replied, 'He forgave them as much as
he could.' Well, well, said Barnabas, 'that will do.' He then demanded of him,
if he remembered any more sins unrepented of; and if he did, he desired him to
make haste and repent of them as fast as he could: that they might repeat over
a few prayers together. Joseph answered, He could not recollect any great
crimes he had been guilty of, and that those he had committed he was sincerely
sorry for. Barnabas said that was enough, and then proceeded to prayer with all
the expedition he was master of, some company then waiting for him below i^ the
parlour, where the ingredients for punch were all in readiness; but no one
would squeeze the oranges till he came.

Joseph complained he was dry, and desired a little tea; which Barnabas
reported to Mrs. Towwouse, who answered, She had just done drinking it, and
could not bear to be slopping all day; but ordered Betty to carry him up some
small beer.

Betty obeyed her mistress's commands; but Joseph, as soon as he tasted it,
said, he feared it would increase his fever, and that he longed very much for
tea: To which the good-natured Betty answered, he should have tea, if there was
any in the land; she accordingly went and bought him some herself, and attended
him with it: where we will leave her and Joseph together for some time, to
entertain the reader with other matters.

CHAP. XIV.
Being very full of adventures, which succeeded each other at the inn.

IT was now the dusk of the evening, when a grave person rode into the inn, and
committing his horse to the hostler, went directly into the kitchen, and having
called for a pipe of tobacco, took his place by the fireside; where several
persons were likewise assembled.

The discourse ran altogether on the robbery which was committed the night
before, and on the poor wretch, who lay above in the dreadful condition in
which we have already seen him. Mrs. Towwouse said, She wondered what the devil
Tom Whipwell meant by bringing such guests to her house, when there were so
many ale houses on the road proper for their reception. But she assured him, if
he died, the parish should be at the expense of the funeral. She added, Nothing
would serve the fellow's turn but tea, she would assure him. Betty, who was
just returned from her charitable office, answered, she believed he was a
gentleman, for she never saw a finer skin in her life. Pox on his skin! replied
Mrs. Tow-wouse, I suppose that is all we are like to have for the reckoning. I
desire no such gentlemen should ever call at the Dragon, (which it seems was
the sign of the inn.)

The gentleman lately arrived discovered a great deal of emotion at the
distress of this poor creature, whom he observed to be fallen not into the most
compassionate hands. And indeed, if Mrs. Tow-wouse had given no utterance to
the sweetness of her temper, nature had taken such pains in her countenance,
that Hogarth himself never gave more expression to a picture.

Her person was short, thin, and crooked. Her forehead projected in the middle,
and thence descended in a declivity to the top of her nose, which was sharp and
red, and would have hung over her lips, had not nature turned up one end of it.
Her lips were two bits of skin, which, whenever she spoke, she drew together in
a purse. Her chin was peaked; and at the upper end of that skin, which composed
her cheeks, stood two bones, that almost hid a pair of small red eyes. Add to
this a voice most wonderfully adapted to the sentiments it was to convey, being
both loud and hoarse.

It is not easy to say, whether the gentleman had conceived a greater dislike
for his landlady, or compassion for her unhappy guest. He enquired very
earnestly of the surgeon, who was now come into the kitchen, whether he had any
hopes of his recovery? he begged him to use all possible means toward it,
telling him, it was the duty of men of all professions, to apply their skill
gratis for the relief of the poor and necessitous. The surgeon answered, he
should take proper care; but he defied all the surgeons in London to do him any
good. 'Pray, Sir,' said the gentleman, 'What are his wounds? -- Why, do you
know any thing of wounds? says the surgeon (winking upon Mrs. Tow-wouse) Sir, I
have a small smattering in surgery, answered the genman. 'A smattering, -- ho,
ho, ho!' said the surgeon, 'I believe it is a smattering indeed.

The company were all attentive, expecting to hear the doctor, who was what
they call a dry fellow, expose the gentleman.

He began therefore with an air of triumph: I suppose, Sir, you have traveled.
No really Sir, said the gentleman. Ho! then you have practiced in the hospitals
perhaps. -- 'No, Sir,' Hum! not that neither? Whence, Sir, then, if I may be so
bold to enquire, have you got your knowledge in surgery? 'Sir', answered the
genman, I do not pretend to much; but the little I know, I have from books.
'Book!' cries the doctor. -- 'What, I suppose you have read Galen and
Hippocrates!' 'No, Sir, said the gentleman. 'How! you understand surgery,'
answers the doctor, 'and not read Galen and Hippocrates' 'Sir,' cries the
other, I believe there are many surgeons who have never read these authors. I
believe so too, says the doctor, more shame for them: but thanks to my
education I have them by heart, and very seldom go without them both in my
pocket. 'They are pretty large books, 'said the gentleman. 'Aye,' said the
doctor, I believe I know how large they are better than you. (At which he fell
a winking, and the whole company burst into a laugh.)

The doctor pursuing his triumph, asked the gentleman, if he did not understand
physic as well as surgery. 'Rather better,' answered the gentleman. 'Aye, like
enough,' cries the doctor, with a wink. 'Why, I know a little of physic too.' I
wish I knew half so much,' said Tow-wouse, I Would never wear an apron again.' Why
I believe, landlord, cries the doctor, there are few men, though I say it,
within twelve miles of the place, that handle a fever better. -- Veniente
accurrite merbo: that is my method. -- I suppose, brother, you understand
Latin? A little, says the gentleman. Aye, and Greek now I Will warrant you: Ton
dapomibo^inos polufloshoio Thalasses. But I have almost forgot these things, I
could have repeated Homer by heart once. -- Isags! the gentleman has caught a
Traitor, says Mrs. Tow-wouse; at which they all fell a laughing.

The gentleman, who had not the least affection for joking, very contentedly
suffered the doctor to enjoy his victory; which he did with no small
satisfaction: and having sufficiently sounded his depth, told him, he was
thoroughly convinced of his great abilities; and that he would be obliged to
him, if he would let him know his opinion of his patient's case above stairs.
'Sir,' says the doctor, his case is that of a dead man -- The contusion on his
head has perforated the internal membrane of the occiput, and divelicated that
radical small minute invisible nerve, which coheres to the pericranium; and
this was antended with a fever at first symptomatic, then pneumatic; and he is
at length grown deliriuus, or delirious as the vulgar express it.

He was proceeding in this learned manner, when a mighty noise interrupted him.
Some young fellows in the neighborhood had taken one of the thieves, and were
bringing him into the inn. Betty ran up stairs with this news to Joseph: who
begged they might search for a little piece of broken gold, which had a ribband
tied to it, and which he could swear to amongst all the hoards of the richest
men in the universe.

Notwithstanding the fellow's persisting in his innocence, the mob were very
busy in searching him, and presently, among other things, pulled out the piece
of gold just mentioned; which Betty no sooner saw, than she laid violent hands
on it, and conveyed it up to Joseph, who received it with raptures of joy, and
hugging it in his bosom, declared, he could now die contented.

Within a few minutes afterward, came in some other fellows, with a bundle
which they had found in a ditch, and which was indeed the clothes which had
been stripped off from Joseph, and the other things they had taken from him.

The gentleman no sooner saw the coat, than he declared he knew the livery;
and, if it had been taken from the poor creature above stairs, desired he might
see him: for that he was very well acquainted with the family to whom that
livery belonged.

He was accordingly conducted up by Betty: but what, reader, was the surprise
on both sides, when he saw Joseph was the person in bed; and when Joseph
discovered the face of his good friend Mr. Abraham Adams!

It would be impertinent to insert a discourse which chiefly turned on the
relation of matters already well known to the reader: for as soon as the curate
had satisfied Joseph concerning the perfect health of his Fanny, he was on his
side very inquisitive into all the particulars which had produced this
unfortunate accident.

To return therefore to the kitchen, where a great variety of company were now
assembled from all the rooms of the house, as well as the neighborhood: so
much delight do men take in contemplating the countenance of a thief.

Mr. Tow-wouse began to rub his hands with pleasure, at seeing so large an
assembly; who would he hoped, shortly adjourn into several apartments, in order
to discourse over the robbery, and drink a health to all honest men. But Mrs.
Tow-wouse, whose misfortune it was commonly to see things a little perversely,
began to rail at those who brought the fellow into her house; telling her
husband, they were very likely to thrive, who kept a house of entertainment for
beggars and thieves.

The mob had now finished their search; and could find nothing about the
captive likely to prove any evidence; for as to the clothes, though the mob was
very well satisfied with that proof; yet, as the surgeon observed, they could
not convict him, because they were not found in his custody; to which Barnabas
agreed, and added, that these things were bona waviata, and belonged to the
lord of the manor.

'How,' says the surgeon, do you say these goods belong to the lord of the
manor? 'I do,' cried Barnabas. 'Then I deny it,' says the surgeon. What can the
lord of the manor have to do in the case? Will any one attempt to persuade me
that what a man finds is not his own? I have heard (says an old fellow in the
corner) justice Wiseone say, that if every man had his right, whatever is found
belongs to the king of London. That may be true, says Barnabas, in some sense:
for the law makes a difference between things stolen and things found: for a
thing may be stolen that never is found; and a thing may be found that never
was stolen. Now goods that are both stolen and found are waviata; and they
belong to the lord of the manor. So the lord of the manor is the receiver of
stolen goods, (says the doctor;) at which there was a universal laugh, being
first begun by himself.

While the prisoner, by persisting in his innocence, had almost (as there was
no evidence against him) brought over Barnabas, the surgeon, Towwouse, and
several others to his side; Betty informed them, that they had over-looked a
little piece of gold, which she had carried up to the man in bed; and which he
offered to swear amongst a million, aye, amongst ten thousand. This immediately
turned the scale against the prisoner; and every one now concluded him guilty.
It was resolved therefore, to keep him secure that night, and early in the
morning to carry him before a justice.

CHAP. XV.
Showing how Mrs. Tow-wouse was a little mollified; and how officious Mr.
Barnabas and the surgeon were to prosecute the thief: with a dissertation
accounting for their zeal, and that of many other persons not mentioned in this
history.

BETTY told her mistress, she believed the man in bed was a greater man than
they took him for: for besides the extreme whiteness of his skin, and the
softness of his hands, she observed a very great familiarity between the
gentleman and him; and added, she was certain they were intimate acquaintance,
if not relations.

This somewhat abated the severity of Mrs. Towwouse's countenance. She said,
God forbid she should not discharge the duty of a Christian, since the poor
gentleman was brought to her house. She had a natural antipathy to vagabonds:
but could pity the misfortunes of a Christian as soon as another. Tow-wouse
said, If the traveller be a gentleman, though he had no money about him now, we
shall most likely be paid hereafter; so 'you may begin to score whenever you
will. Mrs. Tow-wouse answered. Hold your simple tongue, and don't instruct me
in my business. I am sure I am sorry for the gentleman's misfortune with all my
heart; and I hope the villain who has used him so barbarously will be hanged.
Betty, go, see what he wants. God forbid he should want any thing in my house.

Barnabas and the surgeon went up to Joseph, to satisfy themselves concerning
the piece of gold. Joseph was with difficulty prevailed upon to show it them;
but would by no entreaties be brought to deliver it out of his own possession.
He however attested this to be the same which had been taken from him; and
Betty was ready to swear to the finding it on the thief.

The only difficulty that remained, was how to produce this gold before the
justice: for as to carrying Joseph himself, it seemed impossible; nor was there
any great likelihood of obtaining it from him: for he had fastened it with a
riband to his arm, and solemnly vowed, that nothing but irresistible force
should ever separate them; in which resolution, Mr. Adams clenching a fist
rather less than the knuckle of an ox, declared he would support him.

A dispute arose on this occasion concerning evidence, not very necessary to be
related here; after which the surgeon dressed Mr. Joseph's head; still persisting
in the imminent danger in which his patient lay; but concluding with a very
important look, that he began to have hopes; that he should send him a sanative
soporiferous draught, and would see him in the morning. After which Barnabas
and he departed, and left Mr. Joseph and Mr. Adams together.

Adams informed Joseph of the occasion of this journey which he was making to
London, namely, to publish three volumes of sermons; being encouraged, as he
said by an advertisement lately set forth by a society of booksellers, who
proposed to purchase, any copies offered to them, at a price to be settled by
two persons: but though he imagined he should get a considerable sum of money on
this occasion, which his family were in urgent need of, he protested he would
not leave Joseph in his present condition: finally, he told him, he had nine
shillings and three pence halfpenny in his pocket, which he was welcome to use
as he pleased.

This goodness of parson Adams brought tears into Joseph's eyes; he declared he
had now a second reason to desire life, that he might show his gratitude to
such a friend. Adams bade him be cheerful; for that he plainly saw the surgeon
besides his ignorance, desired to make a merit of curing him, though the wounds
in his head, he perceived, were by no means dangerous; that he was convinced he
had no fever, and doubted not but he would be able to travel in a day or two.

These words infused a spirit into Joseph; he said, he found himself very sore
from the bruises, but had no reason to think any of his bones injured, or that
he had received any harm in his inside; unless that he felt something very odd
in his stomach: but he knew not whether that might not arise from not having
eaten one morsel for above twenty-four hours. Being then asked if he had any
inclination to eat, he answered in the affirmative. Then parson Adams desired
him to name what he had the greatest fancy for; whether a poached egg, or
chicken broth: he answered, he could eat both very well; but that he seemed to
have the greatest appetite for a piece of boiled beef and cabbage.

Adams was pleased with so perfect a confirmation that he had not the least
fever; but advised him to a lighter diet, for that evening. He accordingly eat
either a rabbit or a fowl, I never could with any tolerable certainty discover
which; after this, he was, by Mrs. Tow-wouse's order, conveyed into a better
bed, and equipped with one of her husband's shirts.

In the morning early, Barnabas and the surgeon came to the inn, in order to
see the thief conveyed before the justice. They had consumed the whole night in
debating what measures they should take to produce the piece of gold in
evidence against him: for they were both extremely zealous in the business,
though neither of them were in the least interested in the prosecution; neither
of them had ever received any private injury from the fellow, nor had either of
them ever been suspected of loving the public well enough to give them a
sermon or a dose of physic for nothing.

To help our reader therefore as much as possible to account for this zeal, we
must inform him, that, as this parish was so unfortunate as to have no lawyer
in it; there had been a constant contention between the two doctors, spiritual
and physical, concerning their abilities in a science, in which, as neither of
them professed it, they had equal pretensions to dispute each other's opinions.
These disputes were carried on with great contempt on both sides, and had
almost divided the parish; Mr. Towwouse and one half of the neighbors
inclining to the surgeon, and Mrs. Tow-wouse with the other half to the parson.
The surgeon drew his knowledge from those inestimable fountains called the
Attorney's Pocket-Companion, and Mr. Jacob's Law-tables; Barnabas trusted
entirely to Wood's Institutes. It happened on this occasion, as was pretty
frequently the case, that these two learned men differed about the sufficiency
of evidence: the doctor being of opinion, that the maid's oath would convict
the prisoner without producing the gold; the parson e contra, totis viribus. To
display their parts therefore before the justice and the parish, was the sole
motive, which we can discover, to this zeal which both of them pretended to
have for public justice.

O Vanity! how little is thy force acknowledged, or thy operations discerned!
How wantonly do thou deceive mankind under different disguises! Sometimes
thou do wear the face of pity, sometimes of generosity: nay, thou have the
assurance even to put on those glorious ornaments which belong only to heroic
virtue. Thou odious, deformed monster! whom priests have railed at,
philosophers despised, and poets ridiculed: is there a wretch so abandoned as
to own thee for an acquaintance in public? yet how few will refuse to enjoy
thee in private! nay, thou art the pursuit of most men through their lives. The
greatest villainies are daily practiced to please thee: nor is the meanest
thief below, or the greatest hero above thy notice. Thy embraces are often the
sole aim and sole reward of the private robbery, and the plundered province. It
is to pamper up thee, thou harlot, that we attempt to withdraw from others what
we do not want, or to withhold from them what they do. All our passions are thy
slaves. Avarice itself is often no more than thy handmaid, and even lust thy
pimp. Thy bully fear, like a coward, flies before thee, and joy and grief hide
their heads in thy presence.

I know thou will think, that whilst I abuse thee, I court thee; and that thy
love has inspired me to write this sarcastical panegyric on thee: but thou art
deceived, I value thee not a farthing; nor will it give me any pain, if thou
should prevail on the reader to censure this digression as arrant nonsense:
for know, to thy confusion, that I have introduced thee for no other purpose
than to lengthen out a short chapter; and so I return to my history.

CHAP. XVI.
The escape of the thief. Mr. Adams's disappointment. The arrival of two very
extraordinary personages, and the introduction of parson Adams to parson
Barnabas.

BARNABAS and the surgeon being returned, as we have said, to the inn, in order
to convey the thief before the justice, were greatly concerned to find a small
accident had happened, which somewhat disconcerted them; and this was no other
than the thief's escape, who had modestly withdrawn himself by night, declining
all ostentation, and not choosing, in imitation of some great men, to
distinguish himself at the expense of being pointed at.

When the company had retired the evening before, the thief was detained in a
room where the constable, and one of the young fellows who took him, were
planted as his guard. About the second watch, a general complaint of drowth was
made both by the prisoner and his keepers; among whom it was at last agreed,
that the constable should remain on duty, and the young fellow call up the
tapster; in which disposition the latter apprehended not the least danger, as
the constable was well armed, and could besides easily summon him back to his
assistance, if the prisoner made the least attempt to gain his liberty.

The young fellow had not long left the room, before it came into the
constable's head, that the prisoner might leap on him by surprise, and thereby
preventing him of the use of his weapons, especially the long staff, in which
he chiefly confided, might reduce the success of the struggle to an equal
chance. He wisely, therefore, to prevent this inconvenience, slipped out of the
room himself, and locked the door, waiting without with his staff in his hand,
ready lifted to fell the unhappy prisoner, if by ill fortune he should attempt
to break out.

But human life, as has been discovered by some great man or other, (for I
would by no means be understood to affect the honor of making any such
discovery) very much resembles a game at Chess: for as in the latter, while a
gamester is too attentive to secure himself very strongly on one side the
board, he is apt to leave an unguarded opening on the other; so does it often
happen in life; and so did it happen on this occasion: for whilst the cautious
constable with such wonderful sagacity had possessed himself of the door, he
most unhappily forgot the window.

The thief, who played on the other side, no sooner perceived this opening,
than he began to move that way; and finding the passage easy he took with him
the young fellow's hat; and without any ceremony, stepped into the street, and
made the best of his way.

The young fellow returning with a double mug of strong beer, was a little
surprised to find the constable at the door; but much more so, when, the door
being opened, he perceived the prisoner had made his escape, and which way. He
threw down the beer, and without uttering any thing to the constable, except a
hearty curse or two, he nimbly leapt out at the window, and went again in
pursuit of his prey; being very unwilling to lose the reward which he had
assured himself of.

The constable has not been discharged of suspicion on this account: it has
been said, that not being concerned in the taking the thief, he could not have
been entitled to any part of the reward, if he had been convicted; that the
thief had several guineas in his pocket; that it was very unlikely he should
have been guilty of such an oversight; that his pretense for leaving the room
was absurd; that it was his constant maxim, that a wise man never refused money
on any conditions; that at every election he always had sold his vote to both
parties, etc.

But notwithstanding these and many other such allegations, I am sufficiently
convinced of his innocence; having been positively assured of it, by those who
received their informations from his own mouth; which, in the opinion of some
moderns, is the best and indeed only evidence.

All the family were now up, and with many others assembled in the kitchen,
where Mr. Towwouse was in some tribulation; the surgeon having declared, that
by law he was liable to be indicted for the thief's escape, as it was out of
his house: he was a little comforted however by Mr. Barnabas's opinion, that as
the escape was by night, the indictment would not lie.

Mrs. Tow-wouse delivered herself in the following words: Sure never was such a
fool as my husband! would any other person living have left a man in the
custody of such a drunken drowsy blockhead as Tom Suckbribe; (which was the
constable's name) and if he could be indicted without any harm to his wife and
children, I should be glad of it. (Then the bell rung in Joseph's room.) Why,
Betty, John, Chamberlain, where the devil are you all? Have you no ears, or no
conscience, not to tend the sick better? -- See what the gentleman wants; why
don't you go yourself, Mr. Tow-wouse? but any one may die for you; you have no
more feeling than a dead-board. If a man lived a fortnight in your house
without spending a penny, you would never put him in mind of it. See whether he
drinks tea or coffee for breakfast. 'Yes, my dear,' cried Tow-wouse. She then
asked the doctor and Mr. Barnabas what morning's draught they chose, who
answered they had a pot of cyder-and at the fire; which we will leave them
merry over, and return to Joseph.

He had risen pretty early this morning: but though his wounds were far from
threatening any danger, he was so sore with the bruises, that it was impossible
for him to think of undertaking a journey yet; Mr. Adams therefore, whose stock
was visibly decreased with the expenses of supper and breakfast, and which
could not survive that day's scoring, began to consider how it was possible to
recruit it. At last he cried, He had luckily hit on a sure method; and though
it would oblige him to return himself home together with Joseph, it mattered
not much. He then sent for Towwouse, and taking him into another room, told
him, He wanted to borrow three guineas, for which he would put ample security
into his hand. Tow-wouse, who expected a watch, or ring, or something of double
the value, answered, He believed he could furnish him. Upon which Adams,
pointing to his saddle-bag, told him with a voice and face full of solemnity,
That there were in that bag no less than nine volumes of manuscript sermons, as
well worth a hundred pounds as a shilling was worth twelve pence, and that he
would deposit one of the volumes in his hands by way of pledge; not doubting
but that he would have the honesty to return it on his repayment of the money:
for otherwise he must be a very great loser, seeing that every volume would at
least bring him ten pounds, as he had been informed by a neighboring clergyman
in the country: for, said he, as to my own part, having never yet dealt in
printing, I do not pretend to ascertain the exact value of such things.

Tow-wouse, who was a little surprised at the pawn, said (and not without some
truth) That he was no judge of the price of such kind of goods: and as for
money, he really was very short. Adams answered, Certainly he would not scruple
to lend him three guineas on what was undoubtedly worth at least ten. The
landlord replied, He did not believe he had so much money in the house, and
besides he was to make up a sum. He was very confident the books were of much
higher value, and heartily sorry it did not suit him. He then cried out, coming
Sir! though no body called; and ran down stairs without any fear of breaking
his neck.

Poor Adams was extremely dejected at this disappointment, nor knew he what
farther stratagem to try. He immediately applied to his pipe, his constant
friend and comfort in his afflictions; and leaning over the rails he devoted
himself to meditation, assisted by the inspiring fumes of tobacco.

He had on a nightcap drawn over his wig, and a short great coat, which
half-covered his cassock; a dress which, added to something comical enough in
his countenance, composed a figure likely to attract the eyes of those who were
not ever-given to observation.

Whilst he was smoking his pipe in this posture, a coach and fix, with a
numerous attendance, drove into the inn. There alighted from the coach a young
fellow and a brace of pointers, after which another young fellow leapt from the
box, and shook the former by the hand; and both, together with the dogs, were
instantly conducted by Mr. Tow-wouse into an apartment; whither as they passed,
they entertained themselves with the following short facetious dialogue.

'You are a pretty fellow for a coachman, Jack!' says he from the coach, you
had almost overturned us just now. 'Pox take you,' says the coachman, if I had
only broke your neck, it would have been saving somebody else the trouble: but
I should have been sorry for the pointers. 'Why you son of a b --,' answered
the other, if no body could shoot better than you, the pointers would be of no
use. D -- n me, says the coachman, I will shoot with you, five guineas a shot.
'You be hanged,' says the other, for five guineas you shall shoot at my a --.
'Done,' says the coachman, I Will pepper you better than ever you was peppered by
Jenny Bouncer. 'Pepper your grandmother,' says the other, here is Tow-wouse will
let you shoot at him for a shilling a time. 'I know his honor better,' cries
Tow-wouse, I never saw a surer shoot at a partridge. Every man misses now and
then; but if I could shoot half as well as his honor, I would desire no better
livelihood than I could get by my gun. 'Pox on you,' said the coachman, you
demolish more game now than your head's worth. There Is a bitch, Tow-wouse, by G
-- she never blink'd a bird in her life. I have a puppy not a year old shall
hunt with her for a hundred, cries the other gentleman, 'Done,' says the
coachman, but you will be pox'd before you make the bett. If you have a mind
for a bett, cries the coachman, I will match my spotted dog with your white
bitch for a hundred, play or pay. 'Done,' says the other, and I Will run Baldface
against Slouch with you for another. 'No,' cries he from the box, but I Will
venture Miss Jenny against Baldface or Hannibal either. 'Go to the devil,'
cries he from the coach, I will make every bett your own way, to be sure! I
will match Hannibal with Slouch for a thousand, if you dare, and I say done
first.

They were now arrived, and the reader will be very contented to leave them,
and repair to the kitchen, where Barnabas, the surgeon, and an exciseman were
smoking their pipes over some Cyderand, and where the servants, who attended
the two noble gentlemen we have just seen alight, were now arrived.

'Tom,' cries one of the footmen, there is parson Adams smoking his pipe in the
gallery. 'Yes says Tom, I pulled off my hat to him, and the parson spoke to me.

'Is the gentleman a clergyman then?' says Barnabas, (for his cassock had been
tied up when he first arrived.) 'Yes, Sir,' answered the footman, and one there
is but few like. 'Aye,' said Barnabas, If I had known it sooner, I should have
desired his company; I would always pay a proper respect for the cloth; but
what say you, Doctor, shall we adjourn into a room, and invite him to take part
of a bowl of punch?

This proposal was immediately agreed to, and executed; and parson Adams
accepting the invitation, much civility passed between the two clergymen, who
both declared the great honor they had for the cloth. They had not been long
together, before they entered into a discourse on small tithes, which continued
a full hour, without the doctor o^ exciseman's having one opportunity to offer
a word.

It was then proposed to begin a general conversation, and the exciseman opened
on foreign affairs: but a word unluckily dropping from one of them introduced a
dissertation on the hardships suffered by the inferior clergy; which after a
long duration, concluded with bringing the nine volumes of sermons on the
carpet.

Barnabas greatly discouraged poor Adams; he said, The age was so wicked, that
nobody read sermons: Would you think it, Mr. Adams, (said he) I once intended
to print a volume of sermons myself, and they had the approbation of two or
three bishops: but what do you think a bookseller offered me? 'Twelve guineas
perhaps (cried Adams.') 'Not twelve pence, I assure you,' answered Barnabas;
nay, the dog refused me a Concordance in exchange. -- At last I offered to give
him the printing them for the sake of dedicating them to that very gentleman
who just now drove his own coach into the inn; and I assure you he had the
impudence to refuse my offer: by which means I lost a good living, that was
afterward given away in exchange for a pointer, to one who -- but I will not
say any thing against the cloth. So you may guess, Mr. Adams, what you are to
expect; for if sermons would have gone down, I believe -- I will not be vain:
but to be concise with you, three bishops said, they were the best that ever
were writ: but indeed there are a pretty moderate number printed already, and
not all sold yet. -- 'Pray, Sir,' said Adams, to what do you think the numbers
may amount? 'Sir,' answered Barnabas, a bookseller told me, he believed five
thousand volumes at least. 'Five thousand!' ^uoth the surgeon, what can they be
writ upon? I remember when I was a boy, I used to read one Tillotson's sermons;
and I am sure, if a man practiced half so much as is in one of those sermons,
he will go to heaven. 'Doctor,' cried Barnabas, you have a profane way of
talking, for which I must reprove you. A man can never have his duty too
frequently inculcated into him. And as for Tillotson, to be sure he was a good
writer, and said things very well: but comparisons are odious; another man may
write as well as he -- I believe there are some of my sermons, -- and then he
applied the candle to his pipe -- And I believe there are some of my
discourses, cries Adams, which the bishops would not think totally unworthy of
being printed; and I have been informed, I might procure a very large sum
(indeed an immense one) on them. 'I doubt that,' answered Barnabas, however, if
you desire to make some money of them, perhaps you may sell them by advertising
the manuscript sermons, of a clergyman lately deceased, all warranted
originals, and never printed. And now I think of it, I should be obliged to
you, if there be ever a funeral one among them, to lend it me: for I am this
very day to preach a funeral sermon; for which I have not penned a line, though
I am to have a double price. Adams answered, He had but one, which he feared
would not serve his purpose, being sacred to the memory of a magistrate, who
had exerted himself very singularly in the preservation of the morality of his
neighbors, insomuch that he had neither alehouse, nor lewd woman in the
parish where he lived. -- 'No,' replied Barnabas, that will not do quite so
well; for the deceased upon whose virtues I am to harangue, was a little too
much addicted to liquor, and publicly kept a mistress I believe I must take a
common sermon, (...) to my memory to introduce something handsome on him. --
'To your invention rather,' (said the doctor) your memory will be apter to put
you out: for no man living remembers any thing good of him.

With such kind of spiritual discourse, they emptied the bowl of punch, paid
their reckoning, and separated: Adams and the doctor went up to Joseph, parson
Barnabas departed to celebrate the aforesaid deceased, and the exciseman
descended into the cellar to gauge the vessels.

Joseph was now ready to sit down to a loin of mutton, and waited for Mr.
Adams, when he and the doctor came in. The doctor having felt his pulse, and
examined his wounds, declared him much better, which he imputed to that
sanative soporiferous draught, a medicine, 'whose virtues,' he said, 'were
never to be sufficiently extolled.' And great indeed they must be, if Joseph
was so much indebted to them as the doctor imagined; since nothing more than
those effluvia, which escaped the cork, could have contributed to his recovery:
for the medicine had stood untouched in the window ever since his arrival.

Joseph passed that day and the three following with his friend Adams, in which
nothing so remarkable happened as the swift progress of his recovery. As he had
an excellent habit of body, his wounds were now almost healed; and his bruises
gave him so little uneasiness, that he pressed Mr. Adams to let him depart,
told him he should never be able to return sufficient thanks for all his
favors; but begged that he might no longer delay his journey to London.

Adams, notwithstanding the ignorance, as he (...) it, of Mr. Tow-wouse, and
the envy (for such he thought it) of Mr. Barnabas, had great expectations from
his sermons: seeing therefore Joseph in so good a way, he told him he would
agree to his setting out the next morning in the stage-coach, that he believed
he should have sufficient, after the reckoning paid, to procure him one day's
conveyance in it, and afterward he would be able to get on, on foot, or might
be favored with a lift in some neighbor's wagon, especially as there was
then to be a fair in the town whither the coach would carry him, to which
numbers from his parish resorted -- And as to himself, he agreed to proceed to
the great city.

They were now walking in the inn-yard, when a fat, fair, short person rode in,
and alighting from his horse, went directly up to Barnabas, who was smoking
his pipe on a bench. The parson and the stranger shook one another very
lovingly by the hand, and went into a room together.

The evening now coming on, Joseph retired to his chamber, whither the good
Adams accompanied him; and took this opportunity to expatiate on the great
mercies God had lately shown him, of which he ought not only to have the
deepest inward sense; but likewise to express outward thankfulness for them.
They therefore fell both on their knees, and spent a considerable time in
prayer and thanksgiving.

They had just finished, when Betty came in and told Mr. Adams, Mr. Barnabas
desired to speak to him on some business of consequence below stairs. Joseph
desired, if it was likely to detain him long, he would let him know it, that he
might go to bed, which Adams promised, and in that case they wished one another
good night.

CHAP. XVII.
A pleasant discourse between the two parsons and the bookseller, which was
broke off by an unlucky accident happening in the inn, which produced a
dialogue between Mrs. Tow-wouse and her maid, of no gentle kind.

AS soon as Adams came into the room, Mr. Barnabas introduced him (...) the
stranger, who was, he told him, a bookseller, and would be as likely to deal
with him for his sermons as any man whatever. Adams saluted the stranger,
answered Barnabas, that he was very much obliged to him; that nothing could be
more convenient; for he had no other business to the great city, and was
heartily desirous of returning with the young man who was just recovered of his
misfortune. He then snapt his fingers (as was usual with him) and took two or
three turns about the room in an ecstasy. -- And to induce the bookseller to be
as expeditious as possible, as likewise to offer him a better price for his
commodity, he assured him their meeting was extremely lucky to himself: for
that he had the most pressing occasion for money at that time, his own being
almost spent, and having a friend then in the same inn who was just recovered
from some wounds he had received from robbers, and was in a most indigent
condition; 'So that nothing,' says he, could be so opportune, for the supplying
both our necessities, as my making an immediate bargain with you.

As soon as he had seated himself, the stranger began in these words; Sir, I do
not care absolutely to deny engaging in what my friend Mr. Barnabas recommends:
but sermons are mere drugs. The trade is so vastly stocked with them, that
really unless they come out with the name of Whitfield or Westley, or some
other such great man, as a bishop, or those sort of people, I don't care to
touch, unless now i^ was a sermon preached on the 30th of January, or we could
say in the title page, published at the earnest request of the congregation, or
the inhabitants: but truly for a dry piece of sermons, I had rather be excused;
especially, as my hands are so full at present. However, Sir, as Mr. Barnabas
mentioned them to me, I will, if you please take the manuscript with me to
town, and send you my opinion of it in a very short time.

'O,' said Adams, if you desire it, I will read two or three discourses as a
specimen. This Barnabas, who loved sermons no better than a grocer does figs,
immediately objected to, and advised Adams to let the bookseller have his
sermons; telling him, if he gave him a direction, he might be certain of a
speedy answer: adding, he need not scruple trusting them in his possession.
'No,' said the bookseller, if it was a play that had been acted twenty nights
together, I believe it would be safe.

Adams did not at all relish the last expression; he said, he was sorry to hear
sermons compared to plays. 'Not by me, I assure you, cried the bookseller, though
I don't know whether the licensing act may not shortly bring them on the same
footing: but I have formerly known a hundred guineas given for a play. -- More
shame for those who gave it, cried Barnabas. 'Why so?' said the bookseller,
'for they got hundreds by it.' But is there no difference between conveying
good or ill instructions to mankind? said Adams; would not an honest mind
rather lose money by the one, than gain it by the other? If you can find any
such, I will not be their hindrance, answered the bookseller; but I think those
persons who get by preaching sermons, are the properest to lose by printing
them: for my part, the copy that sells best, will be always the best copy in my
opinion; I am no enemy to sermons but because they don't sell: for I would as
soon print one of Whitfield's, as any farce whatever.

Whoever prints such heterodox stuff ought to be hanged, says Barnabas. 'Sir,'
said he, turning to Adams, this fellow's writings (I know not whether you have
seen them) are leveled at the clergy. He would reduce us to the example of the
primitive ages, forsooth! and would insinuate to the people that a clergyman
ought to be always preaching and praying. He pretends to understand the
scripture literally, and would make mankind believe, that the poverty and low
estate which was recommended to the church in it is infancy, and was only
temporary doctrine adapted to her under persecution, was to be preserved in her
flourishing and established state. Sir, the principles of Toland, Woolston, and
all the free-thinkers, are not calculated to do half the mischief, as those
professed by this fellow and his followers.

Sir, answered Adams, if Mr. Whitefield had carried his doctrine no farther
than you mention, I should have remained, as I once was, his wellwisher. I am
myself as great an enemy to the luxury and splendour of the clergy as he can be.
I do not, more than he, by the flourishing estate of the church, understand the
palaces, equipages, furniture, rich dainties, and vast fortunes of her
ministers. Surely those things, which favor so strongly of this world, become
not the servants of one who professes his kingdom was not of it: but when he
began to call nonsense and enthusiasm to his aid, and set up the detestable
doctrine of faith against good works, I was his friend no longer; for surely,
that doctrine was coined in hell, and one would think none but the devil
himself could have the impudence to preach it. For can any thing be more
derogatory to the honor of God, than for men to imagine that the all-wise
Being will hereafter say to the good and virtuous, "notwithstanding the purity
of thy life, notwithstanding that constant rule of virtue and goodness in which
you walked upon earth, still as thou did not believe every thing in the true
orthodox manner, thy want of faith shall condemn thee?" Or on the other side,
can any doctrine have a more pernicious influence on society, than a
persuasion, that it will be a good plea for the villain at the last day; "Lord,
it is true, I never obeyed one of thy commands, yet punish me not, for I
believe them all?" 'I suppose, Sir,' said the bookseller, your sermons are of a
different kind. 'Ay, Sir,' said Adams, the contrary, I thank heaven, is
inculcated in almost every page, or I should belly my own opinion, which has
always been, that a virtuous and good Turk, or heathen, are more acceptable in
the sight of their Creator, than a vicious and wicked Christian, though his faith
was as perfectly orthodox as St. Paul's himself. -- I wish you success, says
the bookseller, but must beg to be excused, as my hands are so very full at
present; and indeed I am afraid, you will find a backwardness in the trade, to
engage in a book which the clergy would be certain to cry down. 'God forbid,'
says Adams, any books should he propagated which the clergy would cry down: but
if you mean by the clergy, some few designing factious men, who have it at
heart to establish some favorite schemes at the price of the liberty of
mankind, and the very essence of religion, it is not in their power to decry
any book they please; witness that excellent book called, "A plain account of
the nature and end of the Sacrament;" a book written (if I may venture on the
expression) with the pen of an angel, and calculated to restore the true use of
Christianity, and of that sacred institution; for what could tend more to the
noble purposes of religion, than frequent cheerful meetings among the members
of a society, in which they should, in the presence of one another, and in the
service of the Supreme Being, make promises of being good, friendly, and
benevolent to each other? Now this excellent book was attacked by a party, but
unsuccessfully.

At these words Barnabas fell a ringing with all the violence imaginable; upon
which a servant attending, he bid him, bring a bill immediately: for that he
was in company, for aught he knew, with the devil himself; and he expected to
hear the Alcoran, the Leviathan, or Woolston commended, if he staid a few
minutes longer. Adams desired, as he was so much moved at his mentioning a
book, which he did without apprehending any possibility of offense, that he
would be so kind to propose any objections he had to it, which he would
endeavor to answer. 'I propose objections!' said Barnabas, I never read a
syllable in any such wicked book; I never saw it in my life, I assure you. --
Adams was going to answer, when a most hideous uproar began in the inn. Mrs.
Tow-wouse, Mr. Tow-wouse, and Betty, all lifting up their voices together: but
Mrs. Tow-wouse's voice, like a bass viol in a concert, was clearly and
distinctly distinguished among the rest, and was heard to articulate the
following sounds, -- O you damned villain, is this the return to all the care I
have taken of your family? This the reward of my virtue? Is this the manner in
which you behave to one who brought you a fortune, and preferred you to so many
matches, all your betters? To abuse my bed, my own bed, with my own servant:
but I Will maul the slut, I Will tear her nasty eyes out: was ever such a pitiful
dog, to take up with such a mean trollop? If she had been a gentlewoman like
myself, it had been some excuse; but a beggarly saucy dirty servant-maid. --
Get you out of my house, you whore. To which she added another name, which we
do not care to stain our paper with. It was a monosyllable beginning with a b
--, and indeed was the same, as if she had pronounced the words, She-Dog. Which
term we shall, to avoid offense, use on this occasion, though, indeed, both the
mistress and maid uttered the abovementioned b --, a word extremely disgustful
to females of the lower sort. Betty had borne all hitherto with patience, and
had uttered only lamentations: but the last appellation stung her to the quick.
I am a woman as well as yourself, she roared out, and no she-dog, and if I have
been a little naughty, I am not the first; if I have been no better than I
should be, cries she sobbing, that is no reason you should call me out of my
name; my be-betters are wo-rse than me. 'Huzzy, huzzy,' says Mrs. Tow-wouse,
have you the impudence to answer me? Did I not catch you, you fancy -- and then
again repeated the terrible word so odious to female ears. 'I cannot bear that
name,' answered Betty, if I have been wicked, I am to answer for it myself in
the other world; but I have done nothing that is unnatural; and I will go out of
your house this moment: for I will never be called She-Dog by any mistress in
England. Mrs. Tow-wouse then armed herself with the spit, but was prevented
from executing any dreadful purpose by Mr. Adams, who confined her arms with
the strength of a wrist which Hercules would not have been ashamed of. Mr.
Towwouse being caught, as our lawyers express it, with the manner, and having
no defense to make, very prudently withdrew himself, and Betty committed
herself to the protection of the hostler, who, though she could not conceive him
pleased with what had happened, was, in her opinion, rather a gentler beast
than her mistress.

Mrs. Tow-wouse, at the intercession of Mr. Adams, and finding the enemy
vanished, began to compose herself, and at length recovered the usual serenity
of her temper, in which we will leave her, ^o open to the reader the steps
which led to a catastrophe common enough and comical enough too, perhaps in
modern history, yet often fatal to the repose and well-being of families, and
the subject of many tragedies, both in life and on the stage.

CHAP. XVIII.
The history of Betty the chambermaid, and an account of what occasioned the
violent scene in the preceding chapter.

BETTY, who was the occasion of all this hurry, had some good qualities. She
had goodnature, generosity, and compassion, but unfortunately her constitution
was composed of those warm ingredients, which, though the purity of courts or
nunneries might have happily controuled them, were by no means able to endure
the ticklish situation of a chambermaid at an inn, who is daily liable to the
solicitations of lovers of all complexions, to the dangerous addresses of fine
gentlemen of the army, who sometimes are obliged to reside with them a whole
year together; and above all are exposed to the caresses of footmen,
stage-coachmen, and drawers; all of whom employ the whole artillery of kissing,
flattering, bribing, and every other weapon which is to be found in the whole
armoury of love, against them.

Betty, who was but one and twenty, had now lived three years in this dangerous
situation, during which she had escaped pretty well. An ensign of foot was the
first person who made an impression on her heart; he did indeed raise a flame
in her, which required the care of a surgeon to cool.

While she burnt for him, several others burnt for her. Officers of the army,
young gentlemen traveling the western circuit, inoffensive squires, and some
of graver character were set afire by her charms!

At length, having perfectly recovered the effects of her first unhappy
passion, she seemed to have vowed a state of perpetual ch^^^ity. She was long
deaf to all the sufferings of her lovers, till one day, at a neighboring fair,
the rhetoric of John the hostler, with a new straw hat, and a pint of wine,
made a second conquest over her.

She did not, however, feel any of those flames on this occasion, which had
been the consequence of her former amor; nor indeed those other ill effects,
which prudent young women very justly apprehend from too absolute an indulgence
to the pressing endearments of their lovers. This latter, perhaps, was a little
owing to her not being entirely constant to John, with whom she permitted Tom
Whipwell the stage-coachman, and now and then a handsome young traveller, to
share her favors.

Mr. Tow-wouse had for some time cast the languishing eyes of affection on this
young maiden. He had laid hold on every opportunity of saying tender things, to
her, squeezing her by the hand, and sometimes kissing her lips: for as the
violence of his passion had considerably abated to Mrs. Towwouse; so like
water, which is stopped from its usual current in one place, it naturally sought
a vent in another. Mrs. Tow-wouse is thought to have perceived this abatement,
and probably it added very little to the natural sweetness of her temper; for
though she was as true to her husband as the dial to the sun, she was rather
more desirous of being shone on, as being more capable of feeling his warmth.

Ever since Joseph's arrival, Betty had conceived an extraordinary liking to
him, which discovered itself more and more, as he grew better and better; till
that fatal evening when, as she was warming his bed, her passion grew to such a
height, and so perfectly mastered both her modesty and her reason, that after
many fruitless hints and fly insinuations, she at last threw down the
warming-pan, and embracing him with great eagerness, swore he was the
handsomest creature she had ever seen.

Joseph in great confusion leapt from her, and told her, he was sorry to see a
young woman cast off all regard to modesty: but she had gone too far to recede,
and grew so very indecent, that Joseph was obliged, contrary to his
inclinations, to use some violence to her, and taking her in his arms, he shut
her out of the room, and locked the door.

How ought man to rejoice, that his chastity is always in his own power, that
if he has sufficient strength of mind, he has always a competent strength of
body to defend himself, and cannot like a poor weak woman, be ravished against
his will.

Betty was in the most violent agitation at this disappointment. Rage and lust
pulled her heart, as with two strings, two different ways; one moment she
thought of stabbing Joseph, the next, of taking him in her arms, and devouring
him with kisses; but the latter passion was far more prevalent. Then she
thought of revenging his refusal on herself: but whilst she was engaged in this
meditation, happily death presented himself to her in so many shapes of
drowning, hanging, poisoning, etc. that her distracted mind could resolve on
none. In this perturbation of spirit, it accidentally occurred to her memory,
that her master's bed was not made; she therefore went directly to his room;
where he happened at that time to be engaged at his bureau. As soon as she saw
him, she attempted to retire, but he called her back, and taking her by the
hand, squeezed her so tenderly, at the same time whispered so many soft things
into her ears, and then pressed her so closely with his kisses, that the
vanquished fair one, whose passions were already raised, and which were not so
whimsically capricious that one man only could lay them, though, perhaps, she
would have rather preferred that one: the vanquished fair-one quietly
submitted, I say, to her master's will, who had just attained the
accomplishment of his bliss, when Mrs. Tow-wouse unexpectedly entered the room,
and caused all that confusion which we have before seen, and which it is not
necessary at present to take any farther notice of: since without the
assistance of a single hint from us, every reader of any speculation, or
experience, though not married himself, may easily conjecture, that it concluded
with the discharge of Betty, the submission of Mr. Tow-wouse, with some things
to be performed on his side by way of gratitude for his wife's goodness of
being reconciled to him, with many hearty promises never to offend any more in
the like manner: and lastly, his quietly and contentedly bearing to be reminded
of his transgressions, as a kind of penance, once or twice a day, during the
residue of his life.

BOOK. II.
CHAP. I.
Of divisions in authors.

THERE are certain mysteries or secrets in all trades from the highest to the
lowest, from that of prime mini^^ring to this of authoring, which are seldom
discovered, unless to members of the same calling. Among those used by us
gentlemen of the latter occupation, I take this of dividing our works into
books and chapters to be none of the least considerable. Now, for want of being
truly acquainted with this secret, common readers imagine, that by this art of
dividing, we mean only to swell our works to a much larger bulk than they would
otherwise be extended to. These several places therefore in our paper, which
are filled with our books and chapters, are understood as so much buckram,
stays, and stay tape in a taylor's bill, serving only to make up the sum total,
commonly found at the bottom of our first page, and of his last.

But in reality the case is otherwise, and in this, as well as in all other
instances, we consult the advantage of our reader, not our own; and indeed many
notable uses arise to him from this method: for first, those little spaces
between our chapters may be looked upon as an inn or resting place, where he
may stop and take a glass, or any other refreshment, as it pleases him. Nay,
our fine readers will, perhaps, be scarce able to travel farther than through
one of them in a day. As to those vacant pages which are placed between our
books, they are to be regarded as those stages, where in long journies the
traveller stays some time to repose himself, and consider of what he has seen
in the parts he has already past through; a consideration which I take the
liberty to recommend a little to the reader; for, however swift his capacity
may be, I would not advise him to travel through these pages too fast: for if he
does, he may probably miss the seeing some curious productions of nature, which
will be observed by the slower and more accurate reader. A volume without any
such places of rest resembles the opening of wilds or seas, which tires the eye
and fatigues the spirit when entered upon.

Secondly, what are the contents prefixed to every chapter, but so many
inscriptions over the gates of inns (to continue the same metaphor) informing
the reader what entertainment he is to expect, which, if he likes not, he may
travel on to the next: for, in biography, as we are not tied down to an exact
concatenation equally with other historians; so a chapter or two (for instance
this I am now writing) may be often passed over without any injury to the
whole. And in these inscriptions I have been as faithful as possible, not
imitating the celebrated Montaigne, who sometimes promises a great deal and
produces nothing at all.

There are, besides these more obvious benefits, several others which our
readers enjoy from this art of dividing; though perhaps most of them too
mysterious to be presently understood by any who are not initiated into the
science of authoring. To mention therefore but one which is most obvious, it
prevents spelling the beauty of a book by turning down its leaves, a method
otherwise necessary to those readers, who, (though they read with great
improvement and advantage) are apt, when they return to their study, after half
an hour's absence, to forget where they left off.

These divisions have the sanction of great antiquity. Homer not only divided
his great work into twenty-four books, (in compliment perhaps to the
twenty-four letters, to which he had very particular obligations) but,
according to the opinion of some very sagacious critics, hawked them all
separately, delivering only one book at a time, (probably by subscription.) He
was the first inventor of the art which has so long lain dormant, of
publishing by numbers, an art now brought to such perfection, that even
dictionaries are divided and exhibited piecemeal to the public; nay, one
bookseller has (to encourage learning and ease the public) contrived to give
them a dictionary in this divided manner, for only fifteen shillings more than
it would have cost entire.

Virgil has given us his poem in twelve books, an argument of his modesty; for
by that doubtless he would insinuate that he pretends to no more than half the
merit of the Greek: for the same reason, our Milton went originally no farther
than ten; 'till being puffed up by the praise of his friends, he put himself on
the same footing with the Roman poet.

I shall not however enter so deep into this matter as some very learned
critics have done, who have with infinite labor and acute discernment
discovered what books are proper for embellishment, and what require simplicity
only, particularly with regard to similies, which I think are now generally
agreed to become any book but the first.

I will dismiss this chapter with the following observation: that it becomes an
author generally to divide a book, as it does a butcher to joint his meat, for
such assistance is of great help to both the reader and the carver. And now
having indulged my self a little, I will endeavor to indulge the curiosity of
my reader, who is no doubt impatient to know what he will find in the
subsequent chapters of this book.

CHAP. II.
A surprising instance of Mr. Adams's short memory, with the unfortunate
consequences which it brought on Joseph.

MR. Adams and Joseph were now ready to depart different ways, when an accident
determined the former to return with his friend, which Tow-wouse, Barnabas, and
the bookseller, had not been able to do. This accident was, that those sermons,
which the parson was traveling to London to publish, were, O my good reader!
left behind; what he had mistaken for them in the saddle-bags being no other
than three shirts, a pair of shoes, and some other necessaries, which Mrs.
Adams, who thought her husband would want shirts more than sermons on his
journey, had carefully provided him.

This discovery was now luckily owing to the presence of Joseph at the opening
the saddle-bags; who having hea^d his friend say, he carried with him nine
volumes of sermons, and not being of that sect of philosophers, who can reduce
all the matter of the world into a nut-shell, seeing there was no room for them
in the bags, where the parson had said they were deposited, had the curiosity
to cry out, Bless me, Sir, where are your sermons? The parson answered. There,
there, child, there they are, under my shirts. Now it happened that he had
taken forth his last shirt, and the vehicle remained visibly empty. 'Sure,
Sir,' says Joseph, there is nothing in the bags. Upon which Adams starting, and
te^^ifying some surprise, cried, Hey! fie, fie upon it; they are not here sure
enough. Ay, they are certainly left behind.

Joseph was greatly concerned at the uneasiness which he apprehended his friend
must feel from this disappointment: he begged him to pursue his journey, and
promised he would himself return with the books to him, with the utmost
expedition. 'No, thank you, child,' answered Adams, it shall not be so. What
would it avail me, to tarry in the great city, unless I had my discourses with
me, which are, ut ita dicum, the sole cause, the aitia (...) of my
peregrination. No, child, as this accident has happened, I am resolved to
return back to my cure, together with you; which indeed my inclination
sufficiently leads me to. This disappointment may perhaps be intended for my
good. He concluded with a verse out of Theocritus, which signifies no more
than, that sometimes it rains, and sometimes the sun shines.

Joseph bowed with obedience and thankfulness for the inclination which the
parson expressed of returning with him; and now the bill was called for, which,
on examination, amounted within a shilling to the sum Mr. Adams had in his
pocket. Perhaps the reader may wonder how he was able to produce a sufficient
sum for so many days: that he may not be surprised therefore, it cannot be
unnecessary to acquaint him, that he had borrowed a guinea of a servant
belonging to the coach and six, who had been formerly one of his parishioners,
and whose master, the owner of the coach, then lived within three miles of him:
for so good was the credit of Mr. Adams, that even Mr. Peter the lady Booby's
steward would have lent him a guinea with very little security.

Mr. Adams discharged the bill, and they were both setting out, having agreed
to ride and tie; a method of traveling much used by persons who have but one
horse between them* and is thus performed. The two travelers set out together,
one on horseback, and the other (...): Now, as it generally happens that he on
horseback outgoes him on foot, the custom is, that when he arrives at the
distance agreed on, he is to dismount, tie the horse to some gate, tree, (...),
or other thing, and then proceed on foot; when the other comes up to the horse,
he unties him, mounts and gallops on, 'till having passed by his
fellow-traveller, he li^ewise arrives at the place of tying. And this is that
method of traveling so much in use among our prudent ancestors, who knew that
horses had mouths as well as legs, and that they could not use the latter,
without being at the expense of suffering the beasts themselves to use the
former. This was the method in use in those days, when, instead of a coach and
six, a member of parliament's lady used to mount a pillion behind her husband;
and a grave sergeant at law condescended to amble to Westminster on an easy
pad, with his clerk kicking his heels behind him.

Adams was now gone some minutes, having insisted on Joseph's beginning the
journey on horseback, and Joseph had his foot in the stirrup, when the hostler
presented him a bill for the horse's board during his residence at the inn.
Joseph said Mr. Adams had paid all; but this matter being referred to Mr.
Tow-wouse, was by him decided in favor of the hostler, and indeed with truth
and justice: for this was a fresh instance of that shortness of memory which
did not arise from want of parts, but that continual hurry in which parson
Adams was always involved.

Joseph was now reduced to a dilemma which extremely puzzled him. The sum due
for horsemeat was twelve shillings, (for Adams, who had borrowed the beast of
his clerk, had ordered him to be fed as well as they could feed him) and the
cash in his pocket amounted to sixpence, (for Adams had divided the last
shilling with him.) Now though there have been some ingenious persons who have
contrived to pay twelve shillings with sixpence, Joseph was not one of them. He
had never contracted a debt in his life, and was consequently the less ready at
an expedient to extricate himself. Tow-wouse was willing to give him credit
'till next time, to which Mrs. Tow-wouse would probably have consented (for
such was Joseph's beauty, that it had made some impression even on that piece
of flint which that good woman wore in her bosom by way of heart.) Joseph would
have found therefore, very likely, the passage free, had he not, when he
honestly discovered the nakedness of his pockets, pulled out that little piece
of gold which we have mentioned before. This caused Mrs. Tow-wouse's eyes to
water; she told Joseph, she did not conceive a man could want money whilst he
had gold in his pocket. Joseph answered, he had such a value for that little
piece of gold, that he would not part with it for a hundred times the riches
which the greatest esquire in the country was worth. A pretty way indeed, said
Mrs. Tow-wouse, to run in debt, and then refuse to part with your money,
because you have a value for it. I never knew any piece of gold of more value
than as many shillings as it would change for. Not to preserve my life from
starving, nor to redeem it from a robber, would I part with this dear piece,
answered Joseph. 'What,' (says Mrs. Tow-wouse) I suppose it was given you by
some vile trollop, some miss or other; if it had been the present of a virtuous
woman, you would not have had such a value for it. My husband is a fool if he
parts with the horse without being paid for him. No, no, I cannot part with the
horse indeed till I have the money, cried Tow-wouse. A resolution highly
commended by a lawyer then in the yard, who declared Mr. Tow-wouse might
justify the detainer.

As we cannot therefore at present get Mr. Joseph out of the inn, we shall
leave him in it, and carry our reader on after parson Adams, who, his mind
being perfectly at ease, fell into a contemplation on a passage in AEschylus,
which entertained him for three miles together, without suffering him once to
reflect on his fellow-traveller.

At length, having spun out his thread, and being now at the summit of a hill,
he cast his eyes backwards, and wondered that he could not (...) any sign of
Joseph. As he left him ready to mount the horse, he could not apprehend any
mischief had happened, neither could he suspect that he missed his way, it
being so broad and plain: the only reason which presented itself to him, was,
that he had met with an acquaintance who had prevailed with him to delay some
time in discourse.

He therefore resolved to proceed slowly forwards, not doubting but that he
should be shortly overtaken and soon came to a large water, which filling the
whole road, he saw no method of passing unless by wading through, which he
accordingly did up to his middle; but was no sooner got on the other side, than
he perceived, if he had looked over the hedge, he would have found a foot-path
capable of conducting him without wetting his (...).

His surprise at Joseph's not coming up grew now very troublesome: he began to
fear he knew not what; and as he determined to move no farther, and if he did
not shortly overtake him, to return back, he wished to find a house of public
entertainment where he might dry (...) clothes, and refresh himself with a
pint: but seeing not such, for no other reason than (...) he did not cast his
eyes a hundred yards forwards he sat himself down on a style, and pulled out
his AEschylus.

A fellow passing presently by, Adams asked him, if he could direct him to an
ale-hou^e. The fellow, who had just left it, and perceived the house and sign
to be within sight, thinking he had jeered him, and being of a morose temper,
bad him f^llow his nose and be^d -- n^d. Adams told him he was a saucy
jackanapes; upon which the fellow turned about angrily: but perceiving Adams
clench his fist, he thought proper to go on without taking any farther notice.

A horseman following immediately after, and being asked the same question,
answered, Friend, there is one within a stone's-throw; I believe you may see it
before you. Adams, lifting up his eyes, cried, I protest and so there is: and,
thanking his informer, proceeded directly to it.

CHAP. III.
The opinion of two lawyers concerning the same gentleman, with Mr. Adams's
enquiry into the religion of his (...).

HE had just entered the house, had called for his pint, and seated himself,
when two horsemen came to the door, and fastening their horses to the rails,
alighted. They said there was a violent shower of rain coming on, which they
intended to weather there, and went into a little room by themselves, not
perceiving Mr. Adams.

One of these immediately asked the other, if he had seen a more comical
adventure a great while? Upon which the other said, he doubted whether by law,
the landlord could justify detaining the horse for his corn and hay. But the
former answered, undoubtedly he can; it is an adjudged case, and I have known
it tried.

Adams, who though he was, as the reader may suspect, a little inclined to
forgetfulness, never wanted more than a hint to remind him, over-hearing their
discourse, immediately suggested to himself that this was his own horse, and
that he had forgot to pay for him, which, upon enquiry, he was certified of by
the gentlemen; who added, that the horse was likely to have more rest than
food, unless he was paid for.

The poor parson resolved to return presently to the inn, though he knew no more
than Joseph, how to procure his horse his liberty: he was however prevailed on
to stay under cover, 'till the shower, which was now very violent, was over.

The three travelers then sat down together over a mug of good beer; when
Adams, who had observed a gentleman's house as he pa^ed along the road,
enquired to whom it belonged: one of the horsemen had no sooner mentioned the
owner's name, than the other began to revile him in the most opprobrio^s terms.
The English language scarce affords a single reproachful word, which he did not
vent on this occasion. He charged him likewise with many particular facts. He
said, -- he no more regarded a field of wheat when he was hunting, than he did
the highway; that he had injured several poor farmers by trampling their corn
under his horse's heels; and if any of them begged him with the utmost
submission to refrain, his horse whip was always ready to do them justice. He
said, that he was the greatest tyrant to the neighbors in every other
instance, and would not suffer a farmer to keep a gun, though he might justify it
by law; and in his own family so cruel a master, that he never kept a servant a
twelvemonth. In his capacity as a justice, continued he, he behaves so
partially, that he commits or acquits just as he is in the humor, without any
regard to truth or evidence: the devil may carry any one before him for me; I
would rather be tried before some judges than be a prosecutor before him: if I
had an estate in the neighborhood* I would sell it for half the value, rather
than live near him.

Adams shook his head, and said, he was sorry such men were suffered to proceed
with impunity, and that riches could set any man above law. The reviler a
little after retiring into the yard, the gentleman who had first mentioned his
name to Adams, began to assure him, that his companion was a prejudiced person.
It is true, says he, perhaps, that he may have sometimes pursued his game over
a field of corn, but he has always made the party ample satisfaction; that so
far from tyrannizing over his neighbors, or taking away their guns, he himself
knew several farmers not qualified, who not only kept guns, but killed game
with them. That he was the best of masters to his servants, and several of them
had grown old in his service. That he was the best justice of peace in the
kingdom, and to his certain knowledge, had decided many difficult points, which
were referred to him, with the greatest equity, and the highest wisdom. And he
verily believed, several persons would give a year's purchase more for an
estate near him, than under the wings of any other great man. He had just
finished his encomium, when his companion returned, and acquainted him the
storm was over. Upon which, they presently mounted their horses and departed.

Adams, who was in the utmost anxiety at those different characters of the same
person, asked his host if he know the gentleman: for he began to imagine they
had by mistake been speaking of two several gentlemen. 'No, no, master!'
answered the host, a shrewd cunning fellow, I know the gentlemen very well of
whom they have been speaking, as I do the gentleman who spoke of him. As for
riding over other men's corn, to my knowledge he has not been on horseback
these two years. I never heard he did any injury of that kind; and as to making
reparation, he is not so free of his money as that comes to neither. Nor did I
ever hear of his taking away any man's gun; nay, I know several who have guns
in their houses: but as for killing game with them, no man is stricter; and I
believe he would ruin any who did. You heard one of the gentlemen say, he was
the worst master in the world, and the other that he is the best: but for my
own part, I know all his servants, and never heard from any of them that he was
either one or the other. -- 'Aye! aye!' says Adams. and how does he behave as a
justice, pray* 'Faith, Friend,' answered the host, I question whether he is in
the commission: the only cause I have heard he has decided a great while, was
one between those very two persons who just went out of this house; and I am
sure he determined that justly, for I heard the whole matter. 'Which did he
decide it in favor of,' quoth Adams? I think I need not answer that question,
cried the host, after the different characters you have heard of him. It is not
my business to contradict gentlemen, while they are drinking in my house; but I
knew neither of them spoke a syllable of truth. 'God forbid!' (said Adams) that
men should arrive at such a pitch of wickedness to belie the character of their
neighbor from a little private affection, or, what is infinitely worse, a
private spite. I rather believe we have mistaken them, and they mean two other
persons: for there are many houses on the road. 'Why prithee, friend,' cries
the host, do thou pretend never to have told a lie in thy life? Never a
malicious one, I am certain, answered Adams; nor with a design to injure the
reputation of any man living. 'Pugh! malicious; no, no,' replied the host; not
malicious with a design to hang a man, or bring him into trouble; but surely
out of love to one's self, one must speak better of a friend than an enemy. Out
of love to yourself! you should confine yourself to truth, says Adams, for by
doing otherwise, you injure the noblest part of yourself, your immortal soul. I
can hardly believe any man such an idiot to risque the loss of that by any
trifling gain, and the greatest gain in this world is but dirt in comparison of
what shall be revealed hereafter. Upon which the host, taking up the cup, with
a smile, drank a health to Hereafter: adding, he was for something present.
'Why,' says Adams very gravely, 'Do not you believe another world?' To which
the host answered, yes, he was no atheist. And you believe you have an immortal
soul, cries Adams. He answered, God forbid he should not. 'And heaven and
hell?' said the parson.' The host then bid him not to profane; for those were
things not to be mentioned nor thought of but in church. Adams asked him, why
he went to church, if what he learned there had no influence on his conduct in
life? 'I go to church,' answered the host, 'to say my prayers and behave
godly.' And do not thou, cried Adams, believe what thou hear at church?
'Most part of it, master,' returned the host. And does not thou then tremble,
cries Adams, at the thought of eternal punishment? 'As for that, master,' said
he, I never once thought about it: but what signifies talking about matters so
far off? The mug is out, shall I draw another?

Whilst he was going for that purpose, a stage-coach drove up to the door. The
coachman coming into the house, was asked by the mistress, what passengers he
had in his coach? A parcel of squinny-gut b -- s, (says he) I have a good mind
to overturn them; you will not prevail upon them to drink any thing, I assure you.
Adams asked him if he had not seen a young man on horseback on the road,
(describing Joseph.) Aye, said the coachman, a gentlewoman in my coach that is
his acquaintance redeemed him and his horse; he would have been here before
this time, had not the storm driven him to shelter. God bless her, said Adams,
in a rapture; nor could he delay walking out to satisfy himself who this
charitable woman was; but what was his surprise, when he saw his old
acquaintance Madam Slipslop? Here Is indeed was not so great, because she had
been informed by Joseph, that he was on the road. Very civil were the
salutations on both sides; and Mrs. Slipslop rebuked the hostess for denying
the gentleman to be there when she asked for him. But indeed the poor woman had
not erred designedly: for Mrs. Slipslop asked for a clergyman; and she had
unhappily mistaken Adams for a person traveling to a neighboring fair with
the thimble and button, or some other such operation: for he marched in a
swinging great, but short, white coat with black buttons, a short wig, and a
hat, which so far from having a black hatband, had nothing black about it.

Joseph was now come up, and Mrs. Slipslop would have had him quit his horse to
the parson and come himself into the coach: but he absolutely refused, saving,
he thanked heaven he was well enough recovered (...) be very able to ride, and
added, he hoped he knew his duty better than to ride in a coach, while Mr.
Adams was on horseback.

Mrs. Slipslop would have persisted longer, had not a ^^dy in the coach put a
short end to the dispute, by refusing to suffer a f^llow in a livery to ride in
the same coach with herself: so it was at length agreed that Adams should fill
the vacant place in the coach, and Joseph should proceed on horseback.

They had not proceeded far before Mrs. Slipslop addressing herself to the
parson, spoke thus: There has been a strange alteration in our family, Mr.
Adams, since Sir Thomas's death. A strange alteration indeed! says Adams, as I
gather from some hints which have dropped from Joseph. 'Aye,' says she, I could
never have believed it, but the longer one lives in the world, the more one
sees. So Joseph has given you hints. -- But of what nature will always remain
a perfect secret with me, cries the parson; he forced me to promise before he
would communicate any thing. I am indeed concerned to find her ladyship behave
in so unbecoming a manner. I always thought her in the main a good lady, and
should never have suspected her of thoughts so unworthy a Christian, and with a
young lad her own servant. 'These things are no secrets to me, I assure you,'
cries Slipslop; and I believe they will be none any where shortly: for ever
since the boy's departure, she has behaved more like a mad-woman than any
thing else. Truly, I am heartily concerned, says Adams, for she was a good sort
of a lady; indeed I have often wished she had attended a little more constantly
at the service, but she has done a great deal of good in the parish. 'O Mr.
Adams!' says Slipslop, people that don't see all, often know nothing. Many
things have been given away in our family, I do assure you, without her
knowledge. I have heard you say in the pulpit we ought not to brag: but indeed
I cannot avoid saying, i^ she had kept the keys herself, the poor would have
wanted many a cordial which I have let them have. As for my late master, he was
as worthy a man as ever lived, and would have done infinite good if he had not
been controlled: but he loved a quiet life, heavens rest his soul! I am
confident he is there, and enjoys a quiet life, which some folks would not
allow him here. Adams answered, 'he had never heard this before, and was
mistaken, if she herself,' (for he remembered she used to commend her mistress
and blame her master) 'had not formerly been of another opinion.' 'I don't
know,' replied she, what I might once think: but now I am confidious matters
are as I tell you: the world will shortly see who has been deceived: for my
part I say nothing, but that it is wondersome how people can carry all things
with a grave face.

Thus Mr. Adams and she discoursed, 'till they came opposite to a great house
which stood at some distance from the road; a lady in the coach spying it,
cried, Yonder lives the unfortunate Leonora, if one can call a woman
unfortunate whom we must own at the same time guilty, and the author of her own
calamity. This was abundantly sufficient to awaken the curiosity of Mr. Adams,
as indeed it did that of the whole company, who jointly solicited the lady to
acquaint them with Leonora's history, since it seemed, by what she had said, to
contain something remarkable.

The lady, who was perfectly well bred, did not require many entreaties, and
having only wished their entertainment might make amends for the company's
attention, she began in the following manner.

CHAP. IV.
The history of Leonora, or the unfortunate jilt.

LEONORA was the daughter of a gentleman of fortune; she was tall and
well-shaped, with a sprightliness in her countenance, which often attracts
beyond more regular features joined with an insipid air; nor is this kind of
beauty less apt to deceive than allure the good humor which it indicates,
being often mistaken for goodnature, and the vivacity for true understanding.

Leonora, who was now at the age of eighteen, lived with an aunt of here is in a
town in the north of England. She was an extreme lover of gaiety; and very
rarely missed a ball, or any other public assembly; where she had frequently
opportunities of satisfying a greedy appetite of vanity with the preference
which was given her by the men to almost every other woman present.

Among many young fellows who were particular in their gallantries toward her,
Horatio soon distinguished himself in her eyes beyond all his competitors; she
danced with more than ordinary gaiety when he happened to be her partner;
neither the fairness of the evening nor the music of the nightingale, could
lengthen her walk like his company. She affected no longer to understand the
civilities of others: whilst she inclined so attentive an air to every
compliment of Horatio, that she often smiled even when it was too delicate for
her comprehension.

'Pray, Madam,' says Adams, 'who was this squire Horatio?'

Horatio, says the lady, was a young gentleman of (...) a good family bred to
the law, and had been some few years called to the degree of a barrister. His
face and person were such as the generality allowed handsome: but he had a
dignity in his air very rarely to be seen. His temper was of the saturnine
complexion, and without the least taint of moroseness. He had wit and humor,
with an inclination to satire, which he indulged rather too much.

This gentleman, who had contracted the most violent passion for Leonora, was
the last person who perceived the probability of its success. The whole town
had made the match for him, before he himself had drawn a confidence from her
actions sufficient to mention his passion to her; for it was his opinion, and
perhaps he was there in the right) that it is highly impoli^^ck to talk
seriously of love to a woman before you have made such a progress in her
affections, that she herself expects and desires to hear it.

But whatever diffidence the fears of a lover may create, which are apt to
magnify every favor conferred on a rival, and to see the little advances
toward themselves through the other end of the perspective; it was impossible
that Horatio's passion should so blind his discernment, as to prevent his
conceiving hopes from the behavior of Leonora, whose fondness for him was now
as visible to an indifferent person in their company, as his for her.

I never knew any of these forward sluts come to good, (says the lady, who
refused Joseph's entrance into the coach) nor shall I wonder at any thing she
does in the sequel.

The lady proceeded in her story thus: it was in the midst of a gay
conversation in the walks one evening, when Horatio whispered Leonora, that he
was desirous to take a turn or two with her in private; for that he had
something to communicate to her of great consequence. Are you sure it is of
consequence? said she smiling -- I hope, answered he, you will think so too,
since the whole future happiness of my life must depend on the event.

Leonora, who very much suspected what was coming, would have deferred it till
another time: but Horatio, who had more than half conquered the difficulty of
speaking, by the first motion, was so very importunate, that she at last
yielded, and leaving the rest of the company, they turned aside into an
unfrequented walk.

They had retired far out of the sight of the company, both maintaining a
strict silence. At last Horatio made a full stop, and taking Leonora, who stood
pale and trembling, gently by the hand, he fetched a deep sigh, and then
looking on her eyes with all the tenderness imaginable, he cried out in a
faltering accent; O Leonora! it is necessary for me to declare to you on what
the future happiness of my life must be founded! Must I say, there is something
belonging to you which is a bar to my happiness, and which unless you will part
with, I must be miserable? What can that be, replied Leonora? -- 'No wonder,'
said he, you are surprised that I should make an objection to any thing which
is yours, yet sure you may guess, since it is the only one which the riches of
the world, if they were mine, should purchase of me -- Oh it is that which you
must part with, to bestow all the rest! Can Leonora, or rather will she, doubt
longer? -- Let me then whisper it in her ears, -- It is your name, Madam. It is
by parting with that, by your condescension to be for ever mine, which must at
once prevent me from being the most miserable, and will render me the happiest
of mankind.

Leonora, covered with blushes, and with as angry a look as she could possibly
put on, told him, that had she suspected what his declaration would have been,
he should not have decoyed her from her company; that he had so surprised and
frighted her, that she begged him to convey her back as quick as possible;
which he, trembling very near as much as herself, did.

More fool he, cried Slipslop, it is a sign he knew very little of our sect.
'Truly, madam,' said Adams, I think you are in the right, I should have
insisted to know a piece of her mind, when I had carried matters so far. But
Mrs. Graveairs desired the lady to omit all such fulsome stuff in her story;
for that it made her sick.

Well then, Madam, to be as concise as possible, said the lady, many weeks had
not passed after this interview, before Horatio and Leonora were what they call
on a good footing together. All ceremonies except the last were now over: the
writings were now drawn, and every thing was in the utmost forwardness
preparative to the putting Horatio in possession of all his wishes. I will, if
you please, repeat you a letter from each of them which I have got by heart,
and which will give you no small idea of their passion on both sides.

Mrs. Grave-airs objected to hearing these letters: but being put to the vote,
it was carried against her by all the rest in the coach; parson Adams
contending for it with the utmost vehemence.

HORATIO to LEONORA.
HOW vain, most adorable creature, is the pursuit of pleasure in the absence of
an object to which the mind is entirely devoted, unless it have some relation
to that object! I was last night condemned to the society of men of wit and
learning, which, however agreeable it might have formerly been to me, now only
gave me a suspicion that they imputed my absence in conversation to the true
cause. For which reason, when your engagements forbad me the extatic happiness
of seeing you, I am always desirous to be alone; since my sentiments for
Leonora are so delicate, that I cannot (...) the apprehension of another's
prying into those delightful endearments with which the warm imagination of a
lover will sometimes indulge him, and which I suspect my eyes then betray. To
fear this discovery of our thoughts, may perhaps appear too ridiculous a nicety
to minds not susceptible of all the tendernesses of this delicate passion. And
surely we shall suspect there are few such, when we consider that it requires
every human virtue, to exert itself in its full extent. Since the beloved,
whose happiness it ultimately respects, may give us charming opportunities of
being brave in her defense, generous to her wants, compassionate to her
afflictions, grateful to her kindness; and, in the same manner, of exercising
every other virtue, which he who would not do to any degree, and that with the
utmost rapture, can never deserve the name of a lover: It is therefore with the
view to the delicate modesty of your mind that I cultivate is so purely in my
own; and it is that which will sufficiently suggest to you the uneasiness I
bear from those liberties, which men, to whom the world allow politeness, will
sometimes give themselves on these occasions.

Can I tell you with what eagerness I expect the arrival of that blessed day,
when I shall experience the falsehood of a common assertion, that the greatest
human happiness consists in hope? A doctrine which no person had ever stronger
reason to believe than myself at present, since none ever tasted such bliss as
fires my bosom with the thoughts of spending my future days with such a
companion, and that every action of my life will have the glorious satisfaction
of conducing to your happiness.


This letter was written by a young lady on reading the former.
LEONORA to HORATIO.
THE refinement of your mind has been so evidently proved by every word and
action ever since I had first the pleasure of knowing you, that I thought it
impossible my good opinion of Horatio could have been heightened to any
additional proof of merit. This very thought was my amusement when I received
your last letter, which, when I opened, I confess I was surprised to find the
delicate sentiments expressed there, so far exceeded what I thought could come
even from you, although I know all the generous principles human nature is
capable of, are centered in your breast, that words cannot paint what I feel on
the reflection, that my happiness shall be the ultimate end of all your actions.

Oh Horatio! what a life must that be, where the meanest domestic cares are
sweetened by the pleasing consideration, that the man on earth who best
deserves, and to whom you are most inclined to give your affections, is to reap
either profit or pleasure from all you do! In such a case toils must be turned
into diversions, and nothing but the unavoidable inconveniences of life can
make us remember that we are mortal.

If the solitary turn of your thoughts, and the desire of keeping them
undiscovered, makes even the conversation of men of wit an learning tedious to
you, what anxious hours must I spend who am condemned by custom to the
conversation of women, whose natural curiosity leads them to pry into all my
thoughts, and whose envy can never suffer Horatio's heart to be possessed by
any one without forcing them into malicious designs against the person who is
so happy as to possess it: but indeed, if ever envy can possibly have any
excuse, or even alleviation, it is in this case, where the good is so great,
and it must be equally natural to all to wish it for themselves, nor am I
ashamed to own it: and to your merit, Horatio, I am obliged, that prevents my
being in that most uneasy of all the situations I can figure in my imagination,
of being led by inclination to love the person whom my own judgment forces me
to condemn.


Matters were in so great forwardness between this fond couple, that the day
was fixed for their marriage, and was now within a fortnight, when the sessions
chanced to be held for that county in a town about twenty miles distance from
that which is the scene of our story. It seems it is usual for the young
gentlemen of the bar to repair to these sessions, not so much for the sake of
profit, as to show their parts, and learn the law of the justices of peace: for
which purpose one of the wisest and gravest of all the justices is appointed
speaker or chairman, as they modestly call it, and he reads them a lecture, and
instructs them in the true knowledge of the law.

You are here guilty of a little mistake, says Adams, which, if you please, I
will correct; I have attended at one of these quarter sessions, where I
observed the counsel taught the justices, instead of learning any thing of
them.

It is not very material, said the lady. Hither repaired Horatio, who as he
hoped by his profession to advance his fortune, which was not at present very
large, for the sake of his dear Leonora, he resolved to spare no pains, nor
lose any opportunity of improving or advancing himself in it.

The same afternoon in which he left the town, as Leonora stood at her window,
a coach and six passed by: which she declared to be the compleatest,
genteelest, prettiest equipage she ever saw; adding these remarkable words, O I
am in love with that equipage! which, though her friend Florella at that time did
not greatly regard, she has since remembered.

In the evening an assembly was held, which Leonora honored with her company:
but intended to pay her dear Horatio the compliment of refusing to dance in his
absence.

O why have not women as good resolution to maintain their vows, as they have
often good inclinations in making them!

The gentleman who owned the coach and six came to the assembly. His clothes
were as remarkably fine as his equipage could be. He soon attracted the eyes of
the company; all the smarts, all the silk waistcoats with silver and gold
edgings, were eclipsed in an instant.

Madam, said Adams, if it be not impertinent, I should be glad to know how this
gentleman was dressed.

Sir, answered the lady, I have been told he had on a cut-velvet coat of a
cinnamon color, lined with a pink satin, embroidered all over with gold: his
waistcoat, which was cloth of silver, was em-broidered with gold likewise. I
cannot be particular as to the rest of his dress: but it was all in the French
fashion; for Bellarmine (that was his name) was just arrived from Paris.

This fine figure did not more engage the eyes of every lady in the assembly,
than Leonora did his. He had scarce beheld her, but he stood motionless and
fixed as a statue, or at least would have done so, if good breeding had
permitted him. However, he carried it so far, before he had power to correct
himself, that every person in the room easily discovered where his admiration
was settled. The other ladies began to single out their former partners, all
perceiving who would be Bellarmine's choice; which they however endeavored, by
all possible means, to prevent: Many of them saying to Leonora, O, Madam, I
suppose we shall not have the pleasure of seeing you dance tonight; and then
crying out, in Bellarmine's hearing, O Leonora will not dance, I assure you;
her partner is not here. One maliciously attempted to prevent her, by sending a
disagreeable fellow to ask her, that so she might be obliged either to dance
with him, or sit down: but this scheme proved abortive.

Leonora saw herself admired by the fine stranger, and envied by every woman
present. Her little heart began to flutter within her, and her head was
agitated with a convulsive motion; she seemed as if she would speak to several
of her acquaintance, but had nothing to say: for as she would not mention her
present triumph; so she could not disengage her thoughts one moment from the
contemplation of it: she had never tasted any thing like this happiness. She
had before known what it was to torment a single woman; but to be hated and
secretly cursed by a whole assembly, was a joy reserved for this blessed
moment. As this vast profusion of ecstacy had confounded her unsterstanding; so
there was nothing so foolish as her behavior; she played a thousand childish
tricks, distorted her person into several shapes, and her face into several
laughs, without any reason. In a word, her carriage was as absurd as her
desires, which were, to affect an insensibility of the stranger's admiration,
and at that same time a triumph, from that admiration, over every woman in the
room.

In this temper of mind, Bellarmine, having enquired who she was, advanced to
her, and with a low bow begged the honor of dancing with her, which she with a
low curt'sy immediately granted. She danced with him all night, and enjoyed
perhaps the highest pleasure that she was capable of feeling.

At these words Adams fetched a deep groan, which frighted the ladies, who told
him, they hoped he was not ill. He answered he groaned only for the folly of
Leonora.

Leonora retired (continued the lady) about six in the morning, but not to
rest. She tumbled and tossed in her bed, with very short intervals of sleep,
and those entirely filled with dreams of the equipage, and fine clothes she had
seen, and the balls, operas, and ridottos, which had been the subject of their
conversation.

In the afternoon, Bellarmine, in the dear coach and ^ix, came to wait on her.
He was indeed charmed with her person, and was, on enquiry, so well pleased
with the circumstances of her father (for he himself, notwithstanding all his
finery, was not quite so rich as Croesus or an Attalus) 'Attalus,' says Mr.
Adams: but pray how came you acquainted with these names? The lady smiled at
the question and proceeded -- He was so pleased I say, that he resolved to make
his addresses to her directly. He did so accordingly, and that with so much
warmth and briskness, that he quickly baffled her weak repulses, and obliged
the lady to refer him to her father, who, she knew, would quickly declare in
favor of a coach and six.

Thus, what Horatio had by sighs and tears, love and tenderness, been so long
obtaining, the French-English Bellarmine with gaiety and gallantry possessed
himself of in an instant. In other words, what modesty had employed a full year
in raising, impudence demolished in twenty-four hours.

Here Adams groaned a second time; but the ladies, who began to smoke him, took
no notice.

From the opening of the assembly till the end of Bellarmine's visit, Leonora
had scarce once thought of Horatio; but he now began, though an unwelcome
guest, to enter into her mind. She wished she had seen the charming Bellarmine
and his charming equipage, before matters had gone so far. Yet why (says she)
should I wish to have seen him before; or what signifies it that I have seen
him now? Is not Horatio my lover? almost my husband? Is he not as handsome, nay
handsomer, than Bellarmine? Aye, but Bellarmine is the genteeler and the finer
man; yes, that he must be allowed. Yes, yes, he is that certainly. But did not
I no longer than yesterday love Horatio more than all the world? Aye, but
yesterday I had not seen Bellarmine. But does not Horatio dote on me, and may
he not in despair break his heart if I abandon him? Well, and has not
Bellarmine a heart to break too? Yes, but I promised Horatio first; but that
was poor Bellarmine's misfortune; if I had seen him first, I should certainly
have preferred him. Did not the dear creature prefer me to every woman in the
assembly, when every She was laying out for him? When was it in Horatio's power
to give me such an instance of affection? Can he give me an equipage, or any of
those things which Bellarmine will make me mistress of? How vast is the
difference between being the wife of a poor counselor, and the wife of one of
Bellarmine's fortune! If I marry Horatio, I shall triumph over no more than one
rival: but by marrying Bellarmine, I shall be the envy of all my acquaintance.
What happiness! -- (...) can I suffer Horatio to die? for he has sworn he
cannot survive my loss: but perhaps he may not die; if he should, can I prevent
it? Must I sacrifice myself to him? besides, Bellarmine may be as miserable for
me too. She was thus arguing with herself, when some young ladies called her to
the walks, and a little relieved her anxiety for the present.

The next morning Bellarmine breakfasted with her in presence of her aunt, whom
her sufficiently informed of his passion for Leonora: he was no sooner
withdrawn, than the old lady began to advise her niece on this occasion -- You
see, child, (says she) what fortune has thrown in your way; and I hope you
will not withstand your own preferment. Leonora sighing, begged her not to
mention any such thing, when she knew her engagements to Horatio. 'Engagements
to a fig,' cried the aunt; you should thank heaven on your knees, that you have
it yet in your power to break them. Will any woman hesitate a moment, whether
she shall ride in a coach, or walk on foot all the days of her life? -- But
Bellarmine drives six, and Horatio not even a pair. 'Yes,' but, Madam, what
will the world say? answered Leonora; 'will not they condemn me?' The world is
always on the side of prudence, cries the aunt, and would surely condemn you,
if you sacrificed your interest to any motive whatever. O, I know the world
very well: and you show your ignorance, my dear, by your objection. OF my
conscience! the world is wiser. I have lived longer in it than you; and I
assure you there is not any thing worth our regard besides money: nor did I
ever know any one person who married from other considerations, who did not
afterward heartily repent it. Besides, if we examine the two men, can you
prefer a sneaking fellow, who has been bred at the university, to a fine
gentleman just come from his travels? -- All the world must allow Bellarmine to
be a fine gentleman, positively a fine gentleman and a handsome man. --
Perhaps, Madam, I should not doubt it if I knew not how to be handsomely off
with the other. O leave that to me, says the aunt. You know your father has
not been acquainted with the affair. Indeed, for my part, I thought it might do
well enough, not dreaming of such an offer: but I Will disengage you; leave me to
give the fellow an answer. I warrant you shall have no farther trouble.

Leonora was at length satisfied with her aunt's reasoning; and, Bellarmine
supping with her that evening, it was agreed he should the next morning go to
her father and propose the match, which she consented should be consummated at
his return.

The aunt retired soon after supper, and the lovers being left together,
Bellarmine began in the following manner: Yes, Madam, this coat I assure you
was made at Paris, and I defy the best English tailor even to imitate it. There
is not one of them can cut, Madam, they cannot cut. If you observe how this
skirt is turned, and this sleeve, a clumsy English rascal can do nothing like
it. -- Pray how do you like my liveries? Leonora answered, 'she thought them
very pretty.' All French, says he, I assure you, except the great coats; I
never trust any thing more than a great coat to an Englishman; you know one
must encourage our own people what one can, especially as, before I had a
place, I was in the country interest, he, he, he! but for myself, I would see
the dirty island at the bottom of the sea, rather than wear a single rag of
English work about me; and I am sure after you have made one tour to Paris, you
will be of the same opinion with regard to your own clothes. You cannot conceive
what an addition a French dress would be to your beauty. I positively assure
you, at the first opera I saw since I came over, I mistook the English ladies
for chambermaids, he, he, he!

With such sort of polite discourse did the gay Bellarmine entertain his
beloved Leonora, when the door opened on a sudden, and Horatio entered the
room. Here it is impossible to express the surprise of Leonora.

'Poor woman,' says Mrs. Slipslop, what a terrible quandary she must be in!
'Not at all,' says Miss Grave-Airs, such sluts can never be confounded. She
must have then more than Corinthian assurance, said Adams; aye more than Lais
herself.

'A long silence,' continued the lady, prevailed in the whole company: If the
familiar entrance of Horatio struck the greatest astonishment into Bellarmine,
the unexpected presence of Bellarmine no less surprised Horatio. At length
Leonora collecting all the spirit she was mistress of, addressed herself to the
latter, and pretended to wonder at ^he reason of so late a visit. I should,
indeed, answered he, have made some apology for disturbing you at this hour,
had not my finding you in company assured me I do not break in upon your
repose. Bellarmine rose from his chair, traversed the room in a minuet step,
and humm'd an opera tune, while Horatio advancing to Leonora, asked her in a
whisper, if that gentleman was not a relation of hers; to which she answered
with a smile, or rather sneer, No, he is no relation of mine yet; adding, she
could not guess the meaning of his question. Horatio told her softly, it did
not arise from jealousy. 'Jealousy!' I assure you, it would be very strange in
a common acquaintance to give himself any of those airs. These words a little
surprised Horatio; but before he had time to answer, Bellarmine danced up to
the lady, and told her, her feared he interrupted some business between her and
the gentleman. I can have no business, said she, with the gentleman, nor any
other, which need be any secret to you.

'You'll pardon me,' said Horatio, if I desire to know who this gentleman is,
who is to be entrusted with all our secrets. You Will know soon enough, cries
Leonora; but I cannot guess what secrets can ever pass between us of such mighty
consequence. 'No, Madam!' cries Horatio, I Am sure you would not have me
understand you in earnest. It Is indifferent to me,' says she, how you
understand me; but I think so unreasonable a visit is difficult to be
understood at all, at at^east when people find one engaged; though one's
servants do not den^ one, one may expect a well-bred person should soon take
the hint. 'Madam,' said Horatio, I did not imagine any engagement with a
stranger, as it seems this gentleman is, would have made my visit impertinent,
or that any such ceremonies were to be preserved between persons in our
situation. 'Sure you are in a dream,' said she, or would persuade me that I am
in one. I know no pretensions a common acquaintance can have to lay aside the
ceremonies of good breeding. 'Sure,' said he, I am in a dream; for it is
impossible I should be really esteemed a common acquaintance by Leonora, after
what has passed between us! Passed between us! Do you intend to affront me
before this gentleman? D -- n me, affront the lady, says Bellarmine, cocking
his hat, and strutting up to Horatio. Does any man dare affront this lady
before me, d -- n me? 'Hearkee, Sir,' says Horatio, I would advise you to lay
aside that fierce air; for I am mightily deceived, if this lady has not a
violent desire to get your worship a good drubbing. 'Sir, said Bellarmine, I
have the honor to be her protector, and d -- n me, if I understand your
meaning. 'Sir,' answered Horatio, she is rather your protectress: but give
yourself no more airs, for you see I am prepared for you, (shaking his whip at
him) Oh! Servi^eur tres humble,' says Bellarmine, Je vous entend perfaitment
bien.' At which time the aunt, who had heard of Horatio's visit, entered the
room, and soon satisfied all his doubts. She convinced him that he was never
more awake in his life, and that nothing more extraordinary had happened in his
three days absence, than a small alteration in the affections of Leonora; who
now burst into tears, and wondered what reason she had given him to use her in
so barbarous a manner. Horatio desired Bellarmine to withdraw with him: but the
ladies prevented it, by laying violent hands on the latter; upon which, the
former took his leave without any great ceremony, and departed, leaving the
lady with his rival to consult for his safety, which Leonora feared her
indiscretion might have endangered: but the aunt comforted her with assurances,
that Horatio would not venture his person against so accomplished a cavalier as
Bellarmine; and that, being a lawyer, he would seek revenge in his own way, and
the most they had to apprehend from him was an action.

They at length therefore agreed to permit Bellarmine to retire to his
lodgings, having first settled all matters relating to the journey which he was
to undertake in the morning, and their preparations for the nuptials at his
return.

But alas! as wise men have observed, the seat of valor is not the
countenance; and many a grave and plain man, will, on a just provocation,
betake himself to that mischievous metal, cold iron; while men of a fiercer
brow, and sometimes with that emblem of courage, a cockade, will more prudently
decline it.

Leonora was waked in the morning, from a visionary coach and six, with the
dismal account, that Bellarmine was run through the body by Horatio; that he
lay languishing at an inn, and the surgeons had declared the wound mortal. She
immediately leaped out of the bed, danced about the room in a frantic manner,
tore her hair, and beat her breast in all the agonies of despair; in which sad
condition her aunt, who likewise arose at the news, found her. The good old
lady applied her utmost art to comfort her niece. She told her, while there was
life there was hope; but that if he should die, her affliction would be of no
service to Bellarmine, and would only expose herself, which might probably keep
her some time without any future offer; that as matters had happened, her
wisest way would be to think no more of Bellarmine, but to endeavor to regain
the affections of Horatio. Speak not to me, cried the disconsolate Leonora; is
it not owing to me, that poor Bellarmine has lost his life? have not these
cursed charms (at which words she looked steadfastly in the glass) been the ruin
of the most charming man of this age? Can I ever bear to contemplate my own
face again? (with her eyes still fixed on the glass.) Am I not the murdress of
the finest gentleman? no other woman in the town could have made any impression
on him. 'Never think of things past,' cries the aunt, think of regaining the
affections of Horatio. 'What reason,' said the niece, have I to hope he would
forgive me? No, I have lost him as well as the other, and it was your wicked
advice which was the occasion of all; your seduced me contrary to my
inclinations, to abandon poor Horatio, at which words she burst into tears; you
prevailed upon me, whether I would or no, to give up my affections for him; had
it not been for you, Bellarmine never would have entered into my thoughts; had
not his addresses been backed by your persuasions, they never would have made
any impression on me; I should have defied all fortune and equipage in the
world; but it was you, it was you, who got the better of my youth and
simplicity, and forced me to lose my dear Horatio for ever.

The aunt was almost borne down with this torrent of words; she however rallied
all the strength she could, and drawing her month up into a purse, began: I am
not surprised, Niece, at this ingratitude. Those who advise young women for
their interest, must always expect such a return: I am convinced my brother
will thank me for breaking off your match with Horatio at any rate. That may
not be in your power yet, answered Leonora; though it is very ungrateful in you
to desire or attempt it, after the presents you have received from him. (For
indeed true it is, that many presents, and some pretty valuable ones, had
passed from Horatio to the old lady: but as true it is, that Bellarmine, when
he breakfasted with her and her niece, had complimented her with a brilliant
from his finger, of much greater value than all she had touched of the other.)

The aunt's gall was on float to reply, when a servant brought a letter into
the room; which Leonora, hearing it came from Bellarmine, with great eagerness
opened, and read as follows:

Most divine creature,
THE wound which I fear you have heard I received from my rival, is not like to
be so fatal as those shot into my heart, which have been fired from your eyes,
tout-brilliant. Those are the only cannons by which I am to fall: for me
surgeon gives me hopes of been soon able to attend your Ruelle; till when,
unless you would do me an honor which I have scarce the Hardiesse to think of,
your absence will be the greatest anguish can be felt by,

Madam, Av^^ t^ute le respect in the world, Your most obedient, most absolute
Devote, BELLARMINE.


As soon as Leonora perceived such hopes of Bellarmine's recovery, and that the
gossip Fame had, according to custom, so enlarged his danger, she presently
abandoned all further thoughts of Horatio, and was soon reconciled to her aunt,
who received her again into favor, with a more christian forgiveness than we
generally meet with. Indeed, it is possible, she might be a little alarmed at
the hints which her niece had given her concerning the presents. She might
apprehend such rumors, should they get abroad, might injure a reputation,
which, by frequenting church twice a day, and preserving the utmost rigor and
strictness in her countenance and behavior for many years, she had established.

Leonora's passion returned now for Bellarmine, with greater force after its
small relaxation than ever. She proposed to her aunt to make him a visit in his
confinement, which the old lady, with great and commendable prudence, advised
her to decline: 'For,' says she, should any accident intervene to p^^vent your
intended match, too forward a behavior with this lover may injure you in the
eyes of others. Every woman, till she is married, ought to consider of and
provide against the possibility of the affair's breaking off. Leonora said, she
should be indifferent to whatever might happen in in such a case: for she had
now so absolutely placed her affections on this dear man, (so she called him)
that if it was her misfortune to lose him, she should for ever abandon all
thoughts of mankind. She therefore resolved to visit him, notwithstanding all
the prudent advice of her aunt to the contrary, and that very afternoon
executed ^er resolution.

The lady was proceeding in her story, when the coach drove into the inn where
the company were to dine, sorely to the dissatisfaction of Mr. Adams, whose
ears were the most hungry part about him; he being, as the reader may perhaps
guess, of an insatiable curiosity, and heartily desirous of hearing the end of
this amor, though he professed he could scarce wish success to a lady of so
inconstant a disposition.

CHAP. V.
A dreadful quarrel which happened at the inn where the company dined; with its
bloody consequences to Mr. Adams.

AS soon as the passengers had alighted from the coach, Mr. Adams, as was his
custom, made directly to the kitchen, where he found Joseph sitting by the
fire, and the hostess anointing his leg: for the horse which Mr. Adams had
borrowed of his clerk, had so violent a propensity to kneeling, that one would
have thought it had been his trade as well as his master's; nor would he always
give any notice of such his intention; he was often found on his knees when the
rider least expected it. This foible however was of no great inconvenience to
the parson, who was accustomed to it, and as his legs almost touched the ground
when he bestrode the beast, had but a little way to fall, and threw himself
forward on such occasions with so much dexterity, that he never received any
mischief? the horse and he frequently rolling many paces distance, and
afterward both getting up and meeting as good friends as ever.

Poor Joseph, who had not been used to such kind of cattle, though an excellent
horseman, did not so happily disengage himself; but falling with his leg under
the beast, received a violent contusion, to which the good woman was, as we
have said, applying a warm hand, with some camphorated spirits, just at the
time when the parson entered the kitchen.

He had scarce expressed his concern for Joseph's misfortune, before the host
likewise entered. He was by no means of Mr. Tow-wouse's gentle disposition, and
was indeed perfectly master of his house, and every thing in it but his guests.

This surly fellow, who always proportioned his respect to the appearance of a
traveller, from God bless your honor, down to plain coming presently,
observing his wife on her knees to a footman, cried out without considering his
circumstances, What a pox is the woman about? why don't you mind the company in
the coach? Go and ask them what they will have for dinner? 'My dear,' says she,
you know they can have nothing but what is at the fire, which will be ready
presently; and really the poor young man's leg is very much bruised. At which
words, she fell to chafing more violently than before: the bell then happening
to ring, he damned his wife, and bid her go into the company, and not stand
rubbing there all day: for he did not believe the young fellow's leg was so bad
as he pretended; and if it was, within twenty miles, he would find a surgeon to
cut it off. Upon these words, Adams fetched two strides across the room; and
snapping his fingers over his head, muttered aloud* He would excommunicate such
a wretch for a farthing; for he believed the devil had more humanity. These
words occasioned a dialogue between Adams and the host, in which there were two
or three sharp replies, till Joseph bade the latter know how to behave himself
to his betters. At which the host (having first strictly surveyed Adams)
scornfully repeating the word betters, flew into a rage, and telling Joseph he
was as able to walk out of his house as he had been to walk into it, offered to
lay violent hands on him; which Adams perceiving, dealt him so sound a
compliment over his face with his fist, that the blood immediately gushed out
of his nose in a stream. The host being unwilling to be outdone in courtesy,
especially by a person of Adam's figure, returned the favor with so much
gratitude, that the parson's nostrils began to look redder than usual. Upon
which he again assailed his antagonist, and with another stroke laid him
sprawling on the floor.

The hostess, who was a better wife than so surly a husband deserved, seeing
her husband all bloody and stretched along, hastened presently to his
assistance, or rather to revenge the blow, which to all appearance, was (...)
la^t he would ever receive; when lo! a pan (...) of hog's-blood, which
unluckily stood on the dresser, presented itself first to her hands. She seized
it in her fury, and without any reflection discharged it into the parson's
face, and with so good an aim, that much the greater part first saluted his
countenance, and trickled thence in so large a current down to his beard, and
over his garments, that a more horrible spectacle was hardly to be seen, or
even imagined. All which was perceived by Mrs. Slipslop, who entered the
kitchen at that instant. This good gentlewoman, not being of a temper so
extremely cool and patient as perhaps was required to ask many questions on
this occasion, flew with great impetuosity at the hostess's cap, which,
together with some of her hair, she plucked from her head in a moment, giving
her at the same time several hearty cuffs in the face, which, by frequent
practice on the inferior servants, she had learned an excellent knack of
delivering with a good grace. Poor Joseph could hardly rise from his chair; the
parson was employed in wiping the blood from his eyes, which had entirely
blinded him, and the landlord was but just beginning to stir, whilst Mrs.
Slipslop, holding down the landlady's face with her left hand, made so
dexterous an use of her right, that the poor woman began to roar in a key which
alarmed all the company in the inn.

There happened to be in the inn at this time, besides the ladies who arrived
in the stage-coach, the two gentlemen who were present at Mr. Tow-wouse's when
Joseph was detained for his horse's meat, and whom we have before mentioned to
have stopped at the alehouse with Adams. There was likewise a gentleman just
returned from his travels to Italy; all whom the horrid outcry of murder
presently brought into the kitchen, where the several combatants were found in
the postures already de^cribed.

It was now no difficulty to put an end to the fray, the conquerors being
satisfied with the vengeance they had taken, and the conquered having no
appetite to renew the fight. The principal figure, and which engaged the eyes
of all, was Adams, who was all over covered with blood, which the whole company
concluded to be his own; and consequently imagined him no longer for this
world. But the host, who had now recovered from his blow, and was risen from
the ground, soon delivered them from this apprehension, by damning his wife for
wasting the hog's puddings, and telling her all would have been very well, if
she had not intermeddled like a b -- as she was; adding, he was very glad the
gentlewoman had paid her, though not half what she deserved. The poor woman had
indeed fared much the worst, having, besides the unmerciful cuffs received,
lost a quantity of hair, which Mrs. Slipslop in triumph held in her left hand.

The traveller, addressing himself to Mrs. Graveairs, desired her not to be
frightened; for here had been only a little boxing, which he said to their
disgracia the English were accustomata to: adding, it must be however a sight
somewhat strange to him, who was just come from Italy, the Italians not being
addicted to the cuffardo, but b^stonza, says he. He then went up to Adams, and
telling him he looked like the ghost of Othello, bid him not shake his gory
locks at him, for he could not say he did it. Adams very innocently answered,
Sir, I am far from accusing you. He then returned to the lady, and cried, I
find the bloody gentleman is uno insipido del nu^lo senso Dammata di me, if I
have seen such a spectaculo in my way from Viterbo.

One of the gentlemen having learned from the host the occasion of this bustle,
and being assured by him that Adams had struck the first blow, whispered in his
ear: he would warrant he would recover. 'Recover! master,' said the host smiling:
Yes, yes, I am not afraid of dying with a blow or two neither; I am not such a
chicken as that. Pugh! said the gentleman, I mean you will recover damages in
that action which undoubtedly you intend to bring as soon as a writ can be
returned from London; for you look like a man of too much spirit and courage to
suffer any one to beat you without bringing your action against him: he must be
a scandalous fellow indeed, who would put up a drubbing whilst the law is open
to revenge it; besides he has drawn blood from you and spoiled your coat; and
the jury will give damages for that too. An excellent new coat upon my word,
and now not worth a shilling!

I don't care, continued he, to intermeddle in these cases: but you have a
right to my evidence; and if I am sworn, I must speak the truth. I saw you
sprawling on the floor, and the blood gushing from your nostrils. You may take
your own opinion; but was I in your circumstances, every drop of my blood
should convey an ounce of gold into my pocket: remember I don't advise you to
go to law; but if your jury were christians, they must give swinging damages.
That Is all.' 'Master,' cried the host, scratching his head, I have no stomach
to law, I thank you. I have seen enough of that in the parish, where two of my
neighbors have been at law about a house, till they have both lawed themselves
into a goal. At which word he turned about, and began to enquire again after
his hog's puddings; nor would it probably have been a sufficient excuse for his
wife, that she spilt them in his defense, had not some awe of the company,
especially of the Italian traveller, who was a person of great dignity,
withheld his rage. Whilst one of the above mentioned gentlemen was employed, as
we have seen him, on the behalf of the landlord, the other was no less hearty
on the side of Mr. Adams, whom he advised to bring his action immediately. He
said the assault of the wi^e was in law the assault of the husband; for they
were but one person; and he was liable to pay damages, which he said must be
considerable, where so bloody a disposition appeared. Adams answered, if it was
true that they were but one person, he had assaulted the wife; for he was sorry
to own he had struck the husband the first blow. 'I am sorry you own it too,'
cries the gentleman; for it could not possibly appear to the court: for here
was no evidence present but the lame man in the chair, whom I suppose to be
your friend, and would consequently say nothing but what made for you. 'How,
Sir,' says Adams, do you take me for a villain, who would prosecute revenge in
cold blood, and use unjustifiable means to obtain it? If you knew me and my
order, I should think you affronted both. At the word order, the gentleman
stared, (for he was too bloody to be of any modern order of knights) and
turning hastily about, said, Every man knew his own business.

Matters being now composed, the company retired to their several apartments,
the two gentlemen congratulating each other on the success of their good
offices in procuring a perfect reconciliation between the contending parties;
and the traveller went to his repast, crying, as the Italian poet says, Je voi
very well que tuta e^pace,
So send up Dinner, good Bonifa^e.


The coachman began now to grow importunate with his passengers, whose entrance
into the coach was retarded by Miss Grave-airs, insisting against the
remonstrance of all the rest, that she would not admit a footman into the
coach: for poor Joseph was too lame to mount a horse. A young lady, who was, as
it seems, an earl's granddaughter, begged it with almost tears in her eyes. Mr.
Adams prayed, and Mrs. Slipslop scolded, but all to no purpose. She said she
would not demean herself to ride with a footman: that there were wagons on the
road: that if the master of the coach desired it, she would pay for two places:
but would suffer no such fellow to come in. 'Madam,' says Slipslop, I am sure
no one can refuse another coming into the stage-coach. 'I don't know, Madam,'
says the lady, I am not much used to stage-coaches, I seldom travel in them.
'That may be, Madam,' replied Slipslop, very good people do, and some people's
betters, for aught I know. Miss Grave-airs said, some folks might sometimes
give their tongues a liberty, to some people that were their betters, which did
not become them; for her part, she was not used to converse with servants.
Slipslop returned, Some people kept no servants to converse with; for her part,
she thanked heaven she lived in a family where there were great many; and had
more under her own command, than any paltry little gentlewoman in the kingdom.
Miss Grave-airs cried, she believed her mistress would not encourage such
sauciness to her betters. 'My betters,' says Slipslop, who is my betters, pray?
'I am your betters,' answered Miss Grave-airs, 'and I Will acquaint your
mistress.' -- At which Mrs. Slipslop laughed aloud, and told her, her lady was
one of the great gentry, and such little paltry gentlewomen, as some folks who
traveled in stage-coaches, would not easily come at her.

This smart dialogue between some people and some folks, was going on at the
coach door, when a solemn person riding into the inn, and seeing Miss
Grave-airs, immediately accosted her with, Dear child, how do you do? She
presently answered, O! papa, I am glad you have overtaken me. 'So am I,'
answered he: for one of our coaches is just at hand: and there being room for
you in it, you shall go no farther in the stage, unless you desire it. How can
you imagine I should desire it? says she; so bidding Slipslop ride with her
fellow, if she pleased, she took her father by the hand, who was just alighted,
and walked with him into a room.

Adams instantly asked the coachman in a whisper; if he knew who the gentleman
was? The coachman answered, he was now a gentleman, and kept his horse and man:
but times are altered master, said he; I remember when he was no better born
than myself. Ay! ay! says Adams. My father drove the squire's coach, answered
he, when that very man rode postilion: but he is now his steward, and a great
gentleman. Adams then snapped his fingers, and cried, he thought she was some
such trollop.

Adams made haste to acquaint Mrs Slipslop with this good news, as he imagined
it; but it found a reception different from what he expected. The prudent
gentlewoman who despised the anger of Miss Grave-airs, whilst she conceived her
the daughter of a gentleman of small fortune, now she heard her alliance with
the upper servants of a great family in her neighborhood, began to fear her
interest with the mistress. She wished she had not carried the dispute so far,
and began to think of endeavoring to reconcile herself to the young lady
before she left the inn; when luckily the scene at London, which the reader can
scarce have forgotten, presented itself to her mind, and comforted her with
such assurance, that she no longer apprehended any enemy with her mistress.

Every thing being now adjusted, the company entered the coach which was just
on its departure, when one lady recollected she had left her fan, a second her
gloves, a third a snuff box, and a fourth a smelling bottle behind her; to find
all which occasioned some delay, and much swearing, to the coachman.

As soon as the coach had left the inn, the women all together fell to the
character of Miss Grave-airs, whom one of them declared she had suspected to be
some low creature from the beginning of their journey; and another affirmed,
she had not even the looks of a gentlewoman; a third warranted she was no
better than she should be; and turning to the lady who had related the story in
the coach, said, Did you ever hear, Madam, any thing so prudish as her remarks?
Well, deliver me from the censoriousness of such a prude. The fourth added, O
Madam! all these creatures are censorious: but for my part, I wonder where the
wretch was bred; indeed I must own I have seldom conversed with these mean kind
of people: so that it may appear stranger to me; but to refuse the general
desire of a whole company had something in it so astonishing, that for my part,
I own I should hardly believe it, if my own ears had not been witnesses to it.
'Yes, and so handsome a young fellow, cries Slipslop: the woman must have no
compulsion in her, I believe she is more of a Turk than a Christian; I am
certain, if she had any Christian woman's blood in her veins, the sight of such
a young fellow must have warmed it. Indeed there are some wretched miserable
old objects, that turn one's stomach; I should not wonder if she had refused
such a one; I am as nice as herself, and should have cared no more than herself
for the company of stinking old fellows: but, hold up thy head, Joseph, thou
art none of those; and she who has no compulsion for thee is a Myhummetman,
and I will maintain it. This conversation made Joseph uneasy, as well as the
ladies; who, perceiving the spirits Mrs. Slipslop was in, (for indeed she was
not a cup too low) began to fear the consequence; one of them therefore desired
the lady to conclude the story -- 'Aye, Madam,' said Slipslop, I beg your
ladyship to give us that story you commensated in the morning; which request
that well-bred woman immediately complied with.

CHAP. VI.
Conclusion of the unfortunate jilt.

LEONORA having once broke through the bounds which custom and modesty impose
on her sex, soon gave an unbridled indulgence to her passion. Her visits to
Bellarmine were more constant, as well as longer, than his surgeon's; in a
word, she became absolutely his nurse, made his water gruel, administered him
his medicines, and, notwithstanding the prudent advice of her aunt to the
contrary, almost entirely resided in her wounded lover's apartment.

The ladies of the town began to take her conduct under consideration; it was
the chief topic of discourse at their tea-tables, and was very severely
censured by the most part; especially by Lindamira, a lady whose discreet and
starch carriage, together with a constant attendance at church three times a
day, had utterly defeated many malicious attacks on her own reputation: for
such was the envy that Lindamira's virtue had attracted, that, notwithstanding
her own strict behavior and strict enquiry into the lives of others she had
not been able to escape being the mark of some arrows herself, which however
did her no injury; a blessing perhaps owned by her to the clergy, who were her
chief male companions, and with two or three of whom she had been barbarously
and unjustly calumniated.

Not so unjustly neither perhaps, says Slipslop, for the clergy are men, as
well as other folks.

The extreme delicacy of Lindamira's virtue was cruelly hurt by those freedoms
which Leonor^ allowed herself: she said it was an affront to her sex; that she
did not imagine it consistent with any woman's honor to speak to the creature,
or to be seen in her company; and that, for her part; she should always refuse
to dance at an assembly with her, for fear of contamination by taking her by
the hand.

But to return to my story: as soon as Bellarmine was recovered, which was
somewhat within a month from his receiving the wound, he set out, according to
agreement, for Leonora's father's, in order to propose the match, and settle
all matters with him touching settlements, and the like.

A little before his arrival, the old gentleman had received an intimation of
the affair by the following letter; which I can repeat verbatim, and which,
they say, was written neither by Leonora nor her aunt, though it was in a woman's
hand. The letter was in these words:

SIR,
I am sorry to acquaint you, that your daughter Leonora has acted one of the
basest, as well as most simple parts with a young gentleman to whom she had
engaged herself, and whom she has, (pardon the word) jilted, for another of
inferior fortune, notwithstanding his superior figure. You may take what
measures you please on this occasion; I have performed what I thought my duty;
as I have, though unknown to you, a very great respect for your family.


The old gentleman did not give himself the trouble to answer this kind
epistle; nor did he take any notice of it after he had read it, 'till he saw
Bellarmine. He was, to say the truth, one of those fathers who look on children
as an unhappy consequence of their youthful pleasures; which as ^e would have
been delighted not to have had attended them, so was he no less pleased with an
opportunity to rid himself of the encumbrance. He passed, in the world's
language, as an exceeding good father, being not only so rapacious as to rob
and plunder all mankind to the utmost of his power, but even to deny himself
the conveniences and almost necessaries of life; which his neighbors
attributed to a desire of raising immense fortunes for his children: but in
fact it was not so: he heaped up money for its own sake only, and looked on his
children as his rivals, who were to enjoy his beloved mistress, when he was
incapable of possessing her, and which he would have been much more charmed
with the power of carrying along with him: nor had his children any other
security of being his heirs, than that the law would constitute them such
without a will, and that he had not affection enough for any one living to take
the trouble of writing one.

To this gentleman came Bellarmine on the errand I have mentioned. His person,
his equigage, his family, and his estate, seemed to the father to make him an
advantageous match for his daughter; he therefore very readily accepted his
proposals: but when Bellarmine imagined the principal affair concluded, and
began to open the accidental matters of fortune; the old gentleman presently
changed his countenance, saying, he resolved never to marry his daughter on a
Smithfield match; that whoever had love for her to (...) her, would, when he
died, find her share of his fortune in his coffers: but he had seen such
examples of undutifulness happen from the too early generosity of parents, that
he had made a vow never to part with a shilling whilst he lived. He commended
the saying of Solomon, He that sparest the rod, spoileth the child: but added
he might likewise asserted, that he that sparest the purse saves ^he child. He
then ran into a discourse on the extravagance of the youth of the age; whence
he launched into a dissertation on horses, and came at length to commend those
Bellarmine drove. That fine gentleman, who, at another season would have been
well enough pleased to dwell a little on that subject, was now very eager to
resume the circumstance of fortune. He said, he had a very high value for the
young lady, and would receive her with less than he would any other whatever;
but that even his love to her made some regard to worldly matters necessary;
for it would be a most distracting sight for him to see her, when he had the
honor to be her husband, in less than a coach and six. The old gentleman
answered. Four will do, four will do; and then took a turn from horses to
extravagance, and from extravagance to horses, till he came round to the
equipage again, whither he was no sooner arrived, than Bellarmine brought him
back to the point; but all to no purpose; he made his escape from that subject
in a minute; till at last the lover declared, that in the present situation of
his affairs it was impossible for him, though he loved Leonora more than tout
le monde, to marry her without any fortune. To which the father answered, he
was sorry then his daughter must lose so valuable a match; that if he had an
inclination at present, it was not in his power to advance a shilling; that he
had had great losses, and been at great expenses on projects; which, though he
had great expectation from them, had yet produced him nothing: that he did not
know what might happen hereafter, as on the birth of a son, or such accident;
but he would make no promise, or enter into any article: for he would not break
his vow for all the daughters in the world.

In short, ladies, to keep you no longer in suspense, Bellarmine having tried
every argument and persuasion which he could invent, and finding them all
ineffectual, at length took his leave, but not in order to return to Leonora;
he proceeded directly to his own seat, whence, after a few days stay, he
returned to Paris, to the great delight of the French, and the honor of the
English nation.

But as soon as he arrived at his home, he presently dispatched a messenger
with the following epistle to Leonora.

Adorable and Charmante,
I AM sorry to have the honor to tell you I am not the heureux person destined
for your divine arms. Your papa has told me so with a politesse not often seen
on this side Paris. You may perhaps guess his manner of refusing me -- Ah mon
dieu! You will certainly believe me, Madam, incapable myself of delivering th^s
triste message, which I intend to try the French air to cure the consequences
of -- A jamais! Coeur! Ange! -- Au diable! -- If your papa obliges you to a
marriage, I hope we shall see you at Paris, till when the wind that blows from
thence, will be the warmest dans le monde! for it will consist almost entirely
of my sighs. Adieu, ma princess! Ah l'amour!

BELLARMINE.


I shall not, attempt, ladies, to describe Leonora's condition, when she
received this letter. It is a picture of horror which I should have had as
little pleasure in drawing, as you in beholding. She immediately left the
place, where she was the subject of conversation and ridicule, and retired to
that house I showed you when I began the story; where she has ever since led a
disconsolate life, and deserves perhaps pity for her misfortunes, more than our
censure for a behavior to which the artifices of her aunt very probably
contributed, and to which very young women are often rendered too liable by
that blameable levity in the education of our sex.

If I was inclined to pity her, said a young lady in the coach, it would be for
the loss of Horatio; for I cannot discern any misfortune in her missing such a
husband as Bellarmine.

Why, I must own, says Slipslop, the gentleman was a little false-hearted: but
how sumever it was hard to have two lovers, and get never a husband at all --
But pray Madam what became of Our-a^ho?

He remains, said the lady, still unmarried, and has applied himself so
strictly to his business, that he has raised. I hear, a very considerable
fortune. And what is remarkable, they say he never hears the name of Leonora
without a sigh, nor has ever uttered one syllable to charge her with her ill
conduct toward him.

CHAP. VII.
A very short chapter, in which parson Adams (...) a great way.

THE lady having finished her story, received the thanks of the company; and
now Joseph, putting his head out of the coach, cried out, Never believe me, if
yonder be not our parson Adams walking along without his horse. On my word, and
so he is, says Slipslop; and as sure as two pence he has left him behind at
the inn. Indeed, true it is, the parson had exhibited a fresh instance of his
absence of mind: for he was so pleased with having got Joseph into the coach,
that he never once thought of the beast in the stable; and finding his legs as
nimble as he desired, he sallied out brandishing a crabstick, and had kept on
before the coach, mending and slackening his pace occasionally, so that he had
never been much more or less than a quarter of a mile distant from it.

Mrs. Slipslop desired the coachman to overtake him, which he attempted, but in
vain: for the faste^ he drove, the faster ran the parson, often crying out Aye,
aye, catch me if you can: till at length the coachman swore he would as soon
attempt to drive after a greyhound; and giving the parson two or three hearty
curses, he cried, softly boys, to his horses, which the civil beasts
immediately obeyed.

But we will be more courteous to our reader than he was to Mrs. Slipslop; and
leaving the coach and its company to pursue their journey, we will carry our
reader on after parson Adams, who stretched forwards without once looking
behind him; till having left the coach full three miles in his rear, he came to
a place, where by keeping the extremest tract to the right, it was just barely
possible for a human creature to miss his way. This track however did he keep,
as indeed he had a wonderful capacity at these kind of bare possibilities; and
traveling in it about three miles over the plain, he arriv^^^ at the summit of
a hill, whence, looking a great way backwards, and perceiving no coach in sight
he sat himself down on the turf, and pulling out his AEschylus, *determined to
wait there for its arrival.

He had not sat long here, before a gun going off very near a little startled
him; he looked up and saw a gentleman within a hundred paces taking up a
partridge, which he had just shot.

Adams stood up, and presented a figure to the gentleman which would have moved
laughter i^ many: for his cassock had just again fallen down below his great
coat, that is to say, it reached his knees; whereas the skirts of his coat
descended no lower then half way down his thighs: but the gentleman's mirth
gave way to his surprise, at beholding such a personage in such a place.

Adams advancing to the gentleman, told him he hoped he had good sport; to
which the other answered very little. 'I see, Sir,' says Adams, you have smote
one partridge: to which the sportsman made no reply, but proceeded to charge
his piece.

Whilst the gun was charging, Adams remained in silence, which he at last
broke, by observing, that it was a delightful evening. The gentleman, who had
at first sight conceived a very distasteful opinion of the parson, began, on
perceiving a book in his hand, and smoking likewise the information of the
cassock, to change his thoughts, and make a small advance to conversation on
his side, by saying* Sir, I suppose you are not one of these parts?

Adams immediately told him, no: that he was a traveller, and invited by the
beauty of the evening and the place to repose a little, and amuse himself with
reading. 'I may as well repose myself too,' said the sportsman; for I have been
out this whole afternoon, and the devil a bird have I seen till I came hither.

Perhaps then the game is not very plenty hereabouts, cries Adams. 'No, Sir,'
said the gentleman; the soldiers, who are quartered in the neighborhood, have
killed it all. It is very probable, cries Adams, for shooting is their
profession. 'Ay, shooting the game,' answered the other, but I don't see they
are so forward to shoot our enemies. I don't like that affair of Carthagena; if
I had been there, I believe I should have done otherguess things, d -- n me;
what is a man's life when his country demands it? a man who will not sacrifice his
life for his country, deserves to be hanged, d -- n me. Which words he spoke
with so violent a gesture, so loud a voice, so strong an accent, and so fierce
a countenance, that he might have frightened a captain of trained bands at the
head of his company; but Mr. Adams was not greatly subject to fears: he told
him intrepidly, that he very much approved his virtue, but disliked his
swearing, and begged him not to addict himself to so bad a custom, without
which he said he might fight as bravely as Achilles did. Indeed he was charmed
with this discourse; he told the gentleman he would willingly have gone many
miles to have met a man of his generous way of thinking; that if he pleased to
sit down, he should be greatly delighted to commune with him: for though he was a
clergyman, he would himself be ready, if thereto called, to lay down his life
for his country.

The gentleman sat down, and Adams by him; and then the latter began, as in the
following chapter, a discourse which we have placed by itself, as it is not
only the most curious in this, but perhaps in any other book.

CHAP. VIII.
A notable dissertation by Mr. Abraham Adams; wherein that gentleman appears in
a political light.

I DO assure you, Sir, says he, taking the gentleman by the hand, I am heartily
glad to meet with a man of your kidney: for though I am a poor parson, I will be
bold to say, I am an honest man, and would not do an ill thing to be made a
bishop: nay, though it has not fallen in my way to offer so noble a sacrifice, I
have not been without opportunities of suffering for the sake of my conscience,
I thank heaven for them; for I have had relations, though I say it, who made some
figure in the world; particularly a nephew, who was a shopkeeper, and an
alderman of a corporation. He was a good lad, and was under my care when a boy,
and I believe would do what I bade him to his dying day. Indeed, it looks like
extreme vanity in me, to affect being a man of such consequence, as to have so
great an interest in an alderman; but others have thought so too, as manifestly
appeared by the rector, whose curate I formerly was, sending for me on the
approach of an election, and telling me, If I expected to continue in his cure,
that I must bring my nephew to vote for one colonel Courtley, a gentleman whom
I had never heard tidings of till that instant. I told the rector, I had no
power over my nephew's vote, (God forgive me for such prevarication!) that I
supposed he would give it according to his conscience; that I would by no means
endeavor to influence him to give it otherwise. He told me, it was in vain to
equivocate, that he knew I had already spoke to him in favor of esquire Fickle
my neighbor; and indeed it was true I had: for it was at a season when the
church was in danger, and when all good men expected they knew not what would
happen to us all. I then answered boldly, If he thought I had given my promise,
he affronted me, in proposing any breach of it. Not to be too prolix: I
persevered, and so did my nephew, in the esquire's interest, who was chose
chiefly through his means; and so I lost my curacy. Well, Sir, but do you think
the esquire ever mentioned a word of the church? Ne verbum quidem, ut ita
dicam: within two years he got a place, and has ever since lived in London;
where I have been informed, (but God forbid I should believe that) that he
never so much as goes to church. I remained Sir, a considerable time without
any cure, and lived a full month on one funeral sermon, which I preached on the
indisposition of a clergyman: but this by the bye. At last, when Mr. Fickle got
his place, colonel Courtley stood again; and who should make interest for him,
but Mr. Fickle himself? that very identical Mr. Fickle, who had formerly told
me, the colonel was an enemy both to the church and state, had the confidence
to solicit my nephew for him; and the colonel himself offered me to make me
chaplain to his regiment, which I refused in favor of Sir Oliver Hearty, who
told us he would sacrifice every thing to his country; and I believe he would,
except his hunting, which he stuck so close to, that in five years together, he
went but twice up to parliament; and one of those times, I have been told,
never was within sight of the house. However, he was a worthy man, and the best
friend I ever had: for by his interest with a bishop, he got me replaced into
my curacy, and gave me eight pounds out of his own pocket to buy me a gown and
cassock, and furnish my house. He had our interest while he lived, which was
not many years. On his death I had fresh applications made to me; for all the
world knew the interest I had with my good nephew, who now was a leading man in
the corporation; and Sir Thomas Booby buying ^he estate which had been Sir
Oliver's, proposed himself a candidate. He was then a young gentleman just come
from his travels; and it did me good to hear him discourse on affairs, which,
for my part, I knew nothing of. If I had been master of a thousand votes, he
should have had them all. I engaged my nephew in his interest; and he was
elected, and a very fine parliament man he was. They tell me he made speeches
of an hour long; and I have been told very fine ones: but he could never
persuade the parliament to be of his opinion. -- Non omnia possumus omnes. He
promised me a living, poor man; and I believe I should have had it, but an
accident happened; which was, that my lady had promised it before, unknown to
him. This indeed I never heard till afterward: for my nephew, who died about a
month before the incumbent, always told me I might be assured of it. Since that
time, Sir Thomas, poor man, had always so much business, that he never could
find leisure to see me. I believe it was partly my lady's fault too; who did
not think my dress good enough for the gentry at her table. However, I must do
him the justice to say, he never was ungrateful; and I have always found his
kitchen, and his cellar too, open to me; many a time after service on a Sunday,
for I preach at four churches, have I recruited my spirits with a glass of his
ale. Since my nephew's death, the corporation is in other hands; and I am not a
man of that consequence I was formerly. I have now no longer any talents to lay
out in the service of my country; and to whom nothing is given, of him can
nothing be required. However, on all proper seasons, such as the approach of an
election, I throw a suitable dash or two into my sermons; which I have the
pleasure to hear is not disagreeable to Sir Thomas, and the other honest
gentlemen my neighbors, who have all promised me these five years, to procure
an ordination for a son of mine, who is now near thirty, has an infinite stock
of learning, and is, I thank heaven, of an unexceptionable life; though, as he
was never at an university, the bishop refuses to ordain him. Too much care
cannot indeed be taken in admitting any to the sacred office; though I hope he
will never act so as to be a disgrace to any order: but will serve his God and
his country to the utmost of his power, as I have endeavored to do before him;
nay, will lay down his life whenever called to that purpose. I am sure I have
educated him in those principles; so that I have acquitted my duty, and shall
have nothing to answer for on that account: but I do not distrust him; for he
is a good boy; and, if Providence should throw it in his way to be of as much
consequence in a public light, as his father once was; I can answer for him, he
will use his talents as honestly as I have done.

CHAP. IX.
In which the gentleman descants on bravery and heroic virtue, till an unlucky
accident puts an end to the discourse.

THE gentleman highly commended Mr. Adams for his good resolutions, and told
him, he hoped his son would tread in his steps; adding, that if he would not
die for his country, he would not be worthy to live in it. I Would make no more of
shooting a man that would not die for his country, than --

'Sir,' said he, I have disinherited a nephew who is in the army; because he
would not exchange his commission, and go to the West Indies. I believe the
rascal is a coward, though he pretends to be in love forsooth. I would have all
such fellows hanged, Sir; I would have them hanged. Adams answered, that would
be too severe: that men did not make themselves; and if fear had too much
ascendance in the mind, the man was rather to be pitied than abhorred: that
reason and time might teach him to subdue it. He said, a man might be a coward
at one time, and brave at another. Homer, says he, who so well understood and
copied nature, has taught us this lesson, for Paris fights, and Hector runs
away: nay, we have a mighty instance of this in the history of later ages, no
longer ago than the 705th year of Rome, when the great Pompey, who had won so
many battles, and been honored with so many triumphs, and of whose valor
several authors, especially Cicero and Paterculus, have formed such elogiums;
this very Pompey left the battle of Pharsalia before he had lost it, and
retreated to his tent, where he sat like the most pusillanimous rascal in a ^it
of despair, and yielded a victory, which was to determine the empire of the
world, to Caesar. I am not much traveled in the history of modern times, that
is to say, these last thousand years: but those who are can, I make no
question, furnish you with parallel instances. He concluded therefore, that had
he taken any such hasty resolutions against his nephew, he hoped he would
consider better, and retract them. The gentleman answered with great warmth,
and talked much of courage and his country, till perceiving it grew late, he
asked Adams, what place he intended for that night? He told him, he waited
there for the stage-coach. 'The stage-coach! Sir,' said the gentleman, they are
all past by long ago. You may see the last yourself almost three miles before
us. 'I protest and so they are,' cries Adams, 'then I must make haste and
follow them.' The gentleman told him, he would hardly be able to overtake them;
and that if he did not know his way, he would be in danger of losing himself on
the downs; for it would be presently dark; and he might ramble about all night,
and perhaps, find himself farther from his journey's end in the morning than he
was now. He advised him therefore to accompany him to his house, which was very
little out of his way, assuring him, that he would find some country fellow in
his parish, who would conduct him for six pence to the city where he was going.
Adams accepted this proposal, and on they traveled, the gentleman renewing his
discourse on courage, and the infamy of not being ready at all times to
sacrifice our lives to our country. Night overtook them much about the same
time as they arrived near some bushes: whence, on a sudden, they heard the most
violent shrieks imaginable in a female voice. Adams offered to snatch the gun
out of his companion's hand. What are you doing? said he. 'Doing!' says Adams,
I am hastening to the assistance of the poor creature whom some villains are
murdering. You are not mad enough, I hope, says the gentleman trembling: Do you
consider this gun is only charged with shot, and that the robbers are most
probably furnished with pistols loaded with bullets? This is no business of
ours; let us make as much haste as possible out of the way, or we may fall into
their hands ourselves. The shrieks now increasing, Adams made no answer, but
snapt his fingers, and brandishing his crabstick, made directly to the place
whence the voice issued; and the man of courage made as much expedition toward
his own home, whither he escaped in a very short time without once looking
behind him: where we will leave him to contemplate his own bravery, and to
censure the want of it in others: and return to the good Adams, who on coming
up to the place whence the noise proceeded, found a woman struggling with a
man, who had thrown her on the ground, and had almost overpowered her. The
great abilities of Mr. Adams were not necessary to have formed a right judgment
of this affair on the first sight. He did not therefore want the entreaties of
the poor wretch to assist her; but lifting up his crabstick, he immediately
levelled a blow at that part of the ravisher's head, where, according to the
opinion of the ancients, the brains of some persons are deposited, and which he
had undoubtedly let forth, had not nature, (who, as wise men have observed,
equips all creatures with what is most expedient for them) taken a provident
care, (as she always does with those she intends for encounters) to make this
part of the head three times as thick as those of ordinary men, who are
designed to exercise talents which are vulgarly called rational and for whom,
as brains are necessary, she is obliged to leave some room for them in the
cavity of the skull: whereas, those ingredients being entirely useless to
persons of the heroic calling, she has an opportunity of thickening the bone,
so as to make it less subject to any impression, or liable to be cracked or
broken; and indeed, in some who are predestined to the command of armies and
empires, she is supposed sometimes to make that part perfectly solid.

As a game-cock, when engaged in amorous toying with a hen, if perchance he
espies another cock at hand, immediately quits his female, and opposes himself
to his rival: so did the ravisher, on the information of the crabstick,
immediately leap from the woman, and hastened to assail the man. He had no
weapons but what nature had furnished him with. However, he clenched his fist,
and presently darted it at that part of Adams's breast where the heart is
lodged. Adams staggered at the violence of the blow, when, throwing away his
staff, he likewise clenched that fist which we have before commemorated, and
would have discharged it full in the breast of his antagonist, had he not
dexterously caught it with his left hand, at the same time darting his head,
(which some modern heroes of the lower class use, like the battering-ram of the
ancients, for a weapon of offense; another reason to admire the cunningness of
nature, in composing it of those impenetrable materials) dashing his head, I
say into the stomach of Adams, he tumbled him on his back, and not having any
regard to the laws of heroism, which would have restrained him from any farther
attack on his enemy 'till he was again on his legs, he threw himself upon him,
and laying hold on the ground with his left hand, he with his right belabored
the body of Adams 'till he was weary, and indeed, 'till he concluded (to use
the language of fighting) 'that he had done his business;' or in the language
of poetry, that he had sent him to the shades below; in plain English, 'that he
was dead.

But Adams, who was no chicken, and could bear a drubbing as well as any boxing
champion in the universe, lay still only to watch his opportunity; and now
perceiving his antagonist to pant with his labors, he exerted his utmost force
at once, and with such success, that he overturned him, and became his
superior; when fixing one of his knees in his breast, he cried out in an
exulting voice, It is my turn now: and after a few minutes constant
application, he gave him so dexterous a blow just under his chin, that the
fellow no longer retained any motion, and Adams began to fear he had struck him
once too often; for he often asserted, he should be concerned to have the blood
of even the wicked upon him.

Adams got up, and called aloud to the young woman -- Be of good cheer, damsel,
said he, you are no longer in danger of your ravisher, who, I am terribly
afraid, lies dead at my feet; but God forgive me what I have done in defense of
innocence. The poor wretch, who had been some time in recovering strength
enough to rise, and had afterward, during the engagement, stood trembling,
being disabled by fear, even from running away, hearing her champion was
victorious, came up to him, but not without apprehension, even of her
deliverer; which, however, she was soon relieved from, by his courteous
behavior and gentle words. They were both standing by the body, which lay
motionless on the ground, and which Adams wished to see stir much more than the
woman did, when he earnestly begged her to tell him, by what misfortune she
came, at such a time of night, into so lonely a place? She acquainted him, she
was traveling toward London, and had accidentally met with the person from
whom he had delivered her, who told her he was likewise on his journey to the
same place and would keep her company: an offer which, suspecting no harm, she
had accepted; that he told her, they were at a small distance from an inn where
she might take up her lodging that evening, and he would show her a nearer way
to it than by following the road. That if she had suspected him, (which she did
not, he spoke so kindly to her,) being alone on these downs in the dark, she
had no human means to avoid him; that therefore she put her whole trust in
Providence, and walked on, expecting every moment to arrive at the inn; when,
on a sudden, being come to those bushes, he desired her to stop, and after some
rude kisses, which she resisted, and some entreaties, which she rejected, he
laid violent hands on her, and was attempting to execute his wicked will, when,
she thanked G --, he timely came up and prevented him. Adams encouraged her for
saying she had put her whole trust in Providence, and told her, he doubted not
but Providence had sent him to her deliverance, as a reward for that trust. He
wished indeed, he had not deprived the wicked wretch of life, but G -- 's will
be done; he said, he hoped the goodness of his intention would excuse him in
the next world, and he trusted in her evidence to acquit him in this. He was
then silent, and began to consider with himself, whether it would be properer
to make his escape or to deliver himself into the hands of justice; which
meditation ended, as the reader will see in the next chapter.

CHAP. X.
Giving an account of the strange catastrophe of the preceding adventure, which
drew poor Adams into fresh calamities; and who the woman was who owed the
preservation of her chastity to his victorious arm.

THE silence of Adams, added to the darkness of the night and loneliness of the
place, struck dreadful apprehensions into the poor woman's mind: She began to
fear as great an enemy in her deliverer, as he had delivered her from; and as
she had not light enough to discover the age of Adams, and the benevolence
visible in his countenance, she suspected he had used her as some very honest
men have used their country; and had rescued her out of the hands of one
ri^^er, in order to rifle her himself. Such were the suspicions she drew from
his silence: but indeed, they were illgrounded. He stood over his vanquished
enemy, wisely weighing in his mind the objections which might be made to either
of the two methods of proceeding mentioned in the last chapter, his judgment
sometimes inclining to the one, and sometimes to the other; for both seemed to
him so equally advisable, and so equally dangerous, that probably he would
have ended his days, at least two or three of them, on that very spot, before
he had taken any resolution: At length he lifted up his eyes, and spied a light
at a distance, to which he instantly addressed himself with Heus tu, Traveller,
hues tu! He presently heard several voices, and perceived the light approaching
toward him. The persons who attended the light began some to laugh, others to
sing, and others to halloo, at which the woman testified some fear, (for she
had concealed her suspicions of the parson himself,) but Adams said, Be of good
cheer, damsel, and repose thy trust in the same Providence which has hitherto
protected thee, and never will forsake the innocent. These people who now
approached were no other, reader, than a set of young fellows, who came to
these bushes in pursuit of a diversion which they call Bird-batting. This, if
thou art ignorant of it (as perhaps if thou have never traveled beyond
Kensington, Islington, Hackney, or the Borough, thou may be) I will inform
thee, is performed by holding a large clap-net before a lanthorn, and at the
same time beating the bushes; for the birds, when they are disturbed from their
places of rest, or roost, immediately make to the light, and so are enticed
within the net. Adams immediately told them what happened, and desired them to
hold the lanthorn to the face of the man on the ground, for he feared he had
smote him fatally. But, indeed his fears were frivolous; for the f^llow, though
he had been stunned by the last blow he received, had long since recovered his
senses, and finding himself quit of Adams, had listened attentively to the
discourse between him and the young woman; for whose departure he had patiently
waited, that he might likewise withdraw himself, having no longer hopes of
succeeding in his desires, which were moreover almost as well cooled by Mr.
Adams, as they could have been by the young woman herself, had he obtained his
utmost wish.

This fellow, who had a readiness at improving any (...), thought he might now
play a better part than that of a dead man; and accordingly the moment the
candle was held to his face, he leapt up, and laying hold on Adams, cried out,
No, villain, I am not dead, though you and your wicked whore might well think
me so, after the barbarous cruelties you have exercised on me. Gentlemen, said
he, you are luckily come to the assistance of a poor traveller, who would
otherwise have been robbed and murdered by this vile man and woman, who led me
hither out of my way from the highroad, and both falling on me have used me as
you see. Adams was going to answer, when one of the young fellows cried, d -- n
them, let us carry them both before the justice. The poor woman began to
tremble, and Adams lifted up his voice, but in vain. Three or four of them laid
hands on him, and one holding the lanthorn to his face, they all agreed, he had
the most villainous countenance they ever beheld; and an attorney's clerk who
was one of the company declared, he was sure he had remembered him at the bar.
As to the woman, her hair was dishevelled in the struggle: and her nose had
bled, so that they could not perceive whether she was handsome or ugly, but
they said her fright plainly discovered her guilt. And searching her pockets,
as they did those of Adams, for money, which the fellow said he had lost, they
found in her pocket a purse with some gold in it, which abundantly convinced
them, especially as the fellow offered to swear to it. Mr. Adams was found to
have no more than one halfpenny about him. This the clerk said, 'was a great
piece of presumption that he was an ^ld offender, by cunningly giving all the
booty to the woman.' To which all the rest readily assented.

This accident promising them better sport than what they had proposed, they
quitted their intention of catching birds, and unanimously resolved to proceed
to the justice with the offenders. Being informed what a desperate fellow Adams
was, they tied his hands behind him; and having hid their nets among the
bushes, and the lanthorn being carried before them, they placed the two
prisoners in their front, and then began their march: Adams not only submitting
patiently to his own fate, but comforting and encouraging his companion under
her sufferings.

Whilst they were on their way, the clerk informed the rest, that this
adventure would prove, a very beneficial one: for that they would be all
entitled to their proportions of 801. for apprehending the robbers. This
occasioned a contention concerning the parts which they had severally borne in
taking them; one insisting, he ought to have the greatest share; for he had
first laid his hands on Adams; another claiming a superior part, for having
first held the lanthorn to the man's face on the ground, by which, he said, the
whole was discovered. The clerk claimed four fifths of the reward, for having
proposed to search the prisoners; and likewise the carrying them before the
justice* he said indeed, in strict justice, he ought to have the whole. These
claims, however, they at last consented to refer to a future decision, but
seemed all to agree that the clerk was entitled to a moiety. They then debated
what money should be allotted to the young fellow, who had been employed only
in holding the nets. He very modestly said. That he did not apprehend any large
proportion would fall to his charge; but hoped they would allow him something:
he desired them to consider, that they had assigned their nets to his care,
which prevented him from being as forward as any in laying hold of the robbers,
(for so these innocent people were called;) that if he had not occupied the
nets, some other must: concluding however, that he should be contented with the
smallest share imaginable, and should think that rather their bounty than his
merit. But they were all unanimous in excluding him from any part whatever, the
clerk particularly swearing, if they gave him a shilling, they might do what
they pleased with the rest; for he would not concern himself with the affair.
This contention was so hot, and so totally engaged the attention of all the
parties, that a dextrous nimble thief, had he been in Mr. Adams's situation,
would have taken care to have given the justice no trouble that evening.
Indeed, it required not the art of a Shepherd to escape, especially as the
darkness of the night would have so much befriended him: but Adams trusted
rather to his innocence than his heels, and without thinking of flight, which
was easy, or resistance (which was impossible, as there were six lusty young
fellows, besides the villain himself, present) he walked with perfect
resignation the way they thought proper to conduct him.

Adams frequently vented himself in ejaculations during their journey; at last
poor Joseph Andrews occurring to his mind, he could not refrain sighing forth
his name, which being heard by his companion in affliction, she cried, with
some vehemence, Sure I should know that voice; you cannot certainly, Sir, be
Abraham Adams? Indeed, damsel, says he, that is my name; there is something
also in your voice, which persuades me I have heard it before. La, Sir, says
she, don't you remember poor Fanny? 'How, Fanny!' answered Adams, indeed I very
well remember you; what can have brought you hither? I have told you, Sir,
replied she, I was traveling toward London; but I thought you mentioned
Joseph Andrews, pray what is become of him? 'I left him, Child, this
afternoon,' said Adams, in the stage-coach, in his way toward our parish,
whither he is going to see you. To see me! La, Sir, answered Fanny, sure you
jeer me; what should he be going to see me for? 'Can you ask that?' replied
Adams. I hope Fanny you are not inconstant; I assure you he deserves much
better of you. La! 'Mr. Adams,' said she, what is Mr. Joseph to me? I am sure I
never had any thing to say to him, but as one fellow servants might to another.
I am sorry to hear this, said Adams; a virtuous passion for a young man, is
what no woman need be ashamed of. You either do not tell me truth, or you are
false to a very worthy man. Adams then told her what had happened at the inn,
to which she listened very attentively; and a sigh often escaped from her,
notwithstanding her utmost endeavors to the contrary, nor could she prevent
herself from asking a thousand questions, which would have assured any one but
Adams, who never ^aw farther into people than they desired to let him, of the
truth of passion she endeavored to conceal. Indeed, the fact was, that this
poor girl having heard of Joseph's misfortune by some of the servants belonging
to the coach, which we have formerly mentioned to have stopped at the inn while
the poor youth was confined to his bed, that instant abandoned the cow she was
milking, and taking with her a little bundle of clothes under her arm, and all
the money she was worth in her own purse, without consulting any one,
immediately set forward, in pursuit of one, whom, notwithstanding her shyness
to the parson, she loved with inexpressible violence, though with the purest
and most delicate passion. This shyness therefore, as we trust it will
recommend her character to all our female readers, and not greatly surprise
such of our males as are well acquainted with the younger part of the other
sex, we shall not give ourselves any trouble to vindicate.

CHAP. XI.
What happened to them while before the justice. A chapter very full of
learning.

THEIR fellow-travellers were so engaged in the hot dispute concerning the
division of the reward for apprehending these innocent people, that they
attended very little to their discourse. They were now arrived at the justice's
house, and had sent one of his servants in to acquaint his worship, that they
had taken two robbers, and brought them before him. The justice, who was just
returned from a fox-chase, and had not yet finished his dinner, ordered them to
carry the prisoners into the stable, whither they were attended by all the
servants in the house, and all the people in the neighborhood, who flocked
together to see them with as much curiosity as if there was something uncommon
to be seen, or that a rogue did not look like other people.

The justice now being in the height of his mirth and his cups, bethought
himself of the prisoners; and telling his company he believed they should have
good sport in their examination, he ordered them into his presence. They had no
sooner entered the room, than he began to revile them, saying, that robberies
on the highway were now grown so frequent, that people could not sleep safely
in their beds, and assured them they both should be made examples of at the
ensuing assizes. After he had gone on some time in this manner, he was reminded
by his clerk, that it would be proper to take the deposition of the witnesses
against them: which he bid him do, and he would light his pipe in the mean
time. Whilst the clerk was employed in writing down the deposition of the
fellow who had pretended to be robbed, the justice employed himself in cracking
jests on poor Fanny, in which he was seconded by all the company at table. One
asked, whether she was to be indicted for a highwayman? Another whispered in
her ear, if she had not provided herself a great belly, he was at her service.
A third said, he warranted she was a relation of Turpin. To which one of the
company, a great wit, shaking his head, and then his sides, answered, he
believed she was nearer related to Turpis; at which there was an universal
laugh. They were proceeding thus with this poor girl, when somebody smoking
the cassock peeping from under the coat of Adams, cried out, 'What have we
here, a parson?' 'How, sirrah, says the justice, do you go robbing in the dress
of a clergyman? let me tell you, your habit will not entitle you to the benefit
of the clergy. 'Yes,' said the witty fellow, he will have one benefit of
clergy, he will be exalted above the heads of the people; at which there was a
second laugh. And now the witty spark, seeing his jokes take, began to rise in
spirits; and turning to Adams, challenged him to cap verses, and provoking him
by giving the first blow, he repeated, Molle meum levibus cord est vilebile
telis.
Upon which Adams, with a look full of ineffable contempt, told him, he
deserved scourging for his pronunciation. The witty fellow answered, What do
you deserve, doctor, for not been able to answer the first time? Why I Will give
you one, (...) blockhead -- with and* Si licet ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus
haurum.


What can not with an M neither? Thou art a pretty fellow for a parson. --
Why did not steal some of the parson's Latin as well as his gown? Another at
the table then answered, if he had, you would have been too hard for him; I
remember you at the college a very devil at this sport; I have seen you catch a
fresh man: for nobody that knew you, would engage with you. I have forgot those
things now, cried the wit. I believe I could have done pretty well formerly. --
Let Us see, what did I end with -- an M again -- ay -- Mars, Bacchus, Apollo,
virorum.
'I could have done it once.' -- Ah! Evil betide you, and so you can now, said
the other, nobody in this country will undertake you. Adams could hold no
longer; 'Friend,' said he, I have a boy not above eight years old, who would
instruct thee, that the verse runs thus: Ut sunt Divorum, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo
virorum.
'I'll hold thee a guinea of that,' said the wit, throwing the money on the
table. -- And I Will go your halves, cries the other. 'Done.' answered Adams; but
upon applying to his pocket, he was forced to retract, and own he had no money
about him; which set them all a laughing, and confirmed the triumph of his
adversary, which was not moderate, any more than the approbation he met with
from the whole company, who told Adams he must go a little longer to school,
before he attempted to attack that (...) Lati^

The clerk having finished the depositions, as well of the fellow himself, as
of those who apprehended the prisoners, delivered them to the justice; who
having sworn the several witnesses, without reading a syllable, ordered his
clerk to make the mittimus.

Adams then said, he hoped he should not be condemned unheard. 'No, no,' cries
the justice, you will be asked what you have to say for yourself, when you come
on your trial: we are not trying you now; I shall only commit you to goal: if
you can prove your innocence at Size, you will be found Ignoramus, and so no
harm done. Is it no punishment, Sir, for an innocent man to lie several months
in goal? cries Adams: I beg you would at least hear me before you sign the
mittimus. 'What signifies all you can say?' says the justice, is it not here in
black and white against you? I must tell you, you are a very impertinent
fellow, to take up so much of my time. -- So make haste with his mittimus.

The clerk now acquainted the justice, that among other suspicious things, as a
penknife, etc. found in Adams's pocket, they had discovered a book written, as
he apprehended, in ciphers: for no one could read a word in it. 'Aye,' says the
justice, the fellow may be more than a common robber, he may be in a plot
against the government -- Produce the book. Upon which the poor manuscript of
Aeschylus, which Adams had transcribed with his own hand, was brought forth;
and the justice looking at it shook his head, and turning to the prisoner asked
the meaning of those ciphers. 'Cyphers!' answered Adams, it is a manuscript of
Aeschylus. 'Who? who?' said the justice. Adams repeated, 'Aeschylus.' That is
an outlandish name, cried the clerk. A fictitious name rather, I believe, said
the justice. One of the company declared it looked very much like Greek.
'Greek,' said the justice, why it is all in writing. 'No,' says the other, I
don't positively say it is so: for it is a very long time since I have seen any
Greek. 'There's one,' says he, turning to the parson of the parish, who was
present, will tell us immediately. The parson taking up the book, and putting
on his spectacles and gravity together, muttered some words to himself, and
then pronounced aloud -- Ay, indeed, it is a Greek manuscript, a very fine
piece of antiquity. I make no doubt but it was stolen from the same clergyman
from whom the rogue took the cassock. 'What did the rascal mean by his
Aeschylus?' says the justice. 'Pooh!' answered the doctor, with a contemptuous
grin, do you think that fellow knows any thing of this book? Aeschylus! ho! ho!
I see now what it is -- A manuscript of one of the fathers. I know a nobleman
who would give a great deal of money for such a piece of antiquity. -- Ay, ay,
question and answer. The beginning is the catechism in Greek. -- Ay, -- Ay, --
Pollaki toi -- What Is your name? -- Ay, what is your name? say the justice to
Adams, who answered, 'It is Aeschylus, and I will maintain it.' -- 'O it is,'
says the justice, make Mr. Aeschylus his mittimus. I will teach you to banter
me with a false name.

One of the company having looked steadfastly at Adams, asked him, if he did not
know lady Booby? Upon which Adams presently calling him to mind, answered in a
rapture, O squire ar^ you there? I believe you will inform his worship I am
innocent. 'I can indeed say,' replied the squire, that I am very much surprised
to see you in this situation; and then addressing himself to the justice, he
said, Sir, I assure you, Mr. Adams is a clergyman as he appears, and a
gentleman of a very good character. I wish you would enquire a little farther
into this affair; for I am convinced of his innocence. 'Nay,' says the justice,
if he is a gentleman, and you are sure he is innocent, I don't desire to commit
him, not I; I will commit the woman by herself, and take your bail for the
gentleman; look into the book, clerk, and see how it is to take bail; come --
and make the mittimus for the woman as fast as you can. 'Sir,' cries Adams, I
assure you she is as innocent as myself. 'Perhaps,' said the squire, there may
be some mistake; -- pray let us hear Mr. Adams's relation. With all my heart,
answered the justice, and give the gentleman a glass to whet his whistle before
he begins. I know how to behave myself to gentlemen as well as another. No body
can say I have committed a gentleman, since I have been in the commission.
Adams then began the narrative, in which, though he was very prolix, he was
uni^terrupted, unless by several hums and has of the justice, and his desire
to repeat those parts which seemed to him most material. When he had finished,
the justice, who, on what the squire had said, believed every syllable of his
story on his bare affirmation, notwithstanding the depositions on oath to the
contrary, began to let loose several rogues and rascals against the witness,
whom he ordered to stand forth, but in vain: the said witness, long sin^
finding what turn matters were like to take, (...) privily withdrawn, without
attending the issue. The justice now flew into a violent passion, and was
hardly prevailed with not to commit the innocent fellows, who had been imposed
on as well as himself. He swore, they had best find out the fellow who was
guilty of perjury, and bring him before him within two days, or he would bind
them all over to their good behavior. They all promised to use their best
endeavors to that purpose, and were dismissed. Then the justice insisted, that
Mr. Adams should sit down and take a glass with him; and the parson of the
parish delivered him back the manuscript without saying a word; nor would
Adams, who plainly discerned his ignorance, expose it. As for Fanny, she was,
at her own request, recommended to the care of a maidservant of the house, who
helped her to new dress, and clean herself.

The company in the parlour had not been long seated, before they were alarmed
with a horrible uproar from without, where the persons who had apprehended
Adams and Fanny, had been regaling, according to the custom of the house, with
the justice's strong beer. These were all fallen together by the ears, and were
cuffing each other without any mercy. The justice himself sallied out, and with
the dignity of his presence soon put an end to the fray. On his return into the
parlour, he reported That the occasion of the quarrel was no other than a
dispute, to whom, if Adams had been convicted, the greater share of the reward
for apprehending him had belonged. All the company laughed at this, except
Adams, who, taking his pipe from his mouth, fetched a deep groan, and said, he
was concerned to see so litigious a temper in men. That he remembered a story
something like it in one of the parishes where his cure lay: There was,
continued he, a competition between three young fellows for the place of the
clerk, which I disposed of to the best of my abilities, according to merit:
that is, I gave it to him who had the happiest knack at setting a psalm. The
clerk was no sooner established in his place than a contention began between
the two disappointed candidates concerning their excellence, each contending,
on whom, had they two been the only competitors, my election would have fallen.
This dispute frequently disturbed the congregation, and introduced a discord
into the psalmody, till I was forced to silence them both. But alas, the
litigious spirit could not be stifled; and being no longer able to vent itself
in singing, it now broke forth in fighting. It produced many battles, (for they
were very near a match;) and, I believe, would have ended fatally, had not the
death of the clerk given me an opportunity to promote one of them to the place;
which presently put an end to the dispute, and entirely reconciled the
contending parties. Adams then proceeded to make some philosophical
observations on the folly of growing warm in disputes, in which neither party
is interested. He then applied himself vigorously to smoking; and a long
silence ensued, which was at length broke by the justice; who began to sing
forth his own praises, and to value himself exceedingly on his nice discernment
in the cause which had lately been before him. He was quickly interrupted by
Mr. Adams, between whom and his worship a dispute now arose, whether he ought
not, in strictness of law, to have committed him, the said Adams; (...) which
the latter maintained he ought to have been committed, and the justice as
vehemently held be ought not. This had most probably produced a quarrel, (for
both were very violent and positive in their opinions) had not Fanny
accidentally heard, that a young fellow was going from the justice's house to
the very inn where the stage-coach, in which Joseph was, put up. Upon this
news, she immediately sent for the parson out of the parlour. Adams, when he
found her resolute to go, (though she would not own the reason, but pretended
she could not bear to see the faces of those who had suspected her of such a
crime) was as fully determined to go with her; he accordingly took leave of the
justice and company, and so ended a dispute in which the law seemed shamefully
to intend to set a magistrate and a divine together by the ears.

Chap. XII.
A very delightful adventure, as well to the persons concerned, as to the
good-natured reader.

ADAMS, Fanny, and the guide, set out together, about one in the morning, the
moon being just risen. They had not gone above a mile before a most violent
storm of rain obliged them to take shelter in an inn, or rather alehouse;
where Adams immediately procured himself a good fire, a toast and ale, and a
pipe, and began to smoke with great content, utterly forgetting every thing
that had happened.

Fanny sat likewise down by the fire; but was much more impatient at the storm.
She presently engaged the eyes of the host, his wife, the maid of the house,
and the young fellow who was their guide; they all conceived they had never
seen any thing half so handsome: and indeed, reader, if thou art of an amorous
hue, I advise you to skip over the next paragraph: which, to render our history
perfect, we are obliged to set down, humbly hoping, that we may escape the fate
of Pygmalion: for if it should happen to us or to thee to be struck with this
picture, we should be perhaps in as helpless a condition as Narcissus, and
might say to ourselves, quod petis est nusquam. Or, if the finest features in
it should set lady -- 's image before our eyes, we should be still in as bad a
situation, and might say to our desires, Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia.

Fanny was now in the nineteenth year of her age: she was tall and delicately
shaped; but not one of those slender young women, who seem rather intended to
hang up in the hall of an anatomist, than for any other purpose. On the
contrary, she was so plump, that she seemed bursting through her tight stays,
especially in the part which confined her swelling breasts. Nor did her hips
want the assistance of a hoop to extend them. The exact shape of her arms
denoted the form of those limbs which she concealed; and though they were a
little reddened by her labor; yet, if her sleeve slipped above her elbow, or her
handkerchief discovered any part of her neck, a whiteness appeared which the
finest Italian paint would be unable to reach. Her hair was of a chestnut brown,
and nature had been extremely lavish to her of it, which she had cut, and on
Sundays used to curl down her neck in the modern fashion. Her forehead was
high, her eyebrows arched, and rather full than otherwise. Her eyes black and
sparkling; her nose just inclining to the Roman; her lips red and moist, and
her under lip, according to the opinion of the ladies, too pouting. Her teeth
were white, but not exactly even. The smallpox had left one only mark on her
chin, which was so large it might have been mistaken for a dimple, had not her
left cheek produced one so near a neighbor to it, that the former served only
for a ^oil to the latter. Her complexion was fair, a little injured by the sun,
but overspread with such a bloom, that the finest ladies would have exchanged
all their white for it: add to these a countenance, in which, though she was
extremely bashful, a sensibility appeared almost incredible; and a sweetness
whenever she smiled, beyond either imitation or description. To conclude all,
she had a natural gentility, superior to the acquisition of art, and which
surprised all who beheld her.

This lovely creature was sitting by the fire with Adams, when her attention
was suddenly engaged by a voice from an inner room, which sung the following
song.

The SONG.
SAY, Chloe, where must the swain stray,
Who is by thy beauties undone,
To wash their remembrance away;
To what distant Lethe must run?
The wretch who is sentenced to die,
May escape, and leave justice behind;
From his country perhaps he may fly:
But O can he fly from his mind!
O rapture! unthought of before,
To be thus of Chloe possessed;
Nor she, nor no tyrant's hard power,
Her image can tear from my breast.
But felt not Narcissus more joy,
With his eyes he beheld his loved charms?
Yet what he beheld, the fond boy
More eagerly wished in his arms.
How can it thy dear image be,
Which fills thus my bosom with woe?
Can aught bear resemblance to thee,
Which grief and not joy can bestow?
This counterfeit snatch from my heart,
Ye powers, though with torment I rave,
Though mortal* will prove the fell smart,
I then shall find rest in my grave.
Ah! see the dear nymph over the plain
Come smiling and tripping along,
A thousand loves dance in her train;
The graces around her all throng.
To meet her soft Zephyrus flies,
And wafts all the sweets from the flowers;
Ah rogue! whilst he kisses her eyes,
More sweets from her breath be devours.
My soul, whilst I gaze, is on fire,
But her looks were so tender and kind;
My hope almost reached my desire,
And left lame despair far behind.
Transported with madness I flew,
And eagerly seized on my bliss;
Her bosom but half she withdrew,
But half she refused my fond kiss.
Advances like these made me bold,
I whispered her, Love -- we are alone,
The rest let immortals unfold,
No language can tell but their own.
Ah Chloe, expiring, I cried,
How long I thy cruelty bore?
Ah! Strephon, she blushing replied.
You never were so pressing before.
Adams had been ruminating all this time on a passage in AEschylus, without
attending in the least to the voice, though one of the most melodious that ever
was heard; when casting his eyes on Fanny, he cried out, 'Bless us, you look
extremely pale.' Pale! Mr. Adams, says she, O Jesus! and fell backwards in her
chair. Adams jumped up, flung his AEschylus into the fire, and fell a roaring
to the people of the (...) for help. He soon summoned every one into the room,
and the songster among the rest: but, O reader, when this nightingale, who was
no other than Joseph Andrews himself, saw his beloved Fanny in this situation
we have described her, can thou conceive the agitations of his mind? If thou
can not, wave that meditation to behold his happiness, when clasping her in
his arms, he found life and blood returning into her cheeks: when he saw her
open her beloved eyes, and heard her with the softest accent whisper, Are you
Joseph Andrews? 'Art thou my Fanny?' he answered eagerly, and pulling her to
his heart, he imprinted numberless kisses on her lips, without considering who
were present.

If prudes are offended at the lusciousness of this picture, they may take
their eyes off from it, and survey parson Adams dancing about the room in a
rapture of joy. Some philosophers may perhaps doubt, whether he was not the
happiest of the three; for the goodness of his heart enjoyed the blessings
which were exulting in the breasts of both the other two, together with his
own. But we shall leave such disquisitions as too deep for us, to those who are
building some favorite hypothesis, which they will refuse no metaphysical
rubbish to erect and support: for our part, we give it clearly on the side of
Joseph, whose happiness was not only greater than the parson's, but of longer
duration: for as soon as the first tumults of Adams's rapture were over, he
cast his eyes toward the fire, where AEschylus lay expiring; and immediately
rescued the poor ^emains, to wit, the sheep-skin covering of his dear friend,
which was the work of his own hands, and had been his inseparable companion for
^^wards of thirty years.

Fanny had no sooner perfectly ^^^^ered herself, than she began to restrain the
impetuosity of her transport; and reflecting on what she had done and suffered
in the presence of so many, she was immediately covered with confusion, and
pushing Joseph gently from her, she begged him to be quiet: nor would admit of
either kiss or embrace, any longer. Then seeing Mrs. Slipslop, she curt'sied,
and offered to advance to her; but that high woman would not return one of her
curt'sies; but casting her eyes another way, immediately withdrew into another
room, muttering as she went, she wondered who the creature was.

CHAP. XIII.
A dissertation concerning high people and low people, with Mrs. Slipslop's
departure in no very good temper of mind, and the evil plight in which she left
Adams and his company.

IT will doubtless seem extremely odd to many readers, that Mrs. Slipslop, who
had lived several years in the same house with Fanny, should in a short
separation utterly forget her. And indeed the truth is, that she remembered her
very well. As we would not willingly therefore, that any thing should appear
unnatural in this our history, we will endeavor to explain the reasons of her
conduct; nor do we doubt being able to satisfy the most curious reader, that
Mrs. Slipslop did not in the least deviate from the common road in this
behavior; and indeed, had she done otherwise, she must have descended below
herself, and would have very justly been liable to censure.

Be it known then, that the human species are divided into two sorts of people,
to wit, High people and Low people. As by high people I would not be understood
to mean persons literally born higher in their dimensions than the rest of the
species, nor metaphorically those of exalted characters or abilities; so by low
people I cannot be construed to intend the reverse. High people signify no
other than people of fashion, and low people those of no fashion. Now this word
Fashion has by long use lost its original meaning, from which at present it
gives us a very different idea; for I am deceived, if by persons of fashion, we
do not generally include a conception of birth and accomplishments superior to
the herd of mankind; whereas in reality, nothing more was originally meant by a
person of fashion, than a person who dressed himself in the fashion of the times;
and the word really and truly signifies no more at this day. Now the world
being thus divided into people of fashion, and people of no fashion, a fierce
con^ention arose between them; nor would those of one party, to avoid
suspicion, be seen publicly to speak to those of the other, though they often
held a very good correspondence in private. In this contention, it is difficult
to say which party succeeded: for whilst the people of fashion seized several
places to their own use, such as courts, assemblies, operas, balls, etc. the
people of no fashion, besides one royal place, called his majesty's
bear-garden, have been in constant possession of all hops, fairs, revels, etc.
Two places have been agreed to be divided between them, namely the church and
the playhouse; where they segregate themselves from each other in a remarkable
manner: for as the people of fashion exalt themselves at church over the heads
of the people of no fashion: so in the playhouse they abase themselves in the
same degree under their feet. This distinction I have never met with any one
able to account for: it is sufficient, that so far from looking on each other
as brethren in the Christian language* they seem scarce to regard each other as
of the same species. This the terms, strange persons, people one does not know,
the creature, wretches, beasts, brutes, and many other appellations evidently
demonstrate; which Mrs. Slipslop having often heard her mistress use, thought
she had also a right to use in her turn: and, perhaps, she was not mistaken;
for these two parties especially those bordering nearly on each other, to wit,
the lowest of the high, and the highest of the low, often change their parties
according to place and time; for those who are people of fashion in one place,
are often people of no fashion in another. And with regard to time, it may not
be unpleasant to survey the picture of dependence like a kind of ladder: as for
instance; early in the morning arises the postilion, or some other boy which
great families, no more than great ships, are without, and falls to brushing
the clothes, and cleaning the shoes of John the footman, who being dressed
himself, applies his hand to the same labors for Mr. Second-hand the squire's
gentleman; the gentleman in the like manner, a little later in the day, attends
the squire; the squire is no sooner equipped, than he attends the levee of my
lord; which is no sooner over, than my lord himself is seen at the levee of the
favorite, who, after the hour of homage is at an end, appears himself to pay
homage to the levee of his sovereign. Nor is there, perhaps, in this whole
ladder of dependence, any one step at a greater distance from the other, than
the first from the second: so that to a philosopher the question might only
seem, whether you would choose to be a great man at six in the morning, or at
two in the afternoon. And yet there are scarce two of these, who do not think
the least familiarity with the persons below them a condescension, and, if they
were to go one step farther, a degradation.

And now, reader, I hope thou will pardon this long digression, which ^eemed to
me necessary to vindicate the character of Mrs. Slipslop, from what low people
who have never seen high people, might think an absurdity: but we who know
them, must have daily found very high persons know us in one place and not in
another, today, and not tomorrow; all which it is difficult to account for,
otherwise than I have here endeavored: and perhaps, if the gods, according to
the opinion of some, made men only to laugh at them; there is no part of our
behavior which answers the end of our creation better than this.

But to return to our history: Adams who knew no more of this than the cat
which sat on the table, imagining Mrs. Slipslop's memory had been much worse
than it really was, followed her into the next room, crying out, Madam
Slipslop, here is one of your old acquaintance: do but see what a fine woman
she is grown since she left lady Booby's service. I think I reflect something
of her, answered she, with great dignity, but I cannot remember all the inferior
servants in our family. She then proceeded to satisfy Adams's curiosity, by
telling him, when she arrived at the inn, she found a chaise ready for her;
that her lady being expected very shortly in the country, she was obliged to
make the utmost haste, and in commensuration, of Joseph's lameness, she had
taken him with her; and lastly, that the excessive virulence of the storm had
driven them into the house where he found them. After which, she acquainted
Adams with his having left his horse, and expressed some wonder at his having
strayed so far out of his way, and at meeting him, as she said, in the company
of that wench, who she feared was no better than she should be.

The horse was no sooner put into Adams's head, but he was immediately driven
out by this reflection on the character of Fanny. He protested, ^e believed
there was not a chaster damsel in the universe. I heartily wish, I heartily
wish, cried he, (snapping his fingers) that all her betters were as good. He
then proceeded to inform her of the accident of their meeting; but when he came
to mention the circumstance of delivering her from the rape, she said, she
thought him properer for the army than the clergy: that it did not become a
clergyman to lay violent hands on any one; that he should have rather prayed
that she might be strengthened. Adams said, he was very far from being ashamed
of what he had done; she replied, want of shame was not the currycuristic of a
clergyman. This dialogue might have probably grown warmer, ^ad not Joseph
opportunely entered the room, (...) leave of Madam Slipslop to introduce Fanny:
but she positively refused to admit any such trollops; and told him, she would
have been burnt, before she would have suffered him to get into a chaise with
her, if she had once respected him of having his sluts waylaid on the road for
him; adding, that Mr. Adams acted a very pretty part, and she did not doubt but
to see him a bishop. He made the best bow he could, and cried out, I thank you,
madam, for that right reverend appellation, which I shall take all honest means
to deserve. Very honest means, returned she with a sneer, to bring good people
together. At which words Adams took two or three strides across the room, when
the coachman came to inform Mrs. Slipslop, that the storm was over, and the
moon shone very bright. She then sent for Joseph, who was sitting without with
his Fanny, and would have had him gone with her: but he peremptorily refused to
leave Fanny behind; which threw the good woman into a violent rage. She said,
she would inform her lady what doings were carrying on, and did not doubt but
she would rid the parish of all such people; and concluded a long speech full
of bitterness and very hard words, with some reflections on the clergy, not
decent to repeat: at last, finding Joseph unmovable, she flung herself into
the chaise, casting a look at Fanny as she went, not unlike that which
Cleopatra gives Octavia in the play. To say the truth, she was most
disagreeably disappointed by the presence of Fanny; she had, from her first
seeing Joseph at the inn, conceived hopes of something which might have been
accomplished at an alehouse as well as a palace. Indeed, it is probable Mr.
Adams had rescued more than Fanny from the danger of a rape that evening.

When the chaise had carried off the enraged Slipslop; Adams, Joseph, and Fanny
assembled over the fire; where they had a great deal of innocent chat, pretty
enough; but as possibly it would not be very entertaining to the reader, we
shall hasten to the morning; only observing that none of them went to bed that
night. Adams when he had smoaked three pipes, took a comfortable nap in a great
chair, and left the lovers, whose eyes were too well employed to permit any
desire of shutting them, to enjoy by themselves, during some hours, an
happiness which none of my readers who have never been in love, are capable of
the least conception of, though we had as many tongues as Homer desired to
describe it with, and which all true lovers will represent to their own minds
without the least assistance from us.

Let it suffice then to say, that Fanny, after a thousand entreaties, at last
gave up her whole soul to Joseph, and almost fainting in his arms, with a sigh
infinitely softer and sweeter too, than any Arabian breeze, she whispered to
his lips, which were then close to hers, O Joseph, you have won me; I will be
yours for ever. Joseph having thanked her on his knees, and embraced her with
eagerness, which she now almost returned, leapt up in a rapture, and awakened
the parson, earnestly begging him, that he would that instant join their hands
together. Adams rebuked him for his request, and told him, he would by no means
consent to any thing contrary to the forms of the church: that he had no
license, nor indeed would he advise him to obtain one. That the church had
prescribed a form, namely the publication of banns, with which all good
christians ought to comply, and to the omission of which he attributed the many
miseries which befell great folks in marriage: concluding, As many as are joined
together otherwise than G -- 's word does allow, are not joined together by G
--, neither is their matrimony lawful. Fanny agreed with the parson, saying to
Joseph with a blush, she assured him she would not consent to any such thing,
and that she wondered at his offering it. In which resolution she was
comforted, and commended by Adams; and Joseph was obliged to wait patiently
till after the third publication of the banns, which however he obtained the
consent of Fanny, in the presence of Adams, to put in at their arrival.

The sun had been now risen some hours, when Joseph finding his leg
surprizingly recovered, proposed to walk forward; but when they were all ready
to set out, an accident a little retarded them. This was no other than the
reckoning, which amounted to seven shillings; no great sum, if we consider the
immense quantity of ale which Mr. Adams poured in. Indeed they had no objection
to the reasonableness of the bill, but many to the probability of paying it;
for the fellow who had taken poor Fanny's purse, had unluckily forgot to return
it. So that the account stood thus: Mr. Adams and company Dr. 0 7 0 In Mr.
Adams's Pocket, 0 0 6 In Mr. Joseph's, 0 0 0 In Mrs. Fanny's, 0 0 0 Balance, 0
6 5 They stood silent some few minutes, staring at each other, when Adams whipped
out on his toes, and asked the hostess 'if there was no clergyman in that
parish? she answered 'there was.' 'Is he wealthy?' replied he; to which she
answered in the affirmative. Adams then snapping his fingers returned overjoyed
to his companions, crying out, Heureka, Heureka; which not being understood, he
told them in plain English, they need give themselves no trouble; for he had a
brother in the parish, who would defray the reckoning, and that he would just
step to his house and fetch the money, and return to them immediately.

CHAP. XIV.
An interview between parson Adams and parson Trulliber.

PARSON Adams came to the house of Parson Trulliber, whom he found stripped into
his waistcoat, with an apron on, and a pale in his hand, just come from serving
his hogs; for Mr. Trulliber was a parson on Sundays, but all the other six
might more properly be called a farmer. He occupied a small piece of land of
his own, besides which he rented a considerable deal more. His wife milked his
cows, managed his dairy, and followed the markets with butter and eggs. The
hogs ^ell chiefly to his care, which he carefully waited on at home, and
attended to fairs; on which occasion he was liable to many jokes, his own size
being with much ale rendered little inferior to that of the beasts he sold. He
was indeed one of the largest men you should see, and could have acted the part
of Sir John Falstaff without stuffing. Add to this, that the rotundity of his
belly was considerably increased by the shortness of his stature, his shadow
ascending very near as far in height when he lay on his back, as when he stood
on his legs. His voice was loud and hoarse, and his accent extremely broad; to
complete the whole, he had a stateliness in his gait, when he walked, not
unlike that of a goose, only he stalked slower.

Mr. Trulliber being informed that somebody wanted to speak with him,
immediately slipped off his apron, and clothed himself in an old nightgown,
being the dress in which he always saw his company at home. His wife, who
informed of Mr. Adams's arrival, had made a small mistake; for she had told her
husband, she believed here was a man come for some of his hogs. This
supposition made Mr. Trulliber hasten with the utmost expedition to attend his
guest. He no sooner saw Adams, than not in the least doubting the cause of his
errand to be what his wife had imagined, he told him, he was come in very good
time; that he expected a dealer that very afternoon; and added, they were all
pure and fat, and upwards of 20 score a piece. Adams answered, 'he believed he
did not know him.' Yes, yes,' cried Trulliber, I have seen you often at fair;
why, we have dealt before now, mun, I warrant you; yes, yes, cries he, I
remember thy face very well, but will not mention a word more till you have seen
them, though I have never sold thee a flitch of such bacon as is now in the stye.
Upon which he laid violent hands on Adams, and dragged him into the hogs-stye,
which was indeed but two steps from his parlour-window. They were no sooner
arrived there than he cried out, Do but handle them; step in, friend, art
welcome to handle them, whether do buy or no. A^ which words opening the
gate, he pushed Adams into the pig-stye, insisting on it, that he should handle
them before he would talk one word with him. Adams, whose natural complaisance
was beyond any artificial, was obliged to comply before he was suffered to
explain himself; and laying hold on one of their tails, the unruly beast gave
such a sudden spring, that he threw poor Adams all along in the mire.
Trulliber, instead of assisting him to get up, burst into a laughter, and
entering the stye, said to Adams, with some contempt* Why, do not know how to
handle a hog? and was going to lay hold of one himself; but Adams, who thought
he had carried his complaisance far enough, was no sooner on his legs, than he
escaped out of the reach of the animals, and cried out, Nihil habeo cum porcis:
I am a clergyman, Sir, and am not come to buy hogs. Trulliber answered, he was
sorry for the mistake; but that he must blame his wife; adding, she was a fool,
and always committed blunders. He then desired him to walk in and clean
himself; that he would only fasten up the stye and follow him. Adams desired
leave to dry his great coat, wig and hat, by the fire, which Trulliber granted.
Mrs. Trulliber would have brought him a basin of water to wash his face; but
her husband bid her be quiet, like a fool, as she was, or she would commit more
blunders, and then directed Adams to the pump. While Adams was thus employed,
Trulliber perceiving no great respect for the appearance of his guest, fastened
the parlour-door, and now conducted him into the kitchen; telling him, he
believed a cup of drink would do him no harm, and whispered his wife to draw a
little of the worst ale. After a short silence, Adams said, I fancy, Sir, you
already perceive me to be a clergyman. 'Ay, ay,' cries Trulliber grinning; I
perceive you have some cassock; I will not venture to caale it a whole one.
Adams answered, it was indeed none of the best; but he had the misfortune to
tear it about ten years ago in passing over a style. Mrs. Trulliber returning
with the drink, told her husband, she fancied the gentleman was a traveller,
and that he would be glad to eat a bit, Trulliber bid her hold her impertinent
tongue; and asked her, if parsons used to travel without horses? adding, he
supposed the gentleman had none by his having no boots on. Yes, Sir, yes, says
Adams, I have a horse, but I left him behind me. 'I am glad to hear you have
one,' says Trulliber; for I assure you I don't love to see clergymen on foot;
it is not seemly nor suiting the dignity of the cloth. Here Trulliber made a
long oration on the dignity of the cloth, (or rather gown) not worth much
relating, till his wife had spread the table and set a mess of porridge on it
for his breakfast. He then said to Adams, I don't know, friend, how you came to
caale on me; however, as you are here, if you think proper to eat a morsel, you
may. Adams accepted the invitation, and the two parsons sat down together, Mrs.
Trulliber waiting behind her husband's chair, as was, it seems, her custom.
Trulliber eat heartily, but scarce put any thing in his mouth without finding
fault with his wife's cookery. All which the poor woman bore patiently. Indeed
she was so absolute an admirer of her husband's greatness and importance, of
which she had frequent hints from his own mouth, that she almost carried her
adoration to an opinion of infallibility. To say the truth, the parson had
exercised her more ways than one, and the pious woman had so well edified by
her husband's sermons, that she had resolved to receive the bad things of the
world together with the good. She had indeed been at first a little
contentious; but he had long since got the better, partly by her love for this,
partly by her fear for that, partly by her religion, partly by the respect he
paid himself, and partly by that which she received from the parish: She had,
in short, absolutely submitted, and now worshipped her husband as Sarah did
Abraham, calling him (not lord but) master. Whilst they were at the table, her
husband gave her a fresh example of his greatness; for as she had just
delivered a cup of ale to Adams, he snatched it out of his hand, and, crying
out, I caal'd vurst, swallowed down the ale. Adams denied it; as was referred
to the wife, who, though her conscience was on the side of Adams, durst not give
it against her husband. Upon which he said, No, Sir, no. I should not have been
so rude to have taken it from you, if you had caal'd vurst; but I Would have you
know I Am a better man than to suffer the best he in the kingdom to drink before
me in my own house, when I caale vurst.

As soon as their breakfast was ended, Adams began in the following manner: I
think, Sir, it is high time to inform you of the business of my embassy. I am a
traveller, and am passing this way in company with two young people, a lad and
a damsel, my parishoners, toward my own cure: we stopped at a house of
hospitality in the parish, where they directed me to you, as having the cure.
-- Though I am but a curate, says Trulliber, I believe I am as warm as the vicar
himself, or perhaps the rector of the next parish too; I believe I could buy
them both. 'Sir,' cries Adams, I rejoice thereat. Now, Sir, my business is,
that we are by various accidents stripped of our money, and are not able to pay
our reckoning, being seven shillings. I therefore request you to assist me with
the loan of those seven shillings, and also seven shillings more, which
peradventure I shall return to you; but if not, I am convinced you will
joyfully embrace such an opportunity of laying up a treasure in a better place
than any this world affords.

Suppose a stranger who entered the chambers of a lawyer, being imagined a
client, when the lawyer was preparing his palm for the fee, should pull out a
writ against him. Suppose an apothecary, at the door of ^^ariot containing some
great doctor of eminent skill, should instead of directions to a patient,
present him with a potion for himself. Suppose a minister should, instead of a
good round sum, treat my Lord -- or Sir -- or Esquire -- with a good broom-stick.
Suppose a civil companion, or a led captain should, instead of virtue, and
honor, and beauty, and parts, and admiration, thunder vice and infamy, and
ugliness, and folly, and contempt in his patron's ears. Suppose when a
tradesman first carries in his bill the man of fashion should pay it; or
suppose, if he did so, the tradesman should abate what he had overcharged on
the supposition of waiting. In short, -- suppose what you will, you never can,
nor will suppose any thing equal to the astonishment which seized on Trulliber,
as soon as Adams had ended his speech. A while he rolled his eyes in silence,
sometimes surveying Adams, then his wife, then casting them on the ground, then
lifting them up to heaven. At last, he burst forth in the following accents.
Sir, I believe I know where to lay up my little treasure as well as another; I
thank G -- if I am not so warm as some, I am content; that is a blessing
greater than riches; and he to whom that is given need ask no more. To be
content with a little is greater than to possess the world, which man may
possess without being so. Lay up my treasures! what matters where a man's
treasure is, whose heart is in the scripture? there is the treasure of a
christian. At these words the water ran from Adams's eyes; and catching
Trulliber by the hand in a rapture, 'Brother,' says he, heavens bless the
accident by which I came to see you; I would have walked many a mile to have
communed with you, and believe me, I shall shortly pay you a second visit: but
my friends, I fancy, by this time, wonder at my stay; so let me have the money
immediately. Trulliber then put on a stern look, and cried out, 'Thou do not
intend to rob me?' At which the wife bursting into tears, fell on her knees,
and roared out, O dear Sir, for heaven's sake don't rob my master, we are but
poor people. Get up, for a fool as thou art, and go about thy business, said
Trulliber, do thou think the man will venture his life? he is a beggar, and
no robber. 'Very true indeed,' answered Adams. I wish with all my heart, the
tithing-man was here, cries Trulliber, I would have thee punished as a vagabond
for thy impudence. Fourteen shillings indeed! I will not give thee a farthing, I
believe thou art no more a clergyman than the woman there, (pointing to his
wife) but if thou art, do deserve to have thy gown stripped over thy shoulders,
for running about the country in such a manner. I forgive your suspicions, says
Adams; but suppose I Am not a clergyman, I am nevertheless thy brother; and
thou, as a christian, much more as a clergyman, art obliged to relieve my
distress. -- 'Dost preach to me?' replied Trulliber, do pretend to instruct
me in my duty? Isacks, a good story, cries Mrs. Trulliber, to preach to my
master. 'Silence, woman,' cries Trulliber, I would have thee know, friend,
(addressing himself to Adams) I shall not learn my duty from such as thee; I
know what charity is, better than to give it to vagabonds. Besides, if we were
inclined, the poors rate obliges us to give so much charity, cries the wife. --
'Pugh!' thou art a fool. Poors rate! hold thy nonsense, answered Trulliber: and
then turning to Adams, he told him he would give him nothing. 'I am sorry,'
answered Adams, that you do know what charity is, since you practice it no
better; I must tell you, if you trust to your knowledge for your justification,
you will find yourself deceived, though you should add faith to it without good
works. 'Fellow,' cries Trulliber, do thou speak against faith in my house?
Get out of my doors, I will no longer remain under the same roof with a wretch
who speaks wantonly of faith and the sciptures, Name not the scriptures, says
Adams. How, not name the scriptures! Do you disbelieve the scriptures? cries
Trulliber. 'No, but you do,' answered Adams, if I may reason from your
practice: for their commands are so explicit, and their rewards and punishments
so immense, that it is impossible a man should steadfastly believe without
obeying* Now there is no command more express, no duty more frequently
enjoined, than charity. Whoever therefore is void of charity, I make no scruple
of pronouncing that he is no christian. I would not advise thee, (says
Trulliber) to say that I am no christian; I will not take it of you: for I believe
I am as good a man as thyself; (and indeed, though he was now rather too
corpulent for athletic exercises, he had in his youth been one of the best
boxers and cudgel-players in the country.) His wife, seeing him clench his
fist, interposed and begged him not to fight, but show himself a true
christian, and take the law of him. As nothing could provoke Adams to strike,
but an absolute assault on himself or his friend, he smiled at the angry look
and gestures of Trulliber; and telling him, he was sorry to see such men in
orders, departed without further ceremony.

CHAP. XV.
An adventure, the consequence of a new instance which parson Adams gave of his
forgetfulness.

WHEN he came back to the inn, he found Joseph and Fanny sitting together. They
were so far from thinking his absence long, as he had feared they would, that
they never once missed or thought of him. Indeed I have been often assured by
both, that they spent these hours in a most delightful conversation: But as I
never could prevail on either to relate it; so I cannot communicate it to the
reader.

Adams acquainted the lovers with the ill success of his enterprise. They were
all greatly confounded, none being able to propose any method of departing,
till Joseph at last advised calling in the hostess, and desiring her to trust
them: which Fanny faid she despaired of her doing, as she was one of the
sourest-fac'd women she had ever beheld.

But she was agreeably disappointed; for the hostess was no sooner asked the
question than she readily agreed; and with a curt'sy and smile wished them a
good journey. However, lest Fanny's skill in physiognomy should be called in
question, we will venture to assign one reason, which might probably incline
her to this confidence and good humor. When Adams said he was going to visit
his brother, he had unwittingly imposed on Joseph and Fanny; who both believed
he had meant his natural brother, and not his brother in divinity; and had so
informed the hostess on her enquiry after him. Now Mr. Trulliber had by his
professions of piety, by his gravity, austerity, reserve, and opinion of his
great wealth, so great an authority in his parish, that they all lived in the
utmost fear and apprehension of him. It was therefore no wonder that the
hostess, who knew it was in his option whether she should ever sell another mug
of drink, did not dare to affront his supposed brother by denying him credit.

They were now just on their departure, ^hen Adams recollected he had left his
great coat and h^t at Mr. Trulliber's. As he was not desirous of renewing his
visit, the hostess herself, having no servant at home, offered to fetch it.

This was an unfortunate expedient: for the hostess was soon undeceived in the
opinion she had entertained of Adams, whom Trulliber abused in the grossest
terms, especially when he heard he had the assurance to pretend to be his near
relation.

At her return therefore, she entirely changed her note. She said, Folks might
be ashamed of traveling about, and pretending to be what they were not. That
taxes were high, and for her part, she was obliged to pay for what she had: she
could not therefore possibly, nor would she trust any body, no not her own
father. That money was never scarcer, and she wanted to make up a sum. That she
expected therefore they should pay their reckoning before they left the house.

Adams was now greatly perplexed: but as he knew that he could easily have
borrowed such a sum in his own parish, and as he knew he would have lent it
himself to any mortal in distress; so he took fresh courage, and sallied out
all round the parish, but to no purpose; he returned as pennyless as he went,
groaning and lamenting, that it was impossible, in a country professing
christianity, for a wretch to starve in the midst of his fellow creatures who
abounded.

Whilst he was gone, the hostess, who stayed as a sort of guard with Joseph and
Fanny, entertained them with the goodness of parson Trulliber. And indeed he
had not only a very good character, (...) to other qualities, in the
neighborhood, but (...) reputed a man of great charity: for though he never gave
a farthing, he had always that word in his m^^th.

Adams was no sooner returned the second time, than the storm grew exceeding
high, the hostess declaring among other things, that if they offered to stir
without paying her, she would soon overtake them with a warrant.

Plato and Aristotle, or somebody else has said, THAT WHEN THE MOST EXQUISITE
CUNNING FAILS, CHANCE OFTEN HITS THE MARK, AND THAT BY MEANS THE LEAST
EXPECTED. Virgil expresses this very boldly: Turn, quod optanti divum
promittere nemo
Auderet volvenda dies, en! attulit ultro.
I would quote more great men if I could: but my memory not permitting me, I
will proceed to exemplify these observations by the following instance.

There chanced (for Adams had not cunning enough to contrive it) to be at that
time (...) the alehouse, a fellow, who had been formerly a drummer in an Irish
regiment, and now traveled the country as a pedlar. This man having
attentively listened to the discourse of the hostess, at last took Adams aside,
and asked him what the sum was for which they were detained. As soon as he was
informed, he sighed, and said, he was sorry it was so much: for that he had no
more than six shillings and sixpence in his pocket, which he would lend them
with all his heart. Adams gave a caper, and cried out, It would do: for that he
had sixpence himself. And thus these poor people, who could not engage the
compassion of riches and piety, were at length delivered out of their distress
by the charity of a poor pedlar.

I shall refer it to my reader to make what observations he pleases on this
incident: it is sufficient for me to inform him, that after Adams and his
companions had returned him a thousand thanks, and told him where he might call
to be repaid, they all sallied out of the house without any compliments from
their hostess, or indeed without paying her any; Adams declaring, he would take
particular care never to call there again, and she on her side assuring them
she wanted no such guests.

CHAP. XVI.
A very curious adventure, in which Mr. Adams gave a much greater instance of
the honest simplicity of his heart ^^an of his experience in the ways of this
world.

OUR travelers had walked about two miles from that inn, which they had more
reason to have mistaken for a castle, that Don Quixote ever had any of those in
which he sojourned; seeing they had met with much difficulty in escaping out of
its walls; when they came to a parish, and beheld a sign of invitation hanging
out. A gentleman sat smoking a pipe at the door; of whom Adams enquired the
road, and received so courteous and obliging an answer, accompanied with so
smiling a countenace, that the good parson, whose heart was naturally disposed
to love and affection, began to ask several other questions; particularly the
name of the parish, and who was the owner of a large house whose front they
then had in prospect. The gentleman answered as obligingly as before: and as to
the house, acquainted him it was his own. He then proceeded in the following
manner: Sir, I presume by your habit you are a clergyman: and as you are
traveling on foot, I suppose a glass of good beer will not be disagreeable to
you; and I can recommend my landlord's within, as some of the best in all this
country. What say you, will you halt a little and let us take a pipe together?
There is no better tobacco in the kingdom. This proposal was not displeasing to
Adams, who had allayed his thirst that day with no better liquor than what Mrs.
Trulliber's cellar had produced; and which was indeed little superior either in
richness or flavor to that which distilled from those grains her generous
husband bestowed on his hogs. Having therefore abundantly thanked the gentleman
for his kind invitation, and bid Joseph and Fanny follow him, he entered the
alehouse, (...) a large loaf and cheese, and a pitcher of beer, (...) truly
answered the character given of it, being set before them, the three travelers
fell to eating with appetites infinitely more voracious than are to be found at
the most exquisite eating-houses in the parish of St. James's.

The gentleman expressed great delight in the hearty and cheerful behavior of
Adams; and particularly in the familiarity with which he conversed with Joseph
and Fanny, whom he often called his children, a term he explained to mean no
more than his parishioners; saying, he looked on all those whom God had
entrusted to his cure, to stand to him in that relation. The gentleman, shaking
him by the hand, highly applauded those sentiments. 'They are indeed,' says he,
the true principles of a christian divine; and I heartily wish they were
universal: but on the contrary, I am sorry to say the parson of our parish,
instead of esteeming his poor parishioners as a part of his family, seems
rather to consider them as not of the same species with himself. He seldom
speaks to any, unless some few of the richest of us; nay, indeed he will not
move his hat to the others. I often laugh, when I behold him on Sundays
strutting along the churchyard like a turky-cock, through rows of his
parishioners; who bow to him with as much submission, and are as unregarded as
a set of servile courtiers by the proudest prince in Christendom. But if such
temporal pride is ridiculous, surely the spiritual is odious and detestable: if
such a puffed-up empty human bladder, strutting in princely robes, just moves
one's derision; surely in the habit of a priest it must raise out scorn.

(...) answered Adams, your opinion is right (...) I hope such examples are
rare. The clergy whom I have the honor to know, maintain a different
behavior; and you will allow me, Sir, that the readiness which too many of the
laity show to contemn the order, may be one reason of (...) avoiding too much
humility. Very true indeed, says the gentleman; I find, Sir, you are a man of
excellent sense, and am happy in this opportunity of knowing you: perhaps our
accidental meeting may not be disadvantageous to you neither. At present, I
shall only say to you, that the incumbent of this living is old and infirm; and
that it is in my gift. Doctor, give me your hand; and assure yourself of it at
his decease. Adams told him, he was never more confounded in his life, than at
his utter incapacity to make any return to such noble and unmerited generosity.
'A mere trifle, Sir,' cries the gentleman, scarce worth your acceptance; a
little more than three hundred a year. I wish it was double the value for your
sake. Adams bowed, and cried from the emotions of his gratitude; when the other
asked him, if he was married, or had any children, besides those in the
spiritual sense he had mentioned. 'Sir,' replied the parson, I have a wife and
six at your service. That is unlucky, says the gentleman; for I would otherwise
have taken you into my own house as my chaplain; however, I have another in the
parish, (for the parsonage-house is not good enough) which I will furnish for
you. Pray does your wife understand a dairy? I cannot profess she does, says
Adams, I am sorry for it, quoth the gentleman; I would have given you half a
dozen cows, and very good grounds to have maintained them. 'Sir', says Adams
(...) an ecstacy, you are too liberal; indeed (...) are. 'Not at all,' cries
the gentleman, I esteem riches only as they give me an opportunity of doing
good; and I never saw one whom I had a greater inclination to serve. At which
words he shook him heartily by the hand, and told him he had sufficient room in
his house to entertain him and his friends. Adams begged he might give him no
such trouble; that he could be very well accommodated in the house where they
were; forgetting they had not a sixpenny piece among them. The gentleman would
not be denied; and informing himself how far they were traveling, he said it
was too long a journey to take on foot, and begged that they would favor him,
by suffering him to lend them a servant and horses; adding withal, that if they
would do him the pleasure of their company only two days, he would furnish them
with his coach and six. Adams turning to Joseph said, How lucky is this
gentleman's goodness to you, who I am afraid would be scarce able to hold out
on your lame leg: and then addressing the person who made him these liberal
promises, after much bowing, he cried out, Blessed be the hour which first
introduced me to a man of your charity: you are indeed a christian of the true
primitive kind, and an honor to the country wherein you live. I would
willingly have taken a pilgrimage to the holy land to have beheld you: For the
advantages which we draw from your goodness, give me little pleasure, in
comparison of what I enjoy for your own sake; when I consider the treasures you
are by these means laying up for yourself in a country that passes not away.
We will therefore, most generous Sir, accept your goodness, as well the
entertainment you have so kindly offered us at your house this evening, as the
accommodation of your horses tomorrow morning. He then began to search for his
hat, as did Joseph for his; and both they and Fanny were in order of departure,
when the gentleman stopping short, and seeming to meditate by himself for the
space of about a minute, exclaimed thus: Sure never any thing was so unlucky; I
had forgot that my housekeeper was gone abroad, and has locked up all my
rooms; indeed I would break them open for you, but shall not be able to furnish
you with a bed; for she has likewise put away all my linen. I am glad it
entered into my head, before I had given you the trouble of walking there;
besides, I believe you will find better accommodations here than you expected.
Landlord, you can provide good beds for these people, cannot you? 'Yes, and
please your worship,' cries the host, and such as no lord or justice of the
peace in the kingdom need be ashamed to lie in. I am heartily sorry, says the
gentleman, for this disappointment. I am resolved I will never suffer her to
carry away the keys again. Pray Sir, let it not make you uneasy, cries Adams,
we shall do very well here; and the loan of your horses is a favor we shall be
incapable of making any return to Ay! said the squire, the horses shall attend
you here, at what hour in the morning you please. And now after many civilities
too tedious to enumerate, many squeezes by the hand, with most affectionate
looks and smiles at each other, and after appointing the horses at seven the
next morning, the gentleman took his leave of them, and departed to his own
house. Adams and his companions returned to the table, where the parson smoaked
another pipe, and then they all retired to rest.

Mr. Adams rose very early, and called Joseph out of his bed, between whom a
very fierce dispute ensued, whether Fanny should ride behind Joseph, or behind
the gentleman's servant; Joseph insisted on it that he was perfectly recovered,
and was as capable of taking care of Fanny as any other person could be. But
Adams would not agree to it, and declared he would not trust her behind him;
for that he was weaker than he imagined himself to be.

This dispute continued a long time, and had begun to be very hot, when a
servant arrived from their good friend to acquaint them, that he was
unfortunately prevented from lending them any horses; for that his groom had,
unknown to him, put his whole stable under a course of physic.

This advice presently struck the two disputants dumb; Adams cried out, was
ever any thing so unlucky as this poor gentleman? I protest I am more sorry on
his account than my own. You see, Joseph, how this good-natured man is treated
by his servants; one lo^ks up his linen, another physics his horses; and I
suppose by his being at this house last night, the butler had locked up his
cellar. Bless us! how goodnature is used in this world! I protest I am more
concerned on his account than my own. 'So am I,' cries Joseph; not that I am
much troubled about walking on foot; all my concern is, (...) we shall get out
of the house; unless God sends another pedlar to redeem us. But certainly this
gentleman has such an affection for you, that he would lend you a larger sum
than we owe here; which is not above four or five shillings. 'Very true,
child,' answered Adams; I will write a letter to him, and will even venture to
solicit him for three hal^-crown^; there will be no harm in having two or
three shillings in our pockets; as we have full forty miles to travel, we may
possibly have occasion for them.

Fanny being now risen, Joseph paid her a visit, and left Adams to write his
letter, which having finished, he dispatched a boy with it to the gentleman,
and then seated himself by the door, lighted his pipe, and betook himself to
meditation.

The boy staying longer than seemed to be necessary, Joseph, who with Fanny was
now returned to the parson, expressed some apprehensions, that the gentleman's
steward had locked up his purse too. To which Adams answered, It might very
possibly be; and he should wonder at no liberties which the devil might put
into the head of a wicked servant to take with so worthy a master: but added,
that as the sum was so small, so noble a gentleman would be easily able to
procure it in the parish; though he had it not in his own pocket. Indeed, says
he, if it was four or five guineas, or any such large quantity of money, it
might be a different matter.

They were now sat down to breakfast over some toast and ale, when the boy
returned, and informed them, 'that the gentleman was not at home.' Very well!
cries Adams; but why, child, did you not stay 'till his return? Go back again,
my good boy, and (...) for his coming home: he cannot be gone far, as his
horses are all sick; and besides he had (...) intention to go abroad; for he
invited us to spend this day and tomorrow at his house. Therefore go back,
child, and tarry 'till his return home. The messenger departed, and was back
again with great expedition; bringing an account, that the gentleman was gone a
long journey, and would not be at home again this month. At these words Adams
seemed greatly confounded, saying, This must be a sudden accident, as the
sickness or death of a relation, or some such unforeseen misfortune; and then
turning to Joseph, cried, I wish you had reminded me to have borrowed this
money last night. Joseph smiling, answered, he was very much deceived, if the
gentleman would not have found some excuse to avoid lending it. I own, says he,
I was never much pleased with his professing so much kindness for you at first
sight: for I have heard the gentlemen of our cloth in London tell many such
stories of their masters. But when the boy brought the message back of his not
being at home, I presently knew what would follow; for whenever a man of
fashion does not care to fulfill his promises, the custom is, to order his
servants that he will never be at home to the person so promised. In London
they call it denying him. I have denied Sir Thomas Booby above an hundred
times; and when the man has danced attendance for about a month, or sometimes
longer, he is acquainted in the end, that the gentleman is gone out of town,
and could do nothing in the business. 'Good lord!' says Adams, what wickedness
is there in the christian world? I profess almost equal to what I have heard of
the heathens. But surely, Joseph, your suspicions of this gentleman must (...)
unjust; for what a silly fellow must he be, who would do the devil's work for
nothing; and can (...) me any interest he could possibly propose to himself
by deceiving us in his professions? It is not for me, answered Joseph, to give
reasons for what men do, to a gentleman of your learning. You say right, quoth
Adams; knowledge of men is only to be learnt from books; Plato and Seneca for
that; and those are authors, I am afraid, child, you never read. 'Not I, Sir,
truly,' answered Joseph; all I know is, it is a maxim among the gentlemen of
our cloth, that those masters who promise the most perform the least; and I
have often heard them say, they have found the largest vails in those families
where they were not promised any. But, Sir, instead of considering any farther
these matters, it would be our wisest way to contrive some method of getting
out of this house: for the generous gentleman, instead of doing us any service
has left us the whole reckoning to pay. Adams was going to answer, when their
host came in, and, with a kind of jeering smile, said, Well, masters! the
squire has not sent his horses for you yet. Laud help me! how easily some
folks make promises! How! says Adams, have you ever known him to do any thing
of the kind before? Ay marry have I, answered the host; it is no business of
mine, you know, Sir, to say any thing to a gentleman to his face: but now he is
not here, I will assure you, he has not his fellow within the three next
market towns. I own I could not help laughing, when I heard him offer you the
living; for thereby hangs a good jest. I thought he would have offered you my
house next; for one is no more his to dispose of than the other. At these
words, Adams blessing himself declared, he had never read of such a monster;
but what vexes me most, says he, is, that he has decoyed us into running up a
long debt with you, which we are not able to pay; for we have no money about
us; and, what is worse, live at such a distance, that if you should trust us, I
am afraid you would lose your money, for want of our finding any convenience of
sending it. Trust you, master, says the host, that I will with all my heart; I
honor the clergy too much to deny trusting one of them for such a trifle;
besides, I like your fear of never paying me. I have lost many a debt in my
lifetime; but was promised to be paid them all in a very short time. I will
score this reckoning for the novelty of it. It is the first I do assure you of
its kind. But what say you, master, shall we have the other pot before we part?
it will waste but a little chalk more; and if you never pay me a shilling, the
loss will not ruin me. Adams liked the invitation very well; especially as it
was delivered with so hearty an accent. -- He shook his host by the hand, and,
thanking him, said, he would tarry another pot, rather for the pleasure of such
worthy company, than for the liquor; adding, he was glad to find some
christians left in the kingdom; for that he almost began to suspect that he was
sojourning in a country inhabited only by Jews and Turks.

The kind host produced the liquor, and Joseph with Fanny retired into the
garden; where while they solaced themselves with amorous discourse, Adams sat
down with his host; and both filling their glasses, and lighting their pipes,
they began that dialogue which the reader will find in the next chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
A dialogue between Mr. Abraham Adams and his host, which by the disagreement
in their opinions, seemed to threaten an unlucky catastrophe, had it not been
timely prevented by the return of the lovers.

SIR, said the host, I assure you, you are not the first to whom our squire
has promised more than he has performed. He is so famous for this practice,
that his word will not be taken for much by those who know him. I remember a
young fellow whom he promised his parents to make an exciseman. The poor
people, who could ill afford it, bred their son to writing, accounts, and other
learning, to qualify him for the place, and the boy held up his head above his
condition with these hopes: nor would he go to plough, nor to any other kind of
work; and went constantly dressed as fine as could be, with two clean holland
shirts a week, and this for several years; 'till at last he followed the squire
up to London, thinking there to mind him of his promises: but he could never
get sight of him. So that being out of money and business, he fell into evil
company, and wicked courses: and in the end came to a sentence of
transportation, the news of which broke the mother's heart. I will tell you
another true story of him: There was a neighbor of mine, a farmer, who had two
sons whom he bred up to the business. Pretty lads they were; nothing would
serve the squire, but that the youngest must be made a parson. Upon which, he
persuaded the father to send him to school, promising, that he would afterward
maintain him at the university; and when he was of a proper age, give him a
living. But after the lad had been seven years at school, and his father
brought him to the squire with a letter from his master, that he was fit for
the university; the squire instead of minding his promise, or sending him
thither at his expense, only told his father, that the young man was a fine
scholar; and it was a pity he could not afford to keep him at Oxford for four
or five years more, by which time, if he could get him a curacy, he might have
him ordained. The farmer said, he was not a man ^ufficient to do any such
thing. 'Why then,' answered the squire, I am very sorry you have given him so
much learning; for if he cannot get his living by that, it will rather spoil
him for any thing else; and your other son who can hardly write his name, will
do more at ploughing and sowing, and is in a better condition than he: and
indeed so it proved; for the poor lad, not finding friends to maintain him in
his learning as he had expected, and being unwilling to work, fell to drinking,
though he was a very sober lad before; and, in a short time, partly with grief,
and partly with good liquor, fell into a consumption and died. Nay; I can tell
you more still: There was another, a young woman, and the handsomest in all
this neighborhood, whom he enticed up to London, promising to make her a
gentlewoman to one of your women of quality: but instead of keeping his word,
we have since heard, after having a child by her himself, she became a common
whore; then kept a coffee-house in Covent Garden; and a little after died of
the French distemper in a goal. I could tell you many more stories; but how do
you imagine he served me myself? You must know, Sir, I was bred a seafaring
man, and have been many voyages; 'till at last I came to be a master of a ship
myself, and was in a fair way of making a fortune, when I was attacked by one
of those cursed Guarda-Costas, who took our ships before the beginning of the
war; and after a fight, wherein I lost the greater part of my crew, my rigging
being all demolished, and two shots received between wind and water, I was
forced to strike. The villains carried off my ship, a brigantine of an hundred
and fifty tons, a pretty creature she was, and put me, a man and a boy, into a
little bad pink, in which, with much ado, we at last made Falmouth; though I
believe the Spaniards did not imagine she could possibly live a day at sea.
Upon my return hither, where my wife, who was of this country, then lived, the
squire told me he was so pleased with the defense I had made against the enemy,
that he did not fear getting me promoted to a lieutenancy of a man of war, if I
would accept of it; which I thankfully assured him I would. Well, Sir, two or
three years passed, during which I had many repeated promises, not only from
the squire, but (as he told me) from the lords of the admiralty. He never
returned from London, but I was assured I might be satisfied now, for I was
certain of the first vacancy; and what surprises me still, when I reflect on
it, these assurances were given me with no less confidence, after so many
disappointments, than at first. At last, Sir growing weary, and somewhat
suspicious, after so much delay, I wrote to a friend in London, who I knew had
some acquaintance at the best house in the admiralty, and desired him to back
the squire's interest: for indeed, I feared he had solicited the affair with
more coolness than he pretended. -- And what answer do you think my friend sent
me? -- Truly, Sir, he acquainted me, that the squire had never mentioned my
name at the admiralty in his life; and unless I had much faithfuller interest,
advised me to give over my pretensions, which I immediately did; and, with the
concurrence of my wife, resolved to set up an alehouse, where you are heartily
welcome: and so my service to you; and may the squire, and all such sneaking
rascals, go to the devil together. 'O fie.' says Adams, O fie! He is indeed a
wicked man; but G -- will, I hope, turn his heart to repentance. Nay if he
could but once see the meanness of this detestable vice; would he but once
reflect that he is one of the most scandalous as well as pernicious liars; sure
he must despise himself to so intolerable a degree, that it would be impossible
for him to continue a moment in such a course. And, to confess the truth,
notwithstanding the baseness of this character, which he has too well
deserved, he has in his countenance sufficient symptoms of that bona indoles,
that sweetness of disposition which furnishes out a good christian. Ah! master,
master! (^ays the host) if you had traveled as far as I have, and conversed
with the many nations where I have traded, you would not give any credit to a
man's countenance. Symptoms in his countenance, quotha! I would look there,
perhaps to see whether a man has had the smallpox but for nothing else. He
spoke this with so little regard to the parson's observation that it a good
deal nettled him; and, taking the pipe hastily from his mouth, he thus
answered: Master of mine, perhaps, I have traveled a great deal farther than
you without the assistance of aship. Do you imagine failing by different cities
or countries is traveling? No. Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.
I can go farther in an afternoon than you in a twelve month. What, I suppose,
you have seen the pillars of Hercules, and perhaps the walls of Carthage. Nay,
you may have heard Scylla, and seen Charybdis; you may have entered the closet
where Archimedes was found at the taking Syracuse. I suppose you have sailed
among the Cyclades, and passed the famous straits which take their name from
the unfortunate Hell, whose fate is sweetly described by Apollonius Rhodius;
you have passed the very spot, I conceive, where Daedalus fell into that sea,
his waxen wings being melted by the sun; you have traversed the Euxine sea, I
have no doubt; nay, you have been on the banks of the Caspian, and called at
Colchis, to see if there is ever another golden fleece. -- 'Not I truly,
master,' answered the host, I never touched at any of these places. But I have
been at all these, replied Adams. Then I suppose, cries the host, you have been
at the East Indies; for there are no such, I will be sworn, either in the West
or the Levant. Pray where is the Levant? quoth Adams, that should be in the
East Indies by right. -- Oho! you are a pretty traveller, cries the host, and
not know the Levant. My service to you, master; you must not talk of these
things with me! you must not tip us the traveller; it will not go here. Since thou
art so dull to misunderstand me still, quoth Adams, I will inform thee; the
traveling I mean, is in books, the only way of traveling by which any
knowledge is to be acquired. From them I learn what I asserted just now, that
nature generally imprints such a portraiture of the mind in the countenance,
that a skilful physiognomist will rarely be deceived. I presume you have never
read the story of Socrates, to this purpose, and therefore I will tell it you.
A certain physiognomist asserted of Socrates that he plainly discovered by his
features that he was a rogue in his nature. A character so contrary to the
tenor of all this great man's actions and the generally received opinion
concerning him, incensed the boys of Athens, so that they threw stones at the
physiognomist, and would have demolished him for his ignorance, had not
Socrates himself prevented them by confessing the truth of his observations,
and acknowledging, that though he corrected his disposition by philosophy, he
was indeed naturally as inclined to vice as had been predicated of him. Now,
pray resolve me, -- How should a man know this story, if he had not read it?
'Well, master,' said the host, and what signifies it whether a man knows it or
no? He who goes abroad as I have done, will always have opportunities enough of
knowing the world without troubling his head with Socrates, or any such
fellows. -- 'Friend,' cries Adams, if a man should sail round the world, and
anchor in every harbor of it, without learning, he would return home as
ignorant as he went out. Lord help you, answered the host, there was my
boatswain, poor fellow he could scarce either write or read, and yet he would
navigate a ship with any master of a man of war; and a very pretty knowledge of
trade he had too. 'Trade,' answered Adams. As Aristotle proves in his first
chapter of politics, is below a philosopher, and unnatural as it is managed
now, The host looked steadfastly at Adams, and after a minute's silence asked
him, if he was one of the writers of the Gazetteers? for I have heard, says he,
they are writ by parsons. 'Gazetteers!' said Adams 'What is that?' 'It is a
dirty news-paper,' replied the host, which has been given away all over the
nation for these many years, to abuse trade and honest men, which I would not
suffer to lie on my table, though it has been offered me for nothing. 'Not I
truly,' said Adams, I never write any thing but sermons; and I assure you I am
no enemy to trade, whilst it is consistent with honesty; nay, I have always
looked on the tradesman as a very valuable member of society, and perhaps,
inferior to none but the man of learning. 'No, I believe he is not, nor to him
neither,' answered the host. Of what else would learning be in a country
without trade! What would all you parsons do to clothe your backs and feed your
bellies? Who fetches you your silks, and your linens, and your wines, and all
the other necessaries of life; I speak chiefly with regard to the sailors. You
should say the extravagancies of life, replied the parson; but admit they were
the necessaries, there is something more necessary than life itself, which is
provided by learning; I mean the learning of the clergy. Who clothes you with
piety, meekness, humility, charity, patience, and all the other christian
virtues? Who feeds your souls with the milk of brotherly love, and diets them
with all the dainty food of holiness, which at once cleanses them of all impure
carnal affections, and fattens them with the truly rich Spirit of grace? -- Who
does this? 'Ay, who indeed!' cries the host; for I do not remember ever to have
seen any such clothing, or such feeding. And so in the mean time, master, my
service to you. Adams was going to answer with some severity, when Joseph and
Fanny returned, and pressed his departure so eagerly, that he would not refuse
them; and so, grasping his crabstick, he took leave of his host, (neither of
them being so well pleased with each other as they had been at their first
sitting down together) and with Joseph and Fanny, who both expressed much
impatience, departed, and now all together renewed their journey.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
THE HISTORY OF THE ADVENTURES OF JOSEPH ANDREWS, AND HIS FRIEND Mr. ABRAHAM
ADAMS. WRITTEN IN IMITATION OF The Manner of CERVANTES, Author of DON QUIXOTE.
BY HENRY FIELDING, ESQUIRE.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY HENRY TAILOR. M.DCC.XCI.

THE HISTORY OF THE ADVENTURES OF JOSEPH ANDREWS and his Friend MR. ABRAHAM
ADAMS.
BOOK (...)
CHAP. I.
(...)

(...) (...) proof than those eternal contradictions occurring (...) two (...)
who undertake the history. (...) For instance, (...) and Mr. Whit^^^, (...) and
Rapin, and many others; where (...) being set forth in a different ^ight,
every-(...) believes as he pleases; and indeed the more judicious (...) justly
(...) the whole us no (...), in which the writer has (...) a happy and fertile
invention. But though (...) it the (...) of (...) victory to the (...) others to
the (...) the (...) rogue, (...) and honest character, (...) where (...) is
supposed (...) person who is (...) lived. Now with (...) mistake the (...) the
(...) of critics, whether (...) has really (...) as to (...) the (...) of
(...) the (...) in the time and place (...) instance of (...) of Gil (...),
where the (...) has made a notorious (...) of Dr. (...), who (...) (...), and
filling them up with (...) one, who (...) least (...) doctor lived? The (...)
in the country (...) were (...) officers. The (...) deserved in Scation, the
(...) of Marianne (...) some few (...) of (...) have not read, or (...) would
by (...) persons of (...) mense (...) writers; who, without (...) or history,
record (...), and facts which (...) you: whole heroes (...) stains the (...).
Not that (...) so far otherwise, that (...) for what can be (...) of the
wonderful (...) may apply to them (...) of (...) they are a (...) inferior
(...) who (...) of whom (...) of those (...) in his Letters, (...) an irregular
(...) of the (...) (...)

(...) the (...) class who are (...) of (...) matter in (...) is not (...) that
which (...) of the (...) and to a particular (...) the history of the world in
(...) which (...) laws, (...) and of (...) the time it (...) applications. I
decla^^ (...) Are (...) To which I answer in the (...) that I (...) The (...)
these (...): and (...) will (...) his (...) has not (...) confined himself to
(...) (...) when the (...) on the (...) who (...) would (...) person (...)
shall upon it. (...) him (...) to mimick some little obscure (...) happens to
(...) perhaps in his (...) in the (...) to (...) in their (...) and ender
(...). This places (...) distinguishes the (...) former privately (...) of the
person, like a (...) exposes the person himself, as an (...) to others, like an
executioner.

There are besides, little circumstances to be considered; as the drapery of a
picture, which though fashion varies at different times the (...) of the
countenance is not by those means diminished. (...) I believe, we may venture
to say, (...) is coeval with (...) lawyer; (...) during the changes (...) must
have passed (...) have stood behind the (...) at (...) not (...) to affirm, she
has likewise in the (...) of ages sat on a throne. In short, (...) (...) with
to the (...) of his (...) of that (...) which they (...) entertained. These are
pictures which (...) (...) taken (...) not (...) to (...) for such (...) is
(...) insolence to (...) with discovered. (...) to (...) of their (...) worthy
of (...) who is (...) was so late (...) house, for (...) had not (...) them, or
(...) if (...) they took (...) of the (...) which (...) to their evil (...) a
race of (...) whom (...) inoffensive (...) we (...)

CHAP. II.
(...)

(...) beings; which was (...) which he thought almost at (...) (...).

(...) To which (...) (...) (...) my fair (...) ^^akness, and (...) the
strength of a man may be (...) you; (...) weighing (...) yourselves with the
(...) and petit maitres of the (...) who, (...) like Joseph, (...) to carry you
in (...) through the (...) will (...) what strength and (...) light (...)
field, (...) to their (...) Fanny over; (...) of lights (...) think of (...) to
a little (...) begged of (...) door (...) him* she was (...) she (...) up her
(...) this (...) with (...) that (...) suffer (...) hold in (...) (...) asked
(...) they would of his (...) To (...) (...) more afraid of men (...) began to
suspect her (...) those without were (...) belonging to (...). At length (...)
master of (...) and laughing, told (...); that (...) with (...) who (...)
otherwise, (...) (...) and servants of (...) unless, peradventure by (...) to
the rich. 'Sir,' said he (...) the gentleman, these two (...) young people are
my (...), and I look (...) them as (...) children. There is (...) singular
(...) but I (...) to recount it. The (...) the (...) Homer was (...) (...),
continued he, what (...) orator, may well (...) applied to a (...); "He ought
to comprehend all (...)." Homer did this in the most excellent degree; it is
not without (...) therefore, that the philosopher, in the and chapter of his
Poeticks mentions him by (...) other (...) than that of The (...). He was the
(...) of the (...), as well of the (...): Not of (...) of comedy (...)
deplorably (...). To him (...). But (...) ourselves (at least (...)) to (...)
it the (...) more simple (...) He is right (...) he says (...) and end, would
have (...) understanding to (...) view. I have (...) wondered why so correct a
writer as Ho^^ce should in his epistle (...) Loll^^s, call him the (...) his
action (...); is (...) same time so (...) I must observe what (...) noted by
any, the (...) his action to (...), how agreeable (...) (...) from which every
incident (...) and to which every episode immediately relates. Thirdly, his
manners, which Aristotle places second in (...) description of the several
parts of (...) which (...) says are included in the (...); I (...) at a l^ss
(...) I should (...) of his (...) in the (...) of these; (...) does (...) If he
has (...) dry (...) observing (...) of the original, in (...) dissuasive
^^eech of (...) put into the mouth (...) (...) was the greatest (...), nor have
any of his (...) that art, that is to say, neither (...) Seneca the tragedian,
been able (...). As to his sentiments and diction; (...) thing; the former
(...) for the utmost (...) on that (...) propriety; (...) the (...) doubtless
you (...). I shall (...) which the^ great (...), or the (...) which (...) epic
as to (...) which divides on (...) and then (...) himself (...) heavens (...)
and (...) their thrones. This is (...)! This is (...)! Adams then rapt out a
(...) Greek (...) and with (...) a voice, (...) and action (...) he (...) so
(...) of Adams, (...) had not a (...) extravagant (...) and (...) ^oodness of
his (...) the (...). He (...) who (...) (...); and in truth (...) opinion of
her quality (...). He said he was (...) with the (...) to work on the (...)
(...) in him a curiosity (...) singularity which Adams had (...). This
curiosity Adams (...) of, than, with Joseph's (...) to gratify it, and
accordingly (...) with as much (...) acter of lady (...) faithful, and (...)
not (...) person of (...) (...) did not (...) to find (...) and ever (...) too
(...).

CHAP. III.
(...)

(...)

(...) I crave the (...) gentleman answered, (...) and then proceeded. (...) I
stayed a very little while at (...); for being a forward youth (...) impatient
to be in the worship for which (...) my parts, (...) and (...) without (...)
fortunes; for (...) which I apprehended (...) of the (...) (...) great house
and (...) into (...) in my (...) and (...) as (...) I (...) as to the (...) of
it a (...) allows a pretend, (...) should (...) which I was (...) to have (...)
showed their (...) (...) were counterfeiter (...) myself. (...) to yourself!
(...) O Sir; answered the gentleman (...) of the times. Half your (...) of
these characters (...) replied, (...) 'Ay, they (...) I do (...) -- Your (...)
I should (...) said (...) in the morning (...) in thy (...) from (...)

(...) to the auction; (...) (...) at some (...) what; for (...) (...) bowed to
the (...) to bid for a snuff box; (...) it.

(...) possibly (...) (...) reply, (...) company (...) within a work I (...) at
St. (...) (...), where I (...) visited (...) play (...) by (...) surgeon (...)
(...) separation, (...) reason to be (...) which grant you (...) sincerely
repent of this and many other things you have related. -- (...) continued the
gentleman, as happy as the possession of a fine (...), who had a good
educations and (...) with many agreeable qualities* could make (...). We lived
some months with vast fondness, (...) other, without any company or
conversation (...) than we found in one another: (...) this could not continue
always; and though I still preserves (...) affection, I began more and more to
want the relief of (...), and consequently to (...) at last, whole days (...)
and complained of the (...) which, I (...) of some other (...) to play at (...)
herself all (...) easy but (...) my chambers. She was rapacious (...)
to-excess, (...) in her (...) oaths, (...) behavior soon (...); I began to
(...) my wife, and to (...) an intention (...) with her (...) having given
(...) she took care to prevent (...) pains of (...) out of doors, and (...),
having first broke (...) (...) with her all she could find to (...) about 200l.
In the first ^eat of my (...) resolved to pursue her ^^ith all the vengeance of
the law: but as she had the (...) luck to escape me during that ferment, (...)
afterward cooled; and having (...) that I (...) been the first aggressor, and
had done her an injury, for which I could make her (...) by robbing her of the
innocence of her mind; and hearing at the same time, that the (...) her mother
had (...) her heart (...) elopement from her, (...) concluding (...) murderer,
('as (...) with a groan;) was pleased (...) God. (...) had taken this method of
punishing me; (...) salved quietly to submit to the (...) could wish I (...)
turn, who became (...) and, after (...), at last (...) her (...) the gentleman
(...) Mr. Adams echoed (...) silent, looking on each other, (...) At last the
gentleman proceeded (...) I ^^d been perfectly constant in this girl (...)
whole time I kept her: but she had (...) before I discovered more (...) than
the (...) forced to make (...) my (...) whose hands (...) discharge (...) I now
foreswore (...) with (...) complained loudly that (...) pleasure did not (...)
the pain, and railed at the beautiful (...), in as gross language (...) himself
(...) reviled the^^ in. (...) all the town (...) with a detestation not (...)
(...) persons appeared to me as printed palaces; inhabited by (...) and death:
(...) beauty make them more desirable objects in my eyes, (...) make me covet a
pill, (...). But though I was no longer (...) absolute ^^ave, I found some
reasons to own myself still the subject of love. My hatred for women decreased
daily; and I am not positive but (...) might have betrayed me again to some
(...), had (...) not been secured by a passion for the ch^rming Sapphir^, which
having (...) entered upon, made a violent (...) in my heart. Sapphira was wife
(...) fashion, and gallantry, and (...) who (...). I own, every way worthy of
(...) affections, which however he (...) not the reputation of (...) coquette
(...) but as it is a (...) kind of (...) to describe it. Were all (...) to be
(...) in the order of creation, (...) usefulness, I know few animals that (...)
of a coquette; (...) indeed (...) pretense (...) any (...) by the (...)
variety, yet (...) several absurd (...) foolish than what (...) observed in
(...) ^^^iculous birds and (...) and which would (...) the beholders, that the
silly wretch (...) at our contempt. (...) its (...), and this (...) (...): for
as beauty, wisdom, (...), and health, are sometimes (...) by (...) creature; so
are ugliness, folly (...) ill nature, ill-breeding, and sickness, (...) put on
by it in their turn. Its life (...) ^^^stant lie; and the only rule by which
you can (...) any judgment of them is, that they are never what, they (...). If
it was possible (...) a coquette to love (as it is not, for if ever it attains
this passion, the (...) ceases instantly) it would (...) the (...)
indifference, if not of (...) the beloved object (...) therefore (...), when
they endeavor to (...) you of their liking, that they (...) to you at (...).
And (...) case with my (...) These (...) and (...) the rest of her (...) more
directly to (...) affected the (...) and many other indications (...) which
(...) deceive thousands. When (...) whist (...) me, and at the (...) then burst
(...) laugh, (...) I cannot (...) what I was thinking (...) detain you no (...)
I had (...) course of (...), as I thought, (...) thoroughly (...) I had raised
a violent (...) in my mistress; (...) an opportunity of (...) with her. She
avoid (...) (...) presented (...) I will (...) all (...) of this (...) suffice,
that (...) could (...) first affected (...) and immediately (...) what I (...)
which could (...) breaking (...) first (...) me, I had no (...). wiser (...) I
thought myself (...) first (...) in the possession (...) would have (...)
forfeited (...); but it had a (...) effect (...) carried my (...) by (...) had
been (...) (...) continue (...) lay under from the (...) of her (...), gave us
great uneasiness. Poor wretch! '(...) pity him,' cried Adams. He did indeed
(...) it, said the gentleman; for he (...) his wife with great tenderness; and
I assure you it (...) satisfaction to me, that I was not the (...) her affect
(...) from him. The^e apprehensions appeared also too well grounded; for at the
end he discovered us, and procured witnesses of our caresses: (...) at (...)
and recovered 3000l: damaged, which much (...) my fortune to pay: and what
(...) worse, his (...) divorced, (...) a very uneasy life with (...) for (...)
my (...) now much (...)

(...) now bade adieu to love; and resolved (...) less dangerous and (...) into
the acquaintance of (...) of jolly (...), who ^^ept all (...) all (...) who
might rather be said to (...). Their (...) were the chief (...) of our (...)
And yet ^ad as (...), they were (...) which were either (...) of dull common
(...) about trifling (...) is a wager. This (...) period to; (...) (...) of a
(...) by young (...) of (...). The (...) was now only (...) in (...) assistance
of our conversation, which rolled on (...) of philosophy. These gentleman were
(...) search after truth, in the pursuit (...) which they threw aside all the
prejudices of education, and governed themselves only by the infallible guide
of human reason. This great guide, (...) having shown them the falsehood of that
very ancient but simple tenet, that there is such a being (...) a Deity in the
universe, helped them to establish (...) a certain rule of right, by adhering
to (...) they all arrived at the utmost purity of (...). Reflections made me as
much delighted with (...), us it had taught me to despise and (...). I began
now to esteem myself a being of a (...) than I and ^ver (...) with this (...)
other (...) to virtue (...) I (...) have (...) philosophers, (...) from us,
taking (...) him the wife of (...) his most intimate friends. Secondly, (...)
the same society left the club without remembering to take leave of his (...).
A third having bo^rowed a (...) of (...) for which I received as security,
(...) to repay it, (...) several practices, so (...) (...) golden rule, made me
begin (...); but when I communicated my (...) to one of the club, he said,
there was nothing absolutely good or evil in itself; that actions were
denominated good or bad by the circumstances of the agent. That possibly the
man who ran away with his neighbor a wife, might be one of very good
inclinations, but over-(...) on by the violence of an unruly passion, and, in
other particulars, might be a very worthy member of society: that if the beauty
of any (...) created (...) him an uneasiness, he had a right from nature (...)
relieve himself; with many other things, which I then detested so much, that I
took leave of the society that very evening, and never (...) to (...) again.
Being now reduced to a (...) of solitude, which I did (...), I became a great
frequenter of the play (...), which (...) was always (...) favorite (...), and
most (...) two or three hours behind the (...) with several poets, (...) of the
players (...). A^ (...) we were generally entertained by the (...) with rending
their performances, and by the players with repeating their parts; upon which
occasions (...) the gentleman who (...) our entertainment, was commonly the
(...) company: who^ (...) they were (...) him to his face, (...) failed to take
(...) opportunity of his (...) to ridicule him. How I made some (...), which
probably are (...) obvious to be worth (...). 'Sir,' says Adams 'your remarks
if you please.' First then, says (...) I concluded that (...) general
observation, that (...), is not true. Men (...) vain of (...) strength, (...),
honor, (...) pear of themselves to the eyes (...) whereas the poor ^it is
obliged to produce his (...) to show you his perfection: and (...) readiness to
do this, that vulgar opinon I have before mentioned is grounded: but does not
the person who expends vast sums in the furniture of his house, (...) the
ornament of his person, who consumes much (...), and employs great pains in
dressing himself, or who thinks himself paid for self-denial, labor, or even
villainy, by a title or a ribbon, sacrifice as much to vanity, as the poor wit,
who is desirous to read you his poem or his play? My second, remark, was, that
vanity is the worst of (...) apt to (...) the mind (...) praiseworthy in
another (...) antipathy, Adams (...) his pockets, and (...) I have it 'not
about (...)' -- Upon th^^ the gentleman (...) him (...) searching for, he said
(...) a sermon, (...) vanity. (...) upon (...) why do I ever leave (...) sermon
out of (...) I wish it was within five miles; I would willingly fetch it, to
read it to you. (...) gentleman answered, that there was no need, for he was
cured of the passion. 'And for that very reason,' quoth Adams, I would read it,
for I am confident you would (...) it: Indeed I have never (...) (...) that
(...) gentleman (...) and (...) -- (...) this society I easily passed (...)
that of the (...), where nothing remarks (...) but the finishing of my fortune,
which these gentleman soon, helped me to the end of. This opened scenes of life
hitherto unknown^ poverty and distress, (...) their horrid train of ^uns,
attorneys, (...) me day and night. My clothes grew shabby, my credit bad, my
friends and acquaintance of all kinds cold. In this (...), the strangest
thought imaginable came into my head; and what was this, but to write a pity?
for I had sufficient leisured fear of bailiffs confined me every day to my
room^ and having always had a (...) inclinations, and something of a (...) that
way, I set myself (...) work (...) produced a (...) at the (...) I remember
(...) tickets (...) their (...) of their performances* and resolving to (...) a
precedent which was so well (...) my present circumstances, I immediately
provided myself with a large number of little (...). Happy, indeed would be the
state of (...) these tickets pass current at the bake-house, the alehouse, and
the chandler's shop: But alas! (...) otherwise; (...) will take them (...)
stay-tape; (...) the civility (...). They are indeed (...) a passport to (...)
with, a certification (...) wants five shillings, which induces (...)
christians to charity. I now (...) is worse than poverty, or rather what (...)
consequences of poverty, I mean attende^^ (...) dependence on the great. Many a
morning (...) I (...) hours (...) the (...) man of (...) the (...) in (...) and
(...) pimps and (...) in fashion (...) I (...) been sometimes (...) ^ending in
my (...) my (...) could not (...) this mornings (...) sufficient assurance that
I should never (...) into that house. (...) I have been (...) admitted; and the
great (...) has thought proper to excuse himself, by ^^lling me he was tied
up. 'Tied up,' says Adams, 'pray what is (...)' Sir, says (...) gentleman, the
profit which (...) authors for the best works, was so very small, (...) certain
man of birth and (...) who were (...) of wit and (...) for what was not (...)
in this (...) persons (...) good from (...) authors, (...) genius was (...)
this was to (...) of money (...) of (...) if ever (...) scribed: (...), and
many more have (...), in order to silence all solicitation. (...) method was
likewise taken with (...) tickets, which w^^^ no (...) (...) and this is what
(...) being (...) is apt enough, and somewhat (...) Adams for a man of large
fortune (...) himself up, as you call it, from the encouragement of men of
merit, ought to (...) tied up in ^^^lity. (...) says the gentleman, to (...) to
my story. (...) I have received a guinea from a man of quality, given with as
ill a grace, as alms are generally to the meanest beggar, and purchased too
with as much time spent in attendance, as, if it had been (...) in honest
industry, might have brought me more profit with infinitely more satisfaction.
After (...) two months spent in this disagreeable way with the utmost,
mortification, when I was pluming (...) the prospect of a plentiful harvest
from my play, upon (...) to the prompter to know what (...) me he had, (...)
season; but if I would (...) it and (...) the next they (...) for it again. I
snatched it from, him with (...) and retired to my room, where I (...) myself
on the (...) in a fit of despair -- You should rather (...) thrown yourself on
your (...) for despair is sinful. As soon, continued the gentleman, as I had
indulged the first (...) passion, I began to (...) should take in a (...)
credit, or reputation (...) After revolving any things in my (...) no other
possibility of furnishing my (...) miserable necessaries of life than to (...)
near the Temple, and commence (...) writer to the (...); for which I was well
(...), being an (...). This (...) who (...) me, and to him I applied. But (...)
of (...) me with any business, (...) at my undertaking and told me, 'he was
(...) I should turn his (...) into plays and (...) should expect to see them on
the stage.'

Not to (...) you with (...) of this kind from others, I found that Pla^e
himself did not hold poets in greater abhorrence than these men of business do.
Whenever I durst venture to a coffee-(...), which was on Sundays only, a
whisper ran (...) the room; which was constantly attended (...) -- (...)
Wilson^ for I know not whether you have observed it, but there (...) in the
(...) out, or (...) in all (...) has sexes, whose births and (...) place them
just without the polite (...); I (...) the lower (...) of the (...), and the
higher of (...) world, who are in reality the (...) part of mankind. Well, Sir,
whilst I (...) with (...) starving the (...) of a (...) I accidentally became
acquainted (...), who told me, it was a pity a (...) learning and genius should
(...) a method of getting his livelihood; (...) a compassion for me, and if I
would (...) him, he would undertake to provide handsomely for me. A man in my
(...) very well (...) acceptant his (...) actions, which were none of (...) and
fell to translating with all (...) longer reason (...) lament (...) for he
furnished me with so much, that in (...) year I almost (...) myself blind. I
likewise (...) attracted a distemper by my sedentary (...) no part of my body
was exercised (...) right arm, which rendered me incapable of writing for a
long time. This unluckily happened to delay the publication of a work, and my
last (...) not having sold well, the bookseller (...) further engagement, and
aspersed (...) as a careless, idle fellow. (...) by having half worked and half
starved myself (...) death, during the time (...) in his (...), (...) a few
guineas, with which (...) a lottery (...) resolving to (...) myself into (...)
if she (...) she had done me at (...) purchase being made, (...) when, as if I
had not been sufficiently miserable, a bailiff in woman's clothes (...)
admittance to (...) chamber, where (...) directed by the bookseller. He
arrested me at my taylor's (...) thirty-five (...); a sum for which I could not
procure bail and was therefore (...) to his (...) was locked up in (...). I
(...) neither health (for (...) recovered (...) indisposition) liberty, (...)
friends; and (...) ^^andoned all hopes, (...) the desire of (...). But this
could not (...) Adams: for doubtless the tailor (...) moment he was truly
acquainted with you (...) and knew that your circumstances would (...) permit
you to (...) could prevent me (...) been his (...) with him, and (...) if he
would not (...) my (...) pay him all the money I could by (...) labor and
industry procure, reserving (...) what was sufficient to preserve me alive; he
(...), his (...) time to time; that (...) put it (...) expect no money. (...)
is in the original (...) to pay them, so (...) ourselves he forgiven when we
are in (...) of paying. He (...) and the gentleman (...) While I was in this
(...) former acquaintance, to (...) my (...) by the (...) wished (...) fortune:
(...) up a price of 3000l^ Adams (...) did not (...) long: for (...). Alas,
(...) this was (...) to sink me the (...) For I (...) of this (...) shilling
without it, in order (...). As (...) friend was (...) with my unfortunate (...)
he (...) and remind, (...) of the (...) of my life. He said, I was (...)
without any hopes of retrieval, nor (...) expect any pity from my friends; that
it (...) extreme weakness to compassionate the (...) of a man who ran (...) to
his own destruction. He then (...) me, (...) as he was (...) the happiness I
should (...), had I not (...) of (...) the plan of (...) with whom I (...) of
life, even that which (...) enjoy, wholesome air, In these (...) circumstances
I applied by letter is (...) and such to whom I had (...) without any great
prospect of (...), for their (...) of a denial was the (...). -- Whilst I (...)
in a (...) horrible to be (...) which (...), and what (...) christianity, (...)
a strange punishment (...) and indiscretion; whilst I (...) condition (...)
came into the prison, (...) delivered me the (...).

SIR,
(...), to whom you (...) your ticket in (...) the same day in which is a (...)
as you have possibly heard, and (...) of all his fortune. I am so (...) much to
(...) with your (...) circumstances, (...) the (...) you must feel at having
been (...) dispose of what might have made you (...) I must desire your
acceptance of the (...) am.

Your Humble servant, HARRIET HEARTY.


And what do you think was enclosed? I don't (...) Adams: 'Not less than a
(...) I had long had (...) disclose to her. (...) thousand times; my eyes (...)
repeated -- But (...) I immediately (...) liberty, and, having paid all my
(...) She happened (...) out of (...) which (...) for by that means (...)
before her in a (...) to town (...) could not oblige her more than by never
mentioning, or, if possible, thinking on a circumstance which must bring to my
mind an ^^cident that might be grievous to me to think on. She proceeded thus:
What I have done is in my own eyes a trifle, and perhaps infinitely less than
would have become me to do. And if you think of engaging in any business, where
a larger sum may be serviceable to you, I shall not be (...) rigid, either as
to the security or interest. I endeavored to express all the gratitude in my
power to this profusion of goodness, though perhaps it (...) my enemy, and began
to afflict my mind with (...) than all the miseries I had (...) afflicted me
with (...) poverty, distress, and prisons (...), had been able (...) me feel^,
for, Sir, these (...) kindness, (...) have raised (...) good heart the most
(...) passion, of friendship (...) of the same, (...) and (...) came to (...)
from (...) beautiful woman, one (...) known; and for whom I had (...) passion,
though with a despair, which (...) me endeavor rather to cur^ and conceal,
than to nourish or acquaint her with it. In short, they came upon me united
with beauty, softness, and tenderness, such be witching smiles -- (...), in
that moment I lost myself, and (...) our different situations, and considering
(...) I was making to her (...), by desiring (...) who had given me so (...) to
bestow has all, (...) gently hold on her (...) it to my lips, I pressed it
(...) overspread (...) to withdraw her hand, yet not so as to (...) it from
mine though I held it with the gentlest (...). We both (...) trembling, her
eyes cast on the ground, and mine steadfastly fixed on her. (...), what was then
the condition of my (...) with love, desire, admiration, gratitude, and every
under passion, all (...) on one charming object. Passion at last got the better
of both reason and respect, and softly letting go her hand, I offered madly to
clasp her in my arms; when a little recovering herself, she started from me,
asking me, with some show of anger, 'If she had any reason to (...) this
treatment from me.' I then fell (...) before her, and told her, If I had
offended, my life was absolutely in her power, (...) in any manner (...) her
(...). said I (...) not (...) me, as (...) I have (...) you long (...) and the
(...) you have (...) mean, (...) views; (...) I who (...) leave of you for
ever, (...) (...) you seem, my happiness is in the (...) of fortune now. You
have obliged me too (...) already, if I have my wish, it is for (...) lost
accident, by which I may contribute with my life to the least augmentation of
your felicity, (...) myself, the only happiness I can ever (...) hearing of
yours; and if fortune (...) make that complete, I will forgive her all her
(...) to me. 'You may, indeed,' answered she, smiling, for your own happiness
must be included in mine. I have long known your worth; may: I must confess,
said she blushing, I have long discovered that passion for me you profess,
notwithstanding those endeavors, which I am convinced were. (...), to (...)
it; and if all I can give with (...) what I will (...) through (...) silent;
then flying to (...) arms, no longer resisting, -- and (...) her, (...) must
give me then herself, -- O Sir, -- (...) her look? She remained Silent; (...)
motionless, several minutes. At last, recovering herself a little, she insisted
(...) my having (...) in such a (...) that (...) however, I (...) her again. --
(...) pardon, I have (...) you too long (...) particulars of the former (...)
otherwise, said Adams, (...) willingly hear it (...) the gentleman (...) within
a week (...) of (...) after; (...) I came to examine the circumstances of my
(...) fortune, (which I do assure you (...) at leisure enough to do) I found it
accounted to about six thousand pounds, most part of (...) lay in effects; for
her father had been (...), and she seemed willing, if I liked (...) that I
should carry on the same trade. I readily, and (...) inconsiderately, undertook
it: for, not having been bred up to the secrets of the business, and
endeavoring to deal with the utmost honesty (...) uprightness, I soon found
our fortune in a (...) and my trade decreasing by little and (...) my wines,
which I never, ^^^terated (...) and were (...) as they (...) of spending money,
and (...) from envy in getting (...) in my (...) I loved (...) which was
perfectly (...) were no other than (...); for she was (...) which that (...)
affection for it, she readily (...). We (...) put our small fortune, now
reduced under (...) thousand pounds, into money, with (...) of which we
purchased this little place, whither we retired soon after her delivery, from a
world full of (...) noise, hatred, envy and ingratitude, to (...) and love. We
have here lived almost twenty years, with little other conversation than our
own most of the neighborhood taking us for very strange people; the squire of
the parish represent (...) a madman, and the (...) cause I will not (...) with
the (...) other, 'Sir,' says Adams, (...) think, paid you all her debts in
(...) Sir, replied the gentleman, (...) I have (...) whom (...). Within three
years of my (...) my eldest son. (Here he (...)) says Adams, we must submit to
(...) consider death is common to all. We (...), indeed, answered the
gentleman; and (...) died, I could have borne the loss with patience (...)!
Sir, he was stolen away (...) wicked traveling people whom they call (...);
not could I ever with the most diligent (...) him. (...) child! he had the
(...) the exact (...) of his mother; at (...) tears unwittingly (...) from his
eyes, (...) likewise from those of Adams, (...) with his friends (...) those
(...) said the gentleman (...) which, if I have been too particular (...) and
now, (...) please, I (...) you another bottle; which proposal the parson (...)
accepted.

CHAP. IV.
A description of Mr. Wilson's way of living. The (...) adventure of the dog,
and other grave matters.

THE gentleman returned with the bottle; and Adams and he sat some time silent,
when the (...) started up, and cried, 'No, that will not do,' (...) gentleman
enquired into, his meaning; he (...) He had been considering that it (...)
famous king (...) son whom he had (...) his (...) could not (...) for (...)
fruit.

(...) had and with (...) soft dews (...) on her (...) to take her (...) over
the (...) and presently after, that (...) from his wife's chamber to pay his
(...) to her (...) gentleman (...) if he would (...) and survey his (...) which
he (...) Joseph at (...) (...) from asleep in which (...) hours buried, went
with them. No (...) fountains, no statues, (...) Its only ornament was a short
walk, (...) each side by a filbert hedge, with a small (...) one end, whither
in hot weather the (...) and his wife used to retire and (...) with their
children, who played in the (...) them* but though vanity had no votary (...)
spot, here was variety of fruit, and every (...) for the kitchen, which was
(...) to catch the admiration of Adams (...) the gentleman he had certainly a
good (...) answered he, that gardener is (...) whatever you see (...) is the
(...) self while my (...) pares our (...) which (...) the (...) of the (...)
weather will not (...) here, I am usually (...) with my (...) say the truth,
(...) perceive that (...) understanding which (...) levity of rakes, the (...)
of (...) of business (...) the austerity of the learned (...) in women. (...)
found none of (...) own (...) observations (...) them (...) not do I believe
any (...) a faithfuller (...) friend. And (...) with more delicacy (...) so it
is consumed by dearer (...) can attend the closest male alliance (...) can be
so fast, as our common interest (...) of ou^ embraced, Perhaps, Sir, you (...)
yourself a father; if you are not, (...) delight I have in my (...) Would you
not despise me, if you (...) the (...) and my children playing (...) I should
(...) the sight (...) myself (...) now the father of (...) and I am say, I
(...) house (...) better; (...) occasion (...) my (...) (And) (...) Adams, as
(...) a maidservant, but (...) up, she is unwilling (...) them (...) the
fortunes I (...) very (...) intend not to (...) the rank they are likely to
(...) hereafter, (...) to teach them to ^espise, (...) (...). Indeed I could
wish a (...) of (...) and a retired lift, might fall to their (...) for I have
experienced that circumstance (...) which is seated in content, is inconsistent
with the hurry and bustle of the world. (...) proceeding (...), when the little
things being last risen, ran eagerly toward him, and asked (...); they were
(...) to the strange (...) but the oldest acquainted her father; that her
mother and the young gentlewoman (...) up, and that (...) fast was ready. They
all (...) in, where the gentleman was surprised at the beauty of (...) had now
recovered herself (...) was entirely clean (...) taken away her (...) had (...)
in the (...) children, and (...) of Adams (...) the reading which (...) their
guests, and (...) forwardness to (...) the best of every thing in their house;
(...) delighted him still (...), was an (...) of their charity: for whilst
(...) at (...) the good woman was (...), which (...) some (...) for the public
use; and the good man went into his garden as the same time, to supply another
with something which he wanted thence; for they (...) nothing which those who
(...) were not (...) to. These good people went in the (...), when they heard
the (...) of (...) immediately afterward a (...) the favorite of the eldest
daughter, came (...) ^loody, and laid himself at his mistress^ (...) the poor
girl, who was about eleven years old, burst into tears at the sight; and
presently one of the neighbors came in and informed them, that the (...)
squire the son of the lord of the manor, ha^ (...) him as he passed by,
swearing at the same time he would prosecute the master of him for keeping a
(...); for that he had given notice; he would (...) suffer one in the parish.
The dog, whom his (...) had taken into her lap, died in a few minutes, licking
her hand. She expressed great (...) at his loss* and the other children began
to (...) for their (...) misfortune, nor could Fanny himself refrain. Whilst
the father and mother attempted to (...) her, Adams glasped his (...), and
would have (...) Joseph with (...) him. (...) bridle his (...) with great
(...); said (...) the (...) lamenting and carrying the dead (...) in (...), out
of the room, when the gentleman said, this was the second (...) this squire had
endeavored to kill the little (...), and ha^ (...) him (...) once before,
adding (...) motive but ill nature; for the (...) which was not near (...)
never (...) twenty yards from (...) years his daughter had had it. He (...)
nothing to deserve this usage: (...) too great a fortune to contend with. That
(...) as absolute (...) any tyrant in the universe, (...) dogs, and taken away
all the (...) and not only (...) (...) hedges, and rode over corn and gardens,
with no more regard than if they were the high way. I wish I could catch him in
my garden, said Adams; though I would rather forgive him riding through my
house than such an ill-natured act as this.

The cheerfulness of their conversation being interrupted by this accident in
which the (...) could be of no service to their kind entertainer, and as the
mother was taken up in administering consolation to the poor girl, whose
disposition was too (...) hastily to forget the sudden loss of her little
favorite which had been fondling with her a few (...) before; and as Joseph
and Fanny were impatient to get home and begin those (...) to their happiness
which Adams had insisted on they now offered to take their learn. The (...) to
stay dinner; (...) when he found, their (...) to depart, he (...) his wife, and
accordingly having (...) usual (...) pleasant to be seen that to be related,
they (...) leave, the gentleman and (...) heartily (...) them a good journey,
and they as heartily thanking them for their kind entertainment. They (...)
departed, Adams declaring, that this (...) the manner in which the people had
lived in the golden (...).

CHAP. V.
A disputation as schools, hold on the road between Mr. Abraham Adams and
Joseph; (...) not unwelcome to them (...).

OUR travelers having well refreshed (...) at the gentleman's house. Joseph
(...) with sleep, and Mr. Abraham Adams (...) tobacco, renewed their journey
with great (...); and pursuing the road in which they were (...) traveled many
miles before they met with any adventure worth relating. In this interval, we
shall (...) our reader with a very curious discourse, as (...) apprehend it,
concerning public schools, which (...) between Mr. Joseph Andrews and Mr.
Abraham Adams.

They (...) not gone far, before Adams calling to Joseph, asked him if he had
attended to the gentleman's story; he answered, to all the former part.' '(...)
don't you think,' says he, 'he was a very (...) in his youth?' 'A very unhappy
man (...) the other. 'Joseph,' cries Adams, (...), I have (...) discovered the
(...) preserved your virtue as you have. The first care I always (...) is of a
(...). What is all (...) man take in exchange for his (...) schools trouble
themselves (...). I have known (...), who has not been (...) his (...); but
for my own part, I always scourged a lad sooner for missing that than any other
(...). Believe me, child, all that gentleman's misfortunes arose from his being
(...) of a public school.

'It does not become me,' answered Joseph, to dispute any thing, Sir, with you
especially (...) matter of this kind; for to be sure you must be allowed by all
the world to (...) teacher of a school in all our county. (...) says Adams, I
believe, is granted me; that I may without much vanity pretend to -- ^ay, I
believe (...) may go to the next county too -- (...) (...) non est moum --
However, Sir a^ you are (...) to bid me speak, says Joseph, (...) you know
(...), Sir, (...) was (...) school, and (...) he had a hundred (...) at the
someplace. (...) heard him (...) a public school, and (...) learn more in one
year (...) education will in (...). He used to say (...) itself initiated him a
great way, (I (...) was his very expression) (...) schools (...) societies,
where a Boy of any (...) in epitome what he will afterward (...) in the world
at large. (...) quoth Adams (...) prefer a (...) school, where boys may (...)
innocence and (...) fine passage is (...) play of Cato, the only English
tragedy I even (...).

If knowledge of the world (...) Juba ever live in (...) Who would not rather
preserve the purity of (...) child, than wish him to attain the whole (...) of
arts and sciences; which, by-the-bye, (...) learn in the classes of a private
school? (...) I would not be vain, but I esteem myself to be (...) to none,
(...) secundum, in teaching these things; so that a lad may have (...) much
learning in a private as in a public education, And, with submission (...)
Joseph, (...) may get (...) much vice, (...) several country gentlemen, who
were educated within five miles of their own houses, and are as wicked as if
they had known the world from their infancy. I (...) I was in the stable, if a
young horse was (...) in his nature, no correction would (...) otherwise; I
take i^ to be equally the (...) men: (...) corrupted. (...) that the (...) in
public schools was much (...) in private -- You (...) says Adams, and so did
(...) twenty or thirty boys more in a (...) presume to (...) in this (...) have
taught from (...) master of six boys only, (...) discipline amongst them as the
(...) greatest school in the world. I say (...) I say nothing (...) himself had
been educated (...) (...), and under the tuition of (...) I name nobody, it
(...) have been (...) him -- but his father must institute him (...) knowledge
of the (...). (...) horis (...). Joseph seeing him run on in this manner, asked
pardon many times assuring him he had no intention to offend. I better you had
not child, said he, and I am not (...) but for maintaining (...) a school; for
this -- And (...) named all the (...) old books, and presented himself to (...)
if this good (...) had an enthusiastic of (...) the vulgar call a blind side,
it was (...) a schoolmaster the (...) and himself the (...) the beautiful
(...). It was a kind of (...) formed by the winding of a (...) was planted with
(...) words, and the (...) gradually above each other by the natural ascent
(...) she ground they (...) on; which ascent as the hid with their (...) to
have (...) disposed by the design of the most skilful planter. The soil was
spread with (...) which no paint (...) imitate; and the whole place might have
raised romantic ideas in elder minds than those of Joseph and Fanny, without
the assistance of love. Here they arrived about noon, and Joseph proposed to
Adams that they should rest a while in (...) delightful place, and refresh
themselves with (...) which the good nature of Mrs. (...) provided them with.
Adams made (...) object (...) to the (...); so down they sat, and pulling but a
cold (...), and a (...) of (...), they (...) which might have (...) of more
(...) did (...). I (...), that they found (...) their provisions a little
paper, containing a piece of gold, which Adams (...) had been put there by
mistake, would have returned back, to restore it: but he was at (...) that Mr.
Wilson had (...) furnishing them with a (...) for their (...), on his having
(...) the (...) were (...) of the (...). Adams (...) such an (...) of (...)
which it (...) to call (...) him; (...) too (...) which those who have as great
(...) as ourselves, (...) hopes of seeing him again. Then Joseph made a speech
on (...) which the reader, if (...) so disposed, may (...); for we scorn to
(...) such reading, without first giving him warning.

CHAP. VI.
(...) reflections by Joseph Andrews, with (...), and person Adams's (...)
escape.

I HAVE often wondered, Sir, said Joseph to (...) serve so few instances of
charity among mankind; for though the goodness of a man's heart did not incline
him to relieve the distresses of his fellow creatures, methinks the desire of
honor (...) move him to it. What inspires a man to build (...) houses, or
(...) clothes, and other things (...) ambition to be (...) would not (...) of
poverty (...) a sum of (...) livelihood (...) respect th^^ (...) house,
furniture, pictures, or (...) ever beheld? For not only the object himself
(...) was thus relieved, (...) all who (...) such a person, must, (...)
infinitely more than (...) things: which when we (...) we (...) praise the
builder, the (...) the painted, the (...) the tailor, and the rest, by whose
ingenuity they are produced, than the person who by his money makes them his
own. For my own part, (...) I have waited behind my lady in a room (...)
pictures, while I have (...) never once thought (...) any one else, as I ever
observed; for when it (...) been asked whose picture that was, it was never
once answered, the master's of the house; but (...), Paul Varnish, Hannibal
Scr^tchi,, (...), which, I suppose were the (...) of (...) painters: but if it
was asked who redeemed such a (...) out of (...) who lent (...) a ruined (...)
money to set up? who clothed that family of (...) small children? it is very
plain what must be the answer. And besides, these great folks are mistaken, if
they imagine they get any honor at (...) means; for (...) where she (...)
house (...), but I (...) they all (...) who do, (...) it is strange that all
men should consent in commending goodness, and (...) endeavor to deserve (...)
whilst on the (...) all (...) wickedness, (...) to be what they abuse. This I
know not the reason of; but it is as (...) as (...)-light to those who (...)
the world. As I have done these three years A^ all the great folks wicked then?
says Fanny. To be (...) there are some exceptions, answered Joseph. Some
gentlemen of our cloth report (...) actions done by their (...) and (...) Pope,
the great (...) of a man that lived (...) (...) Ross, and another at the Bath,
one Al -- Al -- I forget his name, but it is in the book of verses, This
gentleman has built up a stately house too, which the squire likes very well:
but his charity is seen farther than his house; though it stands on a hill, ay,
and brings him more honor too. It was his charity that put him in the book,
where ^he ^quire says he puts all those who deserve it; and to be sure, as he
lives among all the great people, if there were any such, he would know them.
-- This was all of Mr. Joseph Andrews's speech which I could get him to
recollect, which I have delivered as near as was possible in his own words,
with a very small embellishment. But I believe the (...) has not been a little
surprised at the long (...) of person Adams, especially as so many occasions
offered themselves to exert his curiosity and observation. The truth is, he was
(...) asleep and (...) been from the beginning of the preceding (...): and
indeed if the reader considers that so many hours had past since he had closed
his eyes, he will not wonder at his repose, though even Hen^ey himself, or as
great an orator (if any such he) had been in his rostrum or tub before him.

Joseph, who, whilst he was speaking, had continued in one attitude, with his
head reclining on one side, and his eyes cast on (...) ground, no sooner
perceived, on looking up, the position of Adams, who was stretched on his back,
and (...) louder than the usual braying of the animal with long ears; then he
turned toward Fanny, and (...) her by she hand, began a dalliance, which,
(...) consistent with the purest innocence and (...) neither he would have
attempted, (...) before (...) witness. Whilst (...) themselves (...) his
harmless and delight (...), they heard (...) pack of (...) approaching in fall
cry toward them, and presently afterward saw a (...) pop forth (...) the
(...), and, (...) the water, land within a few yards of them in the meadows.
The (...) no sooner on shore, than it seated itself on its (...) legs, and
listened to the sound of the pursuers. Fanny was wonderfully pleased with the
little wretch, and (...) longed to have it in her (...) she might preserve it
from the dangers that (...) to threaten it: but the rational part of the
creation do not always aptly distinguish their friends (...) their foes; what
wonder than if this filly (...) the moment it beheld her, fled from the friend,
who would (...) protected it, and, traversing (...) meadows again, (...) the
little rivulet on the opposite side. It was, however, so spent and (...) down
twice or (...) in (...) way. The (...) tender heart of Fanny, who (...) in her
eyes, against the (...) poor (...) out of its (...) to the extreme^^ (...). She
had not much time to make reflections of this kind; for on a (...) the (...)
the wood, which resounded with their (...) and the (...) of their retinue who
attended (...). The dogs now past the rivulet, and (...) the (...) of the hare;
five Horsemen (...) to leap (...), three of whom (...) two were in the attempt
throws (...) into the water; their companions (...) own horses too, proceeded
after their sport, (...) left, their friends and riders to invoke (...) of
(...), or employ the more active (...) strength (...) for their delivera^^^.
(...) however, (...) not so unconcerned on (...); he left Fanny for a moment to
herself, and (...) to the gentlemen, who were immediately on their legs, making
their ears, and easily with the help of his hand attained the bank (for the
rivulet was not at all deep;) and without staying to thank their kind assister,
ran dripping across the meadow, calling to their brother sportsmen to stop
their horses: but they heard them not.

The hounds were now very little behind their poor ^eeling, staggering prey,
which, fainting almost at every (...) crawled through the wood, and had almost
got round to the place where Fanny stood, when it was overtaken by its enemies;
and, being driven out of the covert, was caught and instantly tore to pieces
before Fanny's face, who was unable to assist it with any (...) nor could ^he
prevail on Joseph, who had been himself a (...) in his youth, to (...) any
thing contrary to the laws of hunting, (...) of the hare, which he said was
killed (...).

The hare was caught within a yard of (...) of Adams, who lay asleep at some
(...) the ^^vers; and the hounds in devouring i^, (...) it backwards and (...),
had drawn it so close to him, that some of them (by (...) perhaps for the
hare's skin) laid hold of the (...) of his cassock; others at the same time
applying their teeth to his wig, which he had with a handkerchief fastened to
his head, began to pull him about; and had not the motion of his body had more
effect on him than seemed to be wrought by the (...), they must certainly have
tasted his (...), which delicious flavor might have been fatal to him: but
being roused by these tuggings, he instantly awaked, and with a jerk (...) his
(...) from his wig, he with most (...) dexterity (...) his legs, which now
seemed the only members he could entrust his safety ^o. Having therefore
escaped likewise from a^ least a third part of his cassock, which he willingly
left as his (...) or spoils to the enemy, he fled with the utmost speed he
could summon to his assistance. Nor let this be any detraction from the bravery
of his character; let the number of the enemies, and the surprise in which he
was taken, be considered; and if there be any modern so outrageously brave,
that he cannot admit of ^^ight in my circumstance whatever, I say (...) I
whisper that softly, and I (...) declare, without any intention of giving (...)
any brave man in the ^^tion) I say, or rather I whisper, that he is an ignorant
fellow, and has (...) or Virgil, nor knows (...) of Hector or Turnus; nay, he
is (...) with the history of some great men living who, though as brave as (...),
have run away, the Lord knows how far, and the Lord knows (...) to the surprise
of their friends, and the entertainment of their enemies. But (...) persons of
such heroic disposition are a little offended at the behavior of Adams, we
assure them they shall be as much pleased at what we shall immediately relate
of Joseph Andrews. The master of the pack was just arrived, or as the sportsmen
call it, come in, when Adams set out, as we have before mentioned. This
gentleman was generally said to be a great lover of humor; but not to mince
the matter, especially as we are upon this subject, he was a great Hunter of
Men: Indeed he had hitherto followed the sport only with dogs of his own
species; for he kept two or three couple of barking curs (...) that use only.
However, as he (...) had now found (...) nimble enough, he was ^^illing to
indulge himself with other sport, and accordingly crying (...), stole away,
encouraged the hounds to pursue Mr. Adams, swearing it was the largest
jack-hare he ever saw; at the same time hallooing and whooping as if a
conquered (...) was ^^ying before him; in which he was imitated by by these two
or three couple of human, or rather two legged curs on horseback which we have
mentioned before.

Now thou, whoever thou art, whether a (...) or by what other name soever thou
chusest to be called, who presidest (...) biography, and have inspired all the
writers of (...) who did infuse such wonderful (...) pen of immortal
Gullive^; who (...) guided the judgment, (...) nervous manly style of my (...)
had no hand in that (...) the translations which (...) willingly (...)
struck out of the life of (...) Lastly, Thou who without the assistance (...)
of (...) and even against his (...) of his book, forced (...); do thou assist
me in what I (...) equal to. Do thou (...) on the (...) the young, the gay, the
brave Joseph Andrews, whilst men shall view him with (...) and (...) tender
virgins with love and anxious (...) his safety.

No sooner did Joseph Andrews perceive (...) distress of his friend, when first
(...) quick-(...) dogs attacked him, than he grasped his (...) in his right
hand, a cudgel which his father had of his grandfather, to whom a mighty (...)
man of (...) had given it for a present in that days when he (...) three heads
on (...). It was a (...) mighty strength and wonderful (...) one of Mr. Deard's
best (...), whom no other (...) the equal; and who (...) made all th^se (...)
which the (...) have lately walked with about (...) Park in a morning: But
(...) was far his (...)-piece; (...) its (...) was engraved (...) and (...),
which might (...) for a (...) of (...) designed to represent the (...); but is
(...) the face of a certain (...) of infinite (...), humor, and gravi^^. He
(...) intend (...) have (...) many (...). (...) of the (...) to the (...) on
this (...) reasons: The (...) it would (...) which should he (...) part; but
(...) does not weigh much, many (...) for such (...) to our (...) indeed, what
(...) we bring to set (...) our reader's (...) at once the (...) of friendship,
(...) youth, beauty, (...) and (...) all which (...) the person of Joseph
Andrews but those therefore, that describe (...) and tigers, (...) than (...),
raise their poems or plays (...) of Joseph Andrews, who is himself (...) the
reach of any simile.

(...) Rockwood (...) and (...) than fell on his (...) brought him to (...) all
(...) trailing; and (...) whenever (...) He fell by the (...) Plunder, and
(...) victims of his (...) on the ground. Then (...) Mr. John Temple had (...)
up in (...) house, and (...) at his own table, and lately sent the (...) for a
present, can (...) at Joseph, (...) by the leg; no dog was ^over fiercer (...)
b^ing descended from (...) worried bulls in (...) country, but now (...) an
unequal (...) the (...) we have (...) may believe (...) (...) interposed, and
in the shape of the (...) her (...) up in (...).

(...) with his (...) to the (...) Then Joseph (...) to his (...), and with
(...) might fell on the victor, (...) to his (...)! Caesar ran yel^ing away.

The (...) with the most (...) man of (...) a language (...) vain to contend
longer; for (...) their (...) with her (...) battle, a battle we (...) poet,
(...) shall (...) with the (...) and his companions, (...) and the (...) sit of
laughter, (...) who had (...) delight (...) many of which lay, (...) in the
(...). The (...) therefore having first called his friends (...) guards, for
the safety of his person, (...) up to the combatants, and (...) all (...) he
was master of into his (...) demanded with an authoritative voice of (...) what
he (...) by assaulting his dogs in (...). Joseph (...) with great (...) they
had first (...) on his friend; and of (...) had belonged to the greatest man in
the kingdom, (...) would have treated there in the same way; (...) whilst his
veins contained a single drop of (...) he would not stand idle by, and see
(...) gentleman (pointing to Adams) abused either by man (...) having so said,
both he and (...) their wooden weapons, and put themselves (...) such a
posture, that the squire and his company thought proper to preponderate, before
they (...) to revenge the (...) of their four-footed (...). At this instant
(...), whom the (...) of Joseph's danger had (...) so which that, (...) getting
her own, she had made the (...), came up. The (...) so surprised with (...)
immediately fixed both (...) on (...), every one (...) charming a creature.
(...) engaged them a moment (...); but all (...) amaze. The (...) only (...)
her attraction, who was (...) he cutting (...) the dogs, and (...) in which he
succeed^^^ so (...), that only (...) no great note remained (...) on the (...)
of action. Upon this the (...) well it was (...) worse; (...) his part, he
could not blame the gentleman, and wondered his master would encourage the dogs
to (...) christians; that it was the surest way to spoil them, to make them
follow vermin instead of sticking to a hare.

The squire being informed of the little mischief that had been done, and
perhaps having more mischief of another kind in his head, accosted Mr. (...)
with a more favorable aspect than before (...) told him he was (...) for what
had happened (...) that he had endeavored all he could to (...) with his (...)
commanded the courage of his (...); for so he imagined Joseph to be. He (...)
Mr. Adams to dinner, and desired the (...) might come with him. Adams (...);
but the invitation was we (...) at length he (...) accept it. His wig and (...)
of the field, being (...) Joseph (...) otherwise probably they (...) himself
into the (...) the house and (...) toward the (...) a very little distance,
(...) which they (...) which, the (...) laughter and (...) to the squire and
his facetious (...).

CHAP. VII.
A scene of roasting very nicely adapted to the present (...) and times.

TH^^ (...) at the squire's (...). A little (...) the account of Fanny, whom
the squire who (...) ^^tchelor, was (...) to place at his own (...) but she
would not consent, nor (...) Mr. Adams permit her to be parted from Joseph: so
their she was at length with him consigned over to the (...) then, where the
servants were (...); a favor which was (...) Adams: which design being (...)
the squire thought he should (...) when he (...) her, (...) Fanny.

It may not be (...), to open a little (...), and that of his (...) house then
was a (...) (if we (...)) (...) under (...) had orders (...) very (...) the
(...) in hunting (...) his mother (...) horses, hounds, and (...) endeavoring
(...) with his young (...) who would, he (...) able handsomely to provide for
him, (...) his companion, not (...) at these exercises, but likewise (...) the
young squire had a very (...) the age of twenty, his mother began to (...) not
fulfilled the duty of a parent; she (...) to persuade her (...), if possible,
(...) she imagined would will (...) have learned at a (...) This is what they
commonly call traveling; which with the help of the tutor who was fixed on to
(...) him, she easily succeeded in. He made in (...) years the tour of Europe,
as they term it, and (...) home well furnished with French clothes, (...) and
(...), with a hearty contempt for (...) own (...) especially what had any
favor of the plain spirit and honesty of our Ancestors. His (...) applauded
herself at his return; and (...) being master of his own fortune, he soon (...)
himself a sent in parliament; and was in the (...) of the (...) gentlemen of
his (...) but what (...) chiefly, was a strange delight (...) thing which is
rediculous, (...) in his own species; (...) without one or (...) these (...)
and those who were (...) by nature (...) most his (...) pleasure in (...)
methods (...) he was always (...) indeed no (...) honor to the (...) business
was to bunt out and display every thing that had any (...) of the above
mentioned qualities, and especially in the gr^^est and best characters: But if
they (...) in their search, they were to turn even virtue and wisdom themselves
into ridicule for the (...) of their master and (...). The gentlemen of
our-like disposition, who were now (...) house, and whom he had brought with
(...) London, were an old half-pay officer, a (...), a (...)-poet, a
quack-doctor, a scraping-(...), and a lame German dancing master.

As soon as dinner was served, while Mr. Adams was saying grace, the captain
(...) his (...) from behind him; so that when he endeavored ^o seat himself,
he (...) down on the (...) and (...) completed joke the (...) to the
great-entertainment of the whole company. The second joke was performed by the
poet, who sat next him on the other side, and took an opportunity, while poor
Adams was respectfully drinking to the master of the house, to overturn a plate
of (...) which, with the many apologies (...) person's gentle answers; (...)
company. Joke the third (...) up by one of the waiting-men, who (...) ordered
to (...) a quantity of gin into Mr. Adams's ale, which (...) to be the (...)
ever drunk, (...) rather too rich of (...) contributed (...) to their laughter.
Mr. Adams (...) we had most of this relation, (...) all the (...) of this kind
practiced (...) which the (...) disposition of his own heart (...) him (...) in
discovering; and indeed, (...) not been for the information which we received
from a servant of the family, this part of our history, which (...) none of the
least curious, must have been deplorably imperfect; though we must own it
probable, that some more jokes were (as they call it) cracked during their
dinner; but we have by no means been able to come at the knowledge of them.
When dinner was removed, the poet began to (...) ^^rses, which he (...) were
made extempore. The following is a copy of them procured with the (...)
difficulty.

(...) poem on parson Adams.
Did (...) such a parson (...):
His (...), not (...)
(...) have him for son mistaken.
(...) to that than (...)?
But (...) not make any mortal (...),
To see this parson taken for a (...)?
Could (...) err thus (...), even he
For a good player might have (...) that.
At (...) the hard (...) off the player's (...) of the company, (...) of his
hand than his (...). The player (...) the jest on the (...) began to (...) his
(...) the same (...): He (...) reflecting (...) received (...) in broken
English (...) man very (...) for (...) suppose by his walk dat he had learn of
some great master. He said it was (...) pretty (...) in clergymen to (...); and
(...) desiring him to dance a (...) telling him. (...) cassock would serve for
pettico^^; and that he would himself he his partner. At which words, without
waiting for an answer, he pulled out his gloves, and the (...) was preparing
his fiddle. The company all (...) the dancing master wagers that the parson
(...) him, which he refused, saying, (...) All hounds that will hunt fox (...)
^unt a piece of rusty (...) tr^iled on the group.
(...) so too; for he had (...) his life who looked de dance (...) man: He than
stopped forwards to take Adams by the hand, which the letter (...) at the (...)
his (...) to carry the j^st too far, for (...) put upon. The dancing master no
sooner (...) the fist then he prudently retired out of its (...) and stood
aloof mimicking Adams, whose eyes were fixed on him, not (...) what he was at,
(...) avoid laying hold on him, which he had once attempted. In the (...)
while, the captain perceiving an opportunity (...) or (...) to the cassock, and
then (...) their little smo^king-candle. Adams (...) to this (...) and
believing he had (...) blown up (...) from his (...) about the (...) to the
infinite joy of (...), who (...) he (...) the best (...). As (...) the devil
had done (...) him, and he ha^ a little recovered his (...) he returned to the
table, standing up in the (...) of one who (...) to make a speech. They all
cried out, Hear him, hear him; and he them (...) in the following manner: Sir,
I am (...) one to (...) Providence has been so (...) in (...) his favors,
make so (...) a return for them; for though you have not insulted me yourself, it
is visible you have delighted in those that do it, ^or have once discouraged
the many rudenesses which have been shown toward me; indeed toward yourself,
if you rightly understood (...) I am your (...), and by the laws of hospitals*
(...) to your protection. One gentleman (...) thought proper (...) produce same
poetry upon (...) of which I shall (...) that I had rather be the (...)
composer. He has (...) ^reat me with disrespect as a person. I (...) my order
is not the object of (...) so, unless by being a disgrace to (...) I hope
poverty will (...) gentleman indeed has repeated some sentence where the order
itself in mention (...) with contempt. He says they are taken from plays. I am
sure such plays are a scandal to the government which permits them, and cursed
will be the nation where they are represented. How others have (...) me, I
(...). You (...) with two of (...) your (...) ^alling (...) whether it (...) of
(...) very well (...), of (...) you, Sir, (...) which words to (...) the half
guinea which was found in the basket) I do not (...) you this (...) of riches,
(...) truth. Your (...), me (...) table (...) honor which I did not ambition
(...) affect: (...) endeavored to behave toward you (...) most respect; if I
have failed, it was (...) sign; nor could I, certainly, so far (...) to deserve
the insults I have (...) meant therefore either to my (...) (and you see I am
not very poor) the (...) not lie at my door, and I heartily pray (...) may be
averted (...).

He thus, finished and received a (...) the whole company. Then the (...) of
the house told him, he was forty (...) happened; that he could not (...) any
share in it: That the verses (...) as himself (...) well observed, so had, that
he might easily answer them; and for the serpent (...) a very great affront
done him (...) the dancing master, for which, if he (...) threshed (...), as he
deserved, he should be very much pleased (...) in which probably he spoke
with.) Adams answered. Whoever had done it, (...) was not his (...) to punish
him that way; but (...) parson whom he had accused Law a witness (...) he, of
his innocence; for I had my eye on himself the while. Whoever (...) and bestow
on him a (...) humanity. The captain answered with a (...) look and accent,
That he (...) he did (...) reflect on him; (...)imanity as another, and (...)
man (...) not, he would convince (...) of his (...) cutting his throat. Adams
(...) said (...) believed he had spoke tight (...) account.(...) which the
captain returned What (...) you (...) by my speaking right (...) you (...) I
would not take them (...); but your gown protects, you. If any man who wears a
sword had said so much, I had pulled him by the nose before this. Adams
replied, if he attempted any rudeness to his person, he would not find any
protection for himself in his gown; and (...) his fist, declared, he had
threshed many a (...) man. The gentleman did all he could to (...) this warlike
disposition in Adams, and was (...) hopes to have produced a battle: But he was
(...) made no other (...) very well you are a person (...) so old mother
church, (...).

(...), who had hitherto been (...) who (...) gravest, but most (...) all, in a
(...) speech highly (...) Adams had said; and as much (...) the behavior to
(...). He proceeded to who (...) who immediately (...) in (...) to (...) a
health to the (...) the captain and the (...) and what is (...) There were
amusements (...) and degrees, from the (...) a point of philosophy, and that
(...) discovered themselves in nothing more than in the choice of their (...);
for, says he, as it must (...) of the future conduct in (...) of (...), whom in
their tender years we perceive (...) of taw or balls, or other (...) play-(...)
choose, at their leisure-hours, to exercise (...) in contentions of wit,
learning, (...) like; so must it inspire one with equal (...) (...) man, if we
should discount him (...) or other childish play. Adams (...) the doctor's
opinion, and said, (...) had (...) wondered at some passages in (...) authors,
where Scipio. Laeli^^, and other (...) men were represented to have passed many
(...) amusements, of the most (...). The doctor replied, He had by him (...)
manuscript where a favorite diversion of Socrates was recorded. 'Ay,' says the
person (...) I should be most infinitely obliged to you for the favor of
perusing it. The doctor promised to send it him, and farther said, that he
(...) could describe it. 'I think,' says (...) as I can remember, it was (...)
throne erected, on one (...) of which (...) and on the other, a queen with
their (...) attendants ranged on, both sides; to them (...) introduced an
ambassador which part (...) always, used to (...) was led up to the (...) the
(...) addressed himself to the (...) in (...) speech, full of virtue, and
goodness, and (...) and such like. After which (...) was (...) between the king
and queen and (...) entertained. This I think was (...) chief (...) -- (...) I
may have forgot (...); for it is long since I read it. Adams said, It was
indeed a diversion worthy the relaxation of, so great a man; and thought
something resembling it should be instituted among our great men, instead of
cards and other idle pastime, in which he (...) informed they trifled away too
much of their (...). He added, The christian religion was a (...) subject for
these speeches than any (...) have invented. The (...) of the (...) Adams said,
(...) to perform the (...).' To which the doctor (...) prepared with a speech,
(...) Adams with a gravity of (...) which would have deceived a more (...)
Sir,' says Adams, I never travel without (...) for (...) happen. He was easily
(...) his worthy friend, as he now called for doctor. (...) of the (...) so
that the gentleman sent immediate (...) have the (...); which was perfor^^^
(...) had drunk two (...): and perhaps the (...) will hereafter (...) great
reason to (...) of the servants. (...) the truth, the throne was (...) more
than this; (...) a great (...) of (...) provided, on each (...) of which (...)
and queen; namely, the master of his house, and the captain. And now the (...)
the poet and the doctor, who (...) his (...) to the great entertainment (...)
all present (...) led up to his place, and seated between their majesty's. They
(...) rose up, when the blanket, (...) its (...) at either end, gave way, and
(...) Adams over head and ears in the water; the captain (...) his escape, but
unluckily the gentleman himself not being as nimble as he ought, Adams caught
hold of him before he descended from his (...) and pulled him in with him, to
(...) satisfaction of all the company. (...) the squire twice or (...) of the
tub, and looked-sharp for the doctor, whom he would certainly have conveyed to
the same place of honor; but he had wisely withdrawn: he then searched for his
crabstick, and having found that, as well as his fellow-travellers, he declared
he would not stay a moment longer, in such a house. He then departed, without
taking leave of his have, whom he had exacted a more severe revenge on than he
intended: for as he did not use sufficient care to dry himself in time, he
caught a cold by the accident, which threw him into a fever, that had like to
have cost him his life.

CHAP. VIII.
Which some readers will think too short, and others too long.

ADAMS, and Joseph, who was no less (...) than his friend at the treatment he
(...) with, went out with their sticks in their hands, and carried off Fanny
notwithstanding the opposition of the servants, who did all, without proceeding
to violence, in their power to detain them. They walked as fast as they could,
not so much from any apprehension of being pursued, as that Mr. Adams might by
exercise prevent any harm from the water. The gentleman, who had given such
orders to his servants concerning Fanny, that he did not in the least fear her
getting away, no sooner heard that she was gone, than he began to rave, and
immediately dispatched several with orders, either ^^bring her back, or never
return. The poet, the (...) and all but the dancing master and doctor; (...)
this errand.

(...) might was very dark, in which our friends began their journey; however,
they made such expedition that they soon arrived at an inn, which was at seven
miles distance. Here they unanimously consented to pass the evening, Mr. Adams
being now as dry as he was before he had set out on his embassy.

This inn, which indeed we might call an alehouse, had not the words The New
Inn, been writ on the sign, afforded them no better provision than bread and
cheese, and ale; on which, however, they made a very comfortable meal; for
hunger is better than a French cook.

They had no sooner supped, than Adams, returning thanks to the Almighty for
his food, declared he had ^at his homely commons with much greater satisfaction
than his splendid dinner, and expressed great contempt for the folly of
mankind, who sacrificed their hopes of heaven to the acquisition of vast
wealth; since so much comfort was to be found in the humblest state and the
lowest prevision. Very true, Sir, says a grave man, who set smocking his pipe
by the fire, and who was a traveller as well as himself, I have often been as
much surprised as you are, when I consider the value which mankind (...)
general set on riches; since every day's experience shows us how little is in
their power; for what indeed truly desirable can they bestow on us? Can they
give beauty to the deformed, strength to the weak, or health to the infirm?
Surely if they could, we should not see so many ill-favored faces haunting the
assemblies of the great, nor would such numbers of feeble wretches languish in
their coaches and palaces. No, not the wealth of a kingdom can purchase any
paint to dre^^ (...) in the bloom of that young maiden, (...) equip disease
with the vigor of that young man. Do not riches bring us solicitude instead of
(...), envy instead of affection, and danger instead of safety? Can they
prolong their own possessions, or lengthen his days who enjoys them? So far
otherwise, that the sloth, the luxury, the care which attended them, shorten
the lives of millions, and bring them with pain and misery to an untimely
grave. Where then is their value, if they can neither embellish, or strengthen
our forms, sweeten or prolong our lives? Again -- Can they adorn the mind more
than the body? Do they not rather swell the heart with vanity, puff up the
chee^^s with pride, shut our ears to every call of virtue, and our bowels to
(...) of compassion! Give me your hand, (...), said Adams (...) rapture; 'for I
suppose you are a clergyman.' 'No truly.' answered the (...), (indeed he was a
priest of the church of (...); but those who understand our laws, will (...) he
was not ^ver-ready to own it.) 'Whatever you are,' (...) Adams, you have spoken
my sentiments: I believe I have preached every syllable of your (...) twenty
times over: For it has always appeared to me easier for a cable (...) (which
by the way is the true rendering of that word we have (...) Camel) to go
through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of
heaven. 'That, Sir.' said the other, will be easily granted you by divines, and
is deplorably true: but as the prospect of our good at a distance does not so
forcibly affect us, it might be of some service to mankind to be made
thoroughly sensible, which I think they might be with very little serious
attention, that even the blessings of this world are not to be purchased with
riches. A doctrine, in my opinion, not only metaphysically, but, if I may so
say, mathematically demonstrable; and which I have been always so perfectly
convinced of, that I have a contempt for nothing so much as for gold. Adams now
began a long discourse; but as most which he said occurs among many authors who
have treated this subject, I shall omit inserting it. During its continuance
Joseph and Fanny retired to rest, and the host likewise left the room. When the
English person had concluded, the Romis^ resumed the discourse, which he
continued with great bitterness and invective; and at last ended, by desiring
Adams to lend him eighteen-pence to pay his reckoning; promising, if he never
paid him, he might be assured of his prayers. The good (...) answered, that
eighteen-pence would be too little to carry him any very long journey; that he
had half a guinea in his pocket, which he would divide with him. He then fell
to searching his pockets, but could find no money: for indeed the company with
whom he dined, had past one jest upon him which we did not then (...), and had
picked his pocket of all that treasure which he had so ostentatiously produced.

'Bless me,' 'cried Adams, I have certainly lost (...); I can never have spent
it. Sir, as I am a christian, I had a whole half guinea in my pocket this
morning, and have not now a single halfpenny of it left. Sure the devil must
have taken it from me. 'Sir,' answered the priest smiling, You need make no
excuses; if you are not willing to lend me the money, I am contented. 'Sir,'
cries Adams, if I had the greatest sum in the world; ay, if I had ten pounds
about me, I would bestow it all to rescue any christian from distress. I am
more vexed at my loss on your account than my own. Was ever any thing so
unlucky? because I have no money in my pocket, I shall be suspected to be no
christian. I am more unlucky, quoth the other, if you are as generous as you
say: for really a crown would have made me happy, and conveyed me in plenty to
the place I am going, which is not above twenty miles off, and where I can
arrive by to morrow-night. I assure you I am not accustomed to travel
pennyless. I am but just arrived in England; and we were forced by a storm in
our passage to throw all we had overboard. I don't suspect but this fellow
will take my word for the tri^le I owe him; but I hate to appear so mean as to
confess myself without a shilling to such people: for these, and indeed too
many other know little difference in their estimation between a beggar and a
thief. However, he thought he should deal better with the host that evening
then the next morning; he therefore resolved to set out immediately,
notwithstanding the darkness; and accordingly, as soon as the host returned, he
communicated to him the situation of his affairs; upon which the host
scratching his head, answered, Why, I do not know, master, if it be so, and you
have no money, I must trust, I think, though I had rather always have ready money
if I could; but, marry, you look like so honest a gentleman, that I don't fear
your paying me, if it was twenty times as much. The priest made (...) reply,
but (...) leave of him and Adams as (...) as he could not without confusion,
and perhaps with some distrust of Adams's sincerity, departed.

He was no sooner gone than the host fell a shaking his head, and declared, if
he had suspected the fellow had no money, he would not have (...) him a single
drop of drink; saying he despaired of ever seeing his face again; for that he
(...) like a confounded rogue. 'Rabbit the fellow,' cries he, I thought by his
talking so much about riches, that he had a hundred pounds at least in his
pocket. Adams chid him for his suspicions, which he said were not becoming a
christian; and then, without reflecting on his loss, or considering how he
himself should depart in the morning, he retired to a very homely bed, as his
companions had before; however, health and fatigue gave them a sweeter repose
than is often in the power of ^^lvet and down to bestow.

CHAP. IX.
Containing as surprising and ^oody adventures as (...) in this, (...) perhaps
any other (...).

IT was almost meaning, when Joseph Andrews, whose eyes the thoughts of his
dear Fanny had opened, as he lay (...) meditating on this lovely (...), heard a
violent knocking at the door over which he ^ay. He presently jumped out of
(...), and opening the window, was asked if there were no travelers in the
house; and presently by another voice, if two men and a young woman had not
taken up there their lodging that night. Though he knew not the voices, he
began to entertain a suspicion of the truth; for indeed he had (...) some
information from one of the servants of the squire's house, of his design; and
answered in the negative. One of the servants who knew the host well, called
out to him by his name, just (...) opened another window, and asked him the
same question; to which he answered in the (...). O (...) said another; have we
found you? and ordered the host to come down and open his door. Fanny, who was
as wakeful as Joseph, no sooner heard all this, than she leaped from her bed,
and hastily putting on her gown and petticoats, ran as fast as possible to
Joseph's room, who then was almost dressed; he immediately let her in, and
embracing her with the most passionate tenderness, bid her fear nothing: for
that he would die in her defense. 'Is that a reason why I should not (...)'
says she, when I should lose what is dearer to (...) than the whole world?
Joseph then kissing her hand, said he could almost thank the occasion which had
extorted from her a tenderness she would never indulge him with (...). He then
(...) waked his bedfellow Adams, who was yet fast asleep, notwithstanding many
(...) Joseph* but was no sooner made sensible of (...) than he leaped from his
(...) without (...) the presence of Fanny, (...) hastily turned her (...) from
him, and enjoyed a double benefit from (...), which as it would have prevented
any (...) to an innocence less pure, or a modesty (...) delicate, so it
concealed even those blushes which (...) raised in her.

Adams had soon put on all his clothes (...) breeches, which in the hurry he
forgot; (...) or they were pretty well supplied by the length of (...) other
garments: and now the house-door being opened; the captain, the poet, the
player, and three servants came in. The captain told the host, that two fellows
who were in his house, had run away with a young woman; and desired to know in
which room she lay. The (...), who presently believed the story, directed them,
and instantly the captain and poet, jostling one another, ran up. The poet, who
was the nimblest, entering the chamber first, searched the bed and (...) other
part, but to no purpose; the bird was flow (...) the impatient reader, who
might otherwise have been in pain for her, was before advertised. They then
enquired where the men lay, and were approaching the chamber, when Joseph
roared out in a loud voice, that he would shoot the first man who offered to
attack the door. The captain enquired (...) fire arms they had; to which the
host answered, he believed they had none; nay, he was almost convinced of it^
(...) for he had heard one ask the other in the evening, what they should have
done, if they had been overtaken when they had no (...); to which the (...)
answered, they would have defended themselves with their sticks as long as they
were able, and God would assist a just cause. This satisfied the captain but
not the (...), who prudently retreated down stairs, saying, it was his business
to record great actions, and not to do (...). The captain was no sooner well
satisfied that them were no firearms, than bidding defiance to gunpowder, and
swearing he loved the smell of (...) ordered the ^ervants to follow him, and
^arching boldly up, immediately attempted to force the door, which the servants
soon helped him to accomplish. When it was opened, they discovered the enemy
drawn up three deep; Adams in the from, and Fanny in the rear. The captain told
Adams, that if they would go all back to the house again, they should be
civilly treated: but unless they consented, he had orders to carry the young
lady with him, whom there was great reason to believe they (...) stolen from
her parents: for notwithstanding her disguise, her air, which she could not
conceal, sufficiently discovered her birth to be infinitely superior to theirs.
Fanny bursting into tears, solemnly assured him he was mistaken; that she was a
poor helpless foundling, and had no relation in the world which she kn^w of;
and throwing herself on her knees, begged that he would not attempt to take her
from her friends, who she was convinced would die before they would lose her;
which Adams confirmed with words not far from amounting to an oath. The captain
swore he had no leisure to talk, and bidding them thank themselves for what
happened, he ordered the servants to fall on, at the same time endeavoring to
pass by Adams, in order (...) lay hold on Fanny; but the person interruption
him, received a blow from one of them, which (...) considering whence it (...),
he returned to the captain, and gave him so dexterous a knock in that part of
the stomach, which is (...) pit, that he staggered some (...) backwards. The
captain, whoever not (...) to this (...) play, and who wisely apprehended the
(...) of such another blow, two of them forming to him equal to a thrust
through the body, drew forth his hanger, as Adams approached him, and was
levelling a blow at his head, which would probably (...) silenced the preacher
for ever, had not Joseph in that instant lifted up a certain huge stone pot of
the chamber with one hand, which six beaus could not have lifted with both, and
discharged it, together with the contents, full in the captain's face. The
uplifted hanger dropped from his hand, and he f^ll prostrate on the floor with
a lumpish noise, and his halfpence rattled in his pocket; the red liquor which
his veins contained, and the white liqu^^ which the pot contained, ran in one
stream (...) his face and his clothes. Nor had Adams quite escaped, some of the
water having in its passage shed its honors on his head, and began to trickle
down the wrinkles or rather surrows of his (...) when one of the servants
snatching a (...) out of a ^^il of water which had already done its duty in
washing the house, pushed it in the person's face; yet could not be bear him
down; for the person wresting the mop from the fellow with one hand, with the
other brought his enemy as low as the earth, having given him a stroke ever
that part of (...), where, in some men of pleasure, the natural and artificial
^oses are conjoined.

Hitherto fortune shamed to incline the victory on the (...) acording to her
custom, (...) of her disposition: (...) the field, or rather chamber of (...)
at Joseph, and (...) his (...) his stomach (for he was a stout fellow, and
(...) almost staggered him; but Joseph ^^^pping (...), did with his left hand
so (...) him under the chin that he reeled. The (...) who pursuing his blow
with his right hand, when he received from one of the servants such a stroke
with a (...) on his temples, that it instantly (...) of sense, and he measured
his length on the ground.

Fanny (...) the air with her cries, and Adams was coming to the assistance of
Joseph: but the two serving men and the (...) now fell on him, and soon subdued
him, though he fought like a madman, and looked so black with the impressions
he had received from the mop, that Don Quixote would certainly have taken him
for an enchanted M^^r. But now follows the most tragical part; for the captain
was risen again; and seeing Joseph on the (...), and Adams secured, he
instantly laid (...) on Fenny, and with the assistance of the poet and player,
who hearing the battle was over, were now (...), dragged her, crying and
tearing her hair, from the sight of her Joseph, and with a perfect deafness to
all her entreaties, carried her down stairs by viloence, and fastened her on
the player's horse; and the captain mounting his own, and loading that on which
this poor miserable wretch was, departed without any more consideration of her
cries than a butcher of th^se of a lamb; for indeed his thoughts were
entertained only with the degree of favor which he promised himself from the
squire on the success of this adventure.

The servants, who (...) Adams and Joseph as (...) might receive no
interruption (...) on poor Fanny, immediately, (...) advice, tied Adams to one
of the (...) they did Joseph on the other sides (...) could bring him to
himself; and (...) them together, back to back, and desiring the host not to
set them at liberty, nor to go near them till he had further orders; they
departed toward their master: but happened to take a different road from that
which the captain had fallen into.

CHAP. X.
A discourse between the poet and players of no other use in this history, but
to divert the reader.

BEFORE we proceed any farther in this tragedy, we shall leave Mr. Joseph and
Mr. Adams to themselves, and imitate the wise (...) of the stage; who, in the
midst of a grave action, entertain you with some excellent piece of satire or
humor called a dance. Which piece indeed is therefore danced, and not spoke,
as it is delivered to the audience by persons whose thinking faculty is by most
people held to lie in their heels; and to whom, as well as heroes, who think
with their hands, nature has only given heads for the sake of conformity, and
as they are of use in dancing, to hang their hats on.

The poet, addressing the player, proceeded thus: 'As I was saying,' (for they
had been at this discourse all the time of the engagement above stairs) the
reason you have no good new plays is evident; it is from your discouragement of
authors. Gentlemen will not write, Sir, they will not write without the
expectation of fame or profit, or perhaps, both. Plays are like trees which
will not grow without nourishment; but, like mushrooms, they shoot up
spontaneously, as it were, in a rich soil. The muses, like vines, may be
pruned, but not with a hatchet. The town like a peevish child, knows not what
it desires, and is always best pleased with a rattle. A farce writer has
indeed some chance for success; but they have lost all taste for the sublime.
Though I believe one reason of their depravity is the badness of the actors. If
a man writes like an angel, Sir, those fellows know not how to give a sentiment
utterance. 'Not so fast,' says the player, the modern actors are as good at
least as their authors, nay, they come nearer their illustrious predecessors,
and I expect a Booth on the stage again, sooner than a Shakespeare or an Otway;
and indeed, I may turn your observation against you, and with truth say, that
the reason no authors are encouraged, is, because we have no good new plays. I
have not affirmed the contrary, said the poet; but I am surprised you grow so
warm; you cannot imagine yourself interested in this dispute; I hope you have a
better opinion of my taste, than to apprehend I squinted at yourself. No, Sir,
if we had six such actors as you, we should soon rival the Bettertons and
Sandfords of former times; for, without a compliment to you, I think it
impossible for any one to have excelled you in most of your parts. Nay, it is a
solemn truth, and I have heard many, and all great judges, express as much; and
you will pardon me if I tell you, I think every time I have seen you lately,
you have constantly acquired some new excellence, like a snowball. You have
deceived me in my estimation of perfection, and have outdone what I thought
inimitable. 'You are as little interested,' answered the player, in what I have
said of other poets; for d -- n me if there are not many strokes, ay, whole
scenes, in your last tragedy, which at least equal Shakespeare. There is a
delicacy of sentiment a dignity of expression in it, which I will own many of
our gentlemen did not do adequate justice to. To confess the truth, they are
bad enough, and I pity an author who is present at the murder of his works. --
Nay it is but seldom that it can happen, returned the poet, the works of most
modern authors, like dead-born children, cannot be murdered. It is such
wretched half-begotten, half-wit, lifeless, spiritless, low, grovelling stuff,
that I almost pity the actor who is obliged to get it by heart, which must be
almost as difficult to remember as words in a language you do not understand.
'I am sure,' said the player, if the sentences have little meaning when they
are writ, when they are spoken they have less. I know scarce one who ever lays
an emphasis right, and much less adapts his action to his character. I have
seen a tender lover in an attitude of fighting with his mistress, and a brave
hero suing to his enemy with his sword in his hand -- I don't care to abuse my
profession, but rot me if in my heart I am not inclined to the poet's side. 'It
is rather generous in you than just,' said the poet; and though I hate to speak
ill of any person's production; nay, I never do it, nor will -- but yet, to do
justice to the actors, what could Booth or Betterton have made of such horrible
stuff as Fenton's Mariaamne, Frowd's Philotas, or Mallet's Eurydice, or those
low, dirty, last dying speeches, which a fellow in the city of Wapping, your
Dillo, or Lillo, what was his name, called Tragedies? -- 'Very well,' says the
player, and pray what do you think of such fellows as Quin and Delane, or that
face-making puppy young Cibber, that ill-look'd dog Macklin, or that saucy slut
Mrs. Clive? What work would they make with your Shakespears, Otways, and Lees?
How would those harmonious lines of the last come from their tongues? -- No
more; for I disdain
All pomp when thou art by -- for be the noise
Of kings and crowns from us, whose gentle souls
Our kinder fates have steered another way.
Free as the forest birds we'll pair together,
Without rememb'ring who our fathers were:
Fly to the arbors, grots, and flowery meads,
There in soft murmurs interchange our souls,
Together drink the crystal of the stream,
Or taste the yellow fruit which autumn yields.
And when the golden evening calls us home,
Wing to our downy nests, and sleep till morn.
Or how would this disdain of Otway,
Who'd be that foolish sordid thing called man?
'Hold, hold, hold,' said the poet. Do repeat that tender speech in the third
act of my play which you made such a figure in, -- I would willingly, said the
player, 'but I have forgotten it.' -- Ay, you were not quite perfect enough in
it when you played it, cries the poet, or you would have had such an applause
as never given on the stage; an applause I was extremely concerned for your
losing. -- 'Sure,' says the player, If I remember, that was hissed more than
any passage in the whole play. -- Ay, your speaking it was hissed said the
poet, 'My speaking it,' said the player. -- 'I mean your not speaking it,' said
the poet. 'You were out, and then they hiss'd' -- 'They hissed and then I was
out, if I remember,' answered the player; and I must say this for myself, that
the whole audience allowed I did your part justice: so don't lay the damnation
of your play to my account. I don't know what you mean by damnation, replied
the poet. Why, you know it was acted but one night, cried the player. 'No,'
said the poet, you and the whole town were enemies; the pit were all my
enemies, fellows that would cut my throat, if the (...) hanging did not
restrain them. All tailors, Sir, all tailors. -- Why should the tailors be so
angry with you? cries the player. I suppose you don't employ so many in making
your clothes. 'I admit your jest,' answered the poet; but you remember the
affair as well as myself; you (...) there was a party in the pit and upper
(...) would not suffer it to be given out again; (...) much, ay infinitely, the
majority, all the boxes in particular, were desirous of it; nay, most of the
ladies swore they never would come to the house till it was acted again. --
Indeed I must own their policy was good, in not letting it be given out a
second time; for the rascals knew, if it had gone a second night, it would have
run fifty: for if ever there was distress in a tragedy -- I am not fond of my
own performance; but if I should tell you what the best judges said of it --
Nor was it entirely owing to my enemies neither, that it did not succeed on the
stage, as well as it has since among the polite readers; for you cannot say it
had justice done it by the performers, -- I think, answered the player, the
performers did the distress of it justice: for I am sure we were in distress
enough, who were pelted with oranges all the last act; we all imagined it would
have been the last act of our lives.

The poet, whose fury was now raised, had just attempted to answer, when they
were interrupted, and an end put to their discourse by an accident; which, if
the reader is impatient to know, he must skip over the next chapter, which is a
sort af counterpart to this, and contains some of the best and gravest matters
in the whole book, being a discourse between person Abraham Adams and Mr.
Joseph Andrews.

CHAP. XI.
Containing the exhortations of person Adams to his friend in affliction:
calculated for the instruction and improvement of the reader.

JOSEPH no sooner came perfectly to himself, than perceiving his mistress gone,
he bewailed her loss with groans, which would have pierced any heart but those
which are possessed by some people, and are made of a certain composition, not
unlike flint in its hardness, and other properties; for you may strike fire
from them, which will dart through the eyes, but they can never distill one drop
of water the same way. His own, poor youth was of a softer composition: and, at
those words, O my dear Fanny! O my love! shall I never, never see thee more?
his eyes overflowed with tears, which would have become any thing but a hero.
In a word, his despair was more easy to be conceived than related --

Mr. Adams, after many groans, sitting with his back to Joseph, began thus in a
sorrowful tone: You cannot imagine, my good child, that I entirely blame these
first agonies of your grief; for when misfortunes attack us by surprise, it
must require infinitely more learning than you are master of to resist them:
but it is the business of a man and a christian, to summon reason as quickly as
he can to his aid; and she will presently teach him patience and submission. Be
comforted, therefore, child, I say be comforted. It is true you have lost the
prettiest, kindest, loveliest, sweetest young woman, one with whom you might
have expected to have lived in happiness, virtue and innocence. By whom you
might have promised yourself many little darlings, who would have been the
delight of your youth, and the comfort of your age. You have not only lost her,
but have reason to fear the utmost violence which lust and power can inflict
upon her. Now indeed you may easily raise ideas of horror which might drive you
to despair. -- 'O I shall run mad,' cries Joseph. O that I could but command my
hands to tear my eyes out, and my flesh off. -- If you would use them to such
purposes, I am glad you cannot, answered Adams. I have stated your misfortune as
strong as I possibly can; but, on the other side, you are to consider you are a
christian; that no accident happens to us without the divine permission, and
that it is the duty of a man and a christian to submit. We did not make
ourselves; but the same power which made us, rules over us, and we are
absolutely at his disposal; he may do with us what (...) pleases, nor have we
any right to complain. A second reason against our complaint is our ignorance:
for as we know not future events, so neither can we tell to what purpose any
accident (...) that which at first threatens us with evil, may (...) the end
produce our good. I should have said indeed our ignorance is twofold (but I
have not at present time to divide properly) for as we know not to what purpose
any event is ultimately directed; so neither can we affirm from what cause it
originally ^prung. You are a man, and consequently a sinner; and this may be a
punishment to you for your sins; indeed in this sense it may be esteemed as a
good, yea, as the greatest good, which satisfies the anger of heaven, and
averts that wrath which cannot continue without our destruction. Thirdly, our
impotency of relieving ourselves, demonstrates the folly and absurdity of our
complaints: for whom do we resist? Or against whom do we complain, but a power,
from whose shafts no armor can guard us, no speed can fly? A power which
leaves us no hope but in submission. -- 'O Sir,' cries Joseph, all this is very
true, and very fine, and I could hear you all day, if I was not so grieved at
heart as now I am. 'Would you take physic,' says Adams, when you are well, and
refuse it when you are sick? Is not comfort to be administered to the afflicted,
and not to those who rejoice, or those who are at ease? -- O you have not
spoken one word of comfort to me yet, returned Joseph. 'No!' cries Adams, What
am I then doing? what can I say to comfort you? -- 'O tell me,' cries Joseph,
that Fanny will escape back to my arms, that they shall again enclose that
lovely creature, with all her sweetness, all her untainted innocence about her.
-- 'Why, perhaps you may,' cries Adams; but I cannot promise you wha't to come.
You must with perfect resignation wait the event; if she be restored to you
again, it is your duty to be thankful, and so it is if she be not: Joseph, if
you are wise, and truly know your own interest, you will peaceably and quietly
submit to all the dispensations of Providence, being thoroughly assured, that
all the misfortunes, how great soever, which happen to the righteous, happen to
them for their own good. -- Nay it is not your interest only, but your duty to
abstain from immoderate grief; which, if you indulge, you are not worthy the
name of a christian. -- He spoke these last words (...) an accent a little
severer than usual; upon (...) Joseph-begged him not to be angry, saying, he
mistook him, if he thought he denied it was his (...) for he had known that
long ago. What signifies knowing your duty, if you do not perform it? answered
Adams. Your knowledge increases your guilt -- O Joseph, I never thought you had
this stubborness in your mind. Joseph replied, he fancied he misunderstood him,
which I assure you, says he, you do, if you imagine I endeavor to grieve; upon
my soul I don't. Adams rebuked him for swearing, and then proceeded to enlarge
on the folly of grief, telling him all the wise men and philosophers, even
among the heathens, had written against it, quoting several passages from
Seneca, and the Consolation, which though it was not Cicero's was he said, as
good almost as any of his works, and concluded all by hinting, that immoderate
grief in this case might incense that power which alone could restore him his
Fanny. This reason, or indeed rather the idea which it raised of the
restoration of his mistress, had more effect than all which the person had said
before, and for a moment abated his agonies: but when his fears sufficiently
set before his eyes the danger that poor creature was in, his grief returned
again with repeated violence, nor could Adams in the least a^^wage it; though
it may be doubted in his behalf, whether Socrates himself could have prevailed
any better.

They remained some time in silence; and groans and sighs issued from them
both; at length Joseph burst out in the following soliloquy: Yes, I will bear
my sorrows like a man,
But I must also feel them as a man.
I cannot but remember such things were (...),
And were most dear to me. --
Adams asked him what stuff that (...) -- To which he answered, they were some
lines he had gotten by heart out of a play -- Ay, there is nothing but
heathenism to be learned from plays, replied he -- I never heard of any plays
fit for a christian to read, but Cato and the Conscious Lovers; and I must own
in the latter, there are some things almost solemn enough for a sermon. But we
shall now leave them a little, and enquire after the subject of their
conversation.

CHAP. XII.
More adventures which we hope will as much please as surprise the reader.

NEITHER the facetious dialogue which passe^^ between the poet and player, nor
the grave and truly solemn discourse of Mr. Adams, will, we conceive, make the
reader sufficient amends for the anxiety which he must have felt on the account
of poor Fanny, whom we left in so deplorable a condition. We shall therefore
now proceed to the relation of what happened to that beautiful and innocent
virgin, after she fell into the wicked hands of the captain.

The man of war having conveyed his charming prize out of the (...) a little
before day, made the utmost expedition in his power toward the squire's house,
where this delicate creature was to be offered up a sacrifice to the lust of a
ravisher. He was not only deaf to all her bewailings and entreaties on (...)
road, but accosted her ears with impurities, (...) having been never before
accustomed to them, she happily for herself very little understood* At last he
changed his note, and attempted to sooth and mollify her, by setting forth the
splendour and luxury which would be her fortune with a man who would have the
inclination and power too, to give her whatever her utmost wishes could desire;
and told her he doubted not but she would soon look kinder on him, as the
instrument of her happiness, and despise that pitiful fellow whom her ignorance
only could make her fond of. She answered, she knew not whom he meant; she
never was fond of any pitiful fellow. Are you affronted, Madam, says (...) at
my calling him so? but what better can be said of one in a livery,
notwithstanding your fondness for him? She returned, that she did not
understand him, that the man had been her fellow servants, and she believed was
as honest a creature as any alive; but as for fondness of men -- 'I warrant
ye,' cries the captain, we shall find means to persuade you to be fond; and I
advise you to yield to gentle ones; for you may be assured that it is not in
your power, by any struggles whatever, to preserve your virginity two hours
longer. It will be your interest to consent; for the squire will be much kinder
to you if he enjoys you willingly than by force, -- At which words she began to
call aloud for assistance (for it was now open day) but finding none, she
lifted her eyes up to heaven, and supplicated the divine assistance to preserve
her innocence. The captain told her, if she persisted in her vociferation, he
would find a means of stopping her mouth. And now the poor wretch perceiving no
hopes of succor abandoned herself to despair, and sighing out (...) name of
Joseph! Joseph! a river of tears ran (...) her lovely cheeks, and wet the
handkerchief (...) covered her bosom. A horseman now appeared in the road, upon
which the captain threatened her violently if she complained; however, the
moment they approached each other, she begged him with the utmost earnestness
to relieve a distressed creature who was in the hands of a ravisher. The fellow
stopped at those words; but the captain assured him it was his wife, and that he
was carrying her home from her adulterer: which so satisfied the fellow who was
an old one, (and perhaps a married one too) that he wished him a good journey,
and rode on. He was no (...) past, than the captain abused her violently (...)
breaking his commands, and threatened to gagg her, when two more horsemen,
armed with pistols, came into the road just before them. She again solicited
their assistance, and the captain told the same story as before. Upon which one
said to the other -- That Is a charming wench! Jack; I wish I had been in the
fellow's place whoever he is. But the other, instead of answering him, cried
out eagerly, 'Zounds, I know her:' and then turning to her, said, 'Sure you are
not Fanny Goodwill.' -- Indeed, indeed I am, she cried -- O John, I know you
now -- Heaven has sent you to my assistance, to deliver me from this wicked
man, who is carrying me away for his vile purposes -- O for God's sake rescue
me from him. A fierce dialogue immediately ensued between the captain and these
two men, who being both armed with pistols, and the chariot which they attended
being now arrived, the captain saw both force and stratagem were vain, and
endeavored to make his escape; in which however he could not succeed. The
gentleman who rode in the chariot ordered it to stop, and with an air of
authority examined (...) the merits of the cause; of which being advert^^^ by
Fanny, whose credit was confirmed by the fellow who knew her, he ordered the
captain, who was all bloody from his encounter at the inn, to be conveyed as a
prisoner behind the chariot, and very gallantry took Fanny into it; for, to say
he truth, this gentleman (who was no other than the celebrated Mr. Peter
Pounce, and who preceded the lady Booby only a few miles, by setting out
earlier in the morning) was a very gallant person, and loved a pretty girl
better than any thing, besides his own money, or the money of other people.

The cha^^^ now proceeded toward the inn, which, as Fanny was informed, lay in
their way, and where it arrived that very time where the poet and player were
disputing below stairs, and Adams and Joseph were discoursing back to back
above: just at that period to which we brought them both in the two preceding
chapters, the chariot stopped at the door, and in an instant Fanny leaping from
it, ran up to her Joseph. -- O reader, conceive if thou can, the joy which
fired the breasts of these lovers on this meeting, and if thy own heart does
not sympathetically assist thee in this conception, I pity thee sincerely from
my own: for let the hard-hearted villain know this, that there is a pleasure in
a tender sensation beyond any which he is capable of tasting.

Peter being informed by Fanny of the presence of Adams, stopped to see him, and
receive his homage; for, as Peter was an hypocrite, a sort of people whom Mr.
Adams never saw through, the one paid that respect to his seeming goodness
which the other believed to be paid to his riches; hence Mr. Adams was so much
his favorite, that he once (...) him four pounds thirteen shillings and
sixpence to prevent his going to goal, on no greater security than a bond and
judgment, which probably he would have made no use of, though the money had not
been (as it was) paid exactly at the time.

It is not perhaps easy to describe the figure of Adams; he had risen in such a
hurry, that he had on neither breeches, garters, nor stockings; nor had he
taken from his head a red spotted handkerchief, which by night bound his wig
turned inside out, around his head. He had on his torn cassock, and his great
coat; but as the remainder of his cassock hung down below his great coat; so
did a small stripe of white, or rather whitish linen, appear below that; to
which we may add the several colors which appeared on his face, where a long
piss-burnt beard served to retain the liquor of the stone-pot, and that of a
blacker hue which distilled from the mop. -- This figure which Fanny had
delivered from his captivity, was no sooner spied by Peter, than it disordered
the composed gravity of his muscles; however he advised him immediatel^ to make
himself clean, nor would accept his homage in that pickle.

The poet and player no sooner saw the captain in captivity, than they began to
consider of their own safety, of which flight presented itself as the only
means; they therefore both of them mounted the poet's horse, and made the most
expeditious retreat in their power.

The host, who well knew Mr. Pounce, and lady Booby's livery, was not a little
surprised at this change of the scene, nor was his confusion much helped by his
wife, who was now just risen, and having heard from him the account of what had
past, comforted him with a decent number of fools and blockheads; asked him why
he did not (...) her; and told him, he would never leave following the
nonsensical dictates of his own numscull, till she and her family were ruined.

Joseph being informed of the captain's arrival, and seeing his Fanny now in
safety, quitted her a moment, and running down stairs, went directly to him,
and, stripping off his coat, challenged him to fight; but the captain refused,
saying, he did not understand boxing. He then grasped a cudgel in one hand, and
catching the captain by the collar in the other, gave him a most severe
drubbing, and ended with telling him, he had now had some revenge for what his
dear Fanny had suffered.

When Mr. Pounce had a little regaled himself with some provision which he had
in his chariot, and Mr. Adams had put on the best appearance his clothes would
allow him, Pounce ordered the captain into his presence; for he said he was
guilty of felony, and the next justice of peace should commit him: but the
servants (whose appetite for revenge is soon satisfied) being sufficiently
contented with the drubbing which Joseph had inflicted on him, and which was
indeed of no very moderate kind, had suffered him to go off, which he did,
threatening a severe revenge against Joseph, which I have never heard he
thought proper to take.

The mistress of the house made her voluntary appearance before Mr. Pounce, and
with a thousand curtsies told him. she hoped his honor would pardon her
husband, who was a very nonsense man, for the sake of his poor family; that
indeed if he could be ruined alone, she should be very willing of it; for
because as why, his worship very well knew he deserved it: but she had three
(...) small children, who were not capable to get their own living; and if her
husband was sent to goal, they must all come to the parish; for she was a poor
weak woman, continually a breeding, and had no time to work for them. She
therefore hoped his honor would take it into his worship's consideration, and
forgive her husband this time; for she was sure he never intended, any harm to
man, woman, or child; and if it was not for that block-head of his own, the man
in some things was well enough; for she had had three children by him in less
than three years, and was almost ready to cry out the fourth time. She would
have proceeded in this manner much longer, had not Peter stopped her tongue, by
telling her he had nothing to say to her husband, nor her neither. So, as Adams
and the rest had assured her of forgiveness, she cried and curtsied out of the
room.

Mr. Pounce was desirous that Fanny should continue her journey with him in the
chariot; but she absolutely refused, saying she would ride behind Joseph, on a
horse which one of lady Booby's servants had equipped him with. But alas! when
the horse appeared, it was found to be no other than that identical beast which
Mr. Adams had left behind him at the inn, and which these honest fellows, who
knew him, had redeemed. Indeed whatever horse they had provided for Joseph,
they would have prevailed with him to mount none, no not even to ride before
his beloved Fanny, till the person was supplied; much less would ^e deprive his
friend of the beast which belonged to him, and which he knew the moment he saw,
though Adams did not: however, when he was reminded of the affair, and told that
they had brought the horse with them which he left behind, he answered -- Bless
me! and so I did.

Adams was very desirous that Joseph and (...) should mount this horse, and
declared he could very easily walk home. 'If I walked alone,' says he, I would
wage a shilling, that the Pedestrian outstripped the Equestrian travelers: but
as I intend to take the company of a pipe, peradventure I may be an hour later.
One of the servants whispered Joseph to take him at his word, and suffer the
old put to walk if he would: This proposal was answered with an angry look and
a peremptory refusal by Joseph, who catching Fanny up in his arms, aver'd he
would rather carry her home in that manner, than take away Mr. Adams's horse,
and permit him to walk on foot.

Perhaps, reader, thou have seen a contest between two gentlemen, or two ladies
quickly decided, though they have both asserted they would not eat such a nice
morsel, and each insisted on the other's accepting it; but in reality both were
desirous to swallow it themselves. Do not therefore conclude hence, that this
dispute would have come to a speedy decision: for here both parties were
heartily in earnest, and it is very probable, they would have remained in the
inn-yard to this day, had not the good Peter Pounce put a stop to it; for
finding he had no longer hopes of satisfying his old appetite with Fanny, and
being desirous of having some one to whom he might communicate his grandeur, he
told the person he would convey him home in his chariot. This favor was by
Adams, with many bows and acknowledgements accepted, though he afterward said,
he ascended the chariot rather that he might not offend, than from any desire
of riding in it, for that in his heart he preferred the Pedestrian even to the
Vehicular expedition. All matters (...) settled, the chariot, in which rode
Adams and Pounce, moved forwards; and Joseph having borrowed a pillion from the
host, Fanny had just seated herself thereon, and had laid hold of the girdle
which her lover wore for that purpose, when the wise beast, who concluded that
one at a time was sufficient, that two to one were odds, etc. discovered much
uneasiness at his double load, and began to consider his hinder as his
forelegs, moving the direct contrary way to that which is called forwards. Nor
could Joseph, with all his horsemanship persuade him to advance; but without
having any regard to the lovely part of the lovely girl which was on his back,
he used such agitations, that had not one of the men come immediately to her
assistance, she had, in plain English, tumbled backwards on the ground. This
inconvenience was presently remedied by an exchange of horses; and then Fanny
being again placed on her pillion, on a better-natured, and some what a
better-fed beast, the person's horse, finding he had no longer odds to contend
with, agreed to march; and the whole procession set forwards for Booby-Hall,
where they arrived in a few hours, without any thing remarkable happening on
the road, unless it was a curious dialogue between the person and the steward;
which to use the language of a late apologist, a pattern to all biographers,
"waits for the reader in the next chapter."

CHAP. XIII.
A curious dialogue which passed between Mr. Abraham Adams and Mr. Peter
Pounce, better worth reading than all the works of Colley Cibber and many
others.

THE chariot had not proceeded far, before Mr. Adams observed it was a very
fine day. Ay, and a very fine country too, answered Pounce. 'I should think so
more,' returned Adams, if I had not lately traveled over the Downs, which I
take to exceed this and all other prospects in the universe. 'A fig for
prospects,' answered Pounce, one acre here is worth ten there; and, for my own
part, I have no delight in the prospect of any land but my own, 'Sir,' said
Adams, you can indulge yourself with many fine prospects of that kind, I thank
God I have a little, replied the other, with which I am content, and envy no
man: I have a little, Mr. Adams, with which I do as much good as I can. Adams
answered, that riches without charity were nothing worth; for that they were a
blessing only to him who made them a blessing to others. You and I, said Peter,
have different notions of charity. I own, as it is generally used, I do not
like the word, nor do I think it becomes one of us, gentlemen; it is a mean
person like quality; though I would not infer many persons have it neither.
'Sir,' said Adams, my definition of charity is a generous disposition to
relieve the distressed. 'There is something in the definition,' answered Peter,
which I like well enough; it is, as you say, a disposition, -- and does not so
much consist in the act as in the disposition to do it; but alas, Mr. Adams,
who are meant by the distressed? Believe me, the distresses af mankind are
mostly imaginary, and it would be rather folly than goodness to relieve them.
'Sure Sir,' replied Adams, hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, and other
distresses which attend the poor, can never be said to be imaginary evils. How
can (...) man complain of hunger, said Peter, in a country where such excellent
sallads are to be gathered in almost every field? or of thirst, where every
river and stream produces such delicious potations? And as for cold and
nakedness, they are evils introduced by luxury and custom. A man naturally
wants clothes no more than a horse or any other animal; and there are whole
nations who go without them: but these are things perhaps, which you who do not
know the world -- 'You will pardon me, Sir,' returned Adams; I have read of the
Gymnosophists. A plague of your Jehosophats, cried Peter; the greatest fault in
our constitution, is the provision made for the poor, except that perhaps made
for some others. Sir, I have not an estate which does not contribute almost as
much again to the po^^ as to the land tax, and I do assure you I expect to come
myself to the parish in the end. To which Adams giving a dissenting smile,
Peter thus proceeded: I fancy, Mr. Adams, you are one of those who imagine I am
a lump of money; for there are many who, I fancy, believe that (...) only my
pockets, but my whole clothes, are (...) with bank-bills; but I assure you, you
are all mistaken: I am not the man the world esteems me. If I can hold my head
above the water, it is all I can. I have injured myself by purchasing. I have
been too liberal of my money. Indeed I fear my heir will find my affairs in a
worse situation than they are reputed to be. Ah! he will have reason to wish I
had loved money more, and land less. Pray, my good neighbor, where should I
have that quantity of riches the world is so liberal to bestow on me? where
could I possibly, without I had stole it, acquire such a treasure? 'Why,
truly,' says Adams, I have been always of your opinion; I have wondered as well
as yourself with what confidence they could report such things of you, which
have appeared to me as mere impossibilities; for you know, Sir, and I have
often heard you say it, that your wealth is of your own acquisition; and can it
be credible that in your short time you should have amassed such a heap of
treasure as these people will have you worth? Indeed had you inherited an
estate like Sir Thomas Booby, which had descended in your family for many
generations, they might have had a color for their assertions. 'Why, what do
they say I am worth?' cries Peter, with a malicious sneer. Sir, answered Adams,
I have heard some aver you are not worth less than twenty thousand pounds. At
which Peter frowned. 'Nay, Sir,' said Adams, you ask me only the opinion of
others; for my own part, I have always denied it, nor did I ever believe you
could possibly be worth half that sum. 'However, Mr. Adams,' said he, squeezing
him by the hand. I would not sell them all I am worth for double that sum; and
as to what you believe, or they believe, I care not a fig, no not a fart. I am
not poor, because you think me so, nor because you attempr to undervalue me in
the country. I know the envy of mankind very well; but I thank heaven I am
above them: It is true, my wealth is of my own acquisition. I have not an
estate like Sir Thomas Booby, that has descended in my family through many
generations; but I know heirs of such estates who are forced to travel about
the country like some people in torn cassocks, and might be glad to accept of a
pitiful curacy for what I know. Yes, Sir, as shabby fellows as yourself, whom
no man of any figure, without that vice of goodnature, about him, would suffer
to ride in a chariot with him. 'Sir,' said Adams, I value not your chariot of a
rush; and if I had known you had intended to affront me, I would have walked to
the world's end on foot, ere I would have accepted a place in it. However, Sir,
I will soon rid you of that inconvenience; and so saying, he opened the
chariot-door, without calling to the coachman, and leapt out into the highway,
forgetting to take his hat along with him; which however, Mr. Pounce threw
after him with great violence. Joseph and Fanny stopped to bear him company the
rest of the way, which was not above a mile.

BOOK. IV.
CHAP. I.
The arrival of lady Booby and the rest at Booby-Hall.

THE coach and six in which lady Booby rode, overtook the other travelers as
they entered the parish. She no sooner saw Joseph, than her cheeks glowed with
red, and immediately after became as totally pale. She had in her surprise
almost stopped her coach; but recollected herself timely enough to prevent it.
She entered the parish amidst the ringing of bells, and the acclamations of the
poor, who were rejoiced to see their patroness returned after so long an
absence, during which time all her rents had been drafted to London, without a
shilling been spent among them, which tended not a little to their utter
impoverishing; for if the court would be severely missed in such a city as
London, how much more must the absence of a person of great fortune be felt in
a little country village, for whose inhabitants such a family finds a constant
employment and supply; and with the offals of whose table the infirm, aged, and
infant poor, are abundantly fed, with a generosity which has scarce a visible
effect on their benefactor's pockets?

But if their interest inspired so public a joy into every countenance, how
much more forcibly did the affection which they bore person Adams operate upon
all who beheld his return? they flocked about him like dutiful children and an
indulgent parent, and vied with each other in demonstrations of duty and love.
The person on his side shook every one by the hand, enquired heartily after the
healths of all that were absent, of their children and relations, and expressed
a satisfaction in his face, which nothing but benevolence made happy by its
objects could infuse.

Nor did Joseph and Fanny want a hearty welcome from all who saw them. In
short, no three persons could be more kindly received, as indeed, (...) ever
more deserved to be universally beloved.

Adams carried his fellow-travellers home to his house where he insisted on
their partaking whatever his wife, whom with his children, he found in health
and joy, could provide; where we shall leave them enjoying perfect happiness
over a homely meal, to view scenes of greater splendour, but infinitely less
bliss.

Our more intelligent readers will doubtless suspect by this second appearance
of lady Booby on the stage, that all was not ended by the dismission of Joseph;
and, to be honest with them, they are in the right; the arrow had pierced
deeper than she imagined; nor was the wound so easily to be cured. The removal
of the object soon cooled her rage, but it had a different effect on her love;
that departed with his person; but this remained lurking in her mind with his
image. Restless, interrupted slumbers, and confused horrible dreams were her
portion the first night. In the morning, fancy painted her a more delicious;
but to delude, not delight her; for before she could reach the promised
happiness, it vanished, and left her to curse, not bless the vision.

She started from her sleep, her imagination being all on fire with the
phantom, when her eyes accidentally glancing toward the spot where yesterday
the real Joseph had stood, that little circumstance raised his idea in the
liveliest colors in her memory. Each look, each word, each gesture rushed back
on her mind with charms which all (...) coldness could not abate. Now she
imputed that to his youth, his folly, his awe, his religion, to every thing,
but what would instantly have produced contempt, want of passion for the sex:
or, that which would have roused her hatred, want of liking to her.

Reflection then hurried her farther, and told her, she must see this beautiful
youth no more: nay, suggested to her, that she herself had dismissed him for no
other fault, than probably that of too violent an awe and respect for herself:
and which she ought rather to have esteemed a merit, the effects of which were
besides so easily and surely to have been removed; she then blamed, she cursed
the hasty rashness of her temper; her fury was vented all on herself, and
Joseph appeared innocent in her eyes. Her passion at length grew so violent,
that it forced her on seeking relief, and now she thought of recalling him; but
pride forbad that; pride which soon drove all softer passions from her soul,
and represented to her the meanness of him she was fond of. That thought soon
began to obscure his beauties; contempt succeeded next, and then disdain, which
presently introduced her hatred of the creature who had given her so much
uneasiness. These enemies of Joseph had no sooner taken possession of her mind,
than they insinuated to her a thousand things in his disfavour; every thing but
dislike of her person; a thought, which, as it would have been intolerable to
bear, she checked the moment it endeavored to arise. Revenge came now to her
assistance; and she considered her dismission of him stripped, and without a
character, with the utmost pleasure. She rioted in the several kinds of misery,
which her imagination suggested to her might be (...) fate; and with a smile
composed of anger, mirth, and scorn, viewed him in the rags in which her fancy
had dressed him.

Mrs. Slipslop being summoned, attended her mistress, who had now in her own
opinion totally subdued this passion. Whilst she was dressing, she asked if
that fellow had been turned away accordingly to her orders. Slipslop answered,
she had told her ladyship so, (as indeed she had) -- 'And how did he behave?'
replied the lady. 'Truly, Madam,' cries Slipslop, in such a manner, as infected
every body who saw him. The poor lad had but little wages to receive: for he
constantly allowed his father and mother half his income; so that when your
ladyship's livery was stripped off, he had not wherewithal to buy a coat, and
must have gone naked, if one of the footmen had not incommodated him with one,
and whilst he was standing in his shirt, (and to say the truth he was an
amorous figure) being told your ladyship would not give him a character, he
sighed and said, he had done nothing willingly to offend; that for his part he
should always give your ladyship a good character wherever he went; and he
prayed God to bless you: for you was the best of ladies, though his enemies had
set you against him; I wish you had not turned him away; for I believe you had
not a faithfuller servant in the house. -- 'How came you then,' replied the
lady, 'to advise me to turn him away?' 'I, Madam!' said Slipslop, I am sure you
will do me the justice to say, I did all in my power to prevent it; but I saw
your ladyship was angry; and it is not the business of us upper servants to
hinterfear on those occasions. -- And was it not you, audacious wretch, cried
the lady, who made me angry? Was it not your tittle-tattle in which I beli^^e
you belied the poor fellow, which incensed me against him? He may thank you for
all that has happened; and so may I for the loss of a good servant, and one
who probably had more merit than all of you. Poor fellow! I am charmed with his
goodness to his parents. Why did not you tell me of that, but suffer me to
dismiss so good a creature without a character; I see the reason of your whole
behavior now as well as your complaint; you was jealous of the wenches,'I
jealous!' said Slipslop; I assure you I look upon myself as his betters; I am
not meat for a footman, I hope, These words threw the lady into a violent
passion, and she sent Slipslop from her presence, who departed tossing her
nose, and crying, Marry come up! there are some people more jealous than I, I
believe. Her lady affected not to hear the words, though in reality she did, and
understood them too. (...) ensued a second conflict, so like the former, that
it might savor of repetition to relate it minutely. It may suffice to say,
that lady Booby found good reason to doubt whether she had so absolutely
conquered her passion, as she had flattered herself; and, in order to
accomplish it quite, took a resolution more common than wise, to retire
immediately into the country. The reader has long ago seen the arrival of Mrs.
Slipslop, whom no pertness could make her mistress resolve to part with;
lately, that of Mr. Pounce, her forerunners; and lastly, that of the lady
herself.

The morning after her arrival, being Sunday, she went to church, to the great
surprise of every body, who wondered to see her ladyship, being no very
constant church woman, there so suddenly upon her journey. Joseph was likewise
there; and I have heard it was remarked, that she fixed her eyes on him much
more than on the parson; but this I believe to be only a malicious rumor. When
the prayers were ended, Mr. Adams stood up, and with a loud voice pronounced: I
publish the banns of marriage between Joseph Andrews and Frances Goodwill, both
of this parish, etc. Whether this had any effect on lady Booby or no, who was
then in her pew, which the congregation could not see into, I could never
discover: but certain it is, that in about a quarter of an hour she stood up,
and directed her eyes to that part of the church were the women sat, and
persisted in looking that way during the remainder of the sermon, in so
scrutinizing a manner, and with so angry a countenance, that most of the women
were afraid she was offended at them.

The moment she returned home, she sent for Slipslop into her chamber, and told
her, she wondered what that impudent fellow Joseph did in that parish. Upon
which Slipslop gave her an account of her meeting Adams with him on the road,
and likewise the adventure with Fanny. At the relation of which, the lady often
changed her countenance; and when she had heard all, the ordered Mr. Adams into
her presence, to whom she behaved as the reader will see in the next chapter.

CHAP. II.
A dialogue between Mr. Abraham Adams and the lady Booby.

MR. Adams was not far off; for he was drinking her ladyship's health below in
a cup of her ale. He no sooner came before her, than she began in the following
manner: I wonder, Sir, after the many great obligations you have had to this
family, (with all which the reader has, in the course of this history, been
minutely acquainted) that you will ungratefully show any respect to a fellow
who has been turned out of it for his misdeeds. Nor does it, I can tell you,
Sir, become a man of your character, to run about the country with an idle
fellow and wench: Indeed, as for the girl, I know no harm of her, Slipslop
tells me she was formerly bred up in my house, and behaved as she ought, till
she hankered after this fellow, and he spoiled her. Nay, she may still,
perhaps, do very well, if he will let her alone. You are therefore doing a
monstrous thing, in endeavoring to procure a match between these two people,
which will be to the ruin (...) them both. -- 'Madam,' says Adams, if your
ladyship will but hear me speak, I protest I never heard any harm of Mr. Joseph
Andrews; if I had, I should have corrected him for it: for I never have, nor
will encourage the faults of those under my cure. As for the young woman, I
assure your ladyship I have as good an opinion of her as your ladyship
yourself, or any other can have. She is the sweetest-tempered, honestest,
worthiest, young creature; indeed, as to her beauty, I do not commend her on
that account, though all men allow she is the handsomest woman, gentle, or
simple, that ever appeared in the parish. 'You are very impertinent,' says she,
to talk such fulsome stuff to me. It is mighty becoming truly in a clergyman to
trouble himself about handsome women, and you are a delicate judge of beauty,
no doubt. A man who has lived all his life in such a parish as this, is a rare
judge of beauty. Ridiculous! Beauty indeed, -- a country wench a beauty. -- I
shall be sick whenever I hear beauty mentioned again -- And so this wench is ^o
stock the parish with beauties, I hope. -- But, Sir, our poor is numerous
enough already; I will have no more vagabonds settled here. 'Madam,' says
Adams, your ladyship is offended with me, I protest, without any reason. This
couple were desirous to consummate long ago, and I dissuaded them from it; nay,
I may venture to say, I believe I was the sole cause of their delaying it.
'Well,' says she, and you did very wisely and honestly too, notwithstanding she
is the greatest beauty in the parish, -- 'And now, Madam,' continued he, I only
perform my office to Mr. Joseph. -- Pray, don't mister such.fellows to me,
cries the lady. 'He,' said the parson, with the consent of Fanny, before my
face, put in the banns. -- 'Yes,' answered the lady, I suppose the slut is
forward enough; Slipslop tells me how her head runs upon fellows; that is one
of her beauties, I suppose. But if they have put in the banns, I desire you
will publish them no more without my orders. 'Madam,' cries Adams, if any one
puts in sufficient caution, and assigns a proper reason against them, I am
willing to surcease. -- 'I tell you a reason,' says she, he is a vagabond, and
he shall not settle here, and bring a nest of beggars into the parish; it will
make us but little amends that they will be beauties. 'Madam,' answered Adams,
with the utmost submission to your ladyship, I have been informed by lawyer
Scout, that any person who serves a year, gains a settlement in the parish
where he serves. 'Lawyer Scout,' replied the lady, is an impudent coxcomb; I
will have no lawyer Scout interfere with me. I repeat to you again, I will have
no more encumbrances brought on us: so I desire you will proceed no farther.
'Madam,' returned Adams, I would obey your ladyship in every thing that is
lawful; but surely the parties being poor is no reason against their marrying.
God forbid there should be any such law. The poor have little share enough of
this world already; it would be barbarous indeed to deny them the common
privileges and innocent enjoyments which nature indulges to the animal
creation. Since you understand yourself no better, cries the lady, nor the
respect due from such as you to a woman of my distinction, than ^o affront my
ears by such loose discourse, I shall mention but one short word; it is my
orders to you, that you publish these banns no more* and if you dare, I will
recommend it to your master the doctor, to discard you from his service. I
will, Sir, notwithstanding your poor family; and you and the greatest beauty in
the parish may go and beg together. 'Madam,' answered Adams, I know not what
your ladyship means by the terms master and service. I am in the service of a
master who will never discard me for doing my duty: and if the doctor (for
indeed I have never been able to pay for a license) thinks proper to turn me
from my cure, God will provide me, I hope, another. At least, my family, as
well as myself, have hands; and he will prosper, I doubt not, our endeavous to
get our bread honestly with them. Whilst my conscience is pure, I shall never
fear what man can do unto me. -- I condemn my humility, said the lady, for
demeaning myself to converse with you so long I shall take other measures; for
I see you are a coufederate with them. But the sooner you leave me the better;
and I shall give orders that my doors may no longer be open to you. I will
suffer no parsons who run about the country with beauties, to be entertained
here. -- 'Madam,' said Adams, I shall enter into no persons doors against their
will: but I am assured, when you have enquired farther into this matter, you
will applaud, not blame my proceeding; and so I humbly take my leave: which he
did with many bows, or at least many attempts at a bow.

CHAP. III.
What passed between the lady and lawyer Scout.

IN the afternoon the lady sent for Mr. Scout, whom she attacked most violently
for intermeddling with her servants: which he denied, and indeed with truth;
for he had only asserted accidentally, and perhaps rightly, that a year's
service gained a settlement; and so far he owned he might have formerly
informed the parson, and believed it was law. 'I am resolved,' said the lady,
to have no discarded servants of mine settled here: and so, if this be your
law, I shall send to another lawyer. Scout said, if she sent to a hundred
lawyers, not one or all of them could alter the law. The utmost that was in the
power of a lawyer, was to prevent the law's taking effect; and that he himself
could do for her ladyship as well as any other: and I believe, says he, Madam,
your ladyship not being conversant in these matters, has mistaken a
difference: for I asserted only, that a man who served a year was settled. Now
there is a material difference between being settled in law and settled in
fact; and as I affirmed generally, he was settled, and law is preferable to
fact, my settlement must be understood in law, and not in fact. And suppose,
madam, we admit he was settled in law, what use will they make of it? how does
that relate to fact? He is not settled in fact; and if he be not settled in
fact, he is not an inhabitant; and if he is not an inhabitant, he is not of
this parish; and then undoubtedly he ought not to be published here; for Mr.
Adams has told me your ladyship's pleasure, and the reason, which is a very
good one, to prevent burdening us with the poor; we have too many already: and
I think we ought to have an act to hang or transport half of them. If we can
prove in evidence, that he is not settled in fact, it is another matter. What I
said to Mr. Adams, was on a supposition that he was settled in fact; and indeed
if that was the case, I should doubt -- 'Don't tell me your facts and your
ifs,' said the lady, I don't understand your gibberish: you take too much upon
you, and are very impertinent in pretending to direct in this parish, and you
shall be taught better, I assure you, you shall. But as to the wench, I am
resolved she shall not settle here; I will not suffer such beauties as these to
produce children for us to keep. -- Beauties indeed! your ladyship is pleased
to be merry, -- answered Scout. -- Mr. Adams described her so to me, said the
lady. -- Pray what sort of a dowdy is it, Mr. Scout? -- The ugliest creature
almost I ever beheld, a poor dirty drab, your ladyship never saw such a wretch.
-- Well, but dear Mr. Scout, let her be what she will, -- these ugly women will
bring children you know; so that we must prevent the marriage, -- 'True,
Madam,' replied Scout, for the subsequent marriage, cooperating with the law,
will carry law into fact. -- When a man is married, he is settled in fact; and
then he is not removeable. I will see Mr. Adams, and I make no doubt of
prevailing with him. His only objection is, doubtless, that he shall lose his
fee; but that being once made easy, as it shall be, I am confident no farther
objection will remain. No, no, it is impossible; but your ladyship cannot
discommend his unwillingness to depart from his fee. Every man ought to have a
proper value for his fee. As to the matter in question, if your ladyship
pleases to employ me in it, I will venture to promise you success. The laws of
this land are not so vulgar, to permit a mean fellow to contend with one of
your ladyship's fortune. We have one sure card, which is to carry him before
justice Frolic, who, upon hearing your ladyship's name, will commit him without
any farther questions. As for the dirty slut, we shall have nothing to do with
her; for if we get rid of the fellow, the ugly jade will -- Take what measures
you please, good Mr. Scout, answered the lady, but I wish you could rid the
parish of both; for Slipslop tells me such stories of this wench, that I abhor
the thoughts of her; and though you say she is such an ugly slut, yet you know,
dear Mr. Scout, these forward creatures who run after men, will always find
some as forward as themselves: so that to prevent the increase of beggars, we
must get rid of her. -- Your ladyship is very much in the right, answered
Scout, but I am afraid the law is a little deficient in giving us any such
power of prevention; however, the justice will stretch it as far as he is able,
to oblige your ladyship. To say the truth, it is a great blessing to the
country that he is in the commission; for he has taken several poor off our
hands that the law would never lay hold on. I know some justices who make as
much of committing a man to Bridewell, as his lordship at size would of hanging
him; but it would do a man good to see his worship our justice, commit a fellow
to Bridewell: he takes so much pleasure in it: and when once we have um there;
we seldom hear any more o'um. He Is either starved or eat up by vermin in a
month's time. -- Here she arrival of a visitor put an end to the conversation,
and Mr. Scout having undertaken the cause, and promised it success, departed.

This Scout was one of those fellows who; without any knowledge of the law, or
being bred to it, take upon them, in defiance of an act of parliament, to act
as lawyers in the country, and are called so. They are the pests of society,
and a scandal to a profession to which indeed they do not belong; and which
owes to such kind of rascallions the ill will which weak persons bear toward
it. With this fellow, to whom a little before she would not have condescended
to have spoken, did a certain passion for Joseph, and the jealousy and disdain
of poor innocent Fanny, betray the lady Booby into a familiar discourse, in
which she inadvertently confirmed many hints, with which Slipslop, whose
gallant he was, had pre-acquainted him; and whence he had taken an opportunity
to assert those severe falsehoods of little Fanny, which possibly the reader
might not have been well able to account for, if we had not thought proper to
give him this information.

CHAP. IV.
A short chapter, but very full of matter; particularly the arrival of Mr.
Booby and his lady.

ALL th^^ night, and the next day, the lady Booby passed with the utmost
anxiety; her mind was distracted, and her soul tossed up and down by many
turbulent and opposite passions. She loved, hated, pitied, scorned; admired,
despised the same person by fits, which changed in a very short interval. On
Tuesday morning, which happened to be a holiday, she went to church, where, to
her surprise, Mr. Adams published the banns again, with as audible a voice as
before. It was lucky for her, that as there was no sermon, she had immediate
opportunity of returning home to vent her rage, which she could not have
concealed from the congregation five minutes; indeed it wad not then very
numerous, the assembly consisting of no more than Adams, his clerk, his wife,
the lady, and one of her servants. At her return she met Slipslop, who accosted
her in these words. -- O meam, what does your ladyship think? To be sure lawyer
Scout has carried Joseph and Fanny both before the justice. All the parish are
in tears, and say they will certainly be hanged: for no body knows what it is
for. -- I suppose they deserve it, says the lady. Why do thou mention such
wretches to me? O dear Madam, answered Slipslop, is it not a pity such a
graceless young man should die a virulent death? I hope the judge will take
commensuration on his youth. As for Fanny, I don't think it signifies much what
becomes of her; and if poor Joseph has done any thing, I could venture to
swear she traduced him to it: Few men ever come to fragrant punishment, but by
those nasty creatures who are a scandal to our sect. The lady was no more
pleased at this news, after a moment's reflection, than Slipslop herself: for
though she wished Fanny far enough, she did not desire the removal of Joseph,
especially with her. She was puzzled how to act or what to say on this
occasion, when a coach and six drove into the court, and a servant acquainted
her with the arrival of her nephew Booby and his lady. She ordered them to be
conducted into a drawing room, whither she presently repaired, having composed
her countenance as well as she could; and being a little satisfied that the
wedding would by these means be at least interrupted, and that she should have
an opportunity to execute any resolution she might take, for which she saw
herself provided with an excellent instrument in Scout.

The lady Booby apprehended her servant had made a mistake, when he mentioned
Mr. Booby's lady; for she had never heard of his marriage; but how great was
her surprise, when at her entering the room, her nephew presented his wife to
her, saying, 'Madam, this is that charming Pamela, of 'whom I am convinced you
have heard so much.' The lady received her with more civility than he expected;
indeed with the utmost; for she was perfectly polite, nor had any vice
inconsistent with good-breeding. They passed some little time in ordinary
discourse, when a servant came and wispered Mr. Booby, who presently told the
ladies he must desert them a little on some business of consequence; and as
their discourse during his absence would afford little improvement or
entertainment to the reader, we will leave them for a while to attend Mr. Booby.

CHAP. V.
Containing justice business: curious precedents of depositions, and other
matters necessary to be perused by all justices of he peace and their clerks,

THE young squire and his lady were no sooner alighted from their coach, than
the servants began to enquire after Mr. Joseph, from whom they said their lady
had not heard a word, to her great surprise, since he had left lady Booby's.
Upon this they were instantly informed of what had lately happened, with which
they hastily acquainted their master, who took an immediate resolution to go
himself and endeavor to restore his Pamela her brother, before she even knew
she had lost him.

The justice before whom the criminals were carried, and who lived within a
short mile of the lady's house, was luckily Mr. Booby's acquaintance, by his
having an estate in his neighborhood. Ordering therefore his horses to his
coach, he set out for me judgment seat, and arrived when the justice had almost
finished his business. He was conducted into a hall, where he was acquainted
that his worship would wait on him in a moment; for he had only a man and a
woman to commit to Bridewell first. As he was now convinced he had not a minute
to lose, he insisted on the servant's introducing him directly into the room
where the justice was then executing his office, as he called it. Being brought
thither, and the first compliments being passed between the squire and his
worship, the former asked the latter, what crime those two young people had
been guilty of? 'No great crime,' answered the justice. I have only ordered
them to Bridewell for a month. 'But what is their crime?' repeated the squire.
'Larceny, an't please your houour,' says Scout. 'Ay,' says the justice, a kind
of felonious larcenous thing. I believe I must order them a little correction
too, a little stripping and whipping. (Poor Fanny, who had hitherto supported
all with the thoughts of Joseph's company, trembled at that sound; but indeed
without reason, for none but the devil himself would have executed such a
sentence on her.) 'Still,' said, the squire, 'I am ignorant of the crime, the
fact I mean' 'Why, there it is in paper,' answered the justice, showing him a
deposition, which in the absence of his clerk, he had writ himself, of which we
have with great difficulty procured an authentic copy: and here it follows
verbatim and literatim.

The depusition of James Scout layer, and Thomas Trotter, yeoman, taken before
me, one of his majesty's justasses of the piece for Zumersetshire.
THESE deponants says, and first Thomas Trotter for himself says, that on the
(...) of this instant October, being Sabbath Day, between the hours of 2 and 4
in the afternoon, he zeed Joseph Andrews, and Francis Goodwill walk akross a
certane field belunging to layer Scout, and out of the path which ledes thru
the said field, and there the zede Joseph Andrews with a nife cut one
hasel-twig, of the value, as he believes, of 3 halfpence, or thereabouts; and
he says, that the said Francis Goodwill was likewise walking along the grass
out of the said path in the said field, and did receive and karry in her hand
the said twig, and so was comforting, eading and abating to the said Joseph
therein. And the said James Scout for himself says, that he verily believes the
said twig to be his own proper twig, etc.

'Jesu!' said the squire, would you commit two persons to Bridewell for a twig?
'Yes,' said the lawyer, and with great lenity too; for if we had called it a
young tree, they would have been both hanged. -- Harkee, (says the justice,
taking aside the squire) I should not have been so severe on this occasion, but
lady Booby desires to get them out of the parish; so lawyer Scout will give the
constable orders to let them run away if they please; but it seems they intend
to marry together, and the lady has no other means, as they are legally
settled there, to prevent their bringing an encumbrance on her own parish,
'Well,' said the squire, I will take care my aunt shall be satisfied in this
point; and likewise I promise you, Joseph here shall never be any encumbrance
on her. I shall be obliged to you therefore, if instead of Bridewell, you will
commit them to my custody. -- 'O to be sure, Sir, if you desire it,' answered
the justice; and without more ado, Joseph and Fanny were delivered over to
squire Booby, whom Joseph very well knew; but little guessed how near he was
related to him. The justice burnt his mittimus; the constable was sent about
his business: the lawyer made no complaint for want of justice; and the
prisoners with exulting hearts gave a thousand thanks to his honor Mr. Booby,
who did not intend their obligations to him should cease here; for ordering his
man to produce a cloak-bag which he had caused to be brought from lady Booby's
on purpose, he desired the justice that he might have Joseph with him into a
room; where ordering his servant to take out a suit of his own clothes, with
linen and other-necessaries, he l^^t Joseph to dress himself, who not yet
knowing the cause of all this civility, excused his accepting such a favor, as
long as decently he could. Whilst Joseph was dressing, the squire repaired to
the justice, whom he found talking with Fanny; for during the examination, she
had flapped her hat over her eyes, which were also bathed in tears, and had by
that means concealed from his worship what might perhaps have rendered the
arrival of Mr. Booby unnecessary, at least for herself. The justice no sooner
saw her countenance cleared up, and her bright eyes shining through her tears,
than he secretly cursed himself for having once thought of Bridewell for her.
He would willingly have sent his own wife thither, to have Fanny in her place.
And conceiving almost at the same instant desires and schemes to accomplish
them, he employed the minutes while the squire was absent with Joseph, in
assuring her how (...) was for having treated her so roughly before he knew her
merit; and told her that since lady Booby was unwilling (...) should settle in
her parish, she was heartily (...) come to his, where he promised (...) his
protection, adding, that he would take Joseph and her into his own family, if
she liked; which assurance he confirmed with a squeeze by the hand. She thanked
him very kindly, and said, She would acquaint Joseph with the offer, which he
would certainly be glad to accept; for that lady Booby was angry with them
both; though she did not know either had done any thing to offend her: but
imputed it to madam Slipslop, who had always been her enemy.

The squire now returned, and prevented any farther continuance of this
conversation; and the justice, out of a pretended respect to his guest, but in
reality from an apprehension of a rival, (for he knew nothing of his marriage)
ordered Fanny into the kitchen, whither she gladly retired; nor did the squire,
who declined the trouble of explaining the whole matter, oppose it.

It would be unnecessary, if I was able, which indeed I am not, to relate the
conversation between these two gentlemen, which rolled as I have been informed,
entirely on the subject of horse-racing. Joseph was soon dressed in the
plainest dress he could find, which was a blue coat and breeches, with a glad
edging, and a red waistcoat with the same; and as this suit, which was rather
too large for the squire, exactly fitted him; so he became it well, and looked
so genteel, that no person would have doubted its being as well adapted to his
quality as his shape; nor have suspected, as one might, when my lord --, or
Sir, -- or Mr. -- appear in lace or embroidery, that the taylor's man-wore
those clothes home on his back, which he should have carried under his arm.

The squire now took leave of the justice, and calling for (...), made her and
Joseph, against their wills, get (...) the coach with him, which he then
ordered to drive to lady Booby's. -- It had moved a few yards only, when the
squire asked Joseph if he knew who that man was crossing the field; for, added
he, I never saw one take such strides before. Joseph answered eagerly, O Sir,
it is parson Adams. -- O la, indeed, and so it is, said Fanny; poor man, he is
coming to do what he could for us. Well, he is the worthiest best-natured
creature, -- 'Ay,' said Joseph, God bless him; for there is not such another in
the universe. -- 'The best creature living sure,' cries Fanny. 'Is he?' says
the squire, then I am resolved to have the best creature living in my coach:
and so saying he ordered it to stop, whilst Joseph, at his request, hallooed to
the parson, who well knowing his voice, made all the haste imaginable, and soon
came up with them. He was desired by the master, who could scarce refrain from
laughter at his figure, to mount into the coach, which he with many thanks
refused, saying he could walk by his side, and he would warrant he kept up with it;
but he was at length over-prevailed on. The squire now acquainted Joseph with
his marriage; but he might have-spared himself that labor; for his servant,
whilst Joseph was dressing, had performed that office before. He continued to
express the vast happiness he enjoyed in his sister, and the value he had for
all who belonged to her. Joseph made many bows, and expressed an many
acknowledgments; and parson Adams who now first perceived Joseph's new apparel,
burst into tears with joy, and fell to rubbing his hands and snapping his
fingers, as if he had been mad.

They were now arrived at the lady Booby's, and the squire desiring them to
wait a moment in the court, walked in to his aunt, and calling her out from his
wife, acquainted her with Joseph's arrival; saying, Madam, as I have married a
virtuous and worthy woman, I am resolved to own her relations, and show them
all a proper respect; I shall think myself, therefore, infinitely obliged to
all mine, who will do the same. It is true, her brother has been your servant,
but he is now become my brother; and I have one happiness, that neither his
character, his behavior, or appearance, give me any reason to be ashamed of
calling him so. In short, he is now below, dressed like a gentleman, in which
light I intend he shall hereafter to seen: and you will oblige me beyond
expression, if you will admit him to be of our party; for I know it will give
great pleasure to my wife, though she will not mention it.

This was a stroke of fortune beyond the lady Booby's hopes or expectation; she
answered him eagerly, Nephew, you know how easily I am prevailed on to do any
thing which Joseph Andrews desires -- Phoo, I mean which you desire me, and as
he is now your relation, I cannot refuse to entertain him as such. The squire
told her, he knew his obligation to her for her compliance; and going three
steps, returned and told her -- he had one more favor, which he believed she
would easily grant, as she had accorded him the former. 'There is a young
woman' -- 'Nephew,' says she, don't let my goodnature make you desire, as is
too commonly the case, to impose on me; nor think, because I have with so much
condescension agreed to suffer your brother-in-law to come to my table, that I
will submit to the company of all my own servants, and all the dirty trollops
in the country. 'Madam,' answered the squire, I believe you never saw this
young creature; I never beheld such sweetness and innocence, joined with such
beauty, and withal so genteel. Upon my soul, I will not admit her, replied the
lady in a passion; the whole world shall not prevail on me. I resent even the
desire as an affront, and -- The squire,' who knew her inflexibility,
interrupted her, by asking pardon, and promising not to mention it more. He
then returned to Joseph, and she to Pamela. He took Joseph aside, and told him
he would carry him to his sister; but could not prevail as yet for Fanny.
Joseph begged that he might see his sister alone, and then be with his Fanny;
but the squire knowing the pleasure his wife would have in her brother's
company, would not admit it, telling Joseph there would be nothing in so short
an absence from Fanny, whilst he was assured of her safety; adding, he hoped he
could not easily quit a sister whom he had not seen so long, and who so
tenderly loved him -- Joseph immediately complied; for, indeed, no brother
could love a sister more; and recommending Fanny, who rejoiced that she was not
to go before lady Booby, to the care of Mr. Adams, he attended the squire up
stairs, whilst Fanny repaired with the parson to his house, where she thought
herself secure of a kind reception.

CHAP. VI.
Of which you are desired to read no more than you like.

THE meeting between Joseph and Pamela was not without tears of joy on both
sides; and their embraces were full of tenderness and affection. They were
however regarded with much more pleasure by the nephew than by the aunt, to
whose flame they were fuel only; and being assisted by the addition of dress,
which was indeed not wanted to set off the lively colors in which nature had
drawn health, strength, comeliness and youth. In the afternoon Joseph, at their
request, entertained them with an account of his adventures; nor could lady
Booby conceal her dissatisfaction at those parts in which Fanny was concerned,
especially when Mr. Booby launched forth into such rapturous praises of her
beauty. She said, applying to her niece, that she wondered her nephew, who had
pretended to marry for love, should think such a subject proper to amuse his
wife with; adding, that for her part, she should be jealous of a husband, who
spoke so warmly in praise of another woman, Pamela answered, indeed she thought
she had cause; but it was an instance of Mr. Booby's aptness to see more beauty
in women than they were mistresses of. At which words both the women fixed
their eyes on two looking-glasses; and lady Booby replied, that men were in
general, very ill judges of beauty; and then, whilst both contemplated only
their own faces, they paid a cross compliment to each other's charms. When the
hour of rest approached, which the lady of the house deferred as long as
decently she could, she informed Joseph (whom for the future we shall call Mr.
Joseph, he having as good a title to that appellation as many others, I mean
that incontested one of good clothes) that she ordered a bed to be provided for
him. He declined this favor to his utmost; for his heart had long been with
his Fanny; but she insisted on his accepting it, alleging, that the parish had
no proper accommodation for such a person as he was now to esteem himself. The
squire and his lady both joining with her, Mr. Joseph was at last forced to
give over his design of visiting Fanny that evening, who, on her side, as
impatiently expected him till midnight, when, in complaisance to Mr. Adams's
family, who had sat up two hours out of respect to her, she retired to bed, but
not to sleep; the thought of her love kept her waking, and his not returning
according to his promise, filled her with uneasiness; of which, however, she
could not assign any other cause than merely that of being absent from him.

Mr. Joseph rose early in the morning, and visited her in whom his soul
delighted. She no sooner heard his voice in the parson's parlour, than she
leaped from her bed, and dressing herself in a few minutes, went down to him.
They passed two hours with inexpressible happiness together, and then having
appointed Monday, by Mr. Adams's permission, for their marriage, Mr. Joseph
returned according to his promise, to breakfast at (...) Booby's, with whose
behavior since the (...) we shall now acquaint the reader.

She was no sooner retired to her chamber than she asked Slipslop what she
thought of this wonderful creature her nephew had married. Madam! said
Slipslop, not yet sufficiently understanding what answer she was to make. 'I
ask you,' answered the lady, what you think of the dowdy, my niece I think I am
to call her? Slipslop, wanting no further hint, began to pull her to pieces,
and so miserably defaced her, that it would have been impossible for any one to
have known the person. The lady gave her all the assistance she could, and
ended with saying, -- I think, Slipslop, you have done her justice; but yet,
bad as she is, she is an angel compared to this Fanny. Slipslop then fell on
Fanny, whom she hacked and hewed in the like barbarous manner, concluding with
an observation, that there was always something in those low life creatures
which must eternally distinguish them from their betters. 'Really,' said the
lady, I think there is one exception to your rule; I am certain you may guess
who I mean. -- Not I, upon my word, madam, said Slipslop. -- I mean a young
fellow; sure you are the dullest wretch, said the lady. -- O la, I am indeed.
-- Yes, truly, Madam, he is an accesion, answered Slipslop. -- 'Ay, is he not,
Slipslop?' returned the lady. Is he not so genteel that a prince might without
a blush acknowledge him for his son. His behavior is such that would not shame
the best education. He borrows from his station a condescension in every thing
to his superiors, yet unattended by that mean servility which is called good
behavior in such persons. Every thing he does, has no mark of the base motive
of fear, but visibly shows some respect and gratitude, and carries with it the
persuasion of love. -- And then for his virtues; such piety to his parents,
such tender affection to his sister, such integrity to his friendship, such
bravery, such goodness, that if he had been born a gentleman, his wife would
have possessed the most invaluable blessing. -- 'To be sure, Ma'am,' said
Slipslop. -- 'But as he is,' answered the lady, if he had a thousand more good
qualities, it must render a woman of fashion contemptible even to be susspected
of thinking on him: yes, I should despise myself for such a thought. 'To be
sure, Ma'am,' said Slipslop. 'And why to be sure?' replied the lady; thou art
always one's echo. Is he not more worthy of affection than a dirty country
clown, though born of a family as old as the flood, or an idle worthless rake,
or little puisne beau of quality? And yet these we must condemn ourselves to,
in order to avoid the censure of the world; to shun the contempt of others, we
must ally ourselves to those we despise; we must prefer birth, title, and
fortune, to real merit. It is a tyranny of custom, a tyranny we must comply
with: for we people of fashion are the slaves of custom. -- Marry come up! said
Slipslop, who now well knew which party to take, if I was a woman of your
ladyship's fortune and quality, I would be a slave to no body. -- 'Me,' said
the lady, I am speaking if a young woman of fashion, who had seen nothing of
the world, should happen to like such a fellow. -- Me, indeed! I hope thou do
not imagine -- No Ma'am, to be sure, cries Slipslop. -- No! what no? cried the
lady. Thou art always ready to answer, before thou have heard one. So far I
must allow he is a charming fellow. Me, indeed! No, Slipslop all thoughts of
men are over with me. -- I have lost a husband, who -- but if I should reflect,
I should run mad. -- My future ^ase must depend upon forgetfulness. Slipslop,
let me hear some of thy nonsense to turn my thoughts another way. What do
thou think of Mr. Andrews? 'Why I think,' says Slipslop, he is the handsomest
and properest man I ever saw: and if I was a lady of the greatest degree it
would be well for some folks. Your ladyship may talk of custom if you please;
but I am confidous there is no more comparison between young Mr. Andrews, and
most of the young gentlemen who come to your ladyship's house in London; a
parcel of whipper-snapper sparks: I would sooner marry our old parson Adams:
never tell me what people say, whilst I am happy in the arms of him I love.
Some folks rail against other folks, because other folks have what some folks
would be glad of. -- 'And so,' answered the lady, if you was a woman of
condition, you would really marry Mr. Andrews? -- 'Yes, I assure your
ladyship,' replied Slipslop, 'if he would have me.' -- Fool, idiot, cries the
lady, if he would have a woman of fashion! is that a question? No truly, Madam,
said Slipslop, I believe it would be none if Fanny was out of the way; and I am
confidous if I was in your ladyship's place, and liked Mr. Joseph Andrews, she
should not stay in the parish a moment. I am sure lawyer Scout would send her
packing, if your ladyship would but say the word. This last speech of Slipslop
raised a tempest in the mind of her mistress. She feared Scout had betrayed
her, or rather that she had betrayed herself. After some silence, and a double
change of her complexion; first to pale, and then to red, she thus spoke: I am
astonished at the liberty you give your tongue. Would you insinuate, that I
employed Scout against this wench, on the account of the fellow? 'La, Ma'am,'
said Slipslop, frighted out of her wits, 'I assassinate such a thing!' I think
you dare not, answered the lady. I believe my conduct may defy malice itself to
assert so cursed a slander. If I had ever discovered any wantonness, any
lightness in my behavior: if I had followed the example of some whom thou
have, I believe, seen, in allowing myself indecent liberties, even with a
husband: but the dear man who is gone, (here she began to sob) was he alive
again, (then she produced tears) could not upbraid me with any one act of
tenderness or passion. No, Slipslop all the time I cohabited with him, he never
obtained even a kiss from me, without my expressing reluctance in the granting
it. I am sure he himself never suspected how much I loved him. -- Since his
death, thou know, though it is almost six weeks (it wants but a day) ago, I
have not admitted one visitor, till this fool my nephew arrived. I have
confined myself quite to one party of friends. -- And can such a conduct as
this fear to be arraigned? To be accused not only of a passion which I have
always despised, but of fixing it on such an object, a creature so much beneath
my notice. -- 'Upon my word, Ma'am,' says Slipslop, I do not understand your
ladyship, nor know I any thing of the matter. -- I believe indeed thou do not
understand me. -- Those are delicacies which exist only in superior minds* thy
coarse ideas cannot comprehend them. Thou art a low creature, of the Andrews
breed, a reptile of lower order, a weed that grows in the common garden of the
creation. -- I assure your ladyship, says Slipslop, whose passions were almost
of as high an order as her lady's, I have no more to do with Common Garden than
other folks. Really your ladyship talks of servants as if they were not born of
the christian specious. Servants have flesh and blood as well as quality; and
Mr. Andrews himself is a proof that they have as good, if not better. And for
my own part, I cannot perceive my Dears Meaning perhaps ideas.
are coarser than other people's; I am sure, if Mr. Andrews was a dear of mine,
I should not be ashamed of him in company with gentlemen: for whoever has seen
him in his new clothes, must confess he looks as much like a gentleman as any
body. Coarse, quotha! I cannot bear to hear the poor young fellow run down
neither; for I will say this, I never heard him say an ill word of any body in
his life. I am sure his coarseness does not lie in his heart; for he is the
best-natured man in the world; and as for his skin, it is no coarser than other
people's, I am sure. His bosom, when a boy, was as white as driven snow: and
where it is not covered with hairs, is so still. Ifakins! if I was Mrs.
Andrews, with a hundred a year, I should not envy the best she who wears a
head. A woman that could not be happy with such a man, ought never to be so:
for if he cannot make a woman happy, I never yet beheld the man who could. I say
again, I wish I was a great lady for his sake; I believe when I had made a
gentleman of him, he would behave so, that nobody should deprecate what I had done;
and I fancy few would venture to tell (...) he was no gentleman to his face,
nor to mine neither. At which words, taking up the candles, she asked her
mistress, who had been some time in her bed, if she had any farther commands;
who mildly answered she had none; and telling her she was a comical creature,
bid her goodnight.

CHAP. VII.
Philosophical reflections, the like not to be found in any light French
romance. Mr. Booby's grave advice to Joseph, and Fanny's encounter with a beau.

HABIT, my good reader, has so vast a prevalence over the human mind, that
there is scarce any thing too strange or too strong to be asserted of it. The
story of the miser, who, from long accustoming to cheat others came at last to
cheat himself, and with great delight and triumph picked his own pocket of a
guinea to convey to his hoard, is not impossible or improbable. In like manner
it fares with the practicers of deceit, who from having long deceived their
acquaintance, gain at last a power of deceiving themselves, and acquire that
very opinion (however false) of their own abilities, excellencies, and virtues,
into which they have for years perhaps endeavored to betray their neighbors.
Now, reader, to apply this observation to my present purpose, thou must know,
that as the passion generally called love, exercises most of the talents of the
female or fair world; so in this they now and then discover a small inclination
to deceit; for which thou will not be angry with the beautiful creatures, when
thou have considered, that at the age of seven, or something earlier, Miss is
instructed by her mother that master is a very monstrous kind of animal, who
will, if she suffers him to come too near her, infallibly eat her up, and grind
her to pieces. That so far from kissing or toying with him of her own accord,
she must not admit him to kiss or toy with her. And lastly, that she must never
have any affection toward him; for if she should, all her friends in
petticoats would esteem her a traitress, point at her, and hunt her out of
their society. These impressions being first received, are farther and deeper
inculcated by their school-mistresses and companions; so that by the age of ten
they have contracted such a dread and abhorrence of the abovenamed monster,
that, whenever they see him, they fly from him as the innocent hare does from
the greyhound. Hence, to the age of fourteen or fifteen, they entertain a
mighty antipathy to master; they resolve, and frequently profess, that they
will never have any commerce with him, and entertain fond hope^ of passing
their lives out of his reach, of the possibility of which they have so visible
an example in their good maiden aunt. But when they arrive at this period, and
have now passed their second climacteric, when their wisdom, grown riper,
begins to see a little farther, and from almost daily falling in master's way,
to apprehend the great difficulty of keeping out of it; and when they observe
him look often at them, and sometimes very eagerly, and earnestly too, (for the
monster seldom takes any notice of them till at this age) they then begin to
think of their danger; and as they perceive they cannot easily avoid him, the
wiser part bethink themselves of providing by other means for their security.
They endeavor by all the methods they can invent to render themselves so
amiable in his eyes, that he may have no inclination to hurt them; in which
they generally succeed so well, that his eyes by frequent languishing, soon
lessen their idea of his fierceness, and so far abate their fears, that they
venture to parley with him; and when they perceive him so different from what he
has been described, all gentleness, softness, kindness, tenderness, fondness,
their dreadful apprehensions vanish in a moment; and now, (it being usual with
the human mind to skip from one extreme to its opposite, as easily, and almost
as suddenly, as a bird from one bough to another;) love instantly succeeds to
fear: But as it happens to persons who have in their infancy been thoroughly
frightened with certain no-persons called ghosts, that they retain their dread
of those beings; after they are convinced that there are no such things; so
these young ladies, though they no longer apprehend devouring, cannot so entirely
shake off all that has been instilled into them; they still entertain the idea
of that censure which was so strongly imprinted on their tender minds, to which
the declarations of abhorrence they every day hear from their companions
greatly contribute. To avoid this censure therefore, is now their only care;
for which purpose they still pretend the same aversion to the monster: And the
more they love him, the more ardently they counterfeit the antipathy. By the
continual and constant practice of which deceit no others, they at length
impose on themselves, and really believe they hate what they love. Thus indeed
it happened to lady Booby, who loved Joseph long before she knew it; and now
loved him much more than she suspected. She had indeed, from the time of his
sister's arrival in the quality of her niece, and from the instant she viewed
him in the dress and character of a gentleman, began to conceive secretly a
design which love had concealed from herself, till a dream betrayed it to her.

She had no sooner risen than she sent for her nephew; when he came to her,
after many compliments on his choice, she told him, He might perceive in her
condescension to admit her own servant to her table, that she looked on the
family of Andrews as his relations, and indeed hers; that as he had married
into such a family, it became him to endeavor by all methods to raise it as
much as possible! At length she advised him to use all his art to dissuade
Joseph from his intended match which would still enlarge their relation to
meanness and poverty; concluding, that by a commission in the army, or some
other genteel employment, he might soon put young Mr. Andrews on the foot of a
gentleman; and that being once done, his accomplishments might quickly gain him
an alliance, which would not be to their discredit.

Her nephew heartily embraced this proposal; and finding Mr. Joseph with his
wife, at his return to her chamber, he immediately began thus: My love to my
dear Pamela, brother, will extend to all her relations; nor shall I show them
less respect than if I had married into the family of a duke. I hope I have
given you some early testimonies of this, and shall continue to give you daily
more. You will excuse me therefore, brother, if my concern for your interest
makes me mention what may be, perhaps, disagreeable to you to hear; But I must
insist upon it, that if you have any value for my alliance or my friendship,
you will decline any thoughts of engaging farther with a girl who is, as you
are a relation of mine, so much beneath you. I know there may be at first some
difficulty in your compliance, but that will daily diminish; and you will in
the end sincerely thank me for my advice. I own, indeed, the girl is handsome;
but beauty alone is a poor ingredient, and will make but an uncomfortable
marriage. 'Sir,' said Joseph, I assure you her beauty is not the least
perfection; nor do I know a virtue which that young creature is not possessed
of. 'As to her virtues,' answered Mr. Booby, you can be yet but a slender judge
of them: But if she had ever so many, you will find her equal in these among
her superiors in both and fortune, which now you are to esteem on a footing
with yourself; at least I will take care they shall shortly be so, unless you
prevent me by degrading yourself with such a match, a match I have hardly
patience to think of; and which would break the hearts of your parents, who now
rejoice in the expectation of seeing you make a figure in the world. 'I know
not,' replied Joseph, that my parents have any power over my inclinations; nor
am obliged to sacrifice my happiness to their whim or ambition: Besides, I
shall be very sorry to see, that the unexpected advancement of my sister should
so suddenly inspire them with this wicked pride, and make them despise their
equals. I am-resolved on no account to quit my dear Fanny, no, though I could
raise her as high above her present station as you have raised my sister. Your
sister, as well as myself, said Booby, are greatly obliged to you for the
comparison: But, Sir, she is not worthy to be compared in beauty to my Pamela;
nor has she half her merit. And besides, Sir, as you civilly throw my marriage
with your sister in my teeth, I must teach you the wide difference between us;
my fortune enabled me to please myself; and it would have been as overgrown a
folly in me to have omitted it, as in you to do it. My fortune enables me to
please myself likewise, said Joseph; for all my pleasure is centred in Fanny;
and whilst I have health, I shall be able to support her with my labor in that
station to which she was born, and with which she is content, 'Brother,' said
Pamela, Mr. Booby advises you as a friend; and, no doubt, my papa and mamma
will be of his opinion, and will have great reason to be angry with you for
destroying what his goodness has done, and throwing down our family again,
after he has raised it. It would become you better, brother, to pray for the
assistance of grace against such a passion than to indulge it. -- Sure, sister,
you are not in earnest; I am sure she is your equal at least. -- 'She was my
equal,' answered Pamela, but I am no longer Pamela Andrews, I am now this
gentleman's lady, and as such am above her -- I hope I shall never behave with
an unbecoming pride, but at the same time, I shall always endeavor to know
myself, and question not the assistance of grace to that purpose. They were now
summoned to breakfast, and thus ended their discourse for the present, very
little to the satisfaction of any of the parties.

Fanny was now walking in an avenue at some distance from the house, where
Joseph had promised to take the first opportunity of coming to her. She had not
a shilling in the world, and had subsisted ever since her return, entirely on
the charity of parson Adams. A young gentleman, attended by many servants, came
up to her, and asked her if that was not the lady Booby's house before him?
This indeed he well knew, but had framed the question for no other reason than
to make her look up, and discover if her face was equal to the delicacy of her
shape. He no sooner saw it than he was struck with amazement. He stopped his
horse, and swore she was the most beautiful creature he ever beheld. Then
instantly alighting, and delivering his horse to his servant, he rapt out half
a dozen oaths that he would kiss her; to which she at first submitted, begging
he would not be rude; but he was not satisfied with the civility of a salute;
nor even with the rudest attack he could make on her lips, but caught her in
his arms, and endeavored to kiss her breasts, which with all her strength she
resisted, and, as our spark was not of the Herculean race, with some difficulty
prevented. The young gentleman, being soon out of breath in the struggle,
quitted her, and remounting his horse called one of his servants to him, whom
he ordered to stay behind with her, and make her any offers whatever, to
prevail on her to return home with him in the evening; and to assure her he
would take her into keeping. He then rode on with his other servants, and
arrived at the lady's house, to whom he was a distant, relation, and was come
to pay a visit.

The trusty fellow, who was employed in an office he had been long accustomed
to, discharged his part with all the fidelity and dexterity imaginable; but to
no purpose. She was entirely deaf to his offers, and rejected them with the
utmost disdain. At last the pimp, who had perhaps more warm blood about him
than his master, began to solicit for himself; he told her, though he was a
servant, he was a man of some fortune, which he would make her mistress of --
and this without any insult to her virtue, for that he would marry her. She
answered, if his master himself, or the greatest lo^^ in the land, would marry
her, she would refuse him. At last being weary with persuasions, and on fire
with charms which would have almost kindled a flame in the bosom of an ancient
philosopher, or modern divine, he fastened his horse to the ground, and
attacked her with much more force than the gentleman had exerted. Poor Fanny,
would not have been able to resist his rudeness a long time; but the deity, who
presides over chaste love, sent her Joseph to her assistance. He no sooner came
within sight, and perceiving her struggling with a man, than like a
cannon-ball, or like lightning, or any thing that is swifter, if any thing be,
he ran toward her, and coming up just as the ravisher had torn her
handkerchief from her breast, before his lips had touched that seat of
innocence and bliss, he dealt him so lusty a blow in that part of his neck
which a rope would have become with the utmost propriety, that the fellow
staggered backwards, and perceiving he had to do with something rougher than
the little, tender, trembling hand of Fanny, he quitted her, and turning about
saw his rival, with fire flashing from his eyes, again ready to assail him; and
indeed before he could well defend himself, or return the first blow, received
a second, which, had it fallen on that part of the stomach to which it was
directed, would have been probably the last he would have had any occasion for;
but the ravisher lifting up his hand, drove the blows upwards to his mouth,
whence it dislodged three of his teeth; and now not conceiving any
extraordinary affection for the beauty of Joseph's person, nor being extremely
pleased with this method of salutation, he collected all his force, and aimed a
blow at Joseph's breast, which he artfully parry'd with one fist, so that it
lost its force entirely in air; and stopping one foot backward, he darted his
fist so fiercely at his enemy, that had he not caught it in his hand (for he
was a boxer of no inferior fame) it must have tumbled him on the ground. And
now the ravisher meditated another blow, which he aimed at that part of the
breast where the heart is lodged; Joseph did not catch it as before, yet so
prevented its aim, that it fell directly on his nose, but with abated force.
Joseph then moving both fist and foot forwards at the same time, threw his head
so dexterously into the stomach of the ravisher, that he fell a lifeless lump
on the field, where he lay many minutes breathless and motionless.

When Fanny saw her Joseph receive a blow in his face, and blood running in a
stream from him, she began to tear her hair, and invoke all human and divine
power to his assistance. She was not, however, long under this affliction,
before Joseph having conquered his enemy, ran to her, and assured her he was
not hurt; she then instantly fell on her knees, and thanked God that he had
made Joseph the means of her rescue and at the same time preserved him from
being injured in attempting it. She offered with her handkerchief to wipe his
blood from his face; but he seeing his rival attempting to recover his legs,
turned to him, and asked him if he had enough; to which the other answered he
had; for he believed he had fought with the devil, instead of a man; and
loosening his horse, said he should not have attempted the wench if he had
known she had been so well provided for.

Fanny now begged Joseph to return with her to parson Adams, and to promise
that he would leave her no more; these were propositions so agreeable to
Joseph, that, had he heard them, he would have given an immediate assent: but
indeed his eyes were now his only sense; for you may remember, reader, that the
ravisher had tore her handkerchief from Fanny's neck, by which he had
discovered such a sight, that Joseph has declared all the statues he ever
beheld, were so much inferior to it in beauty, that it was more capable of
converting a man into a statue, than of being immitated by the greatest master
of that art. This modest creature, whom no warmth in summer could ever induce
to expose her charms to the wanton sun, a modesty to which perhaps they owed
their inconceivable whiteness, had stood many minutes bare-necked in the
presence of Joseph, before her apprehension of his danger, and the horror of
seeing his blood, would suffer her once to reflect on what concerned herself;
till at last, when the cause of her concern had vanished, and admiration at his
silence, together with observing the fixed position of his eyes, produced an
idea in the lovely maid, which brought more blood into her face than had flowed
from Joseph's nostrils. The snowy hue of her bosom was likewise exchanged to
vermillion at the instant when she clapped her handkerchief round her neck.
Joseph saw the uneasiness that she suffered, and immediately removed his eyes
from an object, in surveying which he had felt the greatest delight which the
organs of sight were capable of conveying to his soul. So great was his fear of
offending her, and so truly did his passion for her deserve the noble name of
love.

Fanny, being recovered from her confusion, which was almost equalled by what
Joseph had felt from observing it, again mentioned her request; this was
instantly and gladly complied with, and together they crossed two or three
fields, which brought them to the habitation of Mr. Adams.

CHAP. VIII.
A discourse which happened between Mr. Adams Mrs. Adams, Joseph, and Fanny,
with some behavior of Mr. Adams, which would be called by some few readers
very low, absurd, and unnatural.

THE parson and his wife had just ended a long dispute when the lovers came to
the door. Indeed this young couple had been the subject of dispute; for Mrs.
Adams was one of those prudent people, who never do any thing to injure their
families, or perhaps one of those good mothers who would even stretch their
conscience to serve their children. She had long entertained hopes of seeing
her eldest daughter succeed Mrs. Slipslop, and of making her second son an
exciseman by lady Booby's interest. These were expectations she could not
endure the thoughts of quitting, and was therefore very uneasy to see her
husband so resolute to oppose the lady's intention in Fanny's affair. She told
him, it behoved every man to take the first care of his family; that he had a
wife and six children, the maintaining and providing for whom would be business
enough for him without intermeddling in other folks affairs; that he had always
preached up submission to superiors, and would do ill to give an example of the
contrary behavior in his own conduct; that if lady Booby did wrong, she must
answer for it herself, and the sin would not lie at their door; than Fanny had
been a servant, and bred up in the lady's own family, and consequently she must
have known more of her than they did; and it was very improbable, if she had
behaved herself well, that the lady would have been so bitterly her enemy; that
perhaps he was too much inclined to think well of her, because she was
handsome, but handsome women were often no better than they should be; that G
-- made ugly women as well as handsome ones; and that if a women had virtue, it
signified nothing whether she had beauty or no! For all which reasons, she
concluded he should oblige the lady, and stop the future publication of the
banns. But all these excellent arguments had no effect on the parson, who
persisted in doing his duty; without regarding the consequence it might have on
his worldly interest; he endeavored to answer her as well as he could, to
which she had just finished her reply, (for she had always the last word every
where but at church) when Joseph and Fanny entered their kitchen, where the
parson and his wife then sat at breakfast over some bacon and cabbage. There
was a coldness in the civility of Mrs. Adams, which persons of accurate
speculation might have observed, but escaped her present guests; indeed it was
a good deal covered by the heartiness of Adams, who no sooner heard that Fanny
had neither eat nor drank that morning, than he presented her a bone of bacon
he had just been gnawing, being the only remains of his provision, and then ran
nimbly to the tap, and produced a mug of small beer, which he called ale;
however, it was the best in his house. Joseph addressing himself to the parson,
told him the discourse which had passed between squire Booby, his sister, and
himself, concerning Fanny: he then acquainted him with the dangers whence he
had rescued her, and communicated some apprehensions on her account. He
concluded, that he should never have an easy moment till Fanny was absolutely
his, and begged that he might be suffered to fetch a license, saying, he could
easily borrow the money. The parson answered, that he had already given his
sentiments concerning a license, and that a very few days would make it
unnecessary. 'Joseph,' says he, I wish this haste does not arise rather from
your impatience than your fear; but as it certainly springs from one of these
causes, I will examine both. Of each of these therefore in their turn; and
first, for the first of these, namely, impatience. Now, child, I must inform
you, that if in your purposed marriage with this young woman, you have no
intention but the indulgence of carnal appetites, you are guilty of a very
heinous sin. Marriage was ordained for nobler purposes, as you will learn when
you hear the service provided on that occasion read to you. Nay, perhaps, if
you are a good lad, I shall give you a sermon gratis, wherein I shall
demonstrate how little regard ought to be had to the flesh on such occasions.
The text will be (...), Matthew the 5th, and part of the 28th verse, Whoever
looks on a woman so as to lust after her. (...) latter part I shall omit, as
foreign to my purpose. Indeed all such brutal lusts and affections are to be
greatly subdued, if not totally eradicated, before the vessel can be said to be
consecrated to honor. To marry with a view of gratifying those inclinations is
a prostitution of that holy ceremony, and must entail a curse on all who so
lightly undertake it. If, therefore this haste arises from impatience, you are
to correct, and not give away to it. Now, as to the second head which I
proposed to speak to, namely, fear: it argues a diffidence highly criminal of
that Power in which alone we should put our trust, seeing we may be well
assured that he is able not only to defeat the designs of our enemies, but even
to turn their hearts. Instead of taking therefore any unjustifiable or
desperate means to rid ourselves of fear, we should resort to prayer only on
these occasions; and we may be then certain of obtaining what is best for us.
When any accident threatens us, we are not to despair, nor, when it overtakes
us, to grieve; we must submit in all things to the will of Providence, and set
our affections so much on nothing here, that we cannot quit it without
reluctance. You are a young man, and can know but little of this world; I am
older, and have seen a great deal. All passions are criminal in their excess;
and even love itself, if it is not subservient to our duty, may render us blind
to it. Had Abraham so loved his son Isaac as to refuse the sacrifice required,
is there any of us who would not condemn him? Joseph, I know your many good
qualities, and value you for them: but as I am to render an account of your
soul, (...) is committed to my cure, I cannot see any fault without reminding
you of it. You (...) much inclined to passion, child, and have set your
affections so absolutely on this young woman, that if G -- required her at your
hands, I fear you would reluctantly part with her. Now, believe me, no
christian ought so to set his heart on any person or thing in this world, but
that whenever it shall be required or taken from him in any manner by Divine
Providence, he may be able, peaceably, quietly, and contentedly to resign it.
At which words one came hastily in and acquainted Mr. Adams that his youngest
son was drowned. He stood silent a moment, and soon began to stamp about the
room, and deplore his loss with the bitterest agony. Joseph, who was
overwhelmed with concern likewise, recovered himself sufficiently to endeavor
to comfort the parson; in which attempt he used many arguments, that he had
several times remembered out of his own discourses, both in private and public,
(for he was a great enemy to the passions, and preached nothing more than the
conquest of them by reason and grace) but he was not at leisure how to hearken
to his advice. 'Child, child,' said he, do not go about impossibilities. Had it
been any other of my children, I could have borne it with patience; but my
little prattler, the darling and comfort of my old age, -- the little wretch to
be snatched out of life just at his entrance into it; the sweetest, best
tempered boy, who never did a thing to offend me. It was but this morning I
gave him his first lesson in Quae Genus* This was the very book he learnt; poor
child! it is of no further use to thee now. He would have made the best
scholar, and (...) been an ornament to the church; -- such parts, and such
goodness, never met in one so young: '(...) handsomest lad too,' says Mrs.
Adams, (...) from a swoon in Fanny's arms) -- (...) My poor Jacky, shall I
never see thee more? cries the parson. -- 'Yes, surely,' says Joseph, and in a
better place, you will meet again never to part more. -- I believe the parson
did not hear those words, for he paid little regard to them, but went on
lamenting whilst the tears trickled down into his bosom. At last he cried out,
'where is my little darling?' and was sallying out, when, to his great surprise
and joy, in which I hope the reader will sympathize, he met his (...) in a wet
condition indeed, but alive, and running toward him. The person who brought
the news of his misfortune had been a little too eager, (...) people sometimes
are, from, I believe, no very good principle, to relate ill news; and seeing
him fall into the river, instead of running to his assistance, directly ran to
acquaint his father of a fate which he had concluded to be inevitable, but
whence the child was relieved by the same poor pedlar who had relieved his
father before from a less distress. The parson's joy was now as extravagant as
his grief had been before; he kissed and embraced his son a thousand times, and
danced about the room like one frantic; but as soon as he discovered the face
of his old friend the pedlar, and heard the fresh obligation he had to him,
what were his sensations? not those which two courtiers feel in one another
embraces; not those with which a great man receives the vile, treacherous
engines of his wicked purposes; not those with which a worthless younger
brother wishes his elder joy of a son, or a man congratulates his rival on his
obtaining a mistress a place, or (...). -- No, reader, he felt the ebullition,
the overflowings of a full, honest, open (...) the person who had conferred a
real (...), and of which, if thou can not conceive an idea within, I will not
vainly endeavor to assist thee.

When these tumults were over, the parson, taking Joseph aside, proceeded thus
-- No, Joseph, do not give too much way to thy passions, if thou do expect
happiness. -- The patience of Joseph, nor perhaps of Job, could bear no longer;
be interrupted the parson, saying, it was (...) to give, advice than take it;
nor did he perceive he could so entirely conquer himself, when he apprehended
he had lost his son, or when he found him recovered. -- 'Boy,' replied Adams,
raising his voice, it does not become green heads to advise gray hairs. -- Thou
art ignorant of the tenderness of a fatherly affection; when thou art a father,
thou will be capable then only of knowing what a father can feel. No man is
obliged to impossibilities; and the loss of a child is one of those great
trials, where our grief may be allowed to become immoderate. 'Well, Sir,' cries
Joseph, and if I love a mistress as well as you your child, surely her loss
would grieve me equally. Yes, but such love is foolishness and wrong in itself,
and ought to be conquered, answered Adams, it savours too much of the flesh.
'Sure, Sir,' says Joseph, it is not sinful to love my wife, no not even to dote
on her to distraction! Indeed but it is, says Adams. Every man ought to love
his wife, no doubt; we are commanded so to do; but we ought to love her with
moderation and discretion. -- I am afraid I shall be guilty of some sin, in
spite of all my endeavors, says Joseph; for I shall love without any
moderation, I am sure. -- 'You talk foolishly and childishly,' cries Adams.
'Indeed,' says Mrs. Adams, who, had listened to (...) part of their
conversation; you talk more foolishly yourself. I hope, my dear, you will never
preach any such doctrine, as that husbands can love their wives too well. If I
knew you had such a sermon in the house, I am sure I would burn it; and I
declare, if I had not been convinced you had loved me as well as you could, I
can answer for myself, I should have hated and despised you. Marry come up!
fine doctrine indeed! a wife has a right to insist on her husband's loving her
as much as ever he ca^^; and he is a sinful villain who does not. Does he not
promise to love her, and to comfort her, and to cherish her and all that? I am
sure I remember it all as well as if I had repeated it over but yesterday, and
shall never forget it. Besides, I am certain you do not preach as you practice;
for you have been a loving and a cherishing husband to me, that is the truth
on it; and why you should endeavor to put such wicked nonsense into this young
man's head, I cannot devise Don't hearken to him, Mr. Joseph, be as good a
husband as you are able, and love your wife with all your body and soul too.
Here a violent top at the door put an end to their discourse, and produced a
scene which the reader will find in the next chapter.

CHAP. IX.
A visit which the good lady Booby and her (...) friend paid to the parson.

THE lady Booby had no (...) had an account from the gentleman of his meeting a
wonderful beauty near her house, and perceived the raptures with which he spoke
of her, than immediately concluding it must be Fanny, she began to meditate a
design of bringing them better acquainted: and to entertain hopes that the fine
clothes, (...); and promises of this youth, would prevail on her to (...)
Joseph; she therefore proposed to her company a walk in the fields before
dinner, when she led them toward Mr. Adams's house; and, as she approached it,
told them, if they pleased she would divert them with one of the most
ridiculous sights they had ever soon, which was an old foolish parson, who, she
said laughing, kept a wife and six brats on a salary of about twenty pounds a
year; adding, that there was not such another ragged family in the parish. They
all readily agreed to this visit, and arrived whilst Mrs. Adams was declaiming
as in the last chapter. Beau Didapper, which was the name of the young
gentleman we have seen riding toward lady Booby's, with his cane mimic had the
rap of a London footman at the door. The people within, namely, Adams, his
wife, and three children, Joseph, Fanny, and the pedlar, were all thrown into
confusion by this knock; but Adams went directly to the door, which being
opened, the lady Booby and her company walked in, and were received by the
parson with about two hundred bows, and by his wife with as many curtsies; the
latter telling the lady. She was ashamed to be seen in such a pickle, and that
her house was in such a litter: but that if she expected such an honor from
her ladyship, she should have found her in a better manner. The parson made no
apologies, though he was in his half cassock, and a flannel nightcap. He said,
they were heartily welcome to his poor cottage, and, turning to Mr. Didapper,
cried out, Non mea renidet in domo lacunar. The beau answered, He did not
understand Welsh; at which the parson stared, and made no reply.

Mr. Didapper, or beau Didapper, was a young gentleman of about four foot five
inches in height. He wore his own hair: though the scarcity of it might have
given him sufficient excuse for a periwig. His face was thin and pale: the
shape of his body and legs none of the best; for he had very narrow shoulders,
and no calf; and his gait might more probably be called hopping than walking.
The qualifications of his mind were well adapted to his person. We shall handle
them first negatively. He was not entirely ignorant; for he could talk a little
French, and sing two or three Italian songs: he had lived too much in the world
to be bashful, and too much at court to be proud: he seemed not much inclined
to avarice; for he was profuse in his expenses: nor had he all the features of
prodigality; for he never gave a shilling: -- no hater of women; for he always
dangled after them: yet so little subject to lust, that he had, among those who
knew him best, the character of great moderation in his pleasures. No drinker
of wine; nor so addicted to passion, but that a hot word or two from an
adversary made him immediately cool.

Now, to give him only a dash or two on the afformative side, though he was born
to an immense fortune, he chose, for the pitiful and dirty consideration of a
place of little consequence, to depend entirely on the will of a fellow, whom
they call a great man; who treated him with the utmost disrespect, and exacted
of him a plenary obedience to his commands; which he implicitly submitted to,
at the expense of his conscience, his honor, and of his country, in which he
had himself so very large a share. And to finish his character; as he was
entirely well satisfied with his own person and parts, so he was very apt to
ridicule and laugh at any imperfection in another. Such was the little person
or rather thing that hopped after lady Booby into Mr. Adams's kitchen.

The parson and his company retreated from the chimney-side, where they had
been seated, to give room to the lady and hers. Instead of returning any of the
curtsies or extraordinary civilities of Mrs. Adams, the lady turning to Mr.
Booby, cried out, 'Quelle Beat! Quel animal!' And presently after discovering
Fanny (for she did not need the circumstance of her standing by Joseph to
assure the identity of her person) she asked the beau, Whether he did not think
her a pretty girl? -- Begad, Madam, answered he, ''tis the very same I met.' 'I
did not imagine,' replied the lady, you had so good a taste. Because I never
liked you, I warrant, cries the beau. 'Ridiculous!' said she, you know you were
always my aversion. I would never mention aversion, answered the beau, with
that face; Lest this should appear unnatural to some readers, we think proper
to acquaint them, that it is taken verbatim from very polite conversation.
dear lady Booby, wash your face before you mention aversion, I beseech you. He
then laughed, and turned about to coquet it with Fanny.

Mrs. Adams had been all this time begging and praying the ladies to sit down,
a favor which she at last obtained. The little boy to whom the accident had
happened, still keeping his place by the fire, was chid by his mother for not
being more mannerly: but lady Booby took his part, and commending his beauty,
told the parson he was his very picture. She then seeing a book in his hand,
asked, 'if he could read?' 'Yes,' cries Adams, 'a little Latin, Madam, he is
just got into Quae Genus.' 'A fig for quere genius,' answered she, 'let me hear
him read a little English,' -- Lege, Dick, Lege, said Adams: but the boy made
no answer, 'till he saw the parson knit his brows; and then cried, 'I don't
understand you, father.' -- 'How, boy!' says Adams, What does Lego make in the
imperative mode? Legito, does it not? 'Yes,' answered Dick. -- 'And what
besides?' says the father. 'Lege,' quoth the son, after some hesitation. 'A
good boy,' says the father: And now, child, what is the English of Lego? -- To
which the boy, after long puzzling, answered, he could not tell. 'How,' cries
Adams, in a passion, -- What has the water washed away your learning? Why,
what is Latin for the English verb read? Consider before you speak. -- The
child considered for some time, and then the parson cried twice or thrice, 'Le
-- e, Le --,' Dick answered, 'Lego.' -- Very well; -- and then what is the
English, says the parson, of the verb Lego. -- 'To read,' cried Dick. -- Very
well, said the parson, a good boy, you can do well, if you will take pains. --
I assure your ladyship he is not much above eight years old, and is out of his
Propria quae Maribus already. -- Come, Dick read to her ladyship; -- which she
again desiring, in order to give the beau time and opportunity with Fanny, Dick
began as in the following chapter.

CHAP. X.
The history of two friends, which may afford an useful lesson to all those
persons who happen to take up their residence in married families.

'LEONARD and Paul were two friends,' -- 'Pronounce it Lennard, child,' cries
the -- parson. 'Pray, Mr. Adams,' says Lady Booby, 'let your son read without
interruption.' Dick then proceeded. Lennard and Paul were two friends, who
having been educated together at the same school, commenced a friendship which
they preserved a long time for each other. It was so deeply fixed in both their
minds, that a long absence, during which they had maintained no correspondence,
did not eradicate nor lessen it: but it revived in all its force at their first
meeting, which was not till after fifteen years absence, most of which time
Lennard had spent in the East-Indi-es. -- 'Pronounce it short Indies,' says
Adams. -- 'Pray, Sir, be quiet,' says the lady. -- The boy repeated -- in the
East Indies, whilst Paul had served his king and country in the army. In which
different services, they had found such different success, that Lennard was now
married, and retired with a fortune of thirty thousand pounds; and Paul was
arrived to the degree of a lieutenant of foot; and was not worth a single
shilling.

The regiment in which Paul was stationed, happened to be ordered into
quarters, within a small distance from the estate which Lennard had purchased;
and where he was settled. This latter, who was now become a country gentleman,
and a justice of peace, came to attend the quarter sessions, in the town where
his old friend was quartered. Soon after his arrival, some affair in which a
soldier was concerned, occasioned Paul to attend the justices. Manhood, and
time, and the change of climate had so much altered Lennard, that Paul did not
immediately recollect the features of his old acquaintance: but it was
otherwise with Lennard, he knew Paul the moment he saw him: nor could he
contain himself from quitting the bench, and running hastily to embrace him.
Paul stood at first a little surprised; but had soon sufficient information
from his friend, whom he no sooner remembered, than he returned his embrace
with a passion which made many of the spectators laugh, and gave to some few a
much higher and more agreeable sensation.

Not to detain the reader with minute circumstances, Lennard insisted on his
friend's returning with him to his house that evening; which request was
complied with, and leave for a month's absence for Paul obtained of the
commanding officer.

If it was possible for any circumstances to give any addition to the happiness
which Paul proposed in this visit, he received that additional pleasure, by
finding on his arrival at his friend's house, that his lady was an old
acquaintance which he had formerly contracted at his quarters; and who had
always appeared to be of most agreeable temper. A character she had ever
maintained among her intimates, being of that number, every individual of which
is called quite the best sort of woman in the world.

But good as this lady was, she was still a woman; that is to say, an angel,
and not an angel. -- 'You must mistake, child, 'cries the parson, 'for you read
nonsense.' 'It is so in the book,' answered the son. Mr. Adams was then
silenced by authority and Dick proceeded, -- For though her person was of that
kind to which men attribute the name of angel, yet in her mind she was
perfectly woman. Of which a great degree of (...) gave the most remarkable, and
perhaps most pernicious instance.

A day or two passed after Paul's arrival, before any instances of this
appeared; but it was impossible to conceal it long. Both she and her husband
soon lost all apprehension from their friend's presence, and fell to their
disputes with as much vigor as ever. These were still pursued with the utmost
ardour and eagerness, however trifling the causes were whence they first arose.
Nay, however incredible it may seem, the little consequence of the matter in
debate was frequently given as a reason for the fierceness of the contention,
as thus: "If you loved me, sure you would never dispute with me such a trifle
as this." The answer to which is very obvious; for the argument would hold
equally on both sides, and was constantly retorted with some addition, as -- I
am sure I have much more reason to say so, who am in the right. During all
these disputes, Paul always kept strict silence, and preserved an even
countenance, without showing the least visible inclination to either party. One
day, however, when Madam had left the room in a violent fury, Lennard could not
refrain from referring his cause to his friend. Was ever any thing so
unreasonable, says he, as this woman? What shall I do with her? I dote on her
to distraction; nor have I any cause to complain of more than this obstinacy in
her temper; whatever she asserts she will maintain against all the reason and
conviction in the world. Pray give me your advice. -- First, says Paul, I will
give my opinion, which is flatly that you are in the wron^^ for supposing she
is in the wrong, was the subject of your contention any ways material? What
signified it whether you were married in a red or yellow waistcoat? for that
was your dispute. Now suppose she was mistaken, as you love her you say so
tenderly, and I believe she deserves it, would it not have been wiser to have
yielded, though you certainly knew yourself in the right, than to give either her
or yourself any uneasiness? For my own part, if ever I marry, I am resolved to
enter into an agreement with wife, that in all disputes (especially about
trifles) that party who is most convinced they are right, shall always
surrender the victory: by which means we shall both be forward to give up the
cause. I own, said Lennard, my dear friend, shaking him by the hand, there is
great truth and reason in what you say and I will for the future endeavor to
follow your advice. They soon after broke up the conversation, and Lennard
going to his wife asked her pardon, and told her his friend had convinced him
he had been in the wrong. She immediately began a vast encomium on Paul, which
he seconded her, and both agreed he was the worthiest and wisest man upon
earth. When next they met, which was at supper, though she had promised not to
mention what her husband told her, she could not forbear casting the kindest
and most affectionate looks on Paul, and asked him with the sweetest voice,
whether she should help him to some potted woodcock? -- Potted partridge, my
dear, you mean, says the husband. My dear-says she, I ask your friend if he
will eat any potted woodcock; and I am sure I must know, who potted it. I think
I should know too who shot them, replied the husband, and I am convinced that I
have not seen a woodcock this year; however, though I know I am in the right I
submit, and the potted partridge is potted woodcock, if you desire to have it
so. It is equal to me, says she, whether it is one or the other; but you would
persuade one out of one's senses; to be sure you are always in the right in
your own opinion; but your friend, I believe, knows which he is eating. Paul
answered nothing, and the dispute continued, as usual, the greatest part of the
evening. The next morning the lady accidentally meeting Paul, and being
convinced he was her friend, and of her side, accosted him thus: -- I am
certain, Sir, you have long since wondered at the unreasonableness of my
husband. He is indeed, in other respects, a good sort of man; but so positive,
that no woman but one of my complying temper could possibly live with him. Why,
last night now, was ever any creature so unreasonable? -- I am certain you must
condemn him. -- Pray, answer me, was he not in the wrong? Paul, after a short
silence, spoke as follows: I am sorry, Madam, that as good manners obliges me
to answer against my will, so an adherence to truth forces me to declare myself
of a different opinion. To be plain and honest, you were entirely in the wrong;
the cause I own not worth disputing, but the bird was undoubtedly a partridge.
O Sir, replied the lady, I cannot possibly help your taste -- Madam, returned
Paul, that (...) very little material: for had it been otherwise, a husband
might have expected submission -- Indeed! Sir, says she, I assure you! -- Yes,
Madam, cried he, he might from a person of your excellent understanding; and
pardon me for saying such a condescension would have shown a superiority of
sense even to your husband himself -- But, dear Sir, said she, why should I
submit when I am in the right? -- For that very reason, answered he; it would
be the greatest instance (...) affection imaginable: for can any thing (...)
greater object of our compassion than a person (...) love; in the wrong? Ay,
but I (...) endeavor, said she, to set him right. Pardon me, Madam, answered
Paul; I will apply to your own experience, if you ever found your arguments had
that effect. The more our judgments err, the less we are willing to own it: for
my own part, I have always observed the persons who maintain the worst (...) in
any contest, are the warmed. Why, says she, I must confess there is (...) what
you say, and I will endeavor to practice it. The husband then coming in; Paul
departed. And Lennard approaching his wife with an air of good humor, told her
he was sorry for their foolish dispute the last night: but he was now convinced
of his error. She answered smiling, she believed she owed his condescension to
(...) complaisance; that she was ashamed to think a word had passed on so filly
an occasion, especially as (...) was satisfied she had been mistaken. A little
contention followed, but with the utmost goodwill to each other, and was
concluded by her asserting that Paul had thoroughly convinced her she had been
in the wrong. Upon which they both united in the praises of their (...) friend.

Paul now passed his time with great (...); these disputes being much less
frequent, as well as shorter than usual: but the devil, or some unlucky
accident, in which perhaps the devil had no hand, shortly put an end to his
happiness. He was now eternally the private referee of every difference; in
which, after having perfectly, as he thought, established the doctrine of
submission, he never scrupled to assure both privately that they were in the
right in every argument, as before he had followed the contrary method. One day
a violent litigation happened in his absence, and both parties agreed to refer
it to his decision, The husband professing himself sure the decision would be
in his favor; the wife answered, he might be mistaken; for she believed his
friend was convinced how seldom she was to blame -- and that if he knew all --
The husband replied -- My dear, I have no desire of any retrospect; but I
believe, if you knew all too, you would not imagine my friend (...) entirely in
your side, Nay; says she, since you provoke me, I will mention one instance.
You may remember our dispute about sending Jacky to school in cold weather,
which point I gave up to you from mere compassion, knowing myself to be in the
right; and Paul himself told me afterward, he thought me so. My dear, replied
the husband, I will not scruple your veracity; but I assure you solemnly, on my
applying to him, he gave it absolutely on my side, and said he would have acted
in the same manner. They then proceeded to produce numberless other instances,
in all which Paul had, on vows of secrecy, given his opinion on both sides. In
the conclusion, both believing each other, they fell severely on the treachery
of Paul, and agreed that he had been the occasion of almost every dispute which
had fallen out between them. They then became extremely loving, and so full of
condescension on both sides, that they vied with each other in censuring their
own conduct, and jointly vented their indignation on Paul, whom the wife,
fearing a bloody consequence, earnestly entreated her husband to suffer him
quietly to depart the next day, which was the time fixed for his return to
quarters, and then drop his acquaintance.

However ungenerous this behavior in Bernard may be esteemed, his wife
obtained a promise from him (though with difficulty) to follow her advice; but
they both expressed such unusual coldness that day to Paul, that he, who was
quick of apprehension, taking Lennard aside, pressed him so home, that he at
last discovered the secret. Paul acknowledged the truth, but told him the
design with which he had done it -- To which the other answered, he would have
acted more friendly to have let him into the whole design; for that he might
have assured himself of his secresy. Paul replied with some indignation, he had
given him a sufficient proof how capable he was of concealing a secret from his
wife. Lennard returned with some warmth, he had more reason to upbraid him, for
that he had caused most of the quarrels between them by his strange conduct,
and might (if they had not discovered the affair to each other) have been the
occasion of their separation. Paul 'then said -- But something now happened
which put a stop to Dick's reading, and of which we shall treat in the next
chapter.

CHAP. XI.
In which the history is continued.

JOseph Andrews had borne with great uneasiness the impertinence of Beau
Didapper to Fanny, who had been talking pretty freely to her, and offering her
settlements; but the respect to the company had restrained him from
interfering, whilst the beau confined himself to the use of his tongue only;
but the said beau watching an opportunity whilst the ladies eyes were disposed
another way, offered a rudeness to her with his hands; which Joseph no sooner
perceived, than he presented him with so sound a box on the ear, that it
conveyed him several paaces from where he stood. The ladies immediately
screamed out, rose from their chairs, and the beau as soon as he recovered
himself, drew his hanger, which Adams observing, snatched up the lid of a pot
in his left hand, and covering himself with it as with a shield, without any
weapon of offense in his other hand, stepped in before Joseph, and exposed
himself to the enraged beau, who threatened such perdition and destruction,
that it frighted the women, who were all got in a huddle together, out of their
wits, even to hear his denunciations of vengeance. Joseph was of a different
complexion, and begged Adams to let his rival come on; for he had a good cudgel
in his hand, and did not fear him. Fanny now fainted into Mrs. Adams's arms,
and the whole room was in confusion, when Mr. Booby passing by Adams, who lay
snug under the pot-lid, came up to Didapper, and insisted on his sheathing the
hanger, promising he should have satisfaction; which Joseph declared he would
give him, and ^ight him at any weapon whatever. The beau now sheathed his
hanger, and taking out a pocket glass, and vowing vengeance all the time,
readjusted his hair; the parson deposited his shield, and Joseph running to
Fanny soon brought her back to life. Lady Booby chid Joseph for his insult on
Didapper; but he answered he would have attacked an army in the same cause.
'What cause?' said the lady, 'Madam,' answered Joseph, he was rude to that
young woman. -- 'What,' says the lady, I suppose he would have kissed the
wench; and is a gentleman to be struck for such an offer? I must tell you,
Joseph, these airs do not become you. -- 'Madam,' said Mr. Booby, I saw the
whole affair, and I do not commend my brother; for I cannot perceive why he
should take upon him to be this girl's champion. -- I can commend him, says
Adams, he is a brave lad; and it becomes any man to be the champion of the
innocent; and he must be the basest coward, who would not vindicate a woman
with whom he is on the brink of marriage. -- 'Sir,' says Mr. Booby, my brother
is not a proper match for such a young woman as this. -- 'No,' says lady Booby,
nor do you, Mr. Adams, act in your proper character, by encouraging any such
doings; and I am very much surprised you should concern yourself in it, -- I
think your wife and family your properer care. -- Indeed, Madam, your ladyship
says very true, -- answered Mrs. Adams, he talks a pack of nonsense, that the
whole parish are his children. I am sure I don't understand what he means by
it; it would make some women suspect he had gone astray: but I acquit him of
that; I can read scripture as well as he; and I never found that the parson was
obliged to provide for other folks children; and besides, he is but a poor
curate, and has little enough, as your ladyship knows, for me and mine. -- You
say very well, Mrs Adams, quoth the lady Booby, who had not spoken a word to
her before, you seem to be a very sensible woman; and I assure you, your
husband is acting a very foolish part, and opposing his own interest; seeing my
nephew is violently set against this match: and indeed I cannot blame him; it is
by no means one suitable to our family. In this manner the lady proceeded with
Mrs. Adams, whilst the beau hopped about the room shaking his head, partly from
pain, and partly from anger; and Pamela was chiding Fanny for her assurance, in
aiming at such a match as her brother. -- Poor Fanny answered only with her
tears, which had long since begun to wet her handkerchief; which Joseph
perceiving, took her by the arm, and wrapping it in his, carried her off,
swearing he would own no relation to any one who was an enemy to her he loved
more than all the world. He went out with Fanny under his left arm, brandishing
a cudgel in his right, and neither Mr. Booby nor the beau thought proper to
oppose him. Lady Booby and her company made a very short stay behind him; for
the lady's bell now summoned them to dress; for which they had just time before
dinner.

Adams seemed now very much dejected, which his wife perceiving, began to apply
some matrimonial balsam. She told him he had reason to be concerned: for that
he had probably ruined his family with his tricks almost: But perhaps he was
grieved for the loss of his two children, Joseph and Fanny. His eldest daughter
went on: -- Indeed, father, it is very hard to bring strangers here to eat your
children's bread out of their mouths. -- You have kept them ever since they
came home; and for any thing I see to the contrary, may keep them a month
longer: Are you obliged to give her meat, tho'f she was never so handsome? But
I don't see she is so much handsomer than other people. If people were to be
kept for their beauty, she would scarce fare better than her neighbors. I
believe. -- As for Mr. Joseph, I have nothing to say, he is a young man of
honest principles, and will pay some time or other for what he has: But for
the girl, -- Why does she not return to her place she run away from? I would
not give such a vagabond slut a halfpenny, though I had a million of money; no,
though she was starving. -- 'Indeed but I would,' cries little Dick? and, father,
rather than poor Fanny shall be starved, I will give her all this bread and
cheese. -- (offering what he held in his hand.) Adams smiled on the boy, and
told him, he rejoiced to see he was a christian: and that if he had a halfpenny
in his pocket, he would have given it him: telling him, it was his duty to look
upon all his neighbors as his brothers and sisters, and love them accordingly.
'Yes, papa,' says he, I love her better than my sisters; for she is handsomer
than any of them. 'Is she so, saucebox?' says the sister, giving him a box on
the ear, which the father would probably have resented, had not Joseph, Fanny,
and the pedlar, at that instant returned together -- Adams bid his wife prepare
some food for their dinner; she said. truly she could not, she had something
else to do. Adams rebuked her for disputing his commands, and quoted many texts
of scripture to prove, That the husband is the head of the wife, and she is to
submit and obey. The wife answered, it was blasphemy to talk scripture out of
church; that such things were very proper to be said in the pulpit; but that it
was profane to talk them in common discourse. Joseph told Mr. Adams he was not
come with any design to give him or Mrs. Adams any trouble; but to desire the
favor of all their company to the George (an alehouse in the parish) where he
had bespoke a piece of bacon and greens for their dinner. Mrs. Adams, who was a
very good sort of woman, only rather too strict in oeconomics, readily accepted
this invitation, as did the parson himself by her example; and away they all
walked together, not omitting little Dick, to whom Joseph gave a shilling, when
he heard of his intended liberality to Fanny.

CHAP. XII.
Where the good-natured reader will see something which will give him no great
pleasure.

THE pedlar had been very inquisitive from the time he had first heard that the
great house in this parish belonged to the lady Booby; and had learnt that she
was the widow of Sir Thomas, and that Sir Thomas had bought Fanny, at about the
age of three or four years, of a traveling woman; and now their homely but
hearty meal was ended, he told Fanny, he believed he could acquaint her with
her parents. The whole company, especially she herself, started at this offer
of the pedlar's -- He then proceeded thus, while they all lent their strictest
attention: Though I am now contented with this humble way of getting my
livelihood, I was formerly a gentleman; for so all those of my profession are
called. In a word, I was a drummer in an Irish regiment of foot. Whilst I was
in this honorable station, I attended an officer of our regiment into England
a recruiting. In our march from Bristol to Froome (for since the decay of the
woolen trade, the clothing towns have furnished the army with a great number of
recruits) we overtook on the road a woman who seemed to be about thirty years
old, or thereabouts, not very handsome; but well enough for a soldier. As we
came up to her, she mended her pace, and falling into discourse with our
ladies, (for every man of the party, namely, a sergeant, two private men, and a
drummer, were provided with their women, except myself) she continued to travel
on with us I, perceiving she must fall to my lot, advanced presently (...) her,
made love to her in our military way, and quickly succeeded to my wishes. We
struck a bargain within a mile, and lived together as man and wife to her dying
day. -- I suppose, says Adams, interrupting him, you were married with a
license: for I don't see how you could contrive to have the banns published
while you were marching from place to place. 'No, Sir,' said the pedlar, we
took a license to go to bed together, without any banns. -- 'Ay, ay,' said the
parson, ex necessitate, a license may be allowable enough; but surely, surely,
the other is the more regular and eligible way. -- The pedlar proceeded thus;
She returned with me to our regiment, and removed with us from quarters to
quarters, till at last, whilst we lay at Galway, she fell ill of a fever, and
died. When she was on her deathbed she called me to her, and crying bitterly,
declared she could not depart this world without discovering a secret to me,
which she said was the only sin which sat heavy on her heart. She said she had
formerly traveled in a company of gypsies, who had made a practice of stealing
away children; that for her own part, she had been only once guilty of the
crime; which she said she lamented more than all the rest of her sins, since
probably it might have occasioned the death of the parents: for, added she, it
is almost impossible to describe the beauty of the young creature, which was
about a year and a half old when I kidnapped it. We kept her (for she was a
girl) above two years in our company, when I sold her myself for 3 guineas to
Sir Thomas Booby, in Somersetshire. Now, you know whether there are any more of
that name in this country. -- 'Yes,' says Adams, there are several Boobys who
are squires, but I believe no baronet now alive; besides, it answers so exactly
in every point, there is no room for doubt; but you have forgot to tell us the
parents from whom the child was stolen. -- Their name, answered the pedlar, was
Andrews. -- They lived about thirty miles from the squire; and she told me,
that I might be sure to find them out by one circumstance; for that they had a
daughter of a very strange name, Pamela, or Pemale; some pronounced it one way,
and some the other. Fanny, who had changed color at the first mention of the
name, now fainted away; Joseph turned pale, and poor Dicky began to roar; the
parson fell on his knees, and ejaculated many thanksgivings, that this
discovery had been made before the dreadful sin of incest was committed; and
the pedlar was struck with amazement, not being able to account for all this
confusion, the cause of which was presently opened by the parson's daughter,
who was the only unconcerned person; (for the mother was chafing Fanny's
temples, and taking the utmost care of her) and indeed Fanny was the only
creature whom the daughter would not have pitied in her situation; wherein,
though we compassionate her ourselves, we shall leave her for a little while, and
pay a short visit to lady Booby.

CHAP. XIII.
The history returning to the lady Booby, gives some account of the terrible
conflict in her breast between love and pride; with what happened on the
present discovery.

THE lady sat down with her company to dinner; but eat nothing. As soon as the
cloth was removed, she whispered Pamela, that she was taken a little ill, and
desired her to entertain her husband and beau Didapper. She then went up into
her chamber, sent for Slipslop, threw herself on the bed, in the agonies of
love, rage, and despair; nor could she conceal these boiling passions longer,
without bursting. Slipslop now approached her bed, and asked how her ladyship
did; but instead of revealing her disorder, as she intended, she entered into a
long encomium on the beauty and virtues of Joseph Andrews: ending at last with
expressing her concern, that so much tenderness should be thrown away on so
despicable an object as Fanny. Slipslop, wall knowing how to humor her
mistress's frenzy, proceeded to repeat, with exaggeration, if possible, all her
mistress had said, and concluded with a wish, that Joseph had been a gentleman,
and that she could see her lady in the arms of such a husband. The lady then
started from the bed, and taking a turn or two across the room cried out with a
deep sigh, -- Sure he would make any woman happy. -- Your ladyship, says she,
would be the happiest woman in the world with him. -- A fig for custom and
nonsense. What vails what people say? Shall I be afraid of eating sweetmeats,
because people may say I have a sweet tooth? If I had a mind to marry a man,
all the world should not hinder me. Your ladyship has no parents to tutelar
your infections; besides, he is of your ladyship's family now, and as good a
gentleman as any in the country; and why should not a woman follow her mind as
well as a man? Why should not your ladyship marry the brother, as well as your
nephew the sister? I am sure, if it was a fragrant crime, I would not persuade
your ladyship to it. -- 'But, dear Slipslop,' answered the lady, if I could
prevail on myself to commit such a weakness, there is that cursed Fanny in the
way, whom the idiot. -- O how I hate and despise him! -- She, a little ugly
minx, cries Slipslop, leave her to me. -- I suppose your ladyship has heard of
Joseph's fitting with one of Mr. Didapper's servants about her; and his master
has ordered them to carry her away by force this evening. I Will take care they
shall not want assistance. I was talking with this gentleman, who was below,
just when your ladyship sent for me. -- 'Go back,' says the lady Booby, this
instant; for I expect Mr. Didapper will soon be going. Do all you can; for I am
resolved this wench shall not be in our family; I will endeavor to return to
the company; but let me know as soon as she is carried off. Slipslop went away;
and her mistress began to arraign her own conduct in the following manner:

What am I doing? How do I suffer this passion to creep imperceptibly upon me!
How many days are passed since I could have submitted to ask myself the
question? -- Marry a footman! distraction! Can I afterward bear the eyes of my
acquaintance? But I can retire from them; retire with one in whom I propose
more happiness than the world without him can give me! Retire -- to feed
continually on beauties, which my inflamed imagination sickens with eagerly
gazing on; to satisfy every appetite, every desire, with their utmost wish. --
Ha! and do I dote thus on a footman! I despise, I detest my passion. -- Yet
why? Is he not generous, gentle, kind? -- Kind to whom? to the meanest wretch,
a creature below my consideration. Does he not? -- Yes, he does prefer her;
curse his beauties, and the little low heart that possesses them; which can
basely descend to this despicable wench, and be ungratefully deaf to all the
honors I do him. -- And can I then love this monster? No, I will tear his
image from my bosom, tread on him, spurn him. I will have those pitiful charms,
which now I despise, mangled in my sight; for I will not suffer the little jade
I hate to riot in the beauties I contemn. No, though I despise him myself; though I
would spurn him from my feet, was he to languish at them, no other should taste
the happiness I scorn. Why do I say happiness? To me it would be misery. -- To
sacrifice my reputation, my character, my rank in life, to the indulgence of a
(...) and (...) vile appetite. -- How I detest the thought! How much more
exquisite is the pleasure resulting from the reflection of virtue and prudence,
than the faint relish of what flows from vice and folly! Whither did I suffer
this improper, this mad passion to hurry me, only by neglecting to summon the
aid of reason to my assistance? Reason, which has now set before me my desires
in their proper colors, and immediately helped me to expel them. Yes, I thank
heaven and my pride, I have now perfectly conquered this unworthy passion; and
if there was no obstacle in its way, my pride would disdain any pleasures which
could be the consequence of so base, so mean, so vulgar -- Slipslop returned at
this instant in a violent hurry, and with the utmost eagerness cried out, -- O,
Madam, I have strange news. Tom the footman is just come from the George; where
it seems Joseph and the rest of them are a jinkitting; and he says, there is a
strange man who has discovered that Fanny and Joseph are brother and sister.
-- 'How, Slipslop!' cries the lady in a surprise. -- I had not time, Madam,
cries Slipslop, to enquire about particles, but Tom says, it is most certainly
true.

This unexpected account entirely obliterated all those admirable reflections
which the supreme power of reason had so wisely made just before. In short,
when despair, which had more share in producing the resolutions of hatred we
have seen taken, began to retreat, the lady hesitated a moment, and then
forgetting all the purport of her soliloquy, dismissed her woman again, with
orders to bid Tom attend her in the parlour, whither she now hastened to
acquaint Pamela with the news. Pamela said, she could not believe it: For she
had never heard that her mother had lost any child, or that she had ever had
any more than Joseph and herself. The lady flew into a violent rage with her,
and talked of upstarts and disowning relations, who had so lately been on a
level with her. Pamela made no answer: But her husband, taking up her cause,
severely reprimanded his aunt for her behavior to his wife; he told her, if it
had been earlier in the evening she should not have staid a moment longer in
her house; that he was convinced, if this young woman could be proved her
sister, she would readily embrace her as such; and he himself would do the
same: He then desirred the fellow might be sent for, and the young woman with
him; which lady Booby immediately ordered, and thinking proper to make some
apology to Pamela for what she had said, it was readily accepted, and all
things reconciled.

The pedlar now attended, as did Fanny and Joseph, who would not quit her; the
parson likewise was induced, not only by curiosity, of which he had no small
portion, but his duty, as he apprehended it, to follow them; for he continued
all the way to exhort them, who were now breaking their hearts, to offer up
thanksgivings, and be joyful for so miraculous an escape.

When they arrived at Booby-hall, they were presently called into the parlour,
when the pedlar repeated the same story he had told before, and insisted on the
truth of every circumstance; so that all who heard him were extremely well
satisfied of the truth except Pamela, who imagined, as she had never heard
either of her parents mention such an accident, that it must be certainly
false; and except the lady Booby, who suspected the falsehood of the story from
her ardent desire that it should be true; and Joseph, who feared its truth,
from his earnest wishes that it might prove false.

Mr. Booby now desired them all to suspend their curiosity and absolute believe
or disbelieve, till the next morning, when he expected old Mr. Andrews and his
wife, to fetch himself and Pamela home in his coach, and then they might be
certain of certainly knowing the truth or falsehood of this relation; in which
he said, as there were many strong circumstances to induce their credit, so he
could not perceive any interest the pedlar could have in inventing it, or in
endeavoring to impose such a falsehood on them.

The lady Booby, who was very little used to such company, entertained them
all, viz. her nephew, his wife, her brother and sister, the beau, and the
parson, with great good humor at her own table. As to the pedlar, she ordered
him to be made as welcome as possible by her servants. All the company in the
parlour, except the disappointed lovers, who sat sullen and silent, were full
of mirth: For Mr. Booby had prevailed on Joseph to ask Mr. Didapper's pardon,
with which he was perfectly satisfied. Many jokes passed between the beau and
the parson, chiefly on each other's dress; these afforded much diversion to the
company. Pamela chid her brother Joseph or the concern which he expressed at
discovering a new sister. She said, if he loved Fanny as he ought, with a pure
affection, he had no reason to lament being related to her. -- Upon which Adams
began to discourse on Platonic love; whence he made a quick transition to the
joys in the next world; and concluded with strongly asserting that there was no
such thing as pleasure in this. At which Pamela and her husband smiled on one
another.

This happy pair proposing to retire (for no other person gave the least
symptom of desiring rest) they all repaired to several beds provided for them
in the same house; nor was Adams himself suffered to go home, it being a stormy
night. Fanny indeed often begged she might go home with the parson; but her
stay was so strongly insisted on, that she at last, by Joseph's advice,
consented.

CHAP. XIV.
Containing several curious night-adventures, in which Mr. Adams fell into many
hair-breadth escapes, partly owing to his goodness, and partly to his
inadvertency.

ABOUT an hour after they had all separated (it being now past three in the
morning) beau Didapper, whose passion for Fanny permitted him not to close his
eyes, but had employed his imagination in contrivances how to satisfy his
desires, at last hit on a method by which he hoped to effect it. He had ordered
his servant to bring him word where Fanny lay, and had received his
information; he therefore arose, put on his breeches and nightgown, and stole
softly along the gallery which led to her apartment; and being come to the
door, as he imagined it, he opened it with the least noise possible, and
entered the chamber. A savor now invaded his nostrils which he did not expect
in the room of so sweet a young creature, and which might have probably had no
good effect on a cooler lover. However, he groped out the bed with difficulty;
for there was not a glimpse of light, and opening the curtains, he whispered in
Joseph's voice, (for he was an excellent mimic) Fanny, my angel. I am come to
inform thee that I have discovered the falsehood of the story we last night
heard. I am no longer thy brother, but thy lover; nor will I be delayed the
enjoyment of thee one moment longer. You have sufficient assurances of my
constancy not to doubt my marrying you, and it would be want of love to deny me
the possession of thy charms. -- So saying, he disencumbered himself from the
little clothes he had on, and, leaping into bed, embraced his angel, as he
conceived her, with great rapture. If he was surprised at receiving no answer,
he was no less pleased to find his hug returned with equal ardour. He remained
not long in this sweet confusion; for both he and his paramour presently
discovered their error. Indeed it was no other than the accomplished Slipslop
whom he had engaged; but though she immediately knew the person whom she had
mistaken for Joseph, he wa^^t a loss to guess at the representative of Fanny.
He had so little seen or taken notice of this gentlewoman, that light itself
would have afforded him no assistance in his conjecture. Beau Didapper no
sooner had perceived his mistake, than he attempted to escape from the bed with
much greater haste than he had made to it; but the watchful Slipslop prevented
him. For that prudent woman being disappointed (...) those delicious offerings
which her fancy had promised her pleasure, resolved to make an immediate
sacrifice to her virtue. Indeed she wanted an opportunity to heal some wounds
which her late conduct had, she feared, given her reputation; and as she had a
wonderful presence of mind, she conceived the person of the unfortunate beau to
be luckily thrown in her way to restore her lady's opinion of her impregnable
chastity. At that instant therefore, when he offered to leap from the bed she
caught fast hold of his shirt, at the same time roaring out, O thou villain!
thou have attacked my chastity, and I believe ruined me in my sleep; I will
swear a rape against thee, I will prosecute thee with the utmost vengeance. The
beau attempted to get loose, but she held him fast, and when he struggled, she
cried out Murder! murder! rape! robbery! ruin! At which words parson Adams, who
lay in the next chamber, wakeful, and meditating on the pedlar's discovery,
jumped out of bed, and, without staying to put a rag of clothes on, hastened
into the apartment whence the cries proceeded. He made directly to the (...) in
the dark, where laying hold of the beau's skin (...) Slipslop had torn his
shirt almost off) and (...) his skin extremely soft, and hearing him in a low
voice begging Slipslop to let him go, he no longer doubted but this was the
young woman in danger of ravishing, and immediately falling on the bed, and
laying hold on Slipslop's chin, where he found a rough beard, his belief was
confirmed; he therefore rescued the beau, who presently made his escape, and
then turning toward Slipslop, received such a cuff on his chops, that his
wrath kindling instantly, he offered to return the favor so stoutly, taht had
poor Slipslop received the fist, which in the dark passed by her, and fell on
the pillow, she would most probably have given up the ghost. -- Adams, missing
his blow, fell directly on Slipslop, who cuffed and scratched as well as she
could; nor was he behind-hand with her in his endeavors, but happily the
darkness of the night befriended her. -- She then cried she was a woman; but
Adams answered she was rather the devil, and if she was, he would grapple with
him; and being again irritated by another stroke on his chops, he gave her such
a remembrance in the guts, that she began to roar loud enough to be heard all
over the house. Adams then seizing her by the hair (for her double-clout had
fallen off in the scuffle) pinned her head down to the bolster, and then both
called for lights together.

The lady Booby, who was as wakeful as any of her guests, had been alarmed from
the beginning; and, being a woman of a bold spirit, she slip on a nightgown,
petticoat, and slippers, and taking a candle, which always burnt in her
chamber, in her hand, she walked undauntedly to Slipslop's room; where she
entered just at the instant as Adams had discovered, by the two mountains which
Slipslop carried before her, that he was concerned with a female. He then
concluded her to be a witch, and said, he fancied those breasts gave suck to a
legion of devils. Slipslop seeing lady Booby enter the room, cried, 'Help! or I
am ravished,' with a most audible voice; and Adams perceiving the light, turned
hastily, and saw the lady (as she did him) just as she came to the feet of the
bed; nor (...) her modesty, when she found the naked condition of Adams, suffer
her to approach farther. -- She then began to revile the parson as the
wickedest of all men, and particularly railed at his impudence in choosing her
house for the scene of his debaucheries, and her own woman for the object of
his bestiality. Poor Adams had before discovered the countenance of his
bedfellow, and now first recollecting, he was naked, he was no less confounded
than lady Booby herself, and immediately whipped under the bed-clothes; whence
the chaste Slipslop endeavored in vain to shut him out. Then putting forth his
head, on which by way of ornament, he wore a flannel nigh-cap, he protested his
innocence, and asked ten thousand pardons of Mrs. Slipslop for the blows he had
struck her, vowing he had mistaken her for a witch. Lady Booby then casting her
eyes on the ground, observed something sparkle with great luster, which when
she had taken it up, appeared to be a very fine pair of diamond buttons for the
sleeves. A little farther she saw the sleeve itself of a shirt with laced
ruffles. Heydey! says she, 'what is the meaning of this?' -- 'O, Madam,' says
Slipslop, I don't know what has happened, I have been so terrified. Here may
have been a dozen men in the room. To whom belongs this laced shirt and jewels,
says the lady. -- 'Undoubtedly,' cries the parson, to the young gentleman whom
I mistook for a woman on coming into the room, whence proceeded all the
subsequent mistakes, for if I had suspected him for a man, I would have seized
him had he been another Hercules, though indeed he seems rather to resemble
Hylas. He then gave an account of the reason of his rising from bed, and the
rest, till the lady came into the room; at which, and the figures of Slipslop
and her gallant, whose heads only were visible at the opposite corners of the
bed, she could not refrain from laughter; nor did Slipslop persist in accusing
the parson of any motions toward a rape. The lady therefore desired him to
return to his bed as soon as she was departed, and then ordering Slipslop to
rise and attend her in her own room, she returned herself thither. When she was
gone, Adams renewed his petitions for pardon to Mrs. Slipslop, who, with a most
christian temper, not only forgave, but began to move with such courtesy
toward him, which he taking as a hint to be gone, immediately quitted the bed,
and made the best of his way toward his own; but unluckily, instead of turning
to the right, he turned to the left, and went to the apartment where Fanny lay,
who (as the reader may remember) had not slept a wink the preceding night, and
who was so hagged out with what had happened to her in the day, that
notwithstanding all thoughts of her Joseph, she was fallen into so profound a
sleep, that all the noise in the adjoining room had not been able to disturb
her. Adams groped out the bed, and turning the clothes down softly, a custom
Mrs. Adams had long accustomed him to crept in, and deposited his carcass on
the bed-post, a place which that good woman had always assigned him.

As the cat or lap-dog of some lovely nymph for whom ten thousand lovers
languish, lies quietly by the side of the charming maid, and, ignorant of the
scene of delight on which they repose, meditates the future capture of a mouse,
or surprisal of a plate of bread and butter: so Adams lay by the side of Fanny,
ignorant of the paradise to which he was so near; nor could the emanation of
sweets which flowed from her breath, overpower the fumes of tobacco which
played in the parson's nostrils. And now sleep had not overtaken the good man,
when Joseph who had secretly appointed Fanny to come to her at the break of
day, rapped softly at the chamber door, which, when he had repeated twice,
Adams cried, Come in, whoever you are. Joseph thought he had mistaken the door,
though she had given him the most exact directions; however, knowing his
friend's voice, he opened it, and saw some female vestments lying on a chair.
Fanny waking at the same instant, and stretching out her hand on Adams's beard,
she cried out. -- 'O heavens! where am I?' Bless me! where am I? said the
parson. Then Fanny screamed, Adams leapt out of bed, and Joseph stood, as the
tragedians call it, like the statue of Surprise. 'How came she into my room?'
cried Adams. 'How came you into here is?' cried Joseph, in an astonishment. I
know nothing of the matter, answered Adams, but that she is a vestal for me. As
I am a christian, I know not whether she is a man or woman. He is an infidel
who does not believe in witchcraft. They as surely exist now as in the days of
Saul. My clothes are bewitched away too, and Fanny's brought into their place.
For he still insisted he was in his own apartment; but Fanny denied it
vehemently, and said his attempting to persuade Joseph of such a falsehood
convinced her of his wicked design. 'How!' said Joseph in a rage, 'hath he
offered any rudeness to you?' -- She answered, she could not accuse him of any
more than villainously stealing to bed to her, which she thought rudeness
sufficient, and what no man would do without a wicked intention. Joseph's great
opinion of Adams was not easily to be staggered, and when he heard from Fanny
that (...) harm and happened, he grew a little cooler; yet still he was
confounded, and as he knew the house, and that the women's apartments were on
this side Mrs. Slipslop's room, and the men's on the other, he was convinced
that he was in Fanny's chamber. Assuring Adams therefore of this truth, he
begged him to give some account how he came there. Adams then, standing in his
shirt, which did not offend Fanny, as the curtains of the bed were drawn,
related all that had happened, and when he had ended. Joseph told him it was
plain he had mistaken, by turning to the right instead of the left. (...) (...)
those (...) hand, told him (...) had been Mr. Andrew (...) assured his (...)
daughter by (...) than Joseph (...) on lady (...). -- At the (...), she is my
child. -- (...) at this (...) wife; and the (...) of the lovers, (...) her
husband, who was (...) rest, and having (...) delivered herself as (...)
member, my dear, (...) you (...) Gibralter, you left and (...) with child; you
(...), abroad, you know (...) of thee (...) absence I was (...) to bed, I (...)
of this daughter, whom I am sure (...) to remember, (...) (...) (...) for I
believe he (...) our daughter (...) she (...) him (...) and Lived (...)

The pedlar, (...) of lady (...) had no mark on its (...) Yes, he had as (...)
in a garden. (...) unbuttoning his (...) she (...) Andrews, who (...) and very
likely (...) he could (...) (...) (...)

CHAP. XVI.
Being the last. In which this true History is brought to a happy conclusion.

FANNY was very little behind her Joseph, in the duty she expressed toward her
parents; and the joy she evidenced in discovering them. Gamm^r Andrews kissed
her, and said she was heartily glad to see her: but for her part she could
never love any one better than Joseph. Gaffer Andrews testified no remarkable
emotion; he blessed (...) her, but complained bitterly, that he (...) his pipe,
not having had a whiff that (...).

Mr. Booby, who knew nothing of his aunt's (...), invented her abrupt departure
to her (...) and (...) of the family into which he was (...); he was therefore
desirous to be gone (...) celerity: and now having (...). Wilson and Joseph on
the discovery, (...) Fanny, called her sister, and introduced (...), who
behaved with great decency on the occasion.

(...) sons a message to his aunt, who returned (...) she wished him a good
journey; but was (...) to see any company: he therefore (...) out, having
invited Mr. Wilson to (...); and Pamela and Joseph both so insisted ^sapn^,
that he at last consented, having (...) a messenger from Mr. Booby, to (...)
his wife with the news; which, as he knew (...) render her completely happy, he
could not (...) on himself to delay a moment in acquaint^^ her with.

The company were ranged in this mariner. The two old people, with their two
daughters, rode in the coach; the squire, Mr. Wilson, Joseph, parson Adams, and
the pedlar proceeded on horseback.

In their way Joseph informed his father of his intended match with Fanny; to
which, though he expressed some reluctance at first, on the eagerness of his
son's instances he consented, saying if she was so good a creature as she
appeared, and he described her, he thought the disadvantages of birth and
fortune might be compensated. He however (...) on the match being deferred till
he had (...) mother; in which Joseph perceiving him (...) with great duty
obeyed him, to the great (...) parson Adams, who by these means saw an
opportunity of fulfilling the church forms, and marrying his parishioners
without a license.

Mr. Adams greatly exulting on this occasion (for such ceremonies were matters
of no small moment with him) accidentally gave spars to his (...) which the
generous beast (...); for he was (...) high mettle, and had been used to (...)
than the gentleman who at present (...) him, for whose horsemanship he had
perhaps some contempt, immediately run away full speed, and played so many
antic tricks, that he tumbled she parson from his back; which Joseph (...) to
his relief. This accident afforded (...) to the servants, and no less (...)
Fanny, who beheld him as he (...) by (...) but the mirth of the one, and terror
of the (...) were soon determined, when the parson (...) he received no damage.

The horse having freed himself from his (...) thy rider, as he probably
thought him, proceeded (...) make the best of his way; but was stopped by a
gentleman and his servant who were traveling the opposite way; and were now at
a little distance from the coach. They soon met: and as one of the servants
delivered Adams, his horse, his master hailed him, and Adams looking up,
presently recollected he was the justice of peace before whom he and Fanny had
made their appearance. The parson presently saluted him very kindly; and the
justice informed him, that he had found the fellow who attempted to swear
against him and the young woman the very next day, and had committed him to
Salisbury goal, where he was charged with ma^^ robberies.

Many compliments having passed between the (...) and the justice, the latter
proceeded on his journey, and the former having with some disdain (...)
Joseph's offer of changing horses, and (...) he was as able (...) horseman as
any in the kingdom, remounted his beast; and now the company again proceeded,
and happily arrived at their journey's end, Mr. Adams, by good luck rather than
by good riding, (...) full.

The company arriving of Mr. Booby's house, were all received by him in the
most courteous, and entertained in the most splendid manner, after the custom
of the old English hospitality, which is still preserved in some very few
families in the remote parts of England. They all passed that day with (...)
utmost satisfaction; it being perhaps impossible (...) any set of people more
solidly and sincerely (...). Joseph and Fanny found means to be (...) upwards
of two hours, which were the short* (...), but the sweetest imaginable.

In the morning, Mr. Wilson proposed to his son to make a visit with him to his
mother; which notwithstanding his dutiful inclinations, and a longing desire he
had to see her, a little concerned him, as he must be obliged to leave his
Fanny: but the goodness of Mr. Booby relieved him, for he proposed to send his
own coach and six for Mrs. Wilson, whom Pamela so very earnestly invited, that
Mr. Wilson at length agreed with the entreaties of Mr. Booby and Joseph, and
suffered the coach to go empty for his wife.

On Saturday the coach returned with Mrs. Wilson, who added one more to this
happy assembly. The reader may imagine much better and quicker too than I can
describe, the many embraces and tears of joy which succeeded her arrival. It is
sufficient to say, she was easily prevailed with to follow her husband's
example, in consenting to the match.

On Sunday, Mr. Adams performed the service at the squire's parish church, the
curate of which very kindly exchanged duty, and rode twenty miles to the lady
Booby's parish so to do; being particularly charged not to omit publishing the
banns, being the third and last time.

At length the happy day arrived, which was to put Joseph in the possession of
all his wishes. He arose and dressed himself in a neat but plain suit of Mr.
Booby's which exactly fitted him; for he refused all finery; as did Fanny
likewise, who could be prevailed on by Pamela to attire herself in nothing
richer than a white dimity nightgown. Her shift, indeed, which Pamela
presented her, was of the finest* kind, and had an edging of lace round the
bosom; she likewise equipped her with a pair of fine white thread stockings,
which were all she would accept; for she wore one of her own round-eared caps
and, over it a straw hat, lined with cherry colored (...) and tied with a
cherry colored ribbon. In this dress she came forth from her chamber, blushing
and breathing sweets; and was by Joseph, whose eyes sparkled fire, led to
church, the whole family attending, where Mr. Adams performed the ceremony; at
which nothing was so remarkable, as the extraordinary and unaffected modesty of
Fanny, unless the true christian piety of Adams, who pulickly rebuked Mr. Booby
and Pamela for laughing in so sacred a place, and on so solemn an occasion. Our
parson would have done no less to the highest prince on earth: for though he
paid all submission and deference to his superiors in other matters, where the
least spice of religion intervened, he immediately lost all respect of persons.
It was his maxim, that he was a servant of the Highest, and could not, without
departing from his duty, give np the least article of his honor, or of his
cause, to the greatest earthly potentate. Indeed he always asserted, that Mr.
Adams at church with his surplice on, and Mr. Adams without that ornament, in
any other place, were two very different persons.

When the church rites were over, Joseph led his blooming bride back to Mr.
Booby's (for the distance was so very little, they did not think proper to use
a coach; the whole company attended them likewise on foot; and now a most
magnificent entertainment was provided, at which parson Adams demonstrated an
appetite surprising, as well as surpassing every one present: Indeed the only
persons who betrayed any deficency on this occasion, were those on whose
account the feast was provided: they pampered their imaginations with the much
more (...) repast which the approach of night promised them; the thoughts of
which filled both their minds, though with different sensations; the one all
desire, the other had her wishes tempered with fears.

At length, after a day passed with the utmost merriment, corrected by the
strictest decency; in which however, parson, Adams, being well filled with ale
and pudding, had given a loose to more facetiousness than was usual to him; the
happy, the blessed moment arrived, when Fanny retired with her mother, her
mother in-law, and her sister. She was soon undressed; for she had no jewels to
deposit in their caskets, nor fine laces to fold with the nicest exactness.
Undressing to her was properly discovering, not putting off ornaments: for as
all her charms were the gifts of nature, she could divest herself of none. How,
reader, shall I give thee an adequate idea of this lovely young creature? the
bloom of roses and lilies might a little illustrate her complexion, or their
smell her sweetness: but to comprehend her entirely, conceive youth, health,
bloom, neatness, and innocence, in her bridal bed; conceive all these in their
utmost perfection; and you may place the charming Fanny's picture before your
eyes.

Joseph no sooner heard she was in bed, than he fled with the utmost eagerness
to her. A minute carried him into her arms, where we shall leave this happy
couple to enjoy the private rewards of their constancy; rewards so great and
sweet, that I apprehend Joseph neither envied the noblest duke^ nor Fanny the
finest duchess that night.

The third day, Mr. Wilson and his wife, with their son and daughter, returned
home; where they now live together in a state of bliss scarce equalled. Mr.
Booby has with unprecedented generosity given Fanny a fortune of two thousand
pounds, which Joseph has laid out in a little estate in the same parish with
his father, which he now occupies (his father having stocked it for him;) and
Fanny presides with most excellent management in his dairy, where, however, she
is not at present very able to bustle much, being, as Mr. Wilson informs me in
his last letter, extremely big with her first child.

Mr. Booby has presented Mr. Adams with a living of one hundred and thirty
pounds a year: he at first refused it, resolving not to quit his parishioners,
with whom he had lived so long: but on recollecting he might keep a curate at
this living, he has been lately induced into it.

The pedlar, besides several handsome presents both from Mr. Wilson and Mr.
Booby, is by the latter's interest, made an exciseman; a trust which he
discharges with, such justice, that he is greatly beloved in his neighborhood.

As for the lady Booby, she returned to London in a few days, where a young
captain of dragoons, together with eternal parties at cards, soon obliterated
the memory of Joseph.

Joseph remains blessed with his Fanny, whom he (...) tenderness, which is all
returned on her side. The happiness of this couple is a perpetual fountain of
pleasure to their fond parents; and that is particularly remarkable, he
declares he will imitate them in their retirement; nor will be prevailed on by
any bookseller, or their authors, to make his appearance in high life.

THE END.

