A SERMON, ENTITLED TRUE GRACE, Distinguished from the Experience of Devils.

SERMON Preached at NEW-ARK, in New Jersey, before the Synod of NEW YORK and
PHILADELPHIA, by the Rev. JONATHAN EDWARDS, Late President of the College in
NEW JERSEY. ENTITLED, TRUE GRACE, Distinguished from the Experience of Devils.

"Thou believe that there is one GOD; thou do well; the Devils also believe
and tremble." JAMES 11.19. STOCKBRIDGE: PRINTED BY LORING ANDREWS: M,D,CC,XCI.

TRUE GRACE, Distinguished from the EXPERIENCE OF DEVILS.
JAMES II. 19. "Thou believe that there is one GOD; thou do well; the
Devils also believe and tremble."


OBSERVE in these Words. 1. Something that some depended on, as an Evidence of
their good Estate, and Acceptance, as the Objects of GOD's Favor, viz. a
speculative Faith, or Belief of the Doctrines of Religion. The great Doctrine
of the Existence of one only GOD is particularly mentioned; probably, because
this was a Doctrine wherein, especially, there was a visible and noted
Distinction, between professing Christians and the Heathens, amongst whom the
Christians in those Days were dispersed: And therefore, this was what many
trusted in, as what recommended them to; or at least, was an Evidence of, their
Interest in the great spiritual and eternal Privileges, in which Christians
were distingushed from the rest of the World.

2. How much is allowed concerning this Faith, viz. That it is a good
Attainment: Thou do well. It was good, as it was necessary. This Doctrine was
one of the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity; and, in some respects, above
all others fundamental. It was necessary to be believed, in order to Salvation:
And a Being without the Belief of this Doctrine, especially in those that had
such Advantage to know as they had, whom the Apostle wrote to, would be a great
Sin, and what would vastly aggravate their Damnation. This Belief was also
good, as it had a good Tendency in many Respects.

3. What is implicitly denied concerning it, viz. That it is any Evidence of a
Person's being in a State of Salvation. The whole Context, shows this to be the
Design of the Apostle in the Words: And, it is particularly manifest, by the
Conclusion of the Verse; which is the

4. Thing observable in the Words, viz. The Argument by which the Apostle
proves, that this is no Sign of a State of Grace, viz. that it is found in the
Devils. They believe that there is one GOD, and that He is a holy sin hating
GOD; and that He is a GOD of Truth, and will fulfill his Threatenings, by which
He he has denounced future Judgments, and a great increase of Misery on them;
and that He is an Almighty GOD, and able to execute his threatened Vengeance
upon them.

Therefore, the DOCTRINE I infer from the Words, to make the Subject of my
present Discourse, is this.

Nothing in the Mind of Man, that is of the same Nature with what the Devils
experience, or are the subjects of, is any sure Sign of saving Grace.

If there be any Thing that the Devils have, or find in themselves, which is an
Evidence of the saving Grace of the Spirit of GOD, then the Apostle's Argument
is not good; which is plainly this: That which is in the Devils, or which they
do, is no certain Evidence of Grace. But the Devils believe that there is one
GOD. Therefore, thy believing that there is one GOD, is no sure Evidence that
thou art gracious. So that the whole Foundation of the Apostle's Argument lies
in that Proposition. That which is in the Devils is no certain sign of Grace.

Nevertheless, I shall mention two or three further Reasons or Arguments of the
Truth of this Doctrine.

I. The Devils have no Degree of Holiness: and therefore, those Things, which
are Nothing beyond what they are the subjects of, cannot be holy Experiences.

The Devil once was holy; but when he fell, he lost all his Holiness, and
became perfectly wicked. He is the greatest Sinner, and in some Sense, the
Father of all Sin. John viii. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the
Lusts of your Father ye will do. He was a Murderer from the Beginning and abode
not in the Truth; because there was no Truth in him: When he speaks a Lie, he
speaks of his own; for he is a Liar and the Father of it. 1 John iii. 8. He
that commits Sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the Beginning.
He is often spoken of, as by Way of Eminence, THE WICKED ONE. So, Matt. xiii.
19. Then comes the wicked One, and catches away that which was sown in his
Heart. v. 38. The Tares are the Children of the wicked One. 1 John, ii. 13. I
write unto you young Men, because ye have overcome the wicked One. Chap. iii.
12. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked One. Chap. v. 18. Whosoever is born of
GOD -- keeps himself, and that wicked One touches him not. So the Devils are
called evil Spirits, unclean Spirits, Powers of Darkness, Rulers of the
Darkness of this World, and Wickedness itself: Ephesians vi 12. For we wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood; but against Principalities, against Powers, against
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against spiritual Wickedness in high
Places.

Therefore, surely those Things which the Minds of Devils are the Subjects of,
can have nothing of the Nature of true Holiness in them. The Knowledge and
Understanding which they have of the Things of GOD and Religion, cannot be of
the Nature of divine and holy Light, nor any Knowledge that is merely of the
same Kind. No such Impressions as are made on their Hearts, can be of a
spiritual Nature. That Kind of Sense, which they have of divine Things, however
great, cannot be an holy Sense. Such Affections as move their Hearts, however
powerful, cannot be holy Affections. If there be no Holiness in them, as they
are in the Devil, there can be no Holiness in them as they are in Man; unless
something be added to them, beyond what is in them, or they are in the Devil.
And if any Thing be added to them, then they are not the same Things; but are
something beyond what Devils are the Subjects of; which is contrary to the
Supposition; for the Proposition which I am upon, is, that those Things which
are of the same Nature, and nothing beyond what Devils are the Subjects of,
cannot be holy Experiences. It Is not the Subject that makes the Affection, or
Experience, or Quality holy; but it is the Quality that makes the Subject holy.

And if those Qualities and Experiences, which the Devils are the Subjects of,
have nothing of the Nature of Holiness in them; then they can be no certain
Signs, that Persons which have them, are holy or gracious. There is no certain
Sign of true Grace, but those Things which are spiritual and gracious. It Is
GOD's Image that is his Seal and Mark, the Stamp, by which those that are his,
are known. But that, which has Nothing of the Nature of Holiness, has Nothing
of this Image. That, which is a sure Sign of Grace, must either be something,
which has the Nature and Essence of Grace; or is flowing from, or some way
belonging to its Essence: For that, which distinguishes Things one from
another, in their Essence, or something appertaining to their Essence. And
therefore, that which is sometimes found wholly without the Essence of Holiness
or Grace, can be no essential, sure, or distingushing Mark of Grace.

II. The Devils are not only absolutely without all true Holiness, but they are
not so much as the Subjects of any common Grace.

If any should imagine, that some Things may be Signs of Grace, which are not
Grace itself, or which have nothing of the Nature and Essence of Grace and
Holiness in them; yet, certainly they will allow, that the Qualifications,
which are sure Evidences of Grace, must be things that are near akin to Grace,
or having some remarkable Affinity with it. But the Devils are not only wholly
destitute of any true Holiness; but they are at the greatest Distance from it,
and have nothing in them* in any wise akin to it.

There are many in this World, who are wholly destitute of saving Grace, who
yet have common Grace: They have no true Holiness, but nevertheless, have
something of that which is called moral virtue; and are the Subject of some
Degree of the common Influences of the Spirit of GOD. It Is so with those in
general, that live under the Light of the Gospel, and are not given up to
judicial Blindness and Hardness. Yea, those that are thus given up, yet have
some Degree of restraining Grace, while they live in this World; without which,
the Earth could not bear them, and they would in no Measure, be tolerable
Members of human Society. But when any are damned, or cast into Hell, as the
Devils are, GOD wholly withdraws his restraining Grace, and all merciful
Influences of his Spirit whatsoever: And they have neither saving Grace, nor
common Grace; neither the Grace of the Spirit; nor any of the common Gifts of
the Spirit; neither true Holiness, nor moral Virtue of any kind. Hence arises
the vast Increase of the Exercise of Wickedness in the Hearts of Men, when they
are damned. And herein is the chief Difference between the damned in Hell, and
unregenerate and graceless Men in this World: Not that wicked Men in this
World, have any more Holiness or true virtue than the damned, or that wicked
Men, when they leave this World, have any principles of Wickedness infused into
them: But when Men are cast into Hell, GOD perfectly takes away his Spirit from
them, as to all it is merciful common Influences, and entirely withdraws from
them, all Restraints of his Spirit and good Providence.

III. It is unreasonable to suppose that a Person's being in any Respect as the
Devil is, should be a certain Sign, that he is very unlike, and opposite to
him; and hereafter, shall not have his part with him. True Saints are extremely
unlike, and contrary to the Devil, both relative and really. They are so
relatively. The Devil is the grand Rebel; the chief Enemy of GOD and CHRIST;
the Object of GOD's greatest Wrath; a condemned Malefactor, utterly rejected
and cast off by him; forever shut out of his Presence; the Prisoner of his
Justice; an everlasting inhabitant of the infernal World. The Saints, on the
contrary, are the Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem; Members of the Family, of
the glorious KING of Heaven; the Children of GOD; the Brethren and Spouse of
his dear Son; Heirs of GOD; Joint-heirs with CHRIST; Kings and Priests unto
GOD. And they are extremely different really. The Devil, on Account of his
hateful Nature, and those accursed Dispositions which reign in Him, is called
Satan, the Adversary, Abaddon and Apollyon, the Great Destroyer, the Wolf, the
roaring Lion, the great Dragon, the old Serpent. The Saints are represented as
GOD's holy Ones, his anointed Ones, the Excellent of the Earth; the Meek of the
Earth; Lambs and Doves; CHRIST's little Children; having the Image of GOD, pure
in heart; GOD's Jewels; Lilies in CHRIST 's Garden; Plants of Paradise; Stars
of Heaven; Temples of the Living GOD. The Saints, so far as they are saints,
are as diverse from the Devil, as Heaven is from Hell; and much more contrary
than light is to darkness: And the eternal state that they are appointed to, is
answerably diverse and contrary.

Now it is not reasonable to suppose, that a being, in any respect, as Satan
is, or the being the subject of, any of the same properties, qualifications,
affections, or actions, that are in him, is any certain evidence, that Persons
are thus exceeding different from him; and in circumstances so diverse, and
appointed to an eternal state, so extremely contrary in all respects. Wicked
Men, are in scripture, called the children of the Devil. Now is it reasonable
to suppose, that Men's being, in any respect, as the Devil is, can be a certain
sign, that they are not his children, but the Children of the infinitely holy
and blessed GOD? We are informed, that wicked Men, shall hereafter, have their
part with Devils; shall be sentenced to the same everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his angels. Now, can a man's being like the Devil in
any respect, be a sure token that he shall not have his part with him, but with
glorious Angels, and with JESUS CHRIST, dwelling with him, where he is, that he
may behold, and partake of his glory?

IMPROVEMENT.
The first USE may lie in several inferrences, for our Instruction.

I. From what has been said, it may be inferred, by parity of reason, that
nothing that damned men do, or ever will experience, can be any sure sign of
grace.

Damned men are like the Devils; are conformed to 'em in nature and state. They
have nothing better in them than the Devils; have no higher principles in their
hearts; experience nothing, and do nothing of a more excellent kind: As they
are the children and servants of the Devil; and as such shall dwell with him,
and be partakers with him, of the same misery. As CHRIST says, concerning the
saints, in their future state; Matt. xxii. 30. That they shall be as the Angels
of GOD in Heaven: So it may be said concerning ungodly men, in their future
state; that they shall be as the fallen, wicked Angels in Hell.

Each of the forementioned reasons, given to show the truth of the doctrine,
with respect to Devils, hold good with respect to damned men. Damned men have
no degree of holiness* And thererefore, those things, which are nothing beyond
what they have, cannot be holy experiences. So it is true, that the damned men,
are not only absolutely destitute of all true holiness, but they have not so
much as any common grace. And lastly, it is unreasonable to suppose, that a
person's being in any respect, as the damned in Hell are, should be a certain
sign, that they are very unlike and opposite to them, and hereafter, shall not
have their portion with them.

II. We may hence infer, that no degree of speculative knowledge of things, of
Religion, is any certain sign of saving grace. The Devil, before his fall, was
among those bright and glorious Angels of Heaven, which are represented as
morning stars, and flames of fire, that excel in strength and wisdom. And though
he be now become sinful, yet his sin has not abolished the faculties of the
angelick nature; as when man fell, he did not lose the faculties of the human
nature. Sin destroys spiritual principles, but not the natural faculties. It Is
true, sin, when in full dominion, entirely prevents the exercise of the natural
faculties, in holy and spiritual understanding; and lays many impediments in
the way of their proper exercise in other respects: It lays the natural faculty
of reason, under great disadvantages, by the many and strong prejudices, which
the mind is brought under the power of: And in fallen man, the faculties of the
soul, are, doubtless, greatly impeded in their exercise, through that great
weakness and disorder of the corporeal organ, which it is strictly united to;
which is the consequence of sin. But there seems to be nothing in the nature of
sin, or moral corruption, that has any tendency to destroy the natural
capacity; or even to diminish it, properly speaking. If sin were of such a
nature, as necessarily to have that tendency and effect; then it might be
expected, that wicked men, in a future state, where they are given up entirely
to the unrestrained exercise of their corruptions and lusts, and sin is, in all
respects, brought to its greatest perfection in them, would have the capacity
of their souls greatly diminished: Which we have no reason to suppose; but
rather on the contrary; that their capacities are greatly enlarged, and that
their actual knowledge is vastly increased; and that even with respect to the
Divine Being, and the things of Religion, and the great concerns of the
immortal souls of men; and that, with regard to these things, the eyes of
wicked men are opened; and they, in some respects, emerge out of darkness into
clear light, when they go into another world.

The greatness of the abilities of the Devils, may be argued, from the
representation in Ephesians. vi. 12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, etc. The same may also be argued, from
what the scripture says of Satan's subtilty. Genesis iii. 1. 2 Cor. xi. 3. Acts
xiii. 10.

And as the Devil has a faculty of understanding of large capacity, so he is
capable of great speculative knowledge, of the things of GOD, and the invisible
and eternal world, as well as other things; and must needs, actually, have a
great understanding of these things; as these are the things which have always
been chiefly in his view; and as his circumstances, from his first existence,
have been such as have tended chiefly to engage him to attend to these things.
Before his fall, he was one of those Angels, who continually beheld the face of
the Father, which is in Heaven. And sin has no tendency to destroy the memory:
And therefore, has no tendency to blot out of it, any speculative knowledge
that was formerly there.

As the Devil's su^^^lity, shows his great capacity; so the way in which his
subtility is exercised and manifested; which is principally in his artful
management, with respect to things of religion; his exceeding subtle
representations, insinuations, reasonings and temptations, concerning these
things, demonstrates his great actual understanding of them. As in order to the
being a very artful disputant in any science, though it be only to confound and
deceive such as are conversant in the science; a person had need to have a
great and extensive acquaintance with the things, which pertain to that science.

Thus the Devil has, undoubtedly, a great degree of speculative knowledge in
divinity; having been, as it were, educated in the best divinity school in the
universe, viz. The Heaven of Heavens. He must needs have such an extensive and
accurate knowledge, concerning the nature and attributes of GOD, as we, worms
of the dust, in our present state, are not capable of. And he must have a far
more extensive knowledge of the works of GOD; as of the work of creation in
particular; for he was a spectator of the creation of this visible world: He
was one of those morning stars that we read of, Job xxxviii. 4, 5, 6, 7. who
sang together, and of those Sons of GOD, that shouted for joy, when GOD laid
the foundations of the Earth, and laid the measures thereof, and stretched the
line upon it. And so he must have a very great knowledge of GOD's works of
Providence: He has been a spectator of the series of these works from the
beginning: He has seen how GOD has governed the world in all ages: He has seen
the whole train of GOD's wonderful successive dispensations of Providence
toward his church, from generation to generation. And he has not been an
indifferent spectator; but the great opposition, which there has been between
GOD and him, in the whole course of those dispensations; has necessarily,
greatly engaged his attention, in the strictest observation of them. He must
have a great degree of knowledge, concerning JESUS CHRIST, as the savior of
men; and the nature and method of the work of redemption, and the wonderful
wisdom of GOD in this contrivance. It Is that work of GOD, wherein, above all
others, GOD has acted in opposition to him; and in which he has chiefly set
himself in opposition to GOD. It Is with relation to this affair, that that
mighty warfare has been maintained, which has been carried on between Michael
and his Angels, and the Devil and his Angels, through all ages, from the
beginning of the World; and especially, since Christ appeared in the world. The
Devil has had enough to engage his attention, to the steps of divine wisdom in
this work; for it is to that wisdom he has opposed his subtility: And he has
seen, and found, to his great disappointment, and unspeakable torment; how
divine wisdom, as exercised in that work, has baffled and confounded his
devices. He has a great knowledge of the things of another world; for the
things of that world, are in his immediate view. He has a great knowledge of
Heaven; for he has been an inhabitant of that world of Glory: And he has a
great knowledge of Hell, and the nature of its misery; for he is the first
inhabitant of Hell; and above all the other inhabitants, has experience of its
torment, and has felt them constantly, for more than fifty-seven hundred years.
He must have a great knowledge of the holy scriptures; for it is evident, he is
not hindered from knowing what is written there, by the use he made of the words
of scripture, in his temptation of our Savior. And if he can know, he has much
opportunity to know, and must needs have a dispositton to know, with the
greatest exactness; that he may, to greater effect, prevent and wrest the
scripture, and prevent such an effect of the word of GOD on the hearts of men,
as shall tend to overthrow his kingdom. He must have a great knowledge of the
nature of mankind, their capacity, their dispositions, and the corruptions of
their hearts; for he has had long and great observations and experience. The
heart of man, is what he has had chiefly to do with, in his subtle devices,
mighty efforts, restless and indefatigable operations and exertions of himself,
from the beginning of the world* And it is evident, that he has a great
speculative knowledge of the nature of experimental Religion, by his being able
to imitate it so artfully, and in such a manner, as to transform himself into
an Angel of light.

Therefore it is manifest, from my text and doctrine, that no degree of
speculative knowledge of things of Religion, is any certain sign of true piety.
Whatever clear notions a man may have of the attributes of GOD, and doctrine of
the Trinity; the nature of the two covenants, the economy of the persons of the
Trinity, and the part which each person has in the affair of man's redemption;
if he can discourse never so excellently of the offices of CHRIST, and the way
of salvation by him, and the admirable methods of divine wisdom; and the
harmony of the various attributes of GOD in that way; if he can talk never so
clearly and exactly of the method of the justification of a sinner, and of the
nature of conversion, and the operations of the spirit of GOD, in applying the
redemption of CHRIST; giving good distinctions, happily solving difficulties,
and answering objections; in a manner tending greatly to the enlightening the
ignorant, to the edification of the church of GOD, and the conviction of
gainsayers; and the great increase of light in the world: If he has more
knowledge of this sort than hundreds of true saints, of an ordinary education,
and most divines; yet all is no certain evidence of any degree of saving grace
in the heart.

It Is true, the scripture often speaks of knowledge of divine things, as what
is peculiar to true saints; as in John xvii. This is eternal life, that they
may know thee, the only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom thou have sent. Matt.
xii. 27. No man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the
Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Ps. ix. 10.
They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee. Philip. iii. 8. I count
all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of CHRIST JESUS my
Lord. But then, we must understand it of a different kind of knowledge, from
that speculative understanding* which the Devil has to so great a degree. It
will also be allowed, that the spiritual saving knowledge of GOD, and divine
things, greatly promotes speculative knowledge; as it engages the mind in its
search into things of this kind, and must assist to a distinct understanding of
them; so that, other things being equal, they that have spiritual knowledge,
are much more likely than others, to have a good doctrinal acquaintance with
things of Religion -- but yet, such acquaintance may be no distinguishing
characteristic of true saints.

III. It may also be inferred from what has been observed, that for persons
merely to yield a speculative assent to the doctrines of Religion as true, is
no certain evidence of a state of grace. My text tells us, that the Devils
belive, and as they believe that there is one GOD, so they believe the truth of
the doctrines of Religion in general. The devil is orthodox in his faith -- he
believes the true scheme of Doctrine -- he is no Deist, Socinian, Arian,
Pelagian or Antinomian -- the articles of his faith are all sound, and what he
is thoroughly established in.

Therefore, for a person to believe the doctrines of Christianity, merely from
the influence of things speculative, or from the force of arguments, as
discerned only by speculation, is no evidence of grace.

Though it is probably a very rare thing, for unregenerate men, to have a strong
persuasion of the truth of the doctrines of Religion, especially, such of 'em
as are very mysterious, and much above the comprehension of reason: Yet it is
manifest, that we have no warrant to determine, that it can never be so, or to
look upon such a persuasion, as an infalliable evidence of grace -- and that no
person can safely determine his state to be good from such an evidence. Yet if
he, not only himself, seems to be very confident of the truth of Christianity
and its doctrines, but is able to argue most strongly for the proof of them --
yet in this, he goes nothing beyond the Devil -- who, doubtless, has a great
knowledge of the rational arguments, by which the truth of the Christian
Religion, and its several principles are evinced.

And therefore, when the scripture speaks of believing that JESUS is the Son of
GOD, as a sure evidence of grace, as in 1. John v. 1. and other places, it must
be understood, not of a mere speculative assent, but of another kind and manner
of believing, which is called the faith of GOD's elect. Tit. i. 1. There is a
spiritual conviction of the truth, which is, a believing with the whole heart,
peculiar to true saints -- of which I would speak particularly by and by.

IV. It may be inferred, from the doctrine which has been insisted on, that it is
no certain sign, that persons are savingly converted; that they have been
suBjects of very great distress and terrors of mind, through apprehensions of
GOD's wrath, and fears of damnation.

That the Devils are the subjects of great terrors, through apprehensions of
GOD's wrath, and fears of future effects of it, is implied in my text; which
speaks not only of their believing, but trembling. It must be no small degree
of terror, which should make those principalities and powers, those mighty,
proud and sturdy beings, to tremble.

There are many terrors, that some persons, who are concerned for their
salvation, are the subjects of, which are not from any proper awakenings of
conscience, or apprehensions of truth; but from melancholy, or frightful
impressions on their imagination; or some groundless apprehensions, and the
delusions, and false suggestions of Satan. But if they have had never so great,
and long continued terrors, from real awakenings, and convictions of truth, and
views of things as they are; this is no more than what is in the Devils, and
will be in all wicked men, in another world. However stupid and senseless most
ungodly men are now, all will be effectually awakened at last: There will be no
such thing as slumbering in Hell. There are many that cannot be awakened by the
most solemn warnings, and awful threatenings of the word of GOD; the most
alarming discourses from the pulpit, and the most awakening and awful
providence; but all will be thoroughly awakened, by the sound of the last
trumpet, and the appearance of CHRIST to Judgment; and all sorts will then be
filled with most amazing terrors, from apprehensions of truth, and seeing
things as they be; when the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich
men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, (such as were the most lofty
and stouthearted, most ready to treat the things of Religion with contempt)
shall hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains; and say
to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb; for the great day of his
wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand? Rev. vi. 15.16, 17.

Therefore, if persons have first been awakened, and then afterward have had
comfort and joy, it is no certain sign, that their comforts are of the right
kind, that they were preceded by very great terrors.

V. It may be further inferred from the doctrine, that no work of the law on
men's hearts, in conviction of Guilt, and just desert of punishment, is a sure
argument, that a person has been savingly converted.

Not only, are no awakenings and terrors, any certain evidence of this, but no
mere legal work whatsoever; though carried to the utmost extent that it can be;
nothing wherein there is no grace or spiritual light, but only the mere
conviction of natural conscience, and those acts and operations of the mind,
which are the result of this; and so are, as it were, merely forced by the
clear light of conscience, without the concurrence of the heart and inclination
with that light: I say these things are no certain sign of the saving grace of
GOD, or that a person was ever savingly converted.

The evidence of this, from my text and doctrine, is demonstrative; because the
Devils are the subjects of these things; and all wicked men that shall finally
perish, will be the subjects of the same. Natural consciene is not extinguished
in the damned in Hell; but on the contrary, remains, and is there in it is
greatest strength, and is brought to it is most perfect exercise; most fully to
do its proper office, as GOD's vicegerent in the soul, to condemn those rebels
against the king of heaven and earth, and manifest GOD's just wrath and
vengeance, and by that means to torment them; and be as a never-dying worm
within them. Wretched men find means in this world, to blind the eyes, and stop
the mouth of this vicegerent of a sin revenging GOD; but they shall not be able
to do it always. In another world, the eyes and mouth of conscience will be
fully opened. GOD will hereafter, make wicked men to see and know these things,
which now they industriously hide their eyes from; Isai. xxxvi. 10, 11. Let
favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness; in the
land of uprightness he will deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of
the Lord. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: But they shall
see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea the sire of thine enemies
shall devour them. We have this expression often annexed to GOD's threatenings
of wrath to his enemies; and they shall know, that I am the Lord: This shall be
accomplished by their woeful experience, and clear light in their consciences,
whereby they shall be made to know, whether they will or not; how great and
terrible, holy and righteous a GOD JEHOVAH is; whose authority they have
despised: And they shall know, that he is righteous and holy in their
destruction. This all the ungodly will be convinced of, at the day of Judgment,
by the bringing to light all their wickedness of heart and practice; and
setting all their sins, with all their aggravations, in order, not only in the
view of others, even of the whole world, but in the view of their own
consciences. This is threatened, Ps. 50.21. These things have thou done, and I
kept silence: Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself. But
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Compare this with
the four first verses of the Psalm. -- The end of the day of Judgment, si not
to find out what is just; as it is with human judgment, but it is to manifest
what is just; to make known GOD's justice in the judgment which he will
execute, to men's own consciences, and to the world. And therefore, that day is
called the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of GOD. Romans
ii. 5. Now sinners often cavil against the justice of GOD's dispensations, and
particularly, the justice of the punishment, which GOD threatens for their
sins; excusing themselves, and condemning GOD: But when GOD comes to manifest
their wickedness in the light of that day, and to call them to an account, they
will be speechless; Matt. xxii. 11, 12. And when the king came to see the
guests, he saw there, a man which had not on a wedding garment: And he says
unto him, friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? and
he was speechless. When the king of Heaven and earth comes to judgment, their
consciences will be so perfectly enlightened and convinced, by the all
searching light, they shall then stand in; that their mouths will be
effectually stopped, as to all excuses for themselves* all pleading of their
own righteousness, to excuse or justify them; and all objections against the
justice of their judge; that their conscience will condemn them only, and not
GOD.

Therefore, it follows from the doctrine, that it can be no certain sign of
grace, that persons have had great convictions of sin; have had their sins of
life, with their aggravations remarkably set before them, so as greatly to
affect and terrify them; and withal, have had a great sight of the wickedness
of their hearts, and been convinced of the greatness of the sin of unbelief,
and of the unexcuseableness and heinousness of their most secret spiritual
iniquities; and have been brought to be convinced of the uttter insufficiency
of their own righteousness; and to despair of being recommended to GOD by it;
have been as much brought off from their own righteousness, as ever any are,
under a mere legal humiliation; have been convinced that they are wholly
without excuse before GOD, and deserve damnation; and that GOD would be just,
in executing the threatened punishment upon them, though it be so dreadful. All
these things, will be in all the ungodly at the day of judgment, when they
shall stand with Devils, at the left hand, and shall be doomed as accursed, to
everlasting fire, with them.

Indeed there will be no submission in them. Their conscience will be fully
convinced, that GOD is just in their condemnation; but yet their wills will not
be bowed to GOD's justice. There will be no acquiescence of mind, in that
divine attribute; no yielding of the soul to GOD's sovereignty, but the highest
degree of enmity and opposition. A true submission of the heart and will, to
the justice and sovereignty of GOD, is therefore allowed to be something
peculiar to true converts, being something which the Devils and damned souls
are, and ever will be far from; and which a mere work of the law, and
convictions of conscience, however great and clear, will never bring men to.

When sinners are the subjects of great convictions of conscience, and a
remarkable work of the law; it is only a transacting the business of the day of
Judgment, in the conscience before hand: GOD sits enthroned in the conscience,
as at the last day he will sit enthroned in the cloud of heaven; the sinner is
arraigned, as it were, at GOD's bar; and GOD appears in his awful greatness, as
a just and holy, sin-hating and sin revenging GOD, as he will then. The sinners
iniquities are brought to light; his sins set in order before him; the hidden
things of darkness, and the counsels of the heart are made manifest; as it will
be then: Many witnesses do, as it were, rise up against the sinner under
convictions of conscience; as they will against the wicked at the day of
judgment: And the books are opened, particularly the book of GOD's strict and
holy law, is opened in the conscience, and its rules applied for the
condemnation of the sinner; which is the book that will be opened at the day of
Judgment, as the grand rule of Judgment, to all such wicked men as have lived
under it: And the sentence of the law is pronounced against the sinner; and the
justice of the sentence made manifest; as it will be at the day of Judgment.
The conviction of a sinner at the day of Judgment, will be a work of the law,
as well as the conviction of conscience in this world* And the work of the law
(if the work be merely legal) be sure, is never carried further in the
consciences of sinners now, than it will be at that day, when it is work will be
perfect, in thoroughly stopping the sinner's mouth. Romans iii. 19. Now we know,
that what things soever the law says, it says to them that are under the law;
that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
GOD. Every mouth shall be stopped by the law, either now or hereafter; and all
the world shall become sensibly guilty before GOD; guilty of death, deserving
of damnation. -- And therefore, if sinners have been the subjects of a great
work of the law, and have thus become guilty, and their mouths have been
stopped; it is no certain sign that ever they have been converted.

Indeed the want of a thorough sense of guilt, and desert of punishment, and
conviction of the justice of GOD, in threatening damnation, is a good negative
sign; it is a sign that a person never was converted, and truly brought, with
the whole soul, to embrace CHRIST as a Savior from this punishment: For it is
easily demonstrable, that there is no such thing as entirely and cordially
accepting an offer from GOD, of a Savior, from a punishment that he threatens,
which we think we don't deserve. But the having such a conviction, is no
certain sign, that persons have true faith, or have ever truly received CHRIST
as their Savior. And if persons have great comfort, joy, and confidence,
suddenly let into their minds, after great convictions, of such a kind as has
been mentioned; it is no infalliable evidence that their comforts are built on a
good foundation.

It Is manifest, therefore, that too much stress has been laid by many persons,
on a great work of the law, preceding their comforts: Who seem not only to have
looked on such a work of the law, as necessary to precede faith, but also to
have esteemed it as the chief evidence of the truth and genuineness of
succeeding faith and comforts. By this means it is to be feared, very many have
been deceived, and established in a false hope. And what is to be seen in the
event of things, in multitudes of instances, confirms this. It may be safely
allowed, not to be so usual for great convictions of conscience, to prove
abortive, and fail of a good issue, as for lesser convictions; and that more
generally, when the spirit of GOD proceeds so far with sinners, in the work of
the law, as to give 'em a great sight of their hearts, and of the heinousness
of their spiritual iniquities; and to convince 'em that they are without
excuse; and that all their righteousness can do nothing to merit GOD's favors;
but that they lie justly exposed to GOD's eternal vengeance without mercy; a
work of saving conversion follows. But we can have no warrant to say, it is
universally so, or to lay it down as an infallible rule, that when convictions
of conscience have gone thus far, saving faith, and repentance will surely
follow. If any should think they have ground for such a determination, because
they cannot conceive what end GOD should have, in carrying a work of conviction
to such a length, and so preparing the heart for faith; and after all, never
giving saving faith to the soul; I desire it may be considered, where will be
the end of our doubts and difficulties, if we think ourselves sufficient to
determine, so positively and particularly concerning GOD's ends and designs in
what he does. It may be asked such an objector, what is GOD's end in giving a
sinner any degree of the strivings of his spirit, and conviction of conscience;
when he afterward suffers it to come to nothing, and to prove in vain? If he
may give some degree that may finally be in vain; who shall set the bounds, and
say how great the degree shall be? Who can, on sure grounds, determine, that
when a sinner has so much of that conviction, which the Devils and damned in
hell have; true faith and eternal salvation, will be the certain consequence.
This we may certainly determine, that, if the Apostle's argument in the text be
good, not any thing whatsoever, that the Devils have, is certainly connected
with such a consequence. Seeing sinners, while such, are capable of the most
perfect convictions, and will have them at the day of Judgment, and in Hell;
who shall say, that GOD never shall cause reprobates to anticipate the future
Judgment and damnation in that respect? And if he does so, who shall say to
him, what do thou? Or call him to account concerning his ends in so doing.
Not but that many possible wise ends might be thought of, and mentioned, if it
were needful, or I had now room for it. -- The spirit of GOD, is often
quenched, by the exercise of the wickedness of men's hearts, after he has gone
far in a work of conviction; so that their convictions never have a good issue.
And who can say that sinners, by the exercise of their opposition and enmity
against GOD, (which is not at all mortified by the greatest legal convictions,
neither in the damned in Hell, nor sinners on earth) may not provoke GOD to
take his spirit from them, even after he has proceeded the greatest length in a
work of conviction? Who can say, that GOD never is provoked to destroy some,
after he has brought 'em, as it were, through the wilderness, even to the edge
of the land of rest? As he slew some of the Israelites, even in the plains of
Moab.

And let it be considered, where is our warrant in scripture, to make use of
any legal convictions, or any method or order of successive events in a work of
the law; and consequent comforts, as a sure sign of regeneration* The scripture
is abundant, in expressly mentioning evidences of grace, and of a state of
favor with GOD, and characteristicks of the true saints: But where do we ever
find such things as these, amongst those evidences? Or where do we find any
other signs insisted on, besides grace itself, it is nature, exercises and
fruits? These were the evidences that Job relied upon; These were the things
that the Psalmist, every were insists upon, as evidences of his sincerity: And
particularly in the cxix Psalm, from the beginning to the end. These were the
signs that Hezekiah trusted to, in his sickness.

These were the characteristicks given of those that are truly happy, by our
savior, in the beginning of his sermon in the mount. These are the things that
CHRIST mentions, at the true evidences of being his real disciples, in his
last, and dying discourse to his disciples, in the xiv. xv. and xvi. Chapters
of John; and in his intercessary prayer, Chap. xvii. These are the things which
the Apostle Paul often speaks of, as evidences of his sincerity, and sure title
to a crown of glory. And these are the things he often mentions to others, in
his epistles, as the proper evidences of real christianity; a justified state,
and a title to glory. He insists on the fruits of the spirit; love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, as the
proper evidences of being CHRIST's, and living in the spirit: Gal. v. 22. --
25. It Is that Charity, or divine love, which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy, etc. that he insists on, as the most essential
evidence of true Godliness; without which, all other things are nothing. Such
are the signs which the Apostle James insists on, as the proper evidence, of a
truly wise and good man: Jam. iii 17. The wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. And such are the signs of
true Christianity, which the Apostle John insists on, throughout his epistles.
And we never have any where in the Bible, from the beginning to the end of it,
any other signs of Godliness given, than such as these. If persons have such
things as these apparently in them, it ought to be determined, that they are
truly converted, without its being insisted, that it be first known, what steps
or method the spirit of GOD took, to introduce these things into the soul;
which often times, is altogether untraceable. All the works of GOD, are in some
respects, unsearchable: But the Scripture, represents the works of the spirit
of GOD, as peculiarly so; Isai. xl. 13. Who has directed the spirit of the
Lord, or being his counselor, has taught him? Ecles. xi. 5. As thou know
not what is the way of the spirit; nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her
that is with child, so thou know not the works of GOD, who makes all. John
iii. 8. The wind blows where it lists; and thou hear the sound thereof;
but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is every one that
is born of the spirit.

VI. It follows from my text and doctrine, that it is no certain sign of grace,
that persons have earnest desires and longings after salvation.

The Devils, doubtless, long for deliverance from the misery they suffer, and
from that greater misery which they expect. If they tremble through fear of it,
they must, necessarily, earnestly desire to be delivered from it. Wicked men,
are in scripture, represented as longing for the privileges of the righteous,
when the door is shut, and they are shut out from among them: They come to the
door, and cry, Lord, Lord, open to us. Therefore, we are not to look on all
desires, or all desires that are very earnest and vehement, as certain
evidences of a pious heart. There are earnest desires of a religious nature,
which the saints have, that are the proper breathings of a new nature, and
distinguishing qualities of true saints: But there are also longings, which
unregenerate men may have, which are often mistaken for marks of Godliness:
They think they hunger and thirst after righteousness; and have earnest desires
after GOD and CHRIST, and long for Heaven; when indeed, all is to be resolved
into desires of salvation, from self-love; and so is a longing which arises
from no higher principles, than the earnest desires of Devils.

VII. It may be inferred from what has been observed; that persons who have no
grace, may have a great apprehension of an external glory, in things heavenly
and divine; and of whatsoever is external, pertaining to things of Religon.

If persons have impressed strongly on their minds, ideas of that sort, which
are obtained by the external senses; whether they are of that kind that enter
by the ear, as any kind of sound; whether it be the most pleasant music, or
words spoken of excellent signification; words of scripture, or any other,
immediately suggested, as though they were spoken, though they seem to be never so
suitable to their case, or adapted to the subject of their meditations: Or
whether they are of that kind, that are obtained by the eye, as ideas of a
visible beauty and glory; a shining light, an external glory of Heaven; golden
streets, walls and gates of precious stone; splendid Palaces; glorious
inhabitants, shining forth as the sun; a most magnificent throne, surrounded by
angels and saints, in shining ranks: Or any thing external, belonging to JESUS
CHRIST; either in his humbled state, as of JESUS hanging on the cross with his
crown of thorns, his wounds open, and blood trickling down; or in his glorified
state, with awful majesty, or ravishing beauty and sweetness in his
countenance; his face shining above the brightness of the sun, and the like:
These things are no certain signs of grace.

Multitudes that are now in Hell, will have ideas of the external glory, that
pertains to things heavenly, far beyond what ever any have in this world. They
will see all that external glory and beauty, in which CHRIST will appear at the
day of Judgment, when the sun shall be turned into darkness before him; which,
doubtless, will be ten thousand times greater than ever was impressed on the
imagination of either saints or sinners, in this present state, or ever was
conceived by any mortal man.

VIII. It may be inferred from the doctrine, that persons who have no grace, may
have a very great and affecting sense of many divine things in their hearts.

The Devil has not only great speculative knowledge, but he has a sense of many
divine things, which deeply affects him, and is most strongly impressed on his
heart. As

1. The Devils and damned souls, have a great sense of the vast importance of
the things of another world. They are in the invisible world, and they see and
know how great the things of that world are: Their experience teaches 'em in
the most affecting manner. They have a great sense of the worth of salvation,
and the worth of immortal souls, and the vast importance of those things, that
concern men's eternal welfare. The parable in the latter end of the xvi. Chap.
of Luke, teaches this, in representing the rich man in Hell, as entreating that
Lazarus might be sent to his five brothers, to testify unto them, less they
should come to that place of torment. They who endure the torments of Hell,
have, doubtless, a most lively and affecting sense of the vastness of an
endless eternity; and of the comparative momentariness of this life, and the
vanity of the concerns and enjoyments of time. They are convinced effectually,
that all the things of this world, even those that appear greatest and most
important to the inhabitants of the earth, are despicable trifles, in
comparison of the things of the eternal world. They have a great sense of the
preciousness of time, and of the means of grace, and the inestimable value of
the privileges which they enjoy, which live under the gospel. They are fully
sensible of the folly of those that go on in sin; neglect their opportunities;
make light of the counsels and warnings of GOD; and bitterly lament their
exceeding folly, in their own sins; by which they have brought on themselves so
great and remediless misery. When sinners, by woeful experience, know the
dreadful issue of their evil way; they will mourn at the last, saying, how have
I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not obeyed the
voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me! Prove.
iv. 11, 12, 13.

Therefore, however, true Godliness is now attended with a great sense of the
importance of divine things; and it is rare, that men that have no grace, do
maintain such a sense, in any steady and persevering manner; yet it is manifest,
those things are no certain evidences of grace. Unregenerate men may have a
sense of the importance of of the things of eternity, and the vanity of things
of time; the work of immortal souls; the preciousness of time and means of
grace, and the folly of the way of allowed sin; And may have such a sense of
those things, as may deeply affect them, and cause 'em to mourn for their own
sins, and be much concerned for others. Though it be true, they have not these
things in the same manner, and in all respects, from the same principles and
views, as godly men have them.

2. Devils and damned men, have a strong and most affecting sense of the awful
greatness and majesty of GOD. The awful majesty of GOD, are greatly made
manifest in the execution of divine wrath, which they are the subjects of. The
making this known, is one thing GOD has in design, in his vengeance on his
enemies. Romans ix. 22. What, if GOD willing to show his wrath* and to make his
power known, endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath, fitted to
destruction? The Devils tremble before this great and terrible GOD, and under a
strong sense of his awful majesty. It Is greatly manifested to them, and damned
souls now; but shall be manifested in a further degree, in that day, when the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, in flaming fire, to take vengeance
upon them; and when they shall earnestly desire to fly, and be hid from the
face of him that sits on the throne, (which shall be, because of the glory of
his majesty. Isai. ii. 10.) and when they shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
When CHRIST comes, at the last day, in the glory of his Father, every eye shall
see him in that glory, (in this respect, that they shall see his terrible
majesty) and they also that pierced him: Rev. i. 7. Both those Devils, and
wicked men, which tormented and insulted him, when he appeared in meanness and
ignominy, shall then see him in the glory of his father.

It Is evident, therefore, that a sense of GOD's terrible majesty, is no certain
evidence of saving grace: For we see that wicked men, and Devils are capable of
it: Yea, many wicked men in this world have actually had it. This is a
manifestation, which GOD made of himself, in the sight of that wicked
congregation at Mount Sinai, which they saw, and were deeply affected with; so
that all the people that were in the camp trembled.

3. Devils and damned men have some kind of conviction and sense of all the
attributes of GOD, both natural and moral, that is strong and very affecting.

The Devils know GOD's almighty power: They saw a great manifestation of it,
when they saw GOD lay the foundation of the earth etc. and were much affected
with it. And they have seen innumerable other great demonstrations of his
power; as in the universal deluge, the destruction of Sodom, the wonders in
Egypt, at the red sea, and in the wilderness; the causing the sun to stand
still in Joshua's time; and many others. And they had a very affecting
manifestation of GOD's mighty power on themselves, in casting all their hosts
down from Heaven into Hell; and have continual affecting experience of it, in
GOD's reserving them in strong chains of darkness, and in the strong pains they
feel; and will hereafter, have far more affecting experience of it, when they
shall be punished from the glory of GOD's power, with that mighty destruction,
which they now tremble in expectation of. So the Devils have a great knowledge
of the wisdom of GOD: They have had unspeakably, more opportunity and occasion
to observe it, in the work of creation, and also in the works of providence,
than any mortal man has ever had; and have been themselves the subjects of
innumerable affecting manifestations of it, in GOD's disappointing and
confounding them in their most subtle devices, in so wonderful and amazing a
manner. So they see and find the infinite purity and holiness of the divine
nature, in the most affecting manner, as this appears in his infinite hatred of
sin, in what they feel of the dreadful effects of that hatred. They know
already, by what they suffer, and will know hereafter to a greater degree, and
far more affecting manner, that such is the opposition of GOD's nature to sin,
that it is like a consuming fire, that burns with infinite vehemence against
it: They will feel the vehement heat of that fire, in a very dreadful manner.
They also will see the holiness of GOD, as exercised in his love to
righteousness and holiness, in what they will see of the reward of the
righteousness of CHRIST, in the holiness of his people, in the glory of CHRIST
and his church; which also will be very affecting to Devils, and wicked men.
And the exact justice of GOD, will be manifested to them in the clearest and
strongest, most convincing and most affecting light, at the day of Judgment.
When they will also see great and affecting demonstrations of the riches of his
Grace, in the mavelous fruits of his love to the vessels of mercy; when they
shall see them at the right hand of CHRIST, shining as the sun, in the kingdom
of their father, and shall hear the blessed sentence pronounced upon them; and
will be deeply affected with it; as seems naturally implied in the xiii. Chap.
of Luke, 28, 29, verses. The Devils know GOD's Truth; and therefore, they
believe his threatenings, and tremble in expectation of their accomplishment.
And wicked men that now doubt his truth, and dare not trust his word, will
hereafter, in the most convincing, affecting manner, find his word to be true,
in all that he has threatened; and will see that he is faithful to his
promises, in the rewards of his saints. Devils and damned men, know that GOD is
eternal and unchangeable; and therefore, they despair of there ever being an
end to their misery.

Therefore it is manifest, that merely Persons having an affecting sense of
some, or even of all GOD's attributes, it is no certain sign, that they have
the true Grace of GOD in their Hearts.

Object. Here possibly, some may object against the force of the foregoing
reasoning. That ungodly Men in this World, are in exceeding different
circumstances, from those which the Devils are in; and from those which wicked
men will be in, at the day of Judgment. Those things which are visible and
present to these, are now future and invisible to the other. And wicked men in
this world, are in the body, that clogs and hinders the soul, and are
encompassed with objects that blind and stupify 'em. And therefore, it don't
follow* that, because the wicked in another world, have a great apprehension
and lively sense of such and such things, without grace, that ungodly men, in
their present state may have the same.

Ans. To this I answer: It Is not supposed, that ever men in this life have all
those things which have been mentioned, to the same degree that the Devils and
damned have them. None supposes that ever any in this life have terrors of
conscience to an equal degree with them. It Is not to be supposed, that any
mortal man, whether Godly or Ungodly, has an equal degree of speculative
knowledge with the Devil. And, as was just now observed, the wicked, at the day
of Judgment, will have a vastly greater idea of the external glory of CHRIST,
than ever any have in the present state. So, doubtless, they will have a far
greater sense of GOD's awful greatness and terrible majesty, than any could
subsist under in this frail state. So we may well conclude, that the Devils,
and wicked men in Hell, have a greater and more affecting sense of the vastness
of eternity, and (in some respects) a greater sense of the importance of the
things of another world, than any here have. And they have also longings after
salvation to an higher degree than any wicked men in this world.

But yet, it is evident, that men in this world, may have things of the same
kind with Devils and damned men. The same sort of light in the understanding;
the same views, and the same affections; the same sense of things, the same
kind of impressions on the mind, and on the heart. If the objection is against
the conclusiveness of the reasoning that has been made use of to prove this;
it is against the conclusiveness of that reasoning which is the Apostle's, more
properly than mine. The Apostle judged it, a conclusive argument, against such
as thought their believing there was one GOD, an evidence of their being
gracious,; that the Devils believed the same. So the argument is exactly the
same, against such as think they have grace, because they believe GOD is a holy
GOD, or because they have a sense of the awful majesty of GOD. The same may be
observed of other things that have been mentioned. My text has reference not
only to the act of the understandings of Devils in believing, but to that
affection of their hearts, which accompanies the views they have: As trembling
is an effect of the affection of the heart. Which shows, that if men have both
the same views of understanding, and also the same affections of heart, that
the Devils have, it is no sign of grace.

And as to the particular degree, to which these things may be carried in men,
in this world, without grace; it appears not to be safe, to go about so to
ascertain and fix it, as to make use of it as an infallible rule to determine
men's state. I know not where we have any rule to go by, to fix the precise
degree, in which GOD by his providence, or his common influence on the mind,
will excite in wicked men in this world, the same views and affections, which
the wicked have in another world; which it is manifest, the former are capable
as well as the latter, having the same faculties and principles of soul; and
which views and affections, it is evident, they often are actually the subjects
of in some degree; some in a greater, and some in a less degree. The infallible
evidences of grace, which are laid down in scripture, are of another kind: They
are all of a holy and spiritual nature; and therefore, things of that kind,
which a heart that is wholly carnal and corrupt, cannot receive, or have any
experience of. 1. Cor. ii. 14.

I might also here add, that observation and experience, in very many
instances, seems to confirm what scripture and reason teaches in these things.

The second USE may be of self-examination.

Let the things which have been observed, put all on examining themselves, and
enquiring whether they have any better evidences of saving grace, than such as
have been mentioned.

We see how the infallible spirit of GOD, in the text, plainly represents the
things the Devils are the subjects of, as no sure sign of grace. And we have
now, in some instances, observed how far the Devils, and damned men go, and
will go in their experience, their knowledge of divine things, their belief of
truth, their awakenings and and terrors of conscience, their conviction of
guilt, and of the justice of GOD, in their eternal, dreadful damnation, their
longings after salvation, their sight of the external glory of CHRIST, and
heavenly things; their sense of the vast importance of the things of Religion,
and another world; their sense of the awful greatness and terrible majesty of
GOD, yea, of all GOD's attributes. These things may well put us on serious
self-examination, whether we have any thing to evidence our good estate, beyond
what the Devils are the subjects of CHRIST said to his disciples, except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case, enter into the kingdom of Heaven: So the spirit of CHRIST, in his
Apostle James, does in effect, say, in my text, except what ye experience in
your souls, go beyond the experiences of Devils, ye shall, in no case, enter
into the kingdom of GOD.

Here, it may be, some will be ready to say, I have something besides all these
things, which have been mentioned; I have things which the Devils have not,
even love and joy.

I answer, you may have something besides the experiences of Devils, and yet,
nothing beyond them. Though the experience be different, yet it may not be owing
to any different principle, but only the different circumstances, under which
these principles are exercised. The principles, from whence the forementioned
things in Devils and damned men do arise, are these two, natural understanding,
and self-love. It Is from natural understanding or reason, that they have such a
degree of knowledge in divine things, and such a belief of them. It Is from
these principles of natural understanding and self-love, as exercised about
their own dispositions and actions, and GOD as their judge, that they have
natural conscience; and have such convictions of conscience, as have been
spoken of. It Is from these principles, that they have such a sense of the
importance of the things of religion, and the eternal world, and such ^^^gings
after salvation. It Is from the joint exercise of these two principles, that
they are so sensible of the awful majesty of GOD, and of all the attributes of
the divine nature, and so greatly affected with them. And it is from these
principles, joined with external sense, the wicked, at the day of Judgment,
will have so great an apprehension of, and will be so greatly affected by the
external glory of CHRIST and his saints. And that you have a kind of love or
gratitude and joy, which Devils and damned men have not, may possibly not arise
from any other principles in your heart, different from these two, but only
from these principles, as exercised in different circumstances. As for
instance; your being a subject of the restraining grace of GOD, and being under
circumstances of hope, and the receipt of mercy. The natural understanding and
self-love of Devils, possibly might affect them in the same manner, if they
were in the same circumstances. If your love to GOD, had it is first source from
nothing else than a supposed immediate divine witness, or any other supposed
evidence, that CHRIST died for you in particular, and that GOD loves you; it
springs from no higher principles than self-love; which is a principle that
reigns in the hearts of Devils. Self-love is sufficient, without grace, to
cause men to love those that love them, or that they imagine love them, and
make much of them; Luke vi 32. For if ye love them which love you, what thank
have you? For sinners also love those that love them. And would not the hearts
of devils be filled with great joy, if they, by any means, should take up a
confident persuasion that GOD had pardoned them, and was become their friend,
and that they should be delivered from that wrath which they now are in
trembling expectation of. If the Devils go so far as you have heard, even in
their circumstances, being totally cast off, and given up to unrestrained
wickedness, being without hope, knowing that GOD is, and ever will be their
enemy, they suffering his wrath without mercy: How far may we reasonably
suppose they might go, in imitation of grace and pious experience, if they had
the same degree of knowledge, as clear views, and as strong conviction, under
circumstances of hope, and offers of mercy; and being the subjects of common
grace, restraining their corruptions, and assisting and exciting the natural
principles of reason, conscience, etc. Such things as Devils are the subjects
of; such great conviction of conscience; such a sense of the importance of
eternal things; such affecting views of the awful majecty, greatness, power,
holiness, justice, and truth of GOD, and such a sense of his great grace to the
saints, if they, or any thing like 'em, should be in the heart of a sinner, in
this world; at the same time that he, from some strong impression on his
imagination, of CHRIST appearing to him, or sweet words spoken to him, or by
some other means, has suddenly, after great terrors, imbibed a strong
confidence, that now, this great GOD, is his friend and father, has released
him from all the misery he feared, and has promised him eternal happiness: I
say, such things would, doubtless, vastly heighten his ecstasy of joy, and raise
the exercise of natural gratitude, (that principle from whence sinners love
those that love them) and would occasion a great imitation of many graces, in
strong exercises. Is it any wonder then, that multitudes under such a sort of
affection, are deceived? Especially when they have Devils to help forward the
delusion whose great subtilty, has chiefly been exercised in deceiving mankind,
through all past generations.

Enquiry. Here possibly, some may be ready to enquire* If there may be so many
things, which men may experience from no higher principles than are in the
minds and hearts of Devils; what are those exercises and affections, that are
of a higher nature, which I must find in my heart, and which I may justly look
upon as sure signs of the saving grace of GOD's spirit?

Ans. I answer, those exercises and affections which are good evidences of
grace, differ from all that the Devils are the subjects of, and all that can
arise from such principles as are in their hearts, in two things; viz. their
foundation and their tendency.

1. They differ in their foundation, or in that belonging to them, which is
most fundamental in them, and the foundation of all the rest, which pertains to
'em; viz. An apprehension, or sense of the supreme holy beauty, and comeliness
of divine things, as they are in themselves, or in their own nature.

This the Devils, and damned in Hell are, and forever will be entirely
destitute of. This the Devils once had, while they stood in their integrity;
but this they wholly lost, when they fell: And this is the only thing that can
be mentioned, pertaining to the Devil's apprehension and sense of the divine
being, that he did lose. Nothing else belonging to the knowledge of GOD, can be
devised, that he is destitute of. It has been observed, that there is no one
attribute of the divine nature, but what he is sensible of, and knows, and has
a strong and very affecting conviction of; and this I think is evident, and
undeniable. But the supreme beauty of the divine nature, he is altogether blind
to: He sees no more of it, than a man born perfectly blind does of colors. The
great sight he has of the attributes of GOD, gives him an idea, and strong
sense of his awful majesty, but no idea of his beauty and comeliness. Though he
has seen so much of GOD's wonderful works of power, wisdom, holiness, justice
and truth, and his wonderful works of grace to mankind, this so many thousand
years, and has had occasion to observe them with the strongest attention: Yet
all serves not to give him the least sense of his divine beauty. And though the
Devils should continue to exercise their mighty powers of mind, with the
strongest intention; and should take things in all possible views, in every
order and arrangement; yet they never will see this. So little akin, is the
knowledge they have to this, that the great degrees of that knowledge, bring
them no nearer to it. Yet, the more knowledge they have of GOD, of that kind,
the more do they hate GOD. That wherein the beauty of the divine nature, does
most essentially consist, viz. his holiness, or moral excellency, appears in
their eyes furthest from beauty: It Is on that very account chiefly that he
appears hateful to 'em. The more holiness they see in him, the more hateful he
appears: The greater their sight is of his holiness, the higher is their hatred
of him raised. And because of their hatred of his holiness, they hate him the
more, the more they see of his other attributes. They would hate a holy being,
whatever his other attributes were; but they hate such a holy being the worse,
for his being infinitely wise, and infinitely powerful, etc. more than they
would do, if they saw in him less power, and less wisdom.

The wicked, at the day of judgment, will see every thing else in CHRIST, but
his beauty and amiableness. There is no one quality or property of his person,
that can be thought of, but what will be set before them, in the strongest
light at that day, but only such as consist in this. They will see him coming
in the clouds of Heaven, in power, and great glory, in the glory of his father.
They will have that view of his external glory, which is vastly beyond what we
can have any imagination of: And they will have the strongest and most
convincing demonstrations of all his attributes and perfections. They will have
a sense of his great majesty, that will be, as it were, infinitely affecting to
them. They shall be made to know effectually, that he is the Lord. They shall
see what he is, and what he does: His nature and works, shall appear in the
strongest view. But his holy and infinite beauty and amiableness, which is all
in all, and without which every other quality and property is nothing, and
worse than nothing, they will see nothing of.

Therefore, it is a sight or sense of this, that is the thing, wherein does
fundamentally consist, the difference between those things in which the saving
grace of GOD's spirit consists, and the experiences of Devils and damned souls.
This is the foundation of every thing else that is distinguishing in true
Christian experience. This is the foundation of the faith of GOD's elect. This
gives the mind a saving belief of the truth of divine things. It Is a view of
the excellency of the things exhibited in the gospel, or sense of the divine
beauty, and amiableness of the scheme of doctrine there exhibited, that
savingly convinces the mind, that it is indeed divine, or of GOD. This account
of the matter is plainly implied: 2. Cor. iv. 3, 4. But if our gospel be hid,
it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the GOD of this world has blinded the
minds of them that BELIEVE NOT; lest the light of the glorious gospel of
CHRIST, who is the image of GOD, should shine into them. And, v. 6. For GOD,
who commands the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts,
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of GOD, in the face of JESUS
CHRIST. It Is very evident that a saving belief of the gospel, is here spoken of
by the Apostle, as arising from a view of the divine glory or beauty of the
things it exhibits. It Is by this view, that the soul of a true convert is
enabled savingly, to see the sufficiency of CHRIST for his salvation. He that
has his eyes opened to behold the divine, superlative beauty and loveliness of
JESUS CHRIST, is convinced of his sufficiency, to stand as a mediator between
him, a guilty, Hell-deserving wretch, and an infinitely holy GOD, in an
exceeding different manner than ever he can be convinced by all the arguments
that are made use of, by the excellent authors or preachers.

When he once comes to see CHRIST's divine loveliness, he wonders no more that
he is thought worthy by GOD the father, to be accepted for the vilest sinner.
Now it is not difficult for him to conceive, how the blood of CHRIST should be
esteemed by GOD so precious, as to be worthy to be accepted as a compensation
for the greatest sins. The soul now properly sees the preciousness of CHRIST,
and so does properly see and understand the very ground and reason of his
acceptableness to GOD, and the value GOD sets on his blood, obedience and
intercession. This satisfies the poor guilty soul, and gives it rest; when the
finest and most elaborate discourses, about the sufficiency of CHRIST, and
suitableness of the way of salvation, would not do it. When a man then comes to
see the proper foundation of faith and affiance, with his own eyes, then he
believes savingly. He that sees the son, and believes on him, has
everlasting life. John vi 40. when CHRIST thus MANIFESTS GOD's NAME to men,
then they believe that all things whatsoever GOD has given to CHRIST are of
him, and believe that CHRIST was sent of GOD. John xvii. 6, 7, 8. And they that
thus know CHRIST's name will trust in him. Ps. ix 10. In order to true faith in
JESUS CHRIST, the son of GOD, is REVEALED IN MEN. Gal. i. 15, 16. And it is this
sight of the divine beauty of CHRIST, that bows the wills, and draws the hearts
of men. A sight of the greatness of GOD in his attributes, may overwhelm men,
and be more than they can endure; but the enmity and opposition of the heart,
may remain in its full strength, and the will remain inflexible; whereas, one
glimpse of the moral and spiritual glory of GOD, and supreme amiableness of
JESUS CHRIST, shining into the heart, overcomes and abolishes this opposition,
and inclines the soul to CHRIST, as it were, by an omnipotent power: So that
now, not only the understanding, but the will, and the whole soul receives and
embraces the Savior. This is most certainly the discovery, which is the first
internal foundation of a saving faith in CHRIST, in the soul of the true
convert; and not on having of it immediately suggested and revealed to the
soul, by a text of scripture, or any immediate outward or inward witness, that
CHRIST loves him, or that he died for him in particular, and is his savior; so
begetting confidence and joy, and a seeming love to CHRIST, because he loves
him: By which sort of faith and conversion, (demonstrably vain and counterfeit)
multitudes have been deluded. The sight of the glory of GOD, in the face of
JESUS CHRIST, works true supreme love to GOD: This is a sight of the proper
foundation of supreme love to GOD, viz. The supreme loveliness of his nature;
and a love to him on this ground, is truly above any thing that can come from a
mere principle of self-love, which is in the hearts of Devils, as well as men.
And this begets true spiritual and holy joy in the soul, which is indeed joy in
GOD, and glorying in him, and not rejoicing in ourselves.

This sight of the beauty of divine things, will excite true desires and
longings of soul, after those things; not like the longings of Devils, or any
such forced desires, as those of a man in great danger of death, after some
bitter medicine, that he hopes will save his life; but natural free desires,
the desires of appetite; the thirstings of a new nature; as a newborn babe
desires the mother's breast; and as the hungry man longs for some pleasant food
he thinks of; or as the thirsty heart pants after the cool and clear stream.

This sense of divine beauty, is the first thing in the actual change made in
the soul, in true conversion, and is the foundation of every thing else
belonging to that change; as is evident by those words of the Apostle, 2. Cor.
iii. 18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the
spirit of the Lord.

2. Truly gracious affections and exercises of mind differ from such as are
counterfeit, which arise from no higher principles than are in the hearts of
Devils, in their tendency: And that in these two respects.

(1.) They are of a tendency and influence very contrary to that, which was
especially the Devil's sin, even pride. That pride was in a peculiar manner the
Devil's sin, is manifest from 1. Tim. iii. 6. Not a Novice left, being lifted
up with pride, he fell into the condemnation of the Devil. False and delusive
experiences evermore tend to this; though oftentimes under the disguise of great
and extraordinary humility. Spiritual pride, is the prevailing temper, and
general character of hypocrites, deluded with false discoveries and affections.
They are in general, of a disposition directly contrary to those two things
belonging to the Christian temper, directed to by the Apostle; the one in Romans
xii. 16 Be not wise in your own conceit; and the other in Philip. ii. 3. Let
each esteem others better than themselves. False experience is conceited of
itself, and affected with itself. Thus he that has false humility, is much
affected to think, how he is abased before GOD: He that has false love, is
affected, when he thinks of the greatness of his love. The very food and
nourishment of false experience, is to view itself, and take much notice of
itself; and it is very breath and life is to talk much of itself, or some way to
be showing itself. Whereas truly gracious views and affections, are of a quite
contrary tendency: They nourish no self-conceit; no exalting conceit of the
man's own righteousness, experience, or privileges; no high conceit of his
humiliations. They incline to no ostentation, nor self-exaltation, under any
disguise whatsoever. But that sense of the supreme, holy beauty and glory of
GOD and CHRIST, which is the foundation of them, and that only, mortifies
pride, and truly humbles the soul. It not only cuts off some of the outermost
branches (causing many branches to grow out, where but one was before) but it
strikes at the very root of pride; it alters the very nature and disposition of
the heart. The light of GOD's beauty, and that alone, truly shows the soul its
own deformity, and effectually incline it to exalt GOD, and abase itself.

(2.) These gracious exercises and affections, differ from the other in their
tendency, to destroy Satan's interest. 1st In the person himself, in their
tendency, to cause the soul to hate every evil, and false way, and to produce
universal holiness of heart and life; disposing him to make the service of GOD,
and the promoting his glory, and the good of mankind, the very business of his
life. Whereas those false discoveries and affections, have not this effect.
There may indeed, be great zeal, and a great deal of what is called religion;
but it is not a truly Christian zeal; it is not a being zealous of good works:
Their Religion is not the service of GOD; it is not a seeking and serving GOD;
but indeed, a seeking and serving themselves. Though there may be a change of
life, it is not a change from every wicked way, to a uniform Christian life and
practice; but only a turning the stream of corruption from one channel to
another. Thus the Apostle James distinguishes, in our context, a true faith,
from the faith of Devils: James ii. 19, 20. Thou believe there is one GOD.
The Devils also believe and tremble. But will thou know, O vain man, that says
without works is dead? And thus the Apostle John distinguishes true communion
with GOD. 1. John i. 6, 7. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk
in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. But if we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of CHRIST
cleanses us from all sin. By this he distinguishes true spiritual knowledge,
Chap ii. 3, 4. Herely we do know, that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him. And hereby the same Apostle distinguishes
true love. Chap. iii. 18, 19. Let us not love in word and in tongue, but in
deed, [ in work, as the word signifies] and in truth. And hereby we know that
we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him.

2. Truly gracious experiences, have a tendency to destroy Satan's interest in
the world.

False Religion, consisting in the counterfeits of the operations of the spirit
of GOD, and in high pretenses and great appearances of inward experimental
Religion; when this prevails among a people, though for the present it may
surprise many, and may be the occasion of alarming and awakening some sinners;
yet in the final issue of things, tends greatly to wound and weaken the cause
of vital Religion, and to strengthen the interest of Satan, desperately to
harden the hearts of sinners, exceedingly to fill the world with prejudice,
against the power of Godliness, to promote infidelity, and licentious
principles and practices, to build up, and make strong the Devil^^ kingdom in
the world, more than open vice and profaneness, or professed Atheism, or
public persecution; and perhaps, more than any thing else whatsoever.

But it is not so with true Religion, in it is genuine beauty. That, if it
prevails in great power, will doubtless excite the rage of the Devil, and many
other enemies of Religion: However, it gives great advantage to its friends,
and exceedingly strengthens the cause; and tends to convince or confound
enemies. True Religion, is a divine light in the souls of the saints; and as it
shines out in the conversation before men, it tends to induce others to glorify
GOD. There is nothing like it, (as to means) to awaken the consciences of men,
to convince infidels, and to stop the mouths of gainsayers. Though men naturally
hate the power of Godliness; yet, when they see the fruits of it, there is a
witness in their consciences in its favor. He that serves CHRIST in
righteousness, and peace, and joy* in the Holy Ghost, is acceptable to GOD, and
approved of man. Romans xiv. 17, 18. The prevailing of true Religion, ever tends
to the honor of Religion in the world; though it commonly is the occasion of
great persecution. It Is a sure thing, the more it appears, and is exemplified
in the view of the world, the more will its honor, and the honor of its
author be advanced. -- Philip. i. 11. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness; which are by JESUS CHRIST, unto the glory and praise of GOD.

The third USE may be of exhortation, to seek those distinguishing
qualifications and affections of soul, which neither the Devil, nor any unholy
being, has, or can have.

How excellent is that inward virtue and Religion, which consist in those!
Herein consists the most excellent experiences of saints and angels in Heaven.
Herein consists the best experience of the man, CHRIST JESUS; whether in his
humbled, or glorified state. Herein consists the image of GOD: Yea, this is
spoken of in scripture, as a communication of something of G^D's own beauty and
excellency, a participation of the divine nature; 2. Pet. i. 4. a partaking of
his holiness; Heb. xii 10. A partaking of CHRIST's fullness; John i. 16. Hereby
the saints are filled with all the fullness of GOD; Ephesians. iii. 18, 19. Hereby
they have fellowship with, both the father and the son, (1. John i. 13.) that
is, they communicate with them in their happiness. Yea, by means of this divine
virtue, there is a mutual indwelling of GOD and the saints; 1. John iv. 10. GOD
is love; and he that dwells in love, dwells in GOD, and GOD in him.

This Qualification must render the person that has it, excellent and happy
indeed; and doubtless, is the highest dignity, and blessedness of any creature.
This is the peculiar gift of GOD, which he bestows only on his special
favorites. -- As to Silver, Gold, and Diamonds, earthly Crowns and Kingdoms,
He often throws 'em out to those that he esteems as Dogs and Swine; but this is
the peculiar blessing of his dear Children: This is what Flesh and Blood cannot
impart, and what all the Devils in Hell, cannot work the least degree of in any
heart; it is GOD alone can bestow it. This was the special benefit, which CHRIST
died to procure for his Elect, the most excellent token of his everlasting
Love; the chief fruit of his great Labors, and the most precious Purchase of
his Blood.

By this, above all other Thi^^^, do men glorify GOD. By this, above all other
things, do the Saints shine as Lights in the World, and are blessings to
Mankind. And this, above all things, tends to their own Comfort; from hence
arises that Peace which passes all Understanding, and that Joy, which is
unspeakable and full of Glory: and this is that which will most certainly issue
in the eternal Salvation of those that have it: It Is impossible, that the Soul,
wherein it is, should sink and perish: It Is an immortal Seed; it is eternal Life
begun; and therefore, they that have it, can never die. It Is the dawning of the
light of Glory. It Is the Day Star risen in the Heart, that is a sure
Forerunner of that Sun's rising, which will bring on an everlasting day. This
is that Water CHRIST gives, which is in him that drinks it, a Well of Water
springing up into everlasting life: John iv. 14. It Is something from Heaven, is
of a Heavenly nature, and tends to Heaven. And those that have it, however they
may now wander in a Wilderness, or be tossed to and fro, on a tempestuous
Ocean, shall certainly arrive in Heaven at last, where this heavenly spark
shall be increased, and perfected, and the Souls of the Saints, all be
transformed into a bright and Pure Flame, and they shall shine forth as the
Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. AMEN.

FINIS.

