OBSERVATIONS ON THE REFLECTIONS OF THE Right Hon. EDMUND BURKE, ON THE
REVOLUTION in FRANCE, IN A LETTER TO THE Right Hon. the EARL of STANHOPE.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS. FAUST's STATUE, No. 45,
Newburystreet.

MDCCXCI.

The following, from a lady whose literary and political character is justly
esteemed, accompanied a copy of this work for the Press.
Messieurs THOMAS and ANDREWS,
PRIESTLEY, Pain, and other observers on Mr. Burke's celebrated Philippick,
have been read with avidity in America, while a pamphlet of equal merit has
escaped the public eye. It has happened to fall into very few hands on this
side the Atlantic, therefore a republication will doubtless gratify every
American, who has not lost sight of those principles that actuated, and the
perseverance that effected, the independence of America.

The celebrity of the author precludes the necessity of an introduction to any
of her works, and the truths contained in her observations might be their best
recommendation, even though she had thought proper to prefix her name.

A people who have recently and severely struggled for the security of their
rights, cannot be inattentive to the arguments that support them, however some,
from the versability of the human character, and the instability of man, may be
ready to relinquish them.

Whatever convulsions (...) yet be occasioned by the revolution in France, it
will doubtless be favorable to general liberty, and Mr. Burke may undesignedly
be an instrument of its promotion, by agitating questions which have for a time
lain dormant in England, and have been almost forgotten, or artfully disguised,
in America.

You will doubtless be pleased, without further comment from your
correspondent, with an opportunity of republishing the observations of a lady
in England, who has added in a letter to her friend, that "the French
Revolution was very unpopular in England; that it is disliked by government,
because it would necessarily check the encroachments of arbitrary power; by the
nobility and clergy, from motives of interest; and by the great body of the
people, because the National Assembly, in their reform, had not made the
British Constitution the model of their own."

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
MY LORD,
YOUR lordship's character as a patriot, a philosopher, and the firm friend of
the general rights of man, encourages me to present to you the following
Observations on Mr. Burke's famous Reflections on the Revolution in France.
They claim no popular attention for the ornaments of style in which they are
delivered; they can attract no admiration from the fascinating charms of
eloquence; they are directed, not to captivate, but to convince; and it is on
the presumption that your lordship attends more to the substance and end of
literary compositions, than to the art of their arrangement, which induces me
to flatter myself with your approbation.

It is not surprising that an event, the most important to the dearest
interests of mankind, the most singular in its nature, and the most astonishing
in its means, should not only have attracted the curiosity of all civilized
nations, but that it should have engaged the passions of all reflecting men.

Two parties are already formed in this country, who behold the French
Revolution with a very opposite temper: To the one, it inspires the sentiment
of exultation and rapture; and to the other, indignation and scorn. I shall not
take upon me to consider what are the secret passions which have given birth to
these last sentiments; and shall content myself with observing, that Mr. Burke
has undertaken to be the oracle of this last party. The abilities of this
gentleman have been fully acknowledged by the impatience with which the public
have waited for his observations; and when we consider that he has been in a
manner educated in the great school of Parliament, that he has assisted in the
public councils of the English nation for the greater part of his life, we
must suppose him fully competent to the task he has undertaken, of censuring
the politics of our neighbor kingdom, and entering into an exact definition
of those native rights which equally attach themselves to every description of
men.

Is there a rational observation, or argument, in moral existence, which this
gentleman (so highly favored by nature and circumstances for political debate)
could possibly have passed over, on a subject in which he appears so greatly
interested, and (...) which he has taken a full leisure to consider. When we
fin^ ^im then obliged to substitute a warm and passionate declamation (...)
cool investigation, and to address the passions instead of the rea^^^ of
mankind, we shall be induced to give a fuller credit to our judgment and our
feelings, in the view we have taken of this interesting object, and the
pleasure it has given us.

Mr. Burke sets out with throwing a great deal of contemptuous censure on two
club societies in London, for a very harmless exertion of natural and
constitutional liberty. They certainly had a right to compliment the French
National Assembly on a matter of domestic government, and to express an
approbation of their conduct, with a freedom equal to that which Mr. Burke has
taken in his letter to express his abhorrence.

The National Assembly of France have taken no such supercilious state upon
them, as would render such a communication of sentiment ridiculous or
presumptuous. As the patrons of equal liberty, they have not disdained the
addresses of the meanest individual; consequently the Revolution Society then
might rationally expect that their addresses would have met with a civil
reception, though not clothed with the "dignity of the whole representative
majesty of the whole English nation."

But Mr. Burke thinks that these gentlemen have so strong a predilection in
favor of the democratick arrangements which have taken place in France, that
they have been induced to wish, if not to indulge an hope, that some very
important reformations may in the process of time also take place in this
country; and these harmless operations of the mind in a few obscure
individuals, (for such are the members described who compose the offending
clubs) have produced in Mr. Burke, apprehensions no ways consistent with the
high opinion he has formed of the English constitution, or of the strong
attachment which he supposes all that is great and good in the nation have to
it.

Dr. Price, whose animated love for mankind and the spread of general
happiness, moved him to express the effusion of his patriotick sentiment, in a
sermon preached the 4th of Nov. 1789, at the dissenting meeting house in the
Old Jewry, is censured by Mr. Burke in severe, and even acrimonious terms.
Among other parts of the very offensive matter with which he charges this
sermon, the having asserted that the King of Great Britain owes his right to
the Crown by the choice of the people, is particularly selected, as worthy an
historical and argumentative confutation.

The liberty that was taken in the year 1688, by a convention of Lords and
Commons, to depose king James the reigning sovereign from the throne, and to
vest the sovereignty of the realm in his daughter Mary, and her husband the
prince of Orange; and afterward by the legislature, to pass an act to settle
the succession in queen Anne and her issue, and in default of these, in the
heirs of king William's body, and in default of these, in the house of Hanover,
(the Protestant descendants of the house of Stuart in the female line;) and
this to the prejudice not only of king James, but of his son, who had been
acknowledged as the lawful heir of his throne; and also to the prejudice of the
house of Savoy, who by lineal descent were the next in regular succession; are
indeed facts, which might warrant a plain thinking man in the opinion, that the
present reigning family owe their succession to the choice or assent of the
people. But, in Mr. Burke's opinion, these facts are of no weight, "because the
whole family of the Stuarts were not entirely left out of the succession, and a
native of England advanced to the throne; and because it was declared in the
act of succession, that the Protestant line drawn from James the first, was
absolutely necessary for the security of the realm."

That those individuals of the family of the Stuarts, who had never committed
any offense against the peace of the country, and whose mode of faith was not
injurious to its welfare, should not be set aside in favor of an absolute
stranger to the blood, was certainly a just measure; and it was certainly wise
to leave as few competitors to the crown as possible, whether on grounds
^^unded in justice, or in mere plausibility. But there was a reason still more
forcible for the conduct of the two Houses of Convention, and afterward for
the Parliament in their constitutional capacity; and the reason is this, that
without the prince of Orange, and the assistance of his Dutch army, there could
have been no Revolution. For the English nation at large was so little
convinced of the severe and grave necessity which Mr. Burke talks of, that the
people of themselves would never have been roused to have deposed king James;
and they regarded all his innovations with such a constitutional phlegm, that
had this unfortunate monarch possessed the qualities of firmness, perseverance,
or patience, he must either have been killed by the dark means of
assassination, or he would have continued on the throne.

That the friends of the Revolution knew they could not do without the
assistance of king William, is plain, by their laying aside the intention of
vesting Mary singly with the sovereignty, on his declaring that if this event
took place, he would return to Holland, and leave them to themselves.

However strongly the warm friends of freedom might wish that this abstract
right of the people, of choosing their own magistrates, and deposing them for
ill conduct, had been laid open to the public by a formal declaration of such
a right in the acts of succession, this certainly was not a period of time for
carrying these wishes into execution. The whole body of the people had
swallowed deeply of the poison of church policy; passive obedience, by their
means, had so entirely supplanted the abstract notion of the rights of men,
which prevailed in the opposition to Charles the first; and so desirous were
the triumphant party to prevent the revival of such a principle, by which their
interests had been affected, that they took care to confound the only just
authority they had for their conduct, in as great a mist of words and terms as
possible. Besides, would William, who was the soul of the whole proceeding,
have given way to a claim, by which, in the plainest terms, he was bound to his
good behavior?

Mr. Hume justly supposes, that if the revolution had happened one hundred
years after it did, it would have been materially different in all its
circumstances. Instead of thinking with Mr. Burke, that such a plain
declaration of the rights of men would have tended to disturb the quiet of the
nation, I firmly believe that it would have had a contrary effect; for, in this
case, those endless disputes between the Nonjurors, Tories, and Whigs, would
soon have had an end. For, the question not being involved in that obscurity,
contradiction, and absurdity, in which it was enveloped by the revolutionists,
truth and reason would have resumed their sway; party jarjon would have been
exploded; the people would have given a cheerful obedience to the new
government; and that dreadful necessity by which Sir Robert Walpole excused the
introducing a settled system of corruption into the administration, would never
have existed.

When the succession to a crown in one family, or even the possession of
private property, owes its origin to the people, most undoubtedly the authority
from whence it is derived, attaches itself to the gift as equally in every
individual of the family through the whole line of succession, as in the first
possessor. And I can hardly believe, that there was one enlightened member who
composed part of that legislative body who settled the succession to the
throne, could possibly think that body possessed of such a plenitude of power,
as should give them a right, not only to set aside the regulations of their
ancestors, but to bind their posterity, to all succeeding generations, in the
permanent chains of an unalterable law. Should we once admit of a power so
incompatible with the conditions of humanity, and only reserved for the
dictates of divine wisdom, we have not, in these enlightened days, improved on
the politics of the fanatic atheist Hobbes: For he supposes an original right
in the people to choose their governors; but, in exerting this right, the
citizen and his posterity for ever lose their native privileges, and become
bound through the whole series of generations to the service of a master's will.

We will now take into consideration the nature and tendency of the two
different compliments which have been paid by Dr. Price and Mr. Burke to his
Majesty and his successors. Dr. Price, I think, puts their right to government
on the most dignified, and perhaps, in the event of things, on the most
permanent footing. But Mr. Burke would have done well to consider, whether such
a compliment as he is willing to pay to royalty is at all proper, either for
the subject to make, or the King to receive. To a weak prince, it would be apt
to cancel in his mind all the obligations which he owes to the people; and, by
flattering him in a vain conceit of a mere personal right, tempt him to break
those sacred ties which ought to bind and direct his government. I am apt to
believe, that almost all the vices of royal administration have principally
been occasioned by a slavish adulation in the language of their subjects; and,
to the shame of the English people it must be spoken, that none of the enslaved
nations in the world address the throne in a more fulsome and hyperbolical
style of submissive flattery.

To a wise and a good prince, compliments of the same complexion, made and
recommended by Mr. Burke, would be offensive. He would consider it as taking
away the noblest and safest title by which he possesses his power: He would
consider it as acknowledging a kind of latent right in other families; and the
liberality of his sentiment would incline him to triumph in the opinion, that
he was called to government, and continued in it, by the choice and confidence
of a free nation.

Mr. Burke seems to adopt prejudice, opinion, and the powers of the
imagination, as the safest grounds on which wise and good statesmen can
establish or continue the happiness of societies. These have always been
imputed by philosophers (a tribe of men whom indeed Mr. Burke affects much to
despise) as causes which have produced all that is vicious and foolish in man,
and consequently have been the fruitful source of human misery.

Mr. Burke has certainly a fine imagination; but I would not advise either him,
or any of his admirers, to give too much way to such direction; for if from the
virtue of our nature it does not lead us into crimes, it always involves us in
error.

The being put into a situation clearly to understand and to obey the
principles of truth, appears to be the basis of our happiness in this, and our
perfection in another world; and the more truth is followed and pursued in this
dark vale of human ignorance and misery, the more we shall increase our mundane
felicity, and secure the blessings of a future existence. Every opinion which
deviates from truth, must ever be a treacherous guide; and the more it deviates
from it, it becomes the more dangerous.

Though a false opinion of the rights and powers of citizens may enslave the
ductile mind into a state of passive obedience, and thus secure the peace of
government; yet in the same degree does it inflate the pride and arrogance of
princes, until all considerations of rectitude give way to will, the barriers
of personal security are flung down, and thence arises that tremendous
necessity which must be followed by a state of violence and anarchy, which Mr.
Burke so justly dreads. That this is the case, the experience of all societies
of men who acknowledge a power in their princes paramount to all resistance,
fully evinces. These societies are obliged often to have recourse to violence
and massacre; not indeed to establish any popular rights, but in the way of
force, to wreck their vengeance (...) their tyrants.

As to the right of cashiering or deposing monarchs for misgovernment, I cannot
possibly agree with Mr. Burke, that in England it only existed in that
Convention of the two Houses in 1688, which exercised this power over King
James and his legal successors. But I am clearly of opinion, that it i^ ^ right
that ought never to be exercised by a people who are sati^^^ed with their form
of government, and have spirit enough to correct its abuses; and so far from
condemning the French nation for not deposing or executing their king, even
though the strongest presumptions of the most atrocious guilt should have
appeared against him, I think, had they elected any other person to that high
office, they would have thrown difficulties in the way of their liberty,
instead of improving it. But it is the wisdom, and not the folly of the
National Assembly, which gives offense to their enemies; and forces even Mr.
Burke to contradict, in this instance, the rule which he has laid down, "That
monarchs should not be deposed for misconduct, but only when its criminality is
of a kind to render their government totally incompatible with the safety of
the people."

But before we leave the subject of Dr. Price's patriotick effusions, we must
take notice of a very heavy charge laid against him by Mr. Burke -- no less
than that of profaning the beautiful and prophetic ejaculation, commonly
called, Nunc dimittis! made on the first proclamation of our Savior in the
Temple, and applying it, "with an inhuman and unnatural rapture, to the most
horrid, atrocious, and afflicting spectacle, that perhaps was ever exhibited to
the pity and indignation of mankind." That Mr. Burke's imagination was greatly
affected by a scene, which he describes in the highest glow of coloring, I can
well believe; but Dr. Price, who classes with that description of men styled by
Mr. Burke abstract philosophers, has been used to carry his mind, in a long
series of ideas, to the consequences of actions which arise in the passing
scene. Dr. Price then, with full as much sympathy in him as even Mr. Burke can
have, might not be greatly moved with the mortifications and sufferings of a
very few persons, however highly distinguished for the splendor of their rank,
when those mortifications led the way, or secured the present and future
happiness of twenty four millions of people, with their posterity, emancipated
by their manly exertions, from all that is degrading and afflicting to the
sensible mind; and let into the immediate blessings of personal security, and
to the enjoyment of those advantages which above all others must be delightful
to the feelings of an high spirited people.

The events of human life, when properly considered, are but a series of
benevolent providence: Many of them, though very important in their
consequences, are too much confounded with the common transactions of men, to
be observed; but whenever the believer thinks he perceives the omnipotent will
more immediately declaring itself in favor of the future perfection and
happiness of the moral world, he is naturally led into the same ecstacies of
hope and gratitude, with which Simeon was transported by the view of the infant
Messiah. Has Mr. Burke never heard of any millenium, but that fanciful one
which is supposed to exist in the kingdom of the saints? If this should be the
case, I would recommend to him to read Newton on the Prophecies. He will find
that this most respectable Bishop, who was no ranter, is of opinion, that some
passages in the Revelations point out a period of time when the iron scepter of
arbitrary sway shall be broken; when righteousness shall prevail over the whole
earth, and a correct system of equity take place in the conduct of man. Every
providence, therefore, by which any insuperable object to this transcendent
blessing appears to be taken away, must rationally draw forth ejaculations of
gratitude from the benevolent Christian. What ideas do more naturally associate
in the human mind, than those of the first appearance of the infant Jesus, and
his future universal reign in the hearts of his people?

But Mr. Burke thinks, that there was at least a great impropriety in
expressing an approbation of the spirited conduct of the French nation, before
time and circumstances had manifested that the freedom they had gained, had
been used with wisdom in the forming a new constitution of government, or in
improving the old one. "When I see," says Mr. Burke, "the spirit of liberty in
action, I see a strong principle at work; and this for a while is all I can
possibly know of it. The wild gas, the fixed air, is plainly broke loose; but
we ought to suspend our judgment until the first effervescence is a little
subsided, till the liquor is cleared, and until we see something deeper than
the agitation of a troubled and frothy surface."

The French Revolution was attended with something so new in the history of
human affairs; there was something so singular, so unique, in that perfect
unanimity in the people; in that firm spirit which bashed every hope in the
interested, that they could possibly divide them into parties, and render them
the instruments of a resubjection to their old bondage; that it naturally
excited the surprise and the admiration of all men. It appeared as a sudden
spread of an enlightened spirit, which promised to act as an effectual and
permanent barrier to the inlet of those usurpa^^ons which from the very
beginning of social life the crafty have imposed on ignorance.

This was a triumph of sufficient importance to call forth the exultation of
individuals, and the approbation of societies. But the two clubs who have the
misfortune to fall under Mr. Burke's severe censure, did not testify a formal
approbation of the conduct of their neighbors, till the deputies they had
chosen for the transaction of their affairs, had manifested a virtue equal to
so high a trust; for no sooner was the power of the court sufficiently subdued
to enable them to act with freedom and effect, than they gave an example of
disinterested magnanimity, that has no parallel in the conduct of any preceding
assembly of men, and which was never surpassed by any individual. That
memorable day in which the members of the National Assembly, with a virtuous
enthusiasm, vied with each other in the alacrity with which they surrendered to
the people all their feudal privileges, will for ever stand in the records of
time as a monument of their singular greatness. Such an instance of human
virtue was surely a proper subject of applause and congratulation.

Men who have suffered in their personal interests by the new order of things
in France, must naturally be inclined to exaggerate every blemish which appears
in the conduct of a multitude, by whose spirit they have been deprived of many
fond privileges. Their petulant observations, whilst their minds are heated by
imaginary wrongs and injuries, is excusable; because it is a weakness almost
inseparable from human frailty. It would, however, have become Englishmen, from
whom might have been expected a more sympathising indulgence toward the
friends and promoters of liberty, to have been more candid in their censures;
but in no part of Europe perhaps, have the evils which must necessarily attend
all Revolutions, and especially a Revolution so complete and comprehensive as
that which has taken place in France, been more exaggerated, and more
affectedly lamently.

Had this great work been effected without the shedding one drop of innocent or
even guilty blood, without doubt it would have better pleased the generous and
benevolent mind. But, was it possible that such a pleasing circumstance could
ever have had an existence? If we take into consideration that animosity which
subsisted between the aristocratists and democratists on the eve of the
Revolution, an animosity which was greatly heightened by the imprudent insults
which the Tier Etat had received from the first mentioned body, we shall rather
wonder at the moderation with which the people used their complete victory,
than lament their cruelty. After the successful storming the king's camp, and
the flight or desertion of his Janissaries, instead of that order and voluntary
subjection to discipline which appeared in an armed mob, and which prevented
all infringement on the rights of property, had the subdued party been
delivered over to the outrage and the pillage of the rabble, the horrid scene
might have been parallelled by examples drawn from the guilty violence of
civilized nations, without calling our attention to Theban and Thracian orgies,
or a procession of American savages entering into Onondaga. I do not indeed
exactly know how much blood has been spilled in France, or how many individuals
have fallen a sacrifice in the public commotions; but by all the general
accounts which have been transmitted to us, the history of monarchies will
point out as many sufferers who have fallen in one hour to the rage and
outrageous pride of kingly despots.

The punishment of the lamp post, it must be owned, strikes terror to the mind,
and calls forth an immediate effusion of sympathy to the sufferer. But when
candid reflection supersedes the first emotions of human tenderness, this truth
will force itself on our consideration, that a people who had been used to such
barbarous spectacles as that of beholding wretches, whose destitute poverty had
in a manner compelled to the forlorn course of highway robbery, broken on a
wheel, and lingering out the last hours of life under the agonizing strokes of
a stern executioner, would naturally regard hanging as a mild punishment on men
whom they considered as the worst of criminals. Let us rejoice, then, that such
dreadful legal executions, which must from their nature tend to barbarise men,
are happily put an end to by the Revolution.

But Mr. Burke is now come to a scene which is calculated to draw forth all the
energies of his imagination, and which consequently he describes with the
highest possible coloring. This is no other than the 6th of October, 1789,
when the king and queen were led in triumph to Paris. I very much honor the
king of France for that ease of temper which has enabled him to go through all
his personal mortifications with a manly dignity; but it must be confessed that
he brought them on himself, by a conduct, which, to say the best of it, was
altogether imprudent.

The first involuntary visit which he made to the capital, was absolutely
necessary, to appease the fears and the resentment which had been raised by his
ineffectual attempt to awe the deliberations and the resolutions of the
National Assembly by an armed force. In the second, he was carried to Paris to
prevent the execution of a design formed by the court cabal, which, had it
succeeded, might have deluged the nation in blood, and furnished the fuel of
civil discord for years.

The Parisians showed no intention, or even desire, to deprive in any respect
their king of his personal liberty; till, by a very suspicious conduct, he
appeared to have manifested a design to corrupt the fidelity of his guards to
their new government, and to set up the standard of arms in that quarter of the
kingdom where the friends of despotism from every part of Europe might repair
with safety. The great and unabating rage and indignation which the enemies to
the new constitution have shown for what they term the captivity of the king,
plainly evinces the necessity that urged the measure.

Having endeavored to show the futility of Mr. Burke's observations and
censures on the Revolution and Constitutional Societies; and likewise, that his
severe pointed reflections on the conduct of the French nation, for having, as
he says, committed on the vanquished party the most unexampled acts of
atrocious violence, are not founded either in truth or reason; I shall proceed
with my critical reflections on the animadversions of my author, who goes on in
a very free manner to censure every part of the French constitution, to draw a
comparison between the British and the Gallie governments as they now exist,
and to establish, in the way of reasoning, a superiority in favor of the
government of his own country.

To show that the National Assembly have committed a very gross and ruinous
error, in the building a new structure, instead of improving an old one; Mr.
Burke cites, in a triumphant manner, the conduct of the English nation. Our
oldest reformation, he observes, is that of Magna Charta. "You will see, says
he, addressing his correspondent, that Sir Edward Coke, that great oracle of
our law, and indeed all the great men who follow him to Blackstone, are
industrious to prove the pedigree of our liberties. They endeavor to prove,
that the ancient Charta, the Magna Charta of king John, was connected with
another positive Charta from Henry the first, and that both the one and the
other were nothing more than a reaffirmance of the still more ancient standing
law of the kingdom." "In the famous law of the third of Charles the first,
called the Petition of Right, the Parliament says to the king -- Your subjects
have inherited this freedom (claiming their franchises) not on abstract
principles as the rights of men, but as the rights of Englishmen, and as a
patrimony derived from their forefathers."

This language of the parliament, when pleading for the freedom of their
countrymen at the tribunal of a prince's throne, who was as little inclined to
admit, and whose prejudices enabled him as little to understand the only
reasonable grounds of the argument as any despot who ever swayed an eastern
scepter, was well adapted to the character of the prince, and the ignorance of
the multitude. But had the circumstances of Charles enabled him to speak and to
enforce the sentiments of his mind, he would undoubtedly have made the
following reply: You tell me upon your own authority, and the authority of your
lawyers, that what you plead so strenuously for, is a patrimony derived from
your forefathers, and grounded on the ancient law of the land. Be it so -- Was
not this ancient law superseded by the authority of arms, and the entire
submission of the people to the Norman code established by William the
Conqueror? Magna Charta, then, and the other charters, must either have been
extorted from the imbecility of the princes who granted them, or they must have
issued from the voluntary donations of monarchs; in either case, they only
stand on a resumable right.

What the parliament could have answered to this plea, I know not, without
calling in the aid of an abstract right; which they endeavored to keep out of
the view of the king, with as much care as Mr. Burke endeavors to keep it out
of the view of all men. But certain it is, that the king, though he did not
explicitly declare with all their force the above mentioned sentiments, yet he
acted agreeable to their tenor the moment he got rid of this troublesome
assembly: For, considering the articles of the petition of right as a gift
depending on his pleasure to fulfill or to resume, he broke them whenever they
thwarted his system of administration, and imprisoned those who on the strength
of this statute withstood his authority.

I have myself always considered the boasted birthright of an Englishman, as an
arrogant pretension, built on a beggarly foundation. It is an arrogant
pretension, because it intimates a kind of exclusion to the rest of mankind
from the same privileges; and it is beggarly, because it rests our legitimate
freedom on the alms of our princes.

I must own I was somewhat surprised to find a gentleman of polished manners,
who has spent the best part of his life in the company of those who affect the
nicest conformity to the rules of a refined civility, addressing the august
representatives of the most gallant and respectable of the European nations, in
terms which I should not use to a set of chimney sweepers, though acting the
most ridiculously out of their sphere. Neither do I choose to repeat all those
expressions of ineffable contempt, which the strong glow of Mr. Burke's
imagination has scattered through the whole of his reprehensions.

It is not my intention to make any formal comparison between the new
constitution of France, and the present existing constitution of England; or to
presume to censure a government, from which an industrious people receive
protection, and with which the large majority of the nation are entirely
satisfied. Yet it may not be inexpedient to observe, that we cannot with any
grounds of reason or propriety, set up our own constitution as the model which
all other nations ought implicitly to follow, unless we are certain that it
bestows the greatest possible happiness on the people which in the nature of
things any government can bestow. We ought to be certain, that this model will
bear the most nice and critical examination. It ought to be void of any of
those obvious, or more concealed causes, which produce present evils, and carry
the mind to apprehensions of future mischiefs. We ought not at least to have
had a national debt, swelled to a magnitude which terrifies even the most
sanguine for its consequences. Our parliaments ought to have been eminently
distinguished for their integrity, and a total independence of any corrupt
influence; and no necessity ought to have existed in our affairs, which have
obliged us to endure imposts which our ancestors would have rejected with
horror, and resisted. If an Englishman sees any thing which is amiss in his own
government, he ought not undoubtedly to look forward to any other remedy than
those which the lenient hand of reformation will supply. But when the old
vessel of a commonwealth is torn to pieces by the shocks it has sustained from
contending parties; when the people, disdaining and rejecting all those fond
opinions by which they have been enslaved to misery, assert their native right
of forming a government for themselves; surely in such a case the builders are
bound by no law of duty or reason to make use of these old materials in the
structure of their new constitution, which they suppose to have been of an
injurious tendency. The leaders of the French Revolution, and their followers,
see none of those striking beauties in the old laws and rules of the Gothic
institutions of Europe, which Mr. Burke does. They do not profess to have any
of the spirit of antiquarians among them; and they have not perceived, in the
experience of old or ancient times, a perfect harmony arising from opposition
of interests; nor can they understand how such a combination can be formed as
shall produce it. In such a view of things, they have chosen a simple rule for
the model of their new structure, yet regulated with all that art and design
which the experience of ages affords to the wisdom of man. They are accused of
having entirely dismissed that useful guide experience from their councils, but
they think they have made the best use of it; whether this opinion of theirs is
founded in truth, time, and the future history of man, must evince.

Mr. Burke, reasoning from what I regard as a groundless supposition, very
pathetically laments, and very severely reprehends the conduct of those, who,
holding out false and treacherous lures to the king, led him into concessions
fatal to his personal power, and the constitution of the monarchy. That the
parliaments of France never intended to make any alteration in the old
government, I am thoroughly persuaded; and I am equally persuaded, that they
fondly imagined the people would freely give their money for the redress of
some of the most heavy of the grievances under which they labored. They knew,
by the experience of past times, that in voting by orders, the people had never
gained any solid advantage from an assembly of the States General. Neither the
court, nor the parliament of Paris, who made the king so many splendid
promises, were aware of the consequences which must arise from the general
spread of knowledge among the people; and in the event of things, they were
both disappointed of their purposes; for the Tier Etat, reflecting on the old
practices which the crown, the clergy, and the nobility had used against them,
were determined to throw the whole weight of their natural scale into the
balance, and to redress their own grievances, without waiting the effect of
humble petitions and discordant councils. That neither the king, nor the
parliaments of France, could long have prevented the full exertion of this
power, (had they foreseen all the consequences which did arise from suffering
the meeting of the States General,) is to me very plain. A regeneration of the
constitution would have been equally effected; but it would have been attended
with a tremendous difference in its circumstances. It would have been ushered
in by a general bankruptey, and the waste of civil blood. "Our enemies," says a
popular Leader in the National Assembly, "may, by their machinations, make us
buy our liberties dear, but they cannot deprive us of them." "This breach of
confidence," as Mr. Burke terms it, "to an easy and condescending king, will
have a dreadful effect on the interests of mankind, by sanctifying the dark
suspicious maxims of tyrannous distrust; and will teach kings to tremble at
what will be called the delusive plausibilities of moral politicians." Be this
as it may, the people of France had certainly a right to provide for their own
security and welfare on those principles which they thought the most conducive
to this great end, and to leave it to the wisdom of other nations to make
suitable provision for theirs. It behooves them, however, to be careful to
cherish and preserve the liberty they have so nobly gained; to suffer no
intemperate spirit to produce that licentiousness which must bring anarchy in
its train; nor to indulge a capricious impatience, by which their enemies, in
working on their passions and misguiding their reason, may reduce them to their
old state of bondage; in which case it is certain, power will reap many
advantages from past transactions, by which it will be enabled to tie fast
those fetters the giddy people will so well deserve.

Though I have hitherto spared my readers a detail of all the severe invectives
which Mr. Burke has used against the leading members who compose the National
Assembly; yet, for the sake of those principles of moral rectitude which the
torrent of his eloquence appears to baffle and confound, it will be necessary
to notice his observations on the character and conduct of the nobles who have
taken the lead in the French revolution, and who yet continue to support it. He
accuses them with having assisted in the spoil and humiliation of their own
order, to possess a sure fund for their new followers. "To be attached to the
subdivision, to love the little platoon we belong to in society (says Mr.
Burke) is the first principle, the germ as it were, of public affections: It
is the first link in the series by which we proceed toward a love of our
country and mankind."

What splendid emoluments and what grand objects of personal ambition those
noblemen could have in view, who, whilst they generously sacrificed those
privileges which are the most fondly coveted by human vanity, shut out their
entrance to the public offices of the state, by resolutions which rendered
such promotions incompatible with their legislative trust, I know not; but I
hope we shall not be so much blinded with the splendor of dazzling images, as
to confound those narrow affections which bind small bodies together by the
mutual ties of personal interest, to that liberal benevolence, which,
disdaining the consideration of every selfish good, cheerfully sacrifices a
personal interest to the welfare of the community.

Of the list of individuals whom Mr. Burke selects as examples of true glory,
and as benefactors rather than destroyers of their country, some of them ought
to have been for ever stamped with infamy, as the pests and tyrants of their
species; and they are all of them of doubtful fame, as to any honor derived to
their country by their ambitious projects, unless a nation of slaves can
receive glory from a capacity of becoming the scourage of other societies.

Richlieu was the grand instrument by which the court of France, in the reign
of Louis the fourteenth, was enabled to massacre the greater part of the French
Hugonots, and to drive the remainder out of the kingdom. Cromwell, indeed, who
deprived his sovereign of life, merely to usurp his power, has, with many
people, paid the debt of his crimes, by having, through the general detestation
which men conceived of his treachery and tyranny, rendered the Revolution and
the Revolutionists odious, and thus paved the way for the restoration of the
old government.

In the next argument presented to our attention, Mr. Burke has very strongly
entrenched himself in the holds of the British constitution; and we will not
attempt to pursue him into his fortress: For though a natural vanity might
flatter us with a delusive hope of victory, arising from the subtle objections
which may be urged to every political proposition; yet the victory would cost
too dear, if it subjected us to the reproach of any design against the peace
and quiet of the community. But it will not, I think, be deviating from the
highest point of decency and prudence, to make our objections to his general
assertions. His proposition, "that it is the great masses of property which
form a natural rampart about the lesser properties in all their gradations," is
not in our opinion founded in truth; for every citizen who possesses ever so
small a share of property, is equally as tenacious of it as the most opulent
member of society; and this leads him to respect and to support all the laws by
which property is protected. It is this sense of personal interest, which
running through every rank in society, and attaching itself to every one of its
members who are not in the condition of a pauper, forms an impenetrable barrier
to the security of wealth; for otherwise, as the numbers of the opulent must be
very small in proportion to the number of those who form the great mass of the
people, envy would operate so successfully against them as to destroy the force
of artificial supports.

When the constitution of France is completely settled, and the commonwealth
rests upon its basis, this disposition of the human mind which operates so
powerfully for the preservation of peace and order, will, as on former
occasions, regain its natural force. For the operations of power on the
property of the citizen, is not an unexempled event in the histories of civil
societies.

The manner in which the National Assembly of France have endeavored to secure
and to defend the liberty of the different towns and provinces which compose
that vast empire, come next under Mr. Burke's severe criticism. But in his
endeavor to bring men over to his sentiments on this subject, he is obliged to
have recourse to all those unfair means which persons of genius think
themselves entitled to use in the course of their argument; for what, indeed,
but the delusive power of a subtle sophistry, can produce an apparent concord
between propositions the most opposite in their nature? and what but an appeal
to the passions of the reader, can prevent his assent to the most obvious
truths?

The National Assembly of France are at one time accused by Mr. Burke of a
scheme for perpetuating their power, at the expense of the rights of election;
at another, of acting weakly and meanly in the having limited their sitting to
the short space of two years. In one view of things, they are accused of
drawing to themselves, and to the city of Paris, an exorbitance of power,
which, if not resisted, must end in the total subjection of the provinces,
whose natural productions and acquired wealth are to be exhausted to pamper the
luxury and gratify the avarice of the capital. In another, their politics are
arraigned, for having left no leading controling power in the empire, of
sufficient energy to support a necessary subordination of its parts. Such
palpable contradictions, such little arts of misrepresentation we have seen
daily thrown out in the public papers by the hostile faction, who naturally
endeavor to mislead the people into a distrust of their deputies, because they
have guarded their liberties with too nice and too jealous a care. But we did
not expect to see them collected together and set off with all the powers of
literary composition, by one of the greatest orators of the age; and this in a
work which the author holds out as an exact standard, by which the limits of
power and of freedom are from henceforth to receive their bounds. Neither did
we expect to find that the humane writer would have so far entered into the
passions of the discontented party, as to envy the people of Paris that bread
which is so necessary for their subsistence, and which cannot be otherwise
supplied but by the produce of the provinces.

We were also greatly surprised to find Mr. Burke entering into such
contradictions, as at one time to represent the excellencies of the English
constitution as obvious to every observer, and so sensibly felt by its subjects
as unanimously to bind their affections to its principles, its rules, and its
dictates; to the exception only of a few idle, insignificant, speculative
individuals: And at another, trembling left if the question of the abstract
rights of men were brought before the eyes of the people, the most dreadful
confusions might follow, and be attended with the utter downfall of every order
in the church and state, of every exclusive privilege existing in its bodies
corporate, and with the general pillage of the rich.

Such representations are certainly well adapted to rouse the selfish passions
of the timid mind, and may serve the present purpose of the hour; but they will
not stand the more candid and cool decisions which attend on time.

The legitimate power by which governments are made or altered, must either
stand on the native rights of the species, or it must stand on an authority
vested in an individual, or in a limited number of individuals, exalted to
this authority, either by the positive law of a revealed will, or by some
native superiority evidently attached to their persons. That this sacred trust
has never been so formally vested in any individual, or in any given number of
individuals, is in a manner acknowledged by the most strenuous advocates for
passive obedience* for all their arguments are built on presumptive grounds.

The contrary proposition to this, viz. that native right in the social body to
choose its own government, which Mr. Burke condemns under the description of a
metaphysical foolery, is allowed with all its weight of authority by the
greatest part of the English Revolutionists; nor can any other reasonable
ground of persuasion be made use of, to bring the people to concur in any plan
of salutary or necessary reformation. With what pretense then, can Mr. Burke
charge Dr. Price, or any of his adherents or admirers, with advancing a novel
or a mischievous doctrine, when they assert that all legitimate power is
founded on the rights of nature? "But government (says Mr. Burke) is not made
in virtue of natural rights, which may and do exist in total independence of
it; and exist in much greater clearness, and in a much greater degree of
abstract perfection; but their abstract perfection is their practical defect.
By having a right to every thing, they want every thing. Government is a
contrivance of human wisdom, to provide for human wants. Men have a right that
these wants should be provided for by this wisdom. Among these wants is to be
reckoned the want out of a civil society, of a sufficient restraint upon their
passions. Society requires not only that the passions of individuals should be
subjected, but even in the mass and body, as well as in the individuals, the
inclinations of men should frequently be thwarted, their will controled, and
their passions brought into subjection. This can only be done by a power out of
themselves, and not in the exercise of its functions, subject to that will, and
to those passions, which it is in its office to bridle and subdue. In this
sense, the restraints of men, as well as their liberties, are to be reckoned
among their rights."

To this very ingenious reasoning, and these refined distinctions between
natural and social rights, the people may possibly object, that in delivering
themselves passively over to the unrestrained rule of others on the plea of
controling their inordinate inclinations and passions, they deliver themselves
over to men, who, as men, and partaking of the same nature as themselves, are
as liable to be governed by the same principles and errors; and to men who, by
the great superiority of their station, having no common interest with
themselves which might lead them to preserve a salutary check over their vices,
must be inclined to abuse in the grossest manner their trust. To proceed with
Mr. Burke's argument -- should the rich and opulent in the nation plead their
right to the predominant sway in society, from its being a necessary
circumstance to guard their wealth from the gripe of poverty, the men in an
inferior state of fortune might argue, that should they give way to this plea
in all its extent, their moderate possessions would be exposed to the burden of
unequal taxes; for the rich, when possessed of the whole authority of the
state, would be sure to take the first care of themselves, if they should not
be tempted to secure an exoneration of all burdens, by dividing the spoils of
the public; and that the abuse of such high trusts must necessarily arise,
because to act by selfish considerations, is in the very constitution of our
nature.

To such pleas, so plausibly urged on all sides, I know of no rational
objection; nor can I think of any expedient to remove the well grounded
apprehensions of the different interests which compose a commonwealth, than a
fair and equal representation of the whole people; -- a circumstance which
appears very peculiarly necessary in a mixed form of government, where the
democratic part of the constitution will ever be in danger of being overborne
by the energy attending on its higher constituent parts.

On such grounds of reasoning, there will be found no insuperable objections to
those propositions of Dr. Price, which are so highly censured by Mr. Burke, as
containing principles of the most seditious and dangerous nature; even though
we should allow that every government which accords with the opinions and the
inclinations of the large majority of the people, is, in an high sense of the
term, a legitimate government.

We shall now proceed with that course of the argument in which Mr. Burke
endeavors to show, that the unequal representation which he allows to have
taken place in our government, is a perfection rather than a (...) "With us,
when we elect popular representatives, (says Mr. Burke, still addressing his
French correspondent,) we send them to a council in which each man individually
is a subject, and submitted to a government complete in all its ordinary
functions. With you the elective assembly is the sovereign, and the sole
sovereign; all the members therefore are integral parts of the sole
sovereignty. But with us, it is totally different. With us, the representatives
separated from the other parts, can have no action, and no existence. The
government is the point of reference of the several members and districts of
our representation. This is the center of our unity. This government of
reference is a trustee for the whole, and not for the parts. So is the other
branch of our public council; I mean the House of Lords. With us, the King and
the Lords are several and joint securities for the equality of each district,
each province, each city. When did you hear in Great Britain of any province
suffering from the inequality of representation? what district from having no
representation at all? Not only our monarchy and our peerage secure the
equality on which our unity depends, but it is the spirit of the House of
Commons itself. The very inequality of representation, which is so foolishly
complained of, is perhaps the very thing which prevents us from thinking or
acting as members for districts. Cornwall elects as many members as all
Scotland; but is Cornwall better taken care of than Scotland?"

If your Lordship sees the result of this argument in the same light as I do,
you will consider it as equally recommendatory to an election of the Lower
House in the King and the Lords, as of an inadequate representation made by the
election of the Commons. For if the King and the Lords are several and joint
securities for the equality of each district, each province, and each city; why
should we throw the country into a state of riot and confusion every seven
years? Why should we put ourselves to electioneering expenses? Would it not be
a more convenient method to suffer the King and the House of Lords to choose our
representatives?

But this is not the point of view in which the friends of equal representation
see the necessity of a reform: They do not allege that Cornwall is better
taken care of than any other district in Great Britain. The subject of their
complaint is, that the important interests of the great body of the Commons is,
by our present inadequate state of representation, sacrificed to the ambition
of private individuals, who by their command over boroughs, may make their
market with government at the expense of the public* The strong and firm
opposition which the ruling powers have given to every step toward this
reasonable reformation, is not one o^ (...) happiest effects which arise from
that continual war of interests (...) much admired by Mr. Burke and others. The
jealousy it man ifests of the people, is without all bounds of moderation; for
the organ by which the democratic influence is exerted, has no very formidable
energy. Its power is circumscribed and shut in by the immovable barrier of
laws, usages, positive rules of doctrine and practice, counterpoised by the
House of Lords, and in a manner subjected to the Crown by the prerogative of
calling and dissolving parliaments.

To proceed with the observations of my author -- After a torrent of the most
pointed invectiv^, Mr. Burke takes upon him to censure every part of the
conduct of the French Revolutionists; and among other acts one which I have
always considered as founded in truth, religion, and the purest morality; it is
that of annihilating by the force of a bright example, those notions founded on
false principles of honor, which fell so severely and so cruelly on every
family who had the misfortune to have produced one real or pretended culprit.
The infamy which families sustained for the misconduct of any of its individual
members, was one of the strongest reasons which have been urged for personal
imprisonment at pleasure; and when this dreadful engine of despotism was
removed, it surely became expedient to emancipate the people from the terror of
this impending evil. But when the most laudable transactions of men are
represented as crimes, we ought to be cautious how we give ear to the
suggestions of their accuser.

In the personal mortifications of the Queen of France, Mr. Burke finds great
reason to lament that the age of chivalry is no more; for had the same spirit
existed in this, that existed in past ages, "ten thousand swords might have
leaped from their scabbards, to avenge even alook that threatened her with
insult." The high coloring given by Mr. Burke to those scenes of regal
distress, will, I doubt not, captivate the imagination of the greater number of
his readers, in a degree equal to the effects produced on the author by the
charms of the Queen of France. But the delusions of fancy are apt to subside in
men of cool minds, when any great object of public concern is held up to their
view, to the prejudice even of beauty and dignity, and all those external
objects, adapted rather to enslave our affections, than to lead our judgment.

The bringing the king and queen to Paris, and thus, by preventing their
escape, to disable them from forming new troubles in the kingdom, was certainly
regarded as a measure of the highest necessity; and in this view, must have
been approved by the true friends of the revolution, although it was attended
with tumult and disorder.

The age in which the spirit of chivalry was triumphantly prevalent, would
indeed have been a very improper time to have attempted a regeneration of
constitutions on a popular principle; but I have always regarded the necessity
which gave birth to the orders of chivalry, as a mark of disgrace to the times
in which they were formed. They were indeed a proper remedy to the evils
arising from ferocity, slavery, barbarism, and ignorance; but now, when the
causes no longer exist which rendered them useful, we should rather think of
freeing society of all the evils inherent in those false notions of honor
which they have given rise to, than endeavor to call back their spirit in its
full force. That enthusiastic military fire, that methodized sentimental
barbarism, which instigates men to deprive their fellow citizens of life for
supposed personal affronts, in defiance of the laws of religion and society,
are the offsprings of chivalry, and unknown to all the nations of the ancient
civilized world. But it is the simplicity of all abstract principles against
which Mr. Burke makes an eternal war; all the devices of pride, all the fond
conceits of vanity, all the train of pompous ostentation, by which naked virtue
is put out of her rank, to give way to the more imposing glare of external
magnificence, are represented as useful ideas, "furnished from the wardrobe of
a moral imagination, which the heart owns, and the understanding ratifies, as
necessary to cover the defects of our naked shivering nature, and to raise it
to dignity in our own estimation."

It is not, according to these ideas, recommended by Mr. Burke, that the
Scripture teaches us to respect ourselves; and although the maxims of the
sacred writings are exploded by all politicians as incompatible with their
views, yet certainly the excellency of their precepts consists in their being
exactly fitted to a temporal as well as to a spiritual happiness. Neither in a
moral view of things, can I perceive how the ornaments of artificial greatness,
which are found to answer all the purposes of human pride, should assist us in
acquiring that true dignity of character which alone ought to constitute
distinction; nor how we can truly respect ourselves, by idolizing the mere
phantom of greatness, whether it be attached to our own persons, or the persons
of others.

As every act of the French National Assembly is to be condemned, not only in
the gross, but in the detail, the address of congratulation to the king on the
commencement of the present year, comes, among others, under Mr. Burke's severe
animadversion.

I have not indeed got this address by me; but if my memory does not deceive
me, it contained a language the best adapted to sooth the personal afflictions
of the king. Not the smallest hint was given, than any ill conduct in his
Majesty had provoked t^^ people to emancipate themselves from his power; it
thanke^ him for his concurrence with their wishes; it represented their liberty
as the necessary consequence of their enlightened spirit, not of their
sufferings under his administration; and it promised as loyal an attachment to
his person, and to the distinction he held as the first magistrate of the
commonwealth, as could have been exacted by the authority of which he was
dispossessed.

Whatever might have been held out as the ostensible object of the people in
their demand for the meeting of their representatives, it certainly was
intended by them to use their power, when thus vested with a legitimate form,
and endued with a capability of legislation, not only to the reformation of
abuses, but to the regeneration of their constitution; and thus the National
Assembly became vested with the trust of legislation, in the highest sense of
the word: Nor could this trust be limited or governed by any of those rules and
practices, which, for reasons drawn from experience, the people condemned, and
were determined to abolish.

Thus the preserving the state from the ruin of an impending bankruptcy,
brought on by the prodigality of courts, and the regeneration of the
constitution, were the important services which the National Assembly were
expected to perform for their constituents. And when we consider that these
important and difficult services were to be performed without that ready and
effectual instrument of power, a standing army, (in whom implicit obedience is
the only rule of action), we shall be obliged to confess, either that the men
who undertook this great work were infected with a daring insanity, or that
they were seconded by an unanimity in the sentiments of the people, which is
unparalleled in the history of large empires, and which evidently destroys the
force of every accusation which can be brought against them, as having rendered
themselves the instrument of a faction, rather than the faithful deputies of
the people.

A total reformation in the ecclesiastical system, and the new modelling the
system of jurisprudence, were the two leading points in which every member of
the empire agreed, excepting those individuals whose interests were personally
affected by a change. It was a point of union in which both the nobility and
the people met; and several of those persons who have been the loudest in their
exclamations against the conduct of the National Assembly, for having
disappointed their body of the largest share of the spoils of the crown, and
who have since united themselves to the mal contents among the lawyers and the
clergy, were the most active in the first movements of these grand points of
reformation.

To begin with the reformation of the ecclesiastical system -- It was thought
by the French nation, that one hundred, and four score millions of property,
principally confined to the use of the higher orders of the clergy, and thus
prevented from entering into the common circulation of other parts of property,
was a nuisance in a treble sense. It was a nuisance, in the first instance, as
a monopoly; in the second, it was a nuisance, as giving a dangerous power to
those who possessed that monopoly, and in the third instance, as it tended, by
the natural course of moral causes in this its excess, to corrupt rather than
to increase and invigorate those qualities of the mind, and those spiritual
endowments, which are to be desired in the teachers of religion. What real
grounds there were for this opinion, so generally conceived by the French
nation in the conduct of the clergy, I know not; neither shall I enquire, for I
am as little inclined as Mr. Burke can be to insult the unfortunate: I shall
only say, that as their temptations were great, and that their nature was not
superior to human infirmity, it was probable they produced their due effects.
But there is one sentiment in which I in some measure accord with Mr. Burke. I
do most sincerely lament that the exigencies of the times would not suffer the
National Assembly to indulge their clergy in a life-enjoyment of their
possessions. But this sentiment of mine is not of so forcible a kind as to
destroy all other sympathies. It would not lead me, even if I possessed a
similar portion of abilities with Mr. Burke, like him, to endeavor, by the
animating power of declamation, so to condole with the sufferers as to combine
all the energies of the worst passions of men in favor of my opinion. I should
not attempt to rouse and inflame the resentment of the French clergy to a
repetition of acts which have renewed scenes of violence, and by which, after
the manner of old times, they have set up the standard of Christ crucified, to
arm bigotry in favor of their pretensions. Neither should I, among the more
peaceable members of that body, by representations the most touchingly
affecting, open afresh those wounds on which it is to be hoped religion has
poured her healing balm.

In the attempt to make the French National Assembly singularly odious, for the
confiscations they have made of the church lands, Mr. Burke asserts, that in
many instances they have more violently outraged the principle, as well as the
forms of public justice, than has been done by any other preceding power. The
examples he brings in proof, are the confiscations made by the fury of
triumphant factions in the Roman commonwealth; and an example more in point in
the person of Henry the Eighth, for Mr. Burke does not choose to extend his
observations to the conduct of Denmark, Sweden, and other states, on their
profession of the reformed religion. Mr. Burke considers the violences of
Marius and Sylla to be much graced in the formalities of false accusations of
treason against the most virtuous persons in the commonwealth; and that the
tyrant Henry the Eighth, who seized the property of the clergy for his own
private use, and the emoluments of his favorites, dignified these acts of
violence, by assuming the character of the judge, and condemning the victims on
false pretenses. Surely the French clergy would not have thought themselves
better used, if the National Assembly had set on foot a commission to examine
into the crimes and abuses which prevailed among them, and then to have
governed their proceedings by reported truths, mixed with exaggeration and
falsehood; surely this mockery of justice, so much used in old times, and this
covering to the deeds of power, by spoils torn from the only consolatory
remains of the sufferer, his good fame, will not be thought an example proper
to have been followed, rather than the plain dealing of the French legislature.

But Mr. Burke has as great a dislike to the reform of the church police, as to
the confiscations of the property of the more dignified part of the order. He
is quite in a rage, that the poor curates should be taken out of the hopeless
poverty into which they were plunged; and he cannot endure those regulations
which took place in the best times of Christian societies. That bishops should
be confined to their dioceses, and the care of their spiritual administration,
instead of attending courts, and lavishing their incomes in the pleasures of
the capital; and that the people should assume their rights of election; "are
solecisms in policy, which none but barbarous, ignorant, atheistical minds
could dictate, and which no man of enlarged capacity and generous passions can
obey."

On that article of the French ecclesiastical policy which confines bishops to
their episcopal administration, it may not be improper to observe, that Bishop
Leighton, the most eminent of the Scotch prelates for his piety and his zeal
for that order, ardently wished that such a regulation should take place on
their re-establishment in Scotland under Charles the Second. I am far from
saying that such a regulation is compatible with the state of things among us;
and I think so well of the moderation of the clergy, and their regard to the
constitution of the country, that I wish they were as independent a body as Mr.
Burke represents them to be. But surely if gratitude for past favors, the
hopes held out to ambition for the acquiring further preferments, and a very
considerable number of church livings in the disposal of the crown, can in any
respect influence the minds of the clergy, they cannot be said to be totally
independent.

I shall now take into consideration the second grand point of reformation, in
which the nobles and people appear at first to have been in union, viz. the new
modelling the system of jurisprudence; but that a system of jurisprudence,
formed by ignorant barbarians, from codes of law adapted to support the
despotic tyranny of the Roman Emperors, could not be in unison with the
sentiments of an enlightened people, or capable of supporting the principles of
a free government, was apparent to all parties: But personal interest, for
reasons as apparent, at length produced an union between the lawyers and
nobles. The National Assembly justly thought, that laws dictated by the humane
spirit of an enlightened age, would be but ill administered by a tribunal
formed under the influence of the rankest prejudices; and they conceived it as
a solecism in polities, that Parliaments, who had been especially appointed to
see that the laws and regulations framed by the Assemblies of the States
General, should receive no injury from the edicts of the monarch, should be
kept as a control over the standing authority of the nation. It was on this
reason that the old independent Parliaments with all their merits, and all
their faults, were abolished. Nor is it a wonder that in the change of the
prospect, a change in the sentiments of the nobles should have taken place: For
when they perceived that the system of the ancient tyranny was better adapted
to their personal greatness than the new order of things, they with Mr. Burke,
looked on the Parliaments as a convenient power, under which they might rally.
What a ready convenience for the play of a delusive policy would it have
afforded, if the Parliaments, exerting their old authority under the crown, had
pertinaciously refused to register the edicts of the Assembly! What a display
of eloquence in favor of the privileges of the nobles and the clergy, might
have been seen in their remonstrances to the Assembly! and what useful delays
would it have afforded for the president of the National Assembly, in the name
of the Majesty of the people, to have been obliged to mount the Bed of Justice,
after the example of the late monarchs of the realm; and in case of an
incurable obstinacy, for the Assembly, through the means of the executive
power, to have recourse to the tedious remedy of an imprisonment. With such
advantages on their side, the faction in opposition would have had reasonable
grounds of hope, that centuries might have elapsed before the constitution
could have been in any sense of the word regenerated.

Before I leave this subject, it will be necessary to notice, that Mr. Burke
condemns the conduct of the National Assembly for the distinction they have
made in their treatment of the lawyers and their clergy, a distinction which I
think every unprejudiced person will agree to be founded in justice, viz. the
preference afforded the former by making them a suitable provision during life,
in consideration that the civil offices, of which they were deprived, had been
purchased with private property (as Mr. Burke observes) "at an high rate."

The prevention of a national bankruptcy was thought an object of the most
momentous concern to the whole French nation. It was in order to avert this
impending evil, that the States General were permitted to assemble; and it was
an object principally recommended to the deputies of the people, by their
united voice. In this state of public opinion, the arguments so plausibly, and
indeed so forcibly urged by Mr. Burke against the right of the monarch to
mortgage the public revenue, will not render the Assembly culpable for
endeavoring to keep faith with the creditors of the crown. For though I never
could perceive why on any good grounds of reason, the people should quarrel
with their new constitution, because the prodigality of the old government had
involved them in distresses which were in their nature irremoveable, which did
not proceed from any fraud or corruption in their new servants, and which could
not be mended by subjecting themselves to the old domination; yet certain it
is, that the enemies of the new constitution have beheld the arrival of a
moment big with that temporary distress and confusion which must ever attend a
national bankruptry, with the utmost impatience, as of bringing with it a sure
prospect of victory. What an opportunity indeed, would it present, of setting
forth exaggerated descriptions of public distresses, and of arraigning the
members of the National Assembly as the sole authors of the nation's wrongs!
The anxious and provident care which this Assembly has taken to ward off this
disaster, and also to avoid, in the present irritable state of the public
feelings, the imposing very heavy burdens on the people, is certainly a mark
of political sagacity, and, being such, is treated with the utmost bitterness
of disappointed rage by their opponents.

On the subject of the difficulties which the French Legislature have
encountered in the task of regenerating the constitution, it is natural to turn
our minds on the paper-currency they have established, and especially as it is
a subject on which Mr. Burke has displayed the whole force of his ingenuity, to
alarm the fears of the French nation, and to depreciate, and to render odious
in their eyes, the conduct of their representatives.

On this subject I do profess a total ignorance: I have no financiering
abilities; and I wish with all my heart, that this art which Mr. Burke
represents as a talent the most highly necessary in those who conduct the
affairs of state, and which I consider as deriving its practical use from its
deceptious address in picking the pockets of the people, was not so necessary
an engine in the present modes of administration. A few observations however,
which must occur to every thinking mind, I shall venture to make. They are as
follows: That the difference which Mr. Burke makes between the paper currency
of this country, and that which now subsists in France, is not so much in
favor of England as Mr. Burke represents; for, as the French legislature have
not issued more paper than they appear to have a solid fund to support, and a
fund that is obvious to every man's eyes and understanding, its credit ought
not in reason to have less stability than a paper currency founded on
confidence. For, though every man believes, and on good grounds believes, that
the bank of England has a sufficient property to answer for the payment of its
notes; yet still although this belief should arise to a moral certainty, it
cannot be superior to a credit founded on an obvious fact. And should the
French legislature continue this wise caution, of not issuing more paper than
the state revenue can obviously support, whilst the revolution stands on its
present bottom, this paper, whatever may be the exigencies of the times, must
always be of some value; whereas a failure of our national credit would, it is
generally thought, render the paper money of this country of no more worth than
the intrinsic value of the paper.

The diffusion of a general spirit of gaming, and the destructive practice of
stock jobbing, are evils which I am a fraid in a more or less degree must ever
exist with national debts; and the larger the debt, the greater will be the
degree of evil. That this spirit prevails in our capital to a very alarming
height, the history of the Bulls and Bears in the alley will abundantly
testify: That it has been the ruin of many a fair fortune, thousands of
sufferers can also testify: That it has enabled and tempted several of those
who are in the secret of affairs, to pillage the public unmercifully, same
represents; and that the stocks have a great influence over the landed property
of this country, which rises or falls according to their various fluctuations,
the experience of the last American war evinces beyond a doubt.

All these evils, if evils they are, were prognosticated by those who styled
themselves the patriots of their country, from the first establishment of a
funded debt, to almost the present period of time; and the reasons they urged
to enforce the arguments they used against the measure, appear to me
sufficiently convincing to have induced a cautious moderation in our councils.
But they were not attended to; they were represented as the chimeras of
discontented speculative men; the increase of the national debt was set forth
as both the cause and the effects of public prosperity; it was described as the
enlivening principle of commerce, the grand pan^^ea that was to keep us in an
eternal vigor, the steady hold by which all the members of the community were
to be bound in the bands of loyalty; and that there was no excess in the amount
of the debt, that could be attended with any ruinous consequences.

If such representations, so repeatedly made by a large party in the kingdom,
and at present so generally adopted, are founded in truth, I cannot see how
causes which have a salutary effect among us, should operate as poison to our
neighbors; and I have a better opinion of the policy of the National Assembly
in issuing their assignats, from the strong and violent opposition which was
made to the measure by their enemies.

It must not be forgot, that among the other economical regulations of the
National Assembly, that which has taken place in their list of pensioners,
falls equally with other of their acts, under the severity of Mr. Burke's pen.
The amount of the public money given to this description of people by the
court, was indeed enormous; and if we may give credit to the Red Book,
published by authority, there was little of the principles of reason or justice
in the admeasurement of rewards to individuals, unless the state and the
country are considered as separate interests in the account; and that the
pleasing or gratifying the prince and his favorites should be reckoned in the
value of an hundred pounds to a penny, when set in the balance of blood shed in
defense of the nation.

What indeed can escape Mr. Burke's censure, or what act of the French
legislature can please him, (but the dissolving themselves, and leaving the
king and the nobles to form their own rules of power), when he finds subject
for reproach even in their acts of sympathy to the indigent part of the
citizens? That Paris was always crowded with a numerous herd of mendicants,
even more numerous, if possible, than those who infest and disgrace our
capital, is certain; and should their numbers have increased by the desertion
of those opulent citizens who are out of temper with the government, it would
neither be a surprising nor an alarming circumstance: But it is an evil that
time alone can cure, when the shock of so important a revolution has spent its
force, and when the ill humor which at present rages in the breasts of the
discontented shall subside, and lead them to return into the bosom of their
country, and under the protecting laws of a regular government.

In a very elaborate defense of all the artificial modes of greatness which
have taken place in society, Mr. Burke has used all the powers of eloquence and
subtlety to prove, that the crimes which have been committed by our species,
have not arisen from the imperfections of institutions, but from the vices of
individuals. In one sense, his argument will be found to be just, in another,
nugatory: For though it must be acknowledged, that the crimes committed by Nero
proceeded from the depravity of his character, yet the opportunity of
committing those crimes, and perhaps that very depravity of sentiment from
whence they proceeded, lay in the vice of the imperial institution.

With the same flow of eloquence, and the same subtlety, Mr. Burke recommends
in all legislators, that tardy caution which suffers the spirit of reform to
evaporate before their work is half finished; "for the evils latent in the most
promising contrivances," says Mr. Burke, "should be provided for as they arise;
one advantage is as little as possible to be sacrificed to another; for thus we
compensate, we reconcile, we balance, we are enabled to unite in a consistant
whole, the various anomalies and contending principles that are found in the
minds and affairs of men."

This finely imagined theory would undoubtedly be adopted by all wise and good
legislators, did it in any manner suit with the nature of mankind, and that
leaven of selfishness which taints every principle of human conduct. That
perfect knowledge of human affairs, which Mr. Burke conceives, and justly
conceives, ought to be inseparable from the office of legislation, will
convince men, that when new constitutions are to be formed, it is necessary
they should, in their formation, be regulated in all their circumstances by
those principles which the legislators conceive to be the best; for if any
thing which may be thought defective is left for the wisdom of future
legislators to correct, the constitution must remain defective, as ^uture
reformers will find their difficulties increase, instead of being diminished,
by time. The reason is plain; for that which constitutes the defects in all
governments, are those principles in them which support a partial interest, to
the injury of a public one; and the prescription of time with the politic use
of power, has been found an irresistible barrier to every important part of
reformation in the ordinary course of things.

The French legislature, in order to extinguish those local prejudices and
provincial jealousies which formerly existed in the kingdom of France, arising
from the different laws and customs which took place when the independent
principalities were annexed to the crown; and also to regulate the rights of
election in such a manner, as whilst it secured to the citizens at large this
invaluable blessing, it should provide for the public tranquillity; conceived
and executed a plan of dividing the kingdom into eighty one departments. Each
of these departments are divided into smaller districts, called Communes; and
these again into smaller districts, called Cantons. The primary assemblies of
the cantons elect deputies to the communes, one for every two hundred qualified
inhabitants. The communes chosen by the cantons choose to the departments, and
the deputies of the departments choose the deputies to the National Assembly. A
qualification to the right of election in the first instance, is placed at the
low rate of the price of three days labor; the qualification of being elected
into the Commune, is the amount of ten days labor; and that of being elected a
deputy to the National Assembly, is only one mark of silver.

This plan, in theory at least, promises to unite the highest degree of freedom
with the highest degree of order: it extends the right of election to every man
who is not a pauper, and as such by living on the alms of society, cannot
reasonably have a right to enjoy its political privileges; and whilst it thus
encourages industry, by rendering it a necessary quality to enjoy these
privileges, it opens the door to every man of ability to obtain the highest
honors of his country. But this plan, so plausible at least in its appearance,
and so exactly agreeing with the rights of the citizens in the strictest sense
of the word, is criticized by Mr. Burke in a manner highly unworthy of his
great abilities, because he descends to the arts of a quibbling sophistry. He
accuses the legislature of not attending to their avowed principles of the
equal rights of men, in refusing their paupers a vote. He asserts that the
right of election granted in the first instance, is no previlege at all; and he
foresees, that the most fatal dissensions will arise from regulations which
seemingly tend to (...) every jarring principle in the state, to subdue every
prejudice of the mind hostile to the public welfare, and to combine all its
affections in the character of a loyal citizen.

In opposition to Mr. Burke's accusation, that the legislature, in the
qualifications they have annexed to the rights of election, have acted in
contradiction to their avowed principles of the equal rights of men, I shall,
without sheltering myself under the cover of a practical use, (which may be
used to justify every mode of tyranny,) assert, that the French legislature
have in those qualifications adhered to the rights of men in the strictest
sense, even as they exist in their abstract perfection in a state of nature:
For, who ever conceived, that, in a state of nature, a man who was either not
inclined, or by bodily infirmity not able, to till the ground, had a right to
the fruits produced by the labor of others? In this case, either in a state of
nature, or in a state of society, the right of maintenance depends alone on the
laws of humanity, proceeding from that sympathy which the benevolent Author of
our being has for the best purposes woven into the mental constitution of all
his moral creatures. But these laws of humanity do not oblige men to yield
rights with the donation of alms, and to put those whom their charity has
relieved, into a situation of forcing from them the fruits of their industry.
It is on the basis of industry alone, the only principle which exactly squares
with a native right, and not on rent-rolls, that the legislature has formed the
rights of representation; and this on such liberal principles, that every man
who has activity and industry, may qualify himself as to the matter of
property, for a seat in the legislative assembly. As to the nature and
operation of the privileges annexed to the first and second steps in the
gradation, I conceive that the regular degrees, which directly point to the
grand privilege of choosing the representatives, whilst they totally prevent
confusion and the errors of a blind choice, do not, in any respect, render
nugatory the ^ight of its more abstract principle. For every man in the Canton
makes his choice of a deputy whom he thinks qualified by merit to represent him
in the Commune, and every voter in the Commune has also his choice of a deputy
to present him in the department, who have a right to the choice of
representatives.

As Mr. Burke has made it a point to object to every part of the French
constitution as it now stands, and to every act of the legislature which
respects this constitution, I must follow him through all his objections, and
state those reasons which appear to me to have regulated their conduct. It is
true that a senate, or an assembly of men who have had some control over the
voice of the people, some power of mitigating, regulating, or carrying into
execution their laws, has always had a place in the ancient republics: But Mr.
Burke himself seems to allow, that they are not absolutely necessary in
monarchies, or rather in any government which admits of a standing permanent
executive power. It is true they appear to have been a necessary institution in
the ancient republics; yet history will show us, that their tendency has ever
been hostile to the principles of democracy, and often ended in the ruin of
freedom. To the pride, the avarice, and corruption of the Roman Senate, was
undoubtedly owing the subversion of the republic. It is, I think, very little
to the purpose of enlightening men's minds on the subject of modern government,
to quote the reflections of ancient authors, or draw comparisons from ancient
times, which were totally unacquainted with that excellent policy, by which the
people's power is represented, and brought into regular action through the
means of deputation. An Assembly of men thus appointed, seems to unite in it
all the energy and fitness to the affairs of government of the Roman Senate, in
its most brilliant and perfect state, without the latent principles of
corruption and destruction which lurked in this institution.

What Lord Bolingbroke could mean I know not, when he says, that he prefers a
monarchy to other governments; because every description of a republic can be
better engrafted on it, than any thing of a monarchy upon the republican forms;
unless he refers to such a qualified monarchy as is confined to the mere office
of an executive governor, with the stability that is annexed to hereditary
descent; for sure it is impossible to engraft a democracy on any other
description of monarchy. If this is his Lordship's meaning, the French
monarchy, as it now stands, will be found to agree perfectly with it; and
should experience prove it to be defective for the want of such a member as a
senate, the defect must be supplied with all those cautious preventatives which
experience can alone afford.

The limitations of power, in which the executive magistrate is confined,
affords Mr. Burke a subject for the exertion of all the powers of his oratory.
He deplores the mortified state of the fallen monarch; he sees nothing but
weakness in the government, and confusion in the affairs of the empire; from
the want of a proper influencing power in the executive, and that cordiality
which ought to subsist between it and the legislative. He conceives, that
without such a controling influence, the executive office is a state of
degradation, to which no man of spirit would submit. And if the present King
and his successors respect their true glory, they will take every opportunity
which time may present, of shaking off the yoke of their imperious masters, and
resuming their former independence.

To these animadversions of Mr. Burke, it may be observed, that most of the
limitations of which he complains, are either inseparable to the security of
the democracy, or they have their grounds in a just policy, suiting itself to
the present state of things. It is necessary that a popular legislature should
be informed through other channels than the executive power, of such matters as
may import that body to know: It is necessary that all the means by which a
personal influence may be established by the grant of lands and large pensions,
should be taken away; and for the same reasons of policy, it is necessary that
the executive power should not be capable of deluding the imaginations of men,
by creating artificial distinctions among them.

According to Mr. Burke's political creed, Kings are only to respect those who
serve their personal greatness; and it is his opinion, that the successors to
the throne of France in the Bourbon line, must, unless they are illiterate men,
act on a principle hostile to the constitution which they are sworn to
preserve. It is true, as Mr. Burke observes, this is nature; but are not those
very inclinations, so inherent in man, the grounds for that jealousy which
reflecting patriots entertain of all persons vested with the dangerous gift of
permanent authority? And unless the present monarch of France, and his
successors, shall conceive very different ideas of glory than they will learn
from Mr. Burke; unless they shall conceive that the executing an office
faithfully, reflects more honor upon them than any increase of personal
greatness they can gain by treachery; there is very little probability that
they will obtain from a popular legislature, that enlargement of power The
exercise of the suspensive Veto.
which may reasonably be given, when circumstances shall convince the public
mind that there are no grounds for jealousy.

Mr. Burke extends his commiseration not only to the person of the King and his
royal issue, but even to the ministers of the crown in their civil capacity. In
this commiseration, he reprobates a principle which is held out to the people
of Great Britain as the grand palladium of their liberties, I mean the
principle of responsibility; though the reprobation is indeed qualified by a
distinction of active and zealous service, and the restraint of crimes. But it
is a distinction which I cannot well understand; for if responsibility does not
go to every part of a minister's conduct, in which he acts without due
authority, it is indeed a very slight constitutional barrier against the vices
of administration, especially when it is allowed among the prerogatives of our
Kings, that they may choose their own servants, and retain them in their office
at pleasure: but will any minister who serves such a King (says Mr. Burke, when
speaking of the present King of France) with but a decent appearance of
respect, cordially obey the orders of those whom but the other day in his name
they had committed to the Bastile? Will they obey the orders of those whom,
whilst they were exercising despotick justice upon them, they conceived they
were treating with lenity, and for whom, in a prison, they thought they had
provided an asylum.

This is saying very little, either for the disposition of the ministers, or
for the spirit and principles of the ancient government. Nor can I see that
these gentlemen have any reasonable complaints to make against the conduct of
the French legislature. It is true they are denied a seat amongst them; but
this exception is not made on any personal ground: They do not except against
the abilities of these gentlemen, or their honesty as individuals; but they
will not permit, either a real, or a supposed influence, to control their own
actions. They will not permit that the sanctuary, in which the Majesty of the
people of France resides, should be polluted or impeached by any suspicion of
corruption; and they will not endanger the liberties of their country, by
giving absolute power any motive, which, in the event of things, may possibly
tend to an abuse of trust.

The opinion which Mr. Burke endeavors to establish in his elaborate
Reflections on the French Revolution, is the incompatibility of a truly popular
government with the human constitution: And the subject which affords him the
most ample scope for the display of his argumentative powers, is found in the
investment of that military force which is necessary to the support of all
governments; for if that force is trusted to the people at large, they may be
tempted to act in their natural capacity, and, by destroying or weakening the
energy of those organs by which regular councils are held and enforced, induce
a state of anarchy. And if the support of the government is made to subsist in
a regular standing disciplined body, under the control of an individual, that
individual will become the master of the people, and violate the government he
was appointed to defend.

Either the establishment or the overthrow of an opinion so fatal to the proud
hopes of man, must be left to time and experience; for I am sorry to say, that
we have no notices on which we can attempt the construction of an opposite
argument. We cannot venture to establish an opinion on the state of a country
not yet recovered from the convulsive struggles which every important
revolution must occasion. We can gain no light from history; for history
furnishes no example of any government in a large empire, which, in the
strictest sense of the word, has secured to the citizen the full enjoyment of
his rights. Some attempts indeed have been made of this kind; but they have
hitherto failed, through the treachery of leaders, or by the rash folly of the
multitude. But though these circumstances will prevent cautious persons from
giving a decided opinion on what may be the event of things, yet they do not so
benight the understanding as to deprive the mind of hope. They do not prevent
it from seeing that the present complexion of things in France has something of
a different aspect from what history, or the state of other countries, presents
to our view. Instead of that barbarous ignorance, or that depravity of
principle, which are to be seen in other European States, and which might
reasonably prevent the patriot from bestowing (if it were in his power) the
full boon of liberty, we see a people firm and united in their efforts to
support their rights, yet obedient Mr. Burke acknowledges this obedience, and
calls it fanaticism.
to the dictates of that government which they have appointed to defend them.

From what can this difference which subsists between the French nation and
other societies arise, but in a more general diffusion of knowledge, and in a
principle of action which consults the public good, as well as the
gratifications of self? It is the business of knowledge to teach men their real
interests; and it is to be hoped it will so far prevail over that mist which
inordinate affections cast over the mind, as to enable the French
municipalities to see, that if they so far abuse the power with which they have
been invested for the defense of their rights, as to gratify a private passion
at the expense of the public peace, they will induce a necessity which will
lead to their utter destruction. It is to be hoped also, that a true sense of
interest will enable the army to perceive, that the moment they fling off the
character of the citizen, and assume a controling power over their country,
from that moment they become individually slaves; for the very circumstance in
their condition by which this power must subsist, is a discipline inseparable
to the strictest subordination, and which in all respects must militate against
their civil rights. When the Roman army was in the very height of their power;
when it was enabled to depose and murder emperors, and raise private men to the
imperial throne; when they were enabled to ravage the empire at their pleasure,
and exact largesses from its spoils; they were, in an individual capacity, the
greatest of slaves.

The patriot Frenchman has a prospect of hope which never yet offered itself to
the view of society, and that is in the disinterestedness of those councils to
which he has confided his right. The republican parliament of England, by their
inordinate thirst after public offices, and by using their power to their own
emolument, gave too much room for the suspicions of a divided people to act in
their disfavour; and it must be acknowledged, that the interests of self have
been observed to act as much in popular councils as in courts. But the French
legislature have set, in this point, an example unparellelled in the history of
man. To a bold and enterprising spirit, they have united a disinterestedness of
principle which has deprived their enemies of every means of opposition, but
vain declamation, groundless accusation, and impotent hope. Long may they
continue the admiration of the world in these important particulars! Long may
they thus continue to aggrandize the character of man! And long may they
continue to deserve a monument of esteem on the minds of their species, which
neither time, nor accident, nor adverse fortune, shall be able to efface!

It cannot be denied that Mr. Burke has made a display of very uncommon
abilities in his attack on the French Revolution; but why has he deigned to
make use of the mean arts of abuse as an auxiliary in the contest? Why has he,
by the most invidious comparisons, and groundless accusations, endeavored, to
rouse all nations and all descriptions of men against them, and thus to crush
in their ruin all the rights of man? Is the tendency of his publication a
recommendation to the British government, to dragoon their neighbors into an
adoption of their own system of policy? Would he recommend to the potentates of
Europe, a renewal of that wicked conspiracy against the rights of men, which
was planned by Henry the fourth and his minister Sully, and which was only
prevented from taking place by the timely death of that monarch? -- a plan, by
which, through the combination of power, modes of government were to be
arbitrarily imposed and supported, and the rights of conscience abolished. If
such violent councils were indeed to take place of that moderation and equity
which has hitherto been shown, it would prove that the forming treaties and
directing the force of nations were but ill trusted to the secrecy of cabinets.
When we reflect that such dreadful purposes can never be effected without the
effusion of oceans of blood, of such an invidious intention we must certainly
exculpate Mr. Burke; unless, by a strange modification of sympathy, the lives
of plebeians, and those vulgar characters which compose the "swinish
multitude," is held at no value in his account. Some of Mr. Burke's
expressions, indeed, seem to warrant us in making such a supposition, though we
must acknowledge, that, in others, he appears to have a concern for the
spiritual, if not for the temporal happiness of those he despises: "Whilst,
says he, the wealth and pride of individuals at every moment makes the man of
humble rank and fortune sensible of his inferiority, and degrades and vilifies
his condition This is a sad condition, indeed, for "naked shivering nature:"
But what is the remedy? why, let them respect property, and seek "their
consolation in the final proportions of eternal justice." Vide Reflections,
pages 147 and 351.
; it is for the man in humble life, and to raise his nature, and to put him in
mind of a state in which the privileges of opulence will cease, when he will be
equal by nature, and may be more than equal by virtue, that this portion of the
general wealth of his country is employed, and sanctified."

If Mr. Burke, in the management of his argument, could have descended from the
lofty strain of a poetic imagination, to the drudgery of close reasoning, he
would have perceived the error of deviating from the line of expediency into
the question of right; for when we once give up the point, that there is an
inherent right attached to privileged persons to make laws for the community,
we cannot fix on any other principle that will stand the test of argument, but
the native and unalienable rights of man. For if we say that lawful governments
are formed on the authority of conventions, it will be asked, who gave these
conventions their authority? If we grant that they derived their authority from
the assent of the people, how came the people, it will be said, to exert such
an authority at one period of society, and not at another? If we say it was
necessity that recovered to the social man the full rights of his nature, it
will be asked, who is to be the judge of this necessity? why certainly the
people.

Thus, in every light in which we can place the argument, in every possible
mode of reasoning, we shall be driven back to elect either the first or the
second of these propositions; either that an individual, or some privileged
persons, have an inherent and indefeasible right to make laws for the
community, or that this authority rests in the unalienable and indefeasible
rights of man.

That the people have often abused their power, it must be granted; for they
have often sacrificed themselves and their posterity to the wanton will of an
individual, and this is the foundation of all the regal tyrannies which have
subsisted in society; but no abuse of their power can take away their right,
because their right exists in the very constitution of things. If the French
people therefore should be so capricious as to fling off their new
constitution, and subject themselves to more unequal forms of government, or
even to tyranny, it will be agreeable to the course of past experience: But
such an exertion of power cannot injure their right; and whatever form or
complexion any future government in France may bear, it can have no legitimate
source, but in the will of the people.

I am, my Lord, With great esteem and respect, Your Lordship's Most obedient
Humble Servant, The AUTHOR.


