A LETTER From Mrs S -- A to Mrs. R --, Who, on her way to BATH, visited Saint
Rozo Villozo! The most celebrated Personage in this part of the country, And
now residing near SHARPSBURG.

VIRGINIA: SHEPHERD'S-TOWN: PRINTED BY N. WILLIS.

A LETTER, etc
BATH, August 19, 1798. DEAR MADAM,
I PROMISED I would write you all the occurrencies in our journey; thus far, I
hope, I have fulfilled it. This morning, as it would be but little out of our
way to BATH, we called to see SAINT ROZO VILLOZO! the most celebrated Personage
in this part of the country. As your life has been distinguished by uniform
attachment to steady principles, adopted from investigation, strengthened by
practice, confirmed and approved by reason and religion; and as I really
believe your judgment will ever prevent you from becoming an enthusiest; so, I
as sincerely believe, your faith will not permit you to be a skeptic -- I shall
relate to you the history of Saint Rozo Villozo, with as much accuracy as may
be in my power.

THIS young girl, of seventeen years of age, of honest and discreet parents,
who live at present, and have done for these many years past, near Sharpsburg,
was some time since alarmed about the salvation of her soul, by the influence
of a sermon she heard from a Methodist Preacher. At this time she was usual
good health. The impressions she received were deep and powerful; her
affections were engaged; her heart was warmed; and her imagination extremely
elevated. Jesus was the theme of her song -- That a Savior, the Son of GOD,
should condescend to come into the world, arrayed with heavenly majesty, and
suffer the death at the cross for man, who had tendered himself unworthy any
favors, was an idea so sublime, it never entered her mind -- but tears flowed
down her cheeks. Her conversation at different times was often interrupted by
an (...) of ^ear^ more powerfully expressive than the description of language.
The impressions on her mind were soon visible in her counten^^^e, by a fixed
and settled melancholy. A dejection of spirits -- loss of appetite -- decline
of health -- strong propensity for retirement -- and, when in company, an
aversion to speech, with that solemn silence which marks grief too deeply fixed
to be removed by utterance; she often found a temporary relief in prayer; in
offering up her heart to that GOD who is ever present, and ever ready to help.
The sublimity of whose attributes, when they first entered her feeble mind,
unaccustomed to thought or reflection, struck her with astonishment. A general
debility soon prevailed over her body. For these some months past she has,
occasionally, been confined to her bed. Her diet is extremely light, and
consissts mostly of fruit. During the whole of her indisposition, once in
twenty-four hours, at a particular period, all the functions of the body cease
to perform their office. Life appears suspended. During this interim, after she
has recovered, she declares with the most solemn assurances, and many most
sincerely believe her, that she has been to Heaven -- seen Christ -- and
partook of the pleasures, and enjoyed the company of Angels -- with a great
many other wild, incoherent and unconnected deceptions.

MANY thousands of idle and curious people, from different parts of the
country, have could to see, hear, and question, to look and wonder, and wonder
and look -- and, if possible, to obtain some information how their affairs and
concerns may stand in the other world; which; a little previous enquiry into
their own hearts and actions, conduct and characters, would have ascertained
with more accuracy than phantom spirits; or Saint Rozo Villozo, passing and
repassing from this world to the other.

THE Methodists have been guilty of extravagancies and follies, but they will
never attempt, I am confident, to procure converts at the expense of their
reputation, by artifice, deceit, and imposition. They have been guilty -- and
it is a melancholy truth, which good people must lament -- of rousing and
alarming the passions, without informing the understanding -- of scattering
fire without communicating instruction -- of emiting a vapor, highly
sulphurous, the smell of which was alone sufficient to bewilder the ignorant,
without discovering proper rights to direct them. And I am sorry to observe,
some have been sent out among their preachers, whose morals and manners have
been exceptionable, and whose highest characteristic was their ignorance, to
perform the great office of unfolding the scriptures, to a people who really
stood in need of it, and who would gladly have received instruction, if their
teachers had been competent to so important a trust. But the Methodist church,
like a huge structure, built in a hurry, of combustable materials, without its
proper foundation, (religious knowledge and learned men) will fall, as soon as
the passions of its votaries subside; and this important truth will be
illustrated to the world, whether a fermentation in the minds of the people,
and a change in their sentiments, in exterior garb and professions, is,
ultimately, favorable to the improvement of manners and morals, to social
happiness, to true and genuine religion.

THAT there is any imposition kept up upon a premediated plan, formed by any
sect of people to impose upon the public, the simplicity of the parents, and
the simplicity of the daughter, together with the impracticability of
supporting of it, for any length of time, with any degree of success, in this
enlightened age, a moment's reflection precludes the possibility of a doubts --
and a few facts will show the grounds on which the idea of a premeditated
imposition ought not to be indulged.

1st. A derangement of nerves will produce a derangement of ideas, infinitely
varying.

2d. WHEN the mind has been exercised by any of the more violent passions of
fear, joy, anger, it inclines, in proportion as it has been agitated, to
inaction, to langour, to melancholy; and there it remains, unless roused by
introducing some new object, and putting it under the impulse of some new
passion.

3d. HAD she have received proper information, after the first impulse of
feeling was over, and her fears and terrors had subsided, instead of being
gloomy and melancholy, her thoughts would have found agreeable employment in
searching out the great truths of religion, and her whole attention would have
been occupied in extending their influence upon her life and actions.

4th. AGREERABLE employment of thought or action, of the acquisition of
knowledge or property, banishes dejection and melancholy.

5th. THE discovery of religious truth must have as much happier influence on
the mind, than any other, as it is superior.

6th. VANITY is a universal feeling, it has occupied every human heart, and
every character, in every situation; and when the opportunity offers for
indulging of it, the impulse is too strong to be restrained. What at first
might have originated in mere accident, is confirmend into a habit, and so long
as it can be fed by the admiration of the credulous, there is no danger but the
love of being conspicous, in daughter and parents, if it should not induce them
to encourage, will, at least make them cautions how they remove a disorder,
which has supported, thus far, the delusion.

WHEN the laws which control the connection of soul and body, are,
periodically, once in twenty-four hours, mechanically suspended, a phenomenon
is exhibited which seldom occurs. And when the soul, the invisible principle of
life and motion, passes out and into the body, and it receives no injury, if
true, is not easily to be accounted for. But when a certain debility of
constitution must be a necessary preparation for the display of these wonderful
things, the mystery unravels itself, and the most enthusiastic minds would give
up their implicit belief, if they would only take time to deliberate.

CREDULITY and ignorance have, in every s^age of society, accompanied each
other. The privilege of examining and investigating upon rational principles,
the different occurencies of the day, in the moral and natural world, is
confined to (...) nor do they alwsys use it without abuse. If a puppet dancer,
or merry Andrew can command attention, one whose exhibitions are behind the
curtain which bounds human intelligence, the characters introduced not familiar
to the conceptions of the wisest, the greatest, and the best of men, the
descriptions given especially coming under the garb of religion must command
the belief of that large proportion of mankind, whose ignorance prevents them
from examining, and whose credulity makes it unnecessary. If when the novelty
becomes more familiar, the admiration of the credulous stage for want of fresh
matter to keep it up, when the air of the approaching season, by bracing up
relaxed nerves, produces a change in the constitution; -- when in short she
arrives at her usual good health -- the delusion disappears -- her friends will
be disappointed to have their SAINT remain with them, without any material
change for the better, in worldly or heavenly circumstances -- and ROZO VILLOZO
herself obliged to return to her former course of life -- the ignorant will
wonder; -- and not single person bene^^^ed, but injured, by so glaring a
spectacle of folly and imposition.

I am, Dear Madam, etc.


