The Rights of Conscience inalienable, AND THEREFORE Religious Opinions not
cognizable by Law: OR, The high-flying Churchman, Stripped of his legal Robe,
Appears a Yaho.

By JOHN LELAND.

I know not to give flattering titles to men. ILI^^. NEW LONDON: Printed by T.
GREEN and SON, M,DCC,XCI.

The Rights of Conscience inalienable, etc.
THERE are four principles contended for, as the foundation of civil
government, viz. Birth, property, grace, and compact. The first of these is
practiced upon in all hereditary monarchies; where it is believed that the son
of a monarch is entitled to dominion, upon the decease of his father, whether
he be a wise man or a fool. The second principle is built upon, in all
aristocratical governments, where the rich landholders have the sole rule of
all their tenants; and make laws, at pleasure, which are binding upon all. The
third principle is adopted by those kingdoms and states, that require a
religious test to qualify an officer of state; proscribing all non-conformists
from civil and religious liberty. This was the error of Constantine's
government, who first established the christian religion by law, and then
proscribed the Pagans, and banished the Arian heretics. This error also filled
the heads of the anabaptists in Germany (who were re-sprinklers.) They supposed
that none had right to rule but gracious men. The same error prevails in the Sea of Rome, where his Holiness exalts himself above all who are called God's,
(i. e. kings and rulers) and where no protestant heretic is allowed the
liberty of a citizen. This principle is also plead for in the Ottoman Empire;
where it is death to call in question the divinity of Mahomed, or the
authenticity of the Alcoran.

The same evil has twisted itself into the British form of government; where,
in the state establishment of the church of England, no man is eligible to any
office, civil or military, without he subscribes to the 39 articles and book of
common prayer; and even then, upon receiving a commission for the army, the law
obliges him to receive the sacrament of the Lord's Supper: and no
nonconformist is allowed the liberty of his conscience, without he subscribes
to all the 39 articles but about four. And when that is done, his purse-strings
are drawn by others, to pay preachers, in whom he puts no confidence, and whom
he never hears.

This was the case of several of the Southern States (until the revolution), in
which the church of England was established.

The fourth principle (compact) is adopted in the American States, as the basis
of civil government. -- This foundation appears to be a just one, by the
following investigation.

Suppose a man to remove to a desolate island, and take a peaceable possession
of it, without injuring any; so that he should be the honest inheritor of the
isle. So long as he is alone he is the absolute monarch of the place; and his
own will is his law; which law, is as often altered or repealed as his will
changes. In process of time, from this man's loins ten sons are grown to
manhood, and possess property. So long as they are all good men, each one can
be as absolute, free, and sovereign as his father: but one of the ten turns
vagrant, by robbing the rest. This villain is equal to, if not an over-match
for any one of the nine: not one of them durst engage him, in single combat.
Reason and safety both dictate to the nine, the necessity of a confederation,
to unite their strength together to repel or destroy the plundering knave. Upon
entering into confederation, some compact or agreement would be stipulated, by
which each would be bound to do his equal part in fatigue and expense. It would
be necessary for these nine to meet at stated times, to consult means of safety
and happiness. A shady tree or small cabin, would answer their purpose: and in
case of disagreement, 4 must give up to 5.

In this state of things, their government would be perfectly democratical;
every citizen being a legislator.

In a course of years, from these nine, there arises nine thousand: their
government can be no longer democratical -- prudence would forbid it. Each
tribe or district, must then choose their representative, who (for the term that
he is chosen) has the whole political power of his constituents. These
representatives, meeting in assembly, would have power to make laws, binding on
their constituents; and while their time was spent in making laws for the
community, each one of the community must advance a little of his money as a
compensation therefore. -- Should these representatives differ in judgment, the
minor must be subject to the major, as in the case above.

From this simple parable, the following things are demonstrated.

1. That the law was not made for a righteous man, but for the disobedient. 2.
That righteous men have to part with a little of their liberty and property to
preserve the rest. 3. That all power is vested in, and consequently derived
from the people. 4. That the law should rule over rulers, and not rulers over
the law. 5. That government is founded on compact. 6. That every law made by
the legislators, inconsistent with the compact, modernly called a constitution,
is usurpive in the legislators, and not binding on the people. 7. That whenever
government is found inadequate to preserve the liberty, and property of the
people, they have an indubitable right to alter it, so as to answer those
purposes. 8. That legislators, in their legislative capacity, cannot alter the
constitution, for they are hired servants of the people, to act within the
limits of the constitution.

From these general observations, I shall pass on to examine a question, which
has been the strife and contention of ages. -- The question is, "Are the Rights
of Conscience alienable, or inalienable?"

The word conscience, signifies common science, a court of judicature which the
Almighty has erected in every human breast: a censor morum over all his
conduct. Conscience will ever judge right, when it is rightly informed; and
speak the truth when it understands it. But to advert to the question, Does a
man, upon entering into social compact, surrender his conscience to that
society, to be controled by the laws thereof; or can he, in justice, assist in
making laws to bind his children's consciences before they are born? I judge
not, for the following reasons.

1. Every man must give an account of himself to God, and therefore every man
ought to be at liberty to serve God in that way that he can best reconcile it
to his conscience. If Government, can answer for Individuals at the day of
judgment, let men be controled by it, in religious matters; otherwise, let men
be free.

2. It would be sinful for a man to surrender that to man, which is to be kept
sacred for God. A man's mind should be always open to conviction; and an honest
man will receive that doctrine which appears the best demonstrated: and what is
more common than for the best of men to change their minds? Such are the
prejudices of the mind, and such the force of tradition, that a man who never
alters his mind, is either very weak or very stubborn. How painful then must it
be to an honest heart, to be bound to observe the principles of his former
belief, after he is convinced of their imbecility? and this ever has, and ever
will be the case, while the rights of conscience are considered alienable.

3. But supposing it was right for a man to bind his own conscience, yet surely
it is very iniquitous to bind the consciences of his children -- to make
fetters for them before they are born, is very cruel. And yet such has been the
conduct of men in almost all ages, that their children have been bound to
believe and worship as their fathers did, or suffer shame, loss, and sometimes
life; and at best, to be called dissenters; because they dissent from that
which they never joined voluntarily. Such conduct in parents, is worse than
that of the father of Hannibal, who imposed an oath upon his son, while a
child, never to be at peace with the Romans.

4. Finally, religion is a matter between God and individuals: religious
opinions of men not being the objects of civil government, nor any ways under
its control.

It has often been observed, by the friends of religious establishment by human
laws, that no state can long continue without it; that religion will perish,
and nothing but infidelity and atheism prevail.

Are these things facts? -- Did not the christian religion prevail during the
three first centuries, in a more glorious manner than ever it has since; not
only without the aid of law, but in opposition to all the laws of haughty
monarchs? And did not religion receive a deadly wound by being fostered in the
arms of civil power and regulated by law? These things are so.

From that day to this, we have but a few instances of religious liberty to
judge by; for in almost all states, civil rulers (by the instigation of
covetous priests) have undertaken to steady the ark of religion, by human laws;
but yet we have a few of them, without leaving our own land.

The state of Rhode Island has stood above 160 years without any religious
establishment. The state of New York never had any. New Jersey claims the same.
Pennsylvania has also stood from its first settlement until now upon a liberal
foundation: and if agriculture, the mechanical arts and commerce have not
flourished in these states, equal to any of the states, I judge wrong.

It may further be observed, that all the states now in union, saving two or
three in New England, have no legal force used about religion, in directing its
course or supporting its preachers. -- And moreover, the federal government is
forbidden by the constitution, to make any laws, establishing any kind of
religion. If religion cannot stand, therefore, without the aid of law, it is
likely to fall soon, in our nation, except in Connecticut and Massachusetts.

To say, that "Religion cannot stand without a state establishment," is not
only contrary to fact, (as has been proved already) but is a contradiction in
phrase. Religion must have stood a time before any law could have been made
about it; and if it did stand almost 300 years without law, it can still stand
without it.

The evils of such an establishment are many.

1. Uninspired, fallible men make their own opinions tests of orthodoxy, and
use their own systems, as Rocrustus used his iron bedstead; to stretch and
measure the consciences of all others by. -- Where no toleration is granted to
non-conformists, either ignorance and superstition prevail, or persecution
rages: and if toleration is granted to restricted non-conformists, the minds of
men are biassed, to embrace that religion which is favored and pampered by law,
(and thereby hypocrisy is nourished) while those who cannot stretch their
consciences to believe any thing and every thing in the established creed, are
treated with contempt and opprobrious names; and by such means some are
pampered to death by largesses, and others confined from doing what good, they
otherwise could, by penury. The first lie under a temptation to flatter the
ruling party, to continue that form of government, which brings them in the
sure bread of idleness; the last to despise that government, and those rulers
that oppress them. -- The first have their eyes shut to all further light, that
would alter the religious machine, the last are always seeking new light, and
often fall into enthusiasm. Such are the natural evils of establishment in
religion by human laws.

2. Such establishments not only wean and alienate the affections of one from
another, on account of the different usages they receive, in their religious
sentiments, but are also very impolitic, especially in new countries; for what
encouragement can strangers have to migrate with their arts and wealth into a
state, where they cannot enjoy their religious sentiments without exposing
themselves to the law? when, at the same time, their religious opinions do not
lead them to be mutinous. And further, how often have kingdoms and states been
greatly weakened by religious tests! In the time of the persecution in France,
not less than twenty thousand people fled, for the enjoyment of religious
liberty.

3. These establishments, metamorphise the church into a creature, and religion
into a principle of state; which has a natural tendency to make men conclude
that bible religion is nothing but a trick of state: hence it is that the
greatest part of the well informed in literature, are overrun with deism and
infidelity; nor is it likely that it will ever be much better, while preaching
is made a trade of emolument. And if there is no difference between bible
religion and state religion, I shall soon fall into infidelity.

4. There are no two kingdoms and states that establish the same creed and
formularies of faith, (which alone proves their debility). In one kingdom a man
is condemned for not believing a doctrine that he would be condemned for
believing in another kingdom. Both of these establishments cannot be right --
but both of them can be, and surely are, wrong.

5. The nature of such establishments, further is, to keep from civil office,
the best of men. Good men cannot believe what they cannot believe; and they
will not subscribe to what they disbelieve; and take an oath to maintain what
they conclude is error: and as the best of men differ in judgment, there may
be some of them in any state: their talents and virtue entitle them to fill the
most important posts, yet because they differ from the established creed of the
state, they cannot -- will not fill those posts* Whereas villains make no
scruple to take any oath.

If these, and many more evils, attend such establishments, What were, and
still are the causes that ever there should be a state establishment of
religion in any empire, kingdom, or state?

The causes are many; -- some of which follow:

1. The love of importance is a general evil. It is natural to men, to dictate
for others: they choose to command the bushel and use the whip-row; to have the
halter around the necks of others, to hang them at pleasure.

2. An over-fondness for a particular system or sect. This gave rise to the
first human establishment of religion, by Constantine the Great. Being
converted to the christian system, he established it in the Roman empire,
compelled the pagans to submit, and banished the christian heretics; built
fine chapels at public expense, and forced large stipends for the preachers.
All this was done out of love to the christian religion; but his love operated
inadvertently; for he did the christian church more harm than all the
persecuting emperors ever did. It is said, that in his day, a voice was heard
from heaven, saying, "Now is poison spued into the churches." If this voice was
not heard, it nevertheless was a truth; for from that day to this, the
christian religion has been made a stirrup to mount the steed of popularity,
wealth and ambition.

3. To produce uniformity in religion. Rulers often fear that if they leave
every man to think, speak and worship as he pleases, that the whole cause will
be wrecked in diversity: to prevent which, they establish some standard of
orthodoxy, to effect uniformity. But, is uniformity attainable? Millions of
men, women and children have been tortured to death, to produce uniformity, and
yet the world has not advanced one inch toward it. And as long as men live in
different parts of the world, have different habits, education and interests,
they will be different in judgment, humanly speaking.

Is uniformity of sentiments, in matters of religion, essential to the
happiness of civil government? -- Not at all. Government has no more to do with
the religious opinions of men, than it has with the principles of the
mathematics. Let every man speak freely without fear -- maintain the
principles that he believes -- worship according to his own faith, either one
God, three Gods, no God, or twenty Gods; and let government protect him in so
doing, i. e. see that he meets with no personal abuse or loss of property, for
his religious opinions. Instead of discouraging of him with proscriptions,
fines, confiscation or death, let him be encouraged, as a free man, to bring
forth his arguments and maintain his points with all boldness: then, if his
doctrine is false, it will be confuted, and if it is true (though ever so novel)
let others credit it.

When every man has this liberty, what can he wish for more? -- A liberal man
asks for nothing more of government.

The duty of magistrates is, not to judge of the divinity or tendency of
doctrines; but when those principles break out into overt acts of violence,
then to use the civil sword and punish the vagrant for what he has done, and
not for the religious phrenzy that he acted from.

It is not supposeable, that any established creed contains the whole truth,
and nothing but truth; -- but supposing it did -- which established church in
the world has got it? All bigots contend for it: -- each society cries out,
"The temple of the Lord are we." Let one society be supposed to be in
possession of the whole -- let that society be established by law -- the creed
of faith that they adopt be consecrated so sacred by government, that the man
that disbelieves it must die -- let this creed finally prevail over the whole
world. I ask, what honor truth gets by all this? None at all. It is famed of a
Prussian, called John the Cicero, that by one oration he reconciled two
contending princes, actually in war: but, says the historian, "It was his six
thousand horse of battle that had the most persuasive oratory." So when one
creed or church prevails over another, being armed with (a coat of mail) law
and sword, truth gets no honor by the victory. Whereas if all stand upon one
footing, being equally protected by law, as citizens, (not as saints) and one
prevails over another by cool investigation and fair argument, then truth gains
honor; and men more firmly believe it, than if it was made an essential article
of salvation, by law.

Truth disdains the aid of law for its defense -- it will stand upon its own
merit. The heathens worshipped a goddess, called truth, stark naked; and all
human decorations of truth, serve only to destroy her virgin beauty. It is
error, and error alone, that needs human support; and whenever men fly to the
law or sword to protect their system of religion, and force it upon others, it
is evident that they have something in their system that will not bear the
light, and stand upon the basis of truth.

4. The common objection, "that the ignorant part of the community are not
capacitated to judge for themselves," supports the popish hierarchy, and all
protestant as well as turkish and pagan establishments, in idea.

But is this idea just? Has God chosen many of the wise and learned? Has he not
hid the mystery of gospel truth from them, and revealed it unto babes? Does the
world, by wisdom, know God? Did many of the rulers believe in Christ when he
was upon earth? Were not the learned clergy (the scribes) his most inveterate
enemies? Do not great men differ as much as little men in judgment? Have not
almost all lawless errors crept into the world through the means of wise men
(so called)? Is not a simple man, who makes nature and reason his study, a
competent judge of things? Is the bible written (like Caligula's laws) so
intricate and high that none but the letter learned (according to common
phrase) can read it? Is not the vision written so plain that he that runs may
read it? Do not those who understand the original languages, that the bible was
written in, differ as much in judgment as others? Are the identical copies of
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, together with the epistles, in every university,
and in the hands of every master of arts? If not, have not the learned to trust
to a human transcription, as much as the unlearned have to a translation? If
these questions, and others of the like nature, can be confuted -- then I will
confess that it is wisdom for a conclave of bishops, or a convocation of clergy
to frame a system out of the bible, and persuade the legislature to legalize
it. -- No. -- It would be attended with so much expense, pride, domination,
cruelty and bloodshed, that let me rather fall into infidelity: for no religion
at all, is better than that which is worse than none.

5. The ground work of these establishments of religion is, clerical influence.
Rulers, being persuaded by the clergy that an establishment of religion by
human laws, would promote the knowledge of the gospel, quell religious
disputes, prevent heresy, produce uniformity, and finally be advantageous to
the state, establish such creeds as are framed by the clergy: -- and this they
often do the more readily, when they are flattered by the clergy; that if they
thus defend the truth, they will become nursing fathers to the church, and
merit something considerable for themselves.

What stimulates the clergy to recommend this mode of reasoning is,

1. Ignorance -- not being able to confute error by fair argument.

2. Indolence -- not being willing to spend any time to confute the heretical.

3. But chiefly covetousness, to get money -- for it may be observed that in
all these establishments, settled salaries for the clergy, recoverable by law,
are sure to be interwoven: and was not this the case, I am well convinced that
there would not be many, if any religious establishments, in the christian
world.

Having made the foregoing remarks, I shall next make some observations on the
religion of Connecticut.

If the citizens of this state, have any thing in existence that looks like a
religious establishment, they ought to be very cautious; for being but a small
part of the world, they can never expect to extend their religion over the
whole of it, without it is so well founded that it cannot be confuted.

If one third part of the face of the globe is allowed to be seas, the earthy
parts would compose 4550 such states as Connecticut. The American empire would
afford above 200 of them. And as there is no religion in this empire, of the
same stamp of the Connecticut standing order, upon the Say-Brook platform, they
may expect 199 against 1, at home, and 4549 against 1 abroad.

Connecticut and New Haven were separate governments till the reign of Charles
II. when they were incorporated together by a charter; which charter is still
considered, by some, as the basis of government.

At present, there are in the state about 168 presbyterial congregational and
consociated preachers; 35 baptists; 20 episcopalians; 10
separate-congregationals, and a few of other denominations. The first are the
standing order of Connecticut; to whom all others have to pay obeisance.
Societies of the standing order are formed by law: none have right to vote
therein but men, of age, who possess property to the amount of 40 l. and are in
full communion in the church. Their choice of ministers is by major vote; and
what the society agree to give him annually, is levied upon all within the
limits of the society-bounds; except they bring a certificate to the clerk of
the society, that they attend worship elsewhere, and contribute to the
satisfaction of the society where they attend. The money being levied on the
people, is destrainable by law; and perpetually binding on the society till the
minister is dismissed by a council, or by death, from his charge.

It is not my intention to give a detail of all the tumults, oppression, fines
and imprisonments, that have heretofore been occasioned by this law-religion.
These things are partly dead and buried, and if they do not rise of themselves,
let them sleep peaceably in the dust forever. Let it suffice on this head, to
say, that it is not possible, in the nature of things, to establish religion by
human laws, without perverting the design of civil law and oppressing the
people.

The certificate that a dissenter produces to the society clerk, must be signed
by some officer of the dissenting church, and such church must be
protestant-christian; for heathens, deists, jews and papists are not indulged
in the certificate law: all of them* as well as turks, must therefore be taxed
to the standing order, although they never go among them, or know where the
meeting house is.

This certificate law is founded on this principle, "That it is the duty of all
persons to support the gospel and the worship of God." Is this principle
founded in justice? Is it the duty of a deist to support that which he believes
to be a cheat and imposition? Is it the duty of a jew to support the religion
of Jesus Christ, when he really believes that he was an impostor? Must the
papists be forced to pay men for preaching down the supremacy of the pope, whom
they are sure is the head of the church? Must a turk maintain a religion,
opposed to the alkoran, which he holds as the sacred oracles of heaven? These
things want better confirmation. If we suppose that it is the duty of all these
to support the protestant christian religion, as being the best religion in the
world; yet how comes it to pass that human legislatures have right to force
them so to do? I now call for an instance where Jesus Christ, the author of his
religion, or the apostles, who were divinely inspired, ever gave orders to, or
intimated that the civil powers on earth ought to force people to observe the
rules and doctrine of the gospel.

Mahomed called in the use of law and sword to convert people to his religion;
but Jesus did not -- does not.

It is the duty of men to love God with all their hearts, and their neighbors
as themselves; but have legislatures authority to punish men if they do not? --
So there are many things that Jesus and the apostles taught, that men ought to
obey, which yet the civil law has no concerns in.

That it is the duty of men, who are taught in the word, to communicate to him
that teaches, is beyond controversy; but that it is the province of the civil
law to force them to do so, is denied.

The charter of Charles the second, is supposed to be the basis of government
in Connecticut; and I request any gentleman to point out a single clause in
that charter, which authorizes the legislature to make any religious laws,
establish any religion, or force people to build meeting houses or pay
preachers. If there is no such constitutional clause, it follows, that the laws
are usurpasive in the legislators and not binding on the people. I shall here
add, that if the legislature of Connecticut have authority to establish the
religion which they prefer to all religions, and force men to support it; then
every legislature or legislator has the same authority; and if this be true,
the separation of the christians from the pagans, the departure of the
protestants from the papists, and the dissension of the presbyterians from the
church of England were all schisms of a criminal nature; and all the
persecution that they have met with, is the just effect of their stubbornness.

The certificate law supposes, 1. That the legislature have power to establish
a religion. This is false. 2. That they have authority to grant indulgence to
non-conformists: -- this is also false; for religious liberty is a right and
not a favor. 3. That the legitimate power of government extends to force people
to part with their money for religious purposes. This cannot be proved from the
new testament.

The certificate law has lately passed a new modification. Justices of the
peace must now examine them; -- this gives ministers of state a power over
religious concerns that the new testament does not. -- To examine the law, part
by part, would be needless -- for the whole of it is wrong.

From what is said, this question arises, "Are not contracts with ministers, i.
e. between ministers and people, as obligatory as any contracts whatever?" --
The simple answer is, Yes. Ministers should share the same protection of the
law, that other men do, and no more. To proscribe them from seats of
legislation, etc. is cruel. To indulge them with an exemption from taxes and
bearing arms, is a tempting emolument. The law should be silent about them;
protect them as citizens, (not as sacred officers) for the civil law knows no
sacred, religious officers.

In Rhode Island, if a congregation of people agree to give a preacher a
certain sum of money for preaching, the bond is not recoverable by law. Some
men, who are best informed in the laws of Rhode Island, say, that if ever there
was such an a^^ in that state, there is nothing like it in existence at this
day; and perhaps it is only cast upon them as a stigma, because they have ever
been friends to religious liberty. However, as the principle is supportable, I
have treated it as a real fact: and this I have done th^^ ^ore willingly,
because nine-tenths of the people believe it is a (...).


This law was formed upon a good principle, but, unhappy for the makers of that
law, they were incoherent in the superstructure.

The principle of the law, is, that the gospel is not to be supported by law;
that civil rulers have nothing to do with religion, in their civil capacities;
What business had they then to make that law? -- The evil seemed to arise from
a blending religious right and religious opinions together. Religious right
should be protected to all men, religious opinion to none; i. e. government
should confirm the first unto all; the last unto none: each individual having a
right to differ from all others in opinion if he is so persuaded. If a number
of people in Rhode Island or elsewhere are of opinion, that ministers of the
gospel ought to be supported by law, and choose to be bound by a bond to pay
him; government has no just authority to declare that bond illegal; for in so
doing, they interfere with private contracts, and deny the people the liberty
of conscience. If these people bind nobody but themselves -- who is injured by
their religious opinions? But if they bind an individual besides themselves,
the bond is fraudulent, and ought to be declared illegal. And here lies the
mischief of Connecticut religion. My lord, major vote, binds all the minor
part, unless they submit to idolatry; i. e. pay an acknowledgement to a power
that Jesus Christ never ordained in his church; I mean produce a certificate.
Yea further, jews, turks, heathens, papists and deists, if such there are in
Connecticut, are bound, and have no redress: and further, this bond is not
annually given, but for life, except the minister is dismissed by a number of
others, who are in the same predicament with himself.

Although it is no abridgement of religious liberty for congregations to pay
their preachers by legal force, in the manner prescribed above, yet it is
antichristian; such a church cannot be a church of Christ, because they are not
governed by Christ's laws, but by the laws of state; and such ministers do not
appear like ambassadors of Christ, but like ministers of state.

The next question is this, "Suppose a congregation of people have agreed to
give a minister a certain sum of money annually, for life or during good
behavior; and in a course of time, some or all of them change their opinions,
and verily believe that the preacher is in a capital error; and really from
conscience, dissent from him -- are they still bound to comply with their
engagements to the preacher?" -- This question is supposeable, and I believe
there have been a few instances of the kind.

If men have bound themselves -- honor and honesty call upon them to comply --
but God and conscience call upon them to come out from among them, and let such
blind guides alone. The phrase of blind guides, is not intended to cast
contempt upon any order of religious preachers; for, let a preacher be orthodox
or hetrodox, virtuous or vicious, he is always a blind guide to those who
differ from him in opinion.
Honor and honesty are amiable virtues; but God and conscience call to
perfidiousness. This shows the impropriety of such contracts -- which always
may, and sometimes do lead into such labyrinths. Time enough to pay a man after
his labor is over. -- People are not required to communicate to the teacher
before they are taught. A man, called of God to preach, feels a necessity to
preach, and a woe if he does not. And if he is sent by Christ he looks to him
and his laws for support; and if men comply with their duty, he finds relief;
if not, he must go to his field, as the priests of old did. A man cannot give a
more glaring proof of his covetousness and irreligion, than to say, "If you
will give me so much, then I will preach, but if not, be assured I will not
preach to you."

So that in answering the question, instead of determining which of the evils
to choose; either to disobey God and conscience, or break honor and honesty, I
would recommend an escape of both evils, by entering into no such contracts:
for the natural evils of imprudence, that men are fallen into, neither God nor
man can prevent.

A minister must have a hard heart, to wish men to be forced to pay him, when
(through conscience, enthusiasm, or a private pique) they dissent from his
ministry. The spirit of the gospel disdains such measures.

The question before us, is not applicable to many cases in Connecticut: the
dissenting churches make no contracts for a longer term than a year, and most
of them make none at all. Societies, of the standing order, rarely bind
themselves, in contract with preachers, without binding others beside
themselves: and when that is the case the bond is fraudulent: and if those who
are bound involuntarily can get clear, it is no breach of honor or honesty.

A few additional remarks shall close my piece.

I. The church of Rome, was at first constituted according to the gospel; and
at that time her faith was spoken of through the whole world. Being espoused to
Christ, as a chaste virgin, she kept her bed pure for her husband, almost three
hundred years: but afterward she played the whore with the kings and princes
of this world; who with their gold and wealth came in unto her, and she became
a strumpet: -- and as she was the first christian church that ever forsook the
laws of Christ for her conduct; and received the laws of his rivals; i. e. was
established by human law, and governed by the legalized edicts of councils; and
received large sums of money to support her preachers and her worship, by the
force of civil power -- she is called the MOTHER OF HARLOTS: and all protestant
churches, who are regulated by law, and force people to support their
preachers, build meeting houses and otherwise maintain their worship, are
DAUGHTERS of this HOLY MOTHER.

II. I am not a citizen of Connecticut -- the religious laws of the state do
not oppress me, and I expect never will personally; but a love to religious
liberty in general induces me thus to speak. Was I a resident in the state, I
could not give or receive a certificate to be exempted from ministerial taxes;
for in so doing I should confess that the legislature had authority, to pamper
one religious order in the state, and make all others pay obeisance to that
sheef. -- It is high time to know whether all are to be free alike; and whether
ministers of state are to be lords over God's heritage.

And here I shall ask the citizens of Connecticut, Whether, in the months of
April and September, when they choose their deputies for the assembly, they mean
to surrender to them the rights of conscience, and authorize them to make laws,
binding on their consciences? If not, then all such acts are contrary to the
intention of constituent power, as well as unconstitutional and antichristian.

III. It is likely that one part of the people in Connecticut believe, in
conscience, that gospel preachers should be supported by the force of law; and
the other part believe that it is not in the province of civil law to interfere
or any ways meddle with religious matters. How are both parties to be protected
by law, in their conscientious belief?

Very easily. -- Let all those whose consciences dictate that they ought to be
taxed by law to maintain their preacher, bring in their names to the
society-clerk, by a certain day, and then assess them all, according to their
estates, to raise the sum, stipulated in the contract; and all others go free.
Both parties, by this method would enjoy the full liberty of conscience,
without oppressing one another -- the law use no force in matters of conscience
-- the evil of Rhode Island law be escaped -- and no persons could find fault
with it (in a political point of view), but those who fear the consciences of
too many would lie dormant, and therefore wish to force them to pay. Here let
it be noted; that there are many in the world, who believe, in conscience, that
a minister is not entitled to any acknowledgement for his services, without he
is so poor that he cannot live without it, (and thereby convert a gospel debt
to alms): -- Though this opinion is not founded either on reason or scripture;
yet it is a better opinion than that which would force them to pay a preacher
by human law.

IV. How mortifying must it be to foreigners, and how far from conciliatory is
it, to citizens of the American states, who, when they come into Connecticut to
reside must either conform to the religion of Connecticut, or produce a
certificate? Does this look like religious liberty or human friendship? Suppose
that man (whose name need not be mentioned) that fills every American heart
with pleasure and awe, should remove to Connecticut for his health, or any
other cause -- what a scandal would it be to the state, to tax him to a
presbyterian minister, unless he produced a certificate, informing them that he
was an episcopalian?

V. The federal constitution certainly had the advantage, of any of the state
constitutions, in being made by the wisest men in the whole nation, and after
an experiment of a number of years trial, upon republican principles: and that
constitution forbids congress ever to establish any kind of religion, or
require any religious test to qualify any officer in any department of federal
government. Let a man be Pagan, Turk, Jew or Christian, he is eligible to any
post in that government. So that if the principles of religious liberty,
contended for in the foregoing pages, are supposed to be fraught with deism,
fourteen states, in union, are now fraught with the same. But the separate
states have not surrendered that (supposed) right of establishing religion, to
Congress. Each state retains all its power, saving what is given to the general
government, by the federal constitution. The assembly of Connecticut,
therefore, still undertake to guide the helm of religion: and if Congress were
disposed* yet they could not prevent it, by any power vested in them by the
states. Therefore, if any of the people of Connecticut feel oppressed by the
certificate law, or any other of the like nature, their proper mode of
procedure will be to remonstrate against the oppression, and petition the
assembly for a redress of grievance.

VI. Divines generally inform us, that there is such a time to come (called the
Latter-Day Glory), when the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the
waters do the sea: and that this day will appear upon the destruction of
antichrist: If so, I am well convinced that Jesus will first remove all the
hindrances of religious establishments, and cause all men to be free in matters
of religion. -- When this is effected, he will say to the kings and great men
of the earth, Now see what I can do: ye have been afraid to leave the church
and gospel in my hands alone, without steadying the ark by human law; but now I
have taken the power and kingdom to myself; and will work for my own glory. --
Here let me add, that in the southern states, where there has been the greatest
freedom from religious oppression; where liberty of conscience is entirely
enjoyed; there has been the greatest revival of religion; which is another
proof that true religion can, and will prevail best, where it is left entirely
to Christ.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Author of the foregoing Pages, has a Manuscript by him, ready for the
Press, entitled,

The first Rise of Sin;

Neither from a holy nor sinful Cause: Unavoidable with God, but avoidable with
Creatures.

Exhibited in an Exposition of the three first Chapters of Genesis; in which a
number of Conjectures and mathematical Calculations are given.


