AN ORATION, TO COMMEMORATE THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF
NORTH AMERICA; DELIVERED AT ZION CHURCH, IN FOURTH-STREET, PHILADELPHIA, JULY
4th, 1791; AND PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY OF THE
CINCINNATI.

BY ROBERT PORTER, A. M.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, SECOND-STREET. M, DCC,
XCI.

AT an Annual Meeting of the Pennsylvania Society of the Cincinnati, held at
the State House, in Philadelphia, July 5th, 1791 --

On Motion, Resolved, THAT the Thanks of this Society be presented to ROBERT
PORTER, Esquire, for the ORATION delivered by him yesterday; and that he be
requested to furnish the Society with a Copy for Publication.

Extract from the Minutes, JOSEPH HOWELL, SEC'RY.

TO THE HONORABLE HENRY KNOX, ESQUIRE, Late MAJOR GENERAL in the ARMIES of the
UNITED STATES, SECRETARY for the DEPARTMENT of WAR, and SECRETARY of the
GENERAL SOCIETY of the CINCINNATI.
IN contemplating on a character to shield this performance, the youthful essay
of dutiful indiscretion, from the darts of the ill-natured and uncandid, I
could think of no person more proper than yourself. The patronage of a
gentleman, who possesses superior abilities joined with a generous and noble
heart, will draw a veil over its defects. Possibly it may bring to your
recollection, some of the scenes of the Amerirican Revolution, which you had so
great a share in accomplishing. I am a stranger to flattery; but it is
notorious that your name stands already recorded in the Book of Fame, among the
Worthies, for a continued series of great and good services to your country.
Your conduct in domestic life is as amiable, as it is illustrious in public.

With every sentiment of respect, I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most
obedient, humble servant, ROBERT PORTER.
PHILADELPHIA, July 6 th, 1791.
AN ORATION, etc.
LADIES and GENTLEMEN,
IN those countries, where the love of Liberty has prevailed in the greatest
degree, it has been thought wisely conducive, to increase the generous flame,
that Orations should be delivered in commemoration of events productive of
human felicity. Revolving years have ushered in the Anniversary of that day,
which hailed our country Free and Independent. I have had the honor to be
appointed by this respectable Society to prepare and pronounce the anniversary
Oration in 1791. I am afraid, that I have undertaken a task not suited to my
years, genius, or capacity. It is not enough, that inclination merely should
prescribe, and take the lead: Genius must attend and support her. I am doubtful
that in my very out-setting here, I have thrown an insuperable bar in the way
of proceeding, as I could wish, with any color of propriety. Introduced in the
early part of my youth among you, my former fellow soldiers, with rapture I am
impelled to pay homage to that glorious conflict, remarkable for the
progressive increase of human happiness; and yet all the homage I can pay, is
quite too low for this illustrious subject. And any sentiments I have to offer
on this occasion are scarcely worthy of being brought forward, before so polite
and discerning an audience. However, in honorable attempts, there may be some
merit, or at least admissible excuse, though one should fail of what might be
desired. I proceed, relying on your candor and generous indulgence.

I CANNOT help congratulating my country upon the nobleness of our origin. In
other nations, their establishment is generally buried in the rust of time, and
is totally unknown: or when it has been discovered, it is so mean and
contemptible, that their eloquent writers have been under the necessity of
concealing it with all the graces of poetical fiction. Rome, the mistress of
the world, owed her origin to a hardy band of ruffians, the outlaws of other
societies: yet we find her admired historians so ashamed of their descent, that
with the utmost stretch of ingenuity, they attempted to derive their ancestry
from the Trojans. It is our peculiar situation that from the first settlement
of this country, the love of civil and religious liberty was the predominant
passion of its inhabitants. As it has been happily expressed, "Fierce
Oppression, rattling in her left hand the chains of tyranny; and brandishing in
her right hand the torch of persecution, drove our predecessors from the coasts
of Europe. Liberty, benevolent and serene, pointing to a cornucopia on one
side, and to a branch of olive on the other, invited and conducted them to the
American shores." The security of Property, and Freedom in Religion, roused all
the latent powers of industry, and taught our forefathers to surmount the
greatest obstacles, and convert a dreary wilderness into a prosperous and
flourishing country.

FOR a considerable time Great Britain showed a maternal fondness for her
colonies. And the colonies acted the part of dutiful children. All was harmony
and love. Reciprocal acts of friendship were received. We, foregoing every
advantage, which we might have derived from a trade with foreign nations,
consented to export to Great Britain, what it was for her interest to receive.
And we received in return whatever was for her advantage to send us. We even
exposed ourselves to an enervating luxury, because the mother country was
benefited by vending those articles. We sent our raw materials, with which
Providence had blessed the country, to be manufactured for us, so that her
artizans might meet with sufficient employment. We granted that she should
regulate our commerce for her advantage. We fought and bled by her side with
bravery and magnanimity against her enemies. She treated us in return as a
judicious mother does her dutiful children. She nourished and favored us, and
delighted in our prosperity. Her protecting arm was extended to us. She bound
us to her, by the strong ties of affection and interest: and contented herself
with a moderate share of power. We were rapidly rising to that dignity and
honor never before known among mankind. We were the envy and admiration of the
world. Great Britain, when she had thus arrived to the zenith of her political
grandeur, and sailed the acknowledged sovereign of the sea, suddenly changes
from her usual conduct, and contracts all the narrow views of an illiberal
step-dame. A country famous for the growth of liberty, which had repeatedly
endured the greatest hardships and difficulties, rather than part with that
beloved object -- it is a matter of regret that this country should entertain
such intolerant principles that her children should not participate with her
the blessings of liberty; but that she should undertake to sap the very
foundations of that inestimable privilege in her colonies. An insidious policy
took place in her cabinet. Anxious to support her treasury in all her classes
of venality and corruption, she determines that an arbitrary taxation shall
prevail through all her provinces. Intoxicated with greatness, she wishes to
imitate imperial Rome, and suffer a glimmering of liberty to remain at the
center, but to extend the darkness of tyranny with all its odious trappings to
her colonies, and make them groan under the extremity of slavery.

NOTHING was held out to our view, but unconditional submission, and abject
slavery; or else we must unsheath the desolating sword of war in the defense of
our rights. It is the glory and boast of America, that in this dilemma she did
not pause or ponder; but nobly resolved to pour out the last drop of her blood
at the altar of Liberty, rather than sacrifice the unalienable rights of
humanity to the demon, Arbitrary Power. It must strike every person with
astonishment, that an infant and unformed nation, unpractised in the arts, and
unfurnished with the implements of war, should conceive the grand idea of
emancipating herself from the shackles of a monarchy famed for military skill
and prowess, and whose fleets and armies had often struck terror into ancient
and powerful kingdoms, and shook them to the center. We did not irreligiously
rush into the war. But from the one end of the continent to the other, we
appealed to our common Father for the justice of our cause. We declared in the
face of Heaven, "That we were not the aggressors in the war; and that we meant
by it, not to acquire or even preserve dominion for its own sake, not conquest
or empire, or the gratification of resentment, but solely to deliver ourselves
from oppression; to gain reparation for injury; and to defend ourselves against
men, who would plunder or destroy us." In this awful and tremendous hour of
danger, a kind superintending Providence sent a godlike hero, whose capacious
soul was a bulwark of safety to his country, to extricate us from this
impending ruin. There would be a degree of impropriety for me to attempt to
draw the characters of those truly great men, who conducted in the cabinet and
field, the American Revolution "From the gloom of unsuccessful supplication to
the splendour of victory, and acknowledged sovereignty." It would look like
flattery, and might offend the delicate sensibility of many of my audience, who
were principal actors in those scenes. Posterity will doubtless do them
justice; nay, what is singular, their gallant actions, still fresh in our
memory, pronounce their most ample panegyric. The history of the world cannot
produce a similar revolution conducted with so much wisdom and prudence. Some
future Xenophon will describe, how Franklin, the admiration of the world,
unfolded the rights of man to his oppressed countrymen, and began the
Revolution by his pen. -- He will paint with what bravery and magnanimity,
Warren, Montgomery, Mercer, and an host of Heroes, poured out their patriotic
blood, in the defense of the standard of Liberty. -- He will relate with what
zeal, our gallant Governor, roused up the desponding hopes of the citizens, and
brought them to act with efficacy, and dispelled the clouds of adversity, which
darkened our political hemisphere.

THE noble actions of the generous Gates, will afford an ample field for
description. -- By capturing a British force of 10,000 regular troops, he made
our cause fashionable in Europe; "It was the hinge on which the Revolution
turned." While military science has votaries, and the Defender of his Country
is held in estimation, the name of Knox will be honored with applause, who
conducted with judgment the thunder of war. -- The much lamented Green will
produce a pleasing light in the southern war. A brave and good man struggling
with adversity, and by the dint of abilities, at last coming off victorious.

WAYNE, that thunderbolt of war, will be held in perpetual remembrance by a
grateful country. Lincoln, with St Clair, and many others who might be
mentioned, will enliven the picture by their illustrious merits. The historian
will describe how the Most Worthy with more than human prudence conducted the
Revolution with his sword. Nor will the services of the late Superintendent of
Finance pass unnoticed. It may be truly said of him, that by his credit, he
finished the arduous conflict.

AFTER a bloody contest of eight years, our Independence was completely
accomplished. It is a Revolution that has illuminated the world, and reflected
the greatest advantages to mankind. How much has France profited by the
generous aid she afforded us! Her officers and soldiers were placed in the
school of Freedom, and here learnt the beauties and excellencies of that
heavenly science. The subjects of France heard we were resisting oppression,
and notwithstanding the aristocratic arts made use of to blindfold them, and to
keep the causes out of view, which produced those effects; still it roused them
to enquire into the principles of the contest, and that inquiry produced the
fruits of knowledge, which despotism labored in vain to destroy. -- It was
here M. de la Fayette acquired a more perfect knowledge of the rights of
humanity. He early discovered a predilection for liberty, and a soul animated
by ardour. When but a youth of nineteen years of age, possessed of the means of
enjoyment, he quits the lap of luxury, and embarks in the cause of the
Americans with the most disinterested and generous zeal. And this at a time
when intelligence had arrived in Europe that the American insurgents, reduced
to 2000 men, were fleeing through Jersey before a British force of 30,000.
Great and noble character! While gratitude is ranked among the virtues, my
countrymen, let the tribute of applause be plentifully poured out upon him.
When he was not employed in the field at the head of our armies, he was engaged
in learning the great principles of a free government. When the war ended, in
his affectionate farewell, he breathed this noble sentiment from his
magnanimous soul; "May this great monument, raised to liberty, serve as a
lesson to the oppressor, and an example to the oppressed."

BY the return of the French officers and soldiers to their native country, the
beams of liberty shone with greater effulgence in France. Nothing but an
opportunity was wanting to establish a free government. Happy, thrice happy
circumstance, that opportunity occurred! And M. de la Fayette, and his brave
associates, improved it to the greatest advantage, for the benefit of the whole
community. A constitution is formed, built upon the pillars of freedom, having
the happiness of the people for its basis. France! you are truly fortunate in
having a patriot King, who has been greatly instrumental in restoring your
rights. By his princely conduct, your freedom cost but a few lives -- our's,
much blood and treasure. Reason dictated to your chieftain, that liberty should
be extended to his people, to make them great and happy. He has proclaimed
himself, "Their father, their brother, and their friend; that he cannot be
happy, but in their welfare; great, but in their glory; powerful, but in their
liberty; rich, but in their prosperity; and he can only suffer, but in their
afflictions." By his virtue and patriotism, he has acquired a more dignified
title than any monarch, the KING OF FREEMEN.

FRANCE has not only profited by our example, but the Old World bids fair to be
regenerated by the New. The renovation of Great Britain herself does not appear
to be far distant. The majority of her citizens treat, with contempt, the
horrid principles of the courtly Burke, and enlist in crowds under the banners
of Common Sense. This is an age of revolutions. And the political heresies of
passive obedience, non-resistance, the divine right of kings, and that the
people were created to minister to the pride and ambition of their rulers, are
fast wearing out; and will cause neither a sigh, nor a groan in the
philanthropic mind, at their departure. The world begins to awaken from the
slumbers into which she has been lulled by arbitrary power. The cabinet of
kings can no longer prejudice nation against nation, by telling them that they
are natural enemies. They begin to know one another, and that knowledge begets
a love for each other, and a desire to procure happiness for themselves, and
the great family of mankind. We have a well-founded hope, that the period is
not far remote when the rest of the world will follow the laudable example of
America and France; and construct governments, that will embrace the happiness
of the many, and not of the few. We will shortly see the proud oppressors of
humanity struck with terror, and fall down with religious fear at the shrine of
Liberty, and ask forgiveness for their manifold sins against her laws. They
will receive absolution, upon their binding themselves to venerate and obey her
rights for the future. We will behold the oppressed emerging from ignorance,
wretchedness and poverty, to knowledge, happiness and plenty, together with all
the other concomitant blessings of freedom.

THE sublime science of government, before the American revolution, was but in
its infancy. The sons of America have studied the subject; and like true
politicians and sound philosophers, have cleared it of the mysteries in which
it has been so long involved. Some of our governments were formed in an early
stage of the war, upon the spur of the occasion; and of course were crude and
indigested in many parts. The enlightened citizens saw the defects and set
about procuring a remedy. The fathers of our country were delegated by the
people to plan a government, adequate to the exigencies of the union. An
efficient confederation arises out of the wisdom of that assembly. The good
qualities of the various governments heretofore established were judiciously
culled and improved -- the noxious weeds were wisely rejected. In the
constitution may be observed the dispatch of a monarchy, without its enormous
expense and vices. Wisdom and stability, without the insolence of an hereditary
nobility, are its leading features. The freedom of the people is secured and
guarded beyond the power of anarchy or despotism. It keeps the good of the
public constantly in view. It promises a lasting union between the east and
south, the Atlantic and Mississippi. If a politician had been told a few years
ago, that a government would be thus formed, and established by the people:
without hesitation he would have pronounced it impossible. We have solved the
problem, and instructed the human race. Pennsylvania, with a spirit of harmony,
has lately followed this example, and constituted a government which sanctifies
every hope of security to life, liberty, and property.

THE excellencies of the federal constitution are not merely problematical; but
when reduced to practice, the most salutary effects have been produced from it.
Public and private credit has been restored, which has already become a mine of
wealth to this country. Agriculture, commerce, and manufactures are regulated
and shine with superior luster. Every class and denomination of citizens feel
the beneficent rays of the new constitution. The various departments of
government are filled by men of the first abilities and integrity.

THAT this freedom and happiness may long, long continue -- CITIZENS of the
United States! it is a duty incumbent upon you, to guard the avenues to the
Temple of Liberty with the strictest attention. It is the nature of the human
mind to degenerate into arbitrary power; and we should be always prepared to
nip it in the bud, lest it should blossom and produce deadly fruit.

WE have the example of other nations, for many thousand years to point out the
rocks on which they have been shipwrecked. From their misfortunes let us learn
to be happy.

THE most brilliant imagination cannot form a point of human greatness which
the United States may not attain. We inhabit a country enriched by the gifts of
heaven, a temperate climate, and luxuriant soil, abounding with lakes and
rivers, which, like veins and arteries, circulate the various blessings of life
through all the system.

BY the generous exertions of the citizens, the hand of art is about to make
further improvements in nature. A noble rivalship has arisen between the states
in promoting the improvement of roads and inland navigation. By this mean, our
internal trade, manufactures and population, will rapidly increase.

AGRICULTURE, that school of all the republican virtues, has many respectable
supporters. It justly commands honor and respect from every citizen. It
banishes all effeminacy, and servility, the food of despotism. It keeps alive
the noble principle of liberty. It gives an independence of spirit to the
manners of the people, and diffuses the most exalted sentiments through the
soul. It strengthens the body and invigorates the mind. I know, gentlemen of
the Society, that this is a theme you delight to dwell upon. We denominated
ourselves the Society of the Cincinnati, from the high veneration which we
possessed for the character of that illustrious Roman, Lucius Quintius
Cincinnatus, who rose awful from the plough to save his country -- his country
saved, he returned to the plough again with increasing dignity and honor.

THE gradual abolition of slavery is gaining ground, and will soon take place
throughout the continent. The time will shortly come, when each state will be
compelled to let the hapless African sleep undisturbed upon his native shore.
And may every breast glow with a desire to enlighten the natives of this land,
who roam through the woods and wilds devoid of every finer art and elegance of
life. To civilize them will redound more to our honor than to extirpate them.
Our power is so great that we could efface them from the earth; but we should
beware of carrying our resentment too far.

LET us promote their happiness by disseminating among them those arts which
embellish and adorn life. In their language, let us teach them to bury deep
under ground the bloody hatchet; and plant the tree of peace. Let us nourish
and favor its growth; and let them remain in tranquillity upon their matts,
learning the works of peace and civilization. May the covenant chain of
friendship be renewed between us* kept bright, and not suffered to contract any
rust.

THE END.

