AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE OPENING OF PORTSMOUTH ACADEMY, ON EASTER MONDAY,
A. D. 1791, BY THE REVEREND JOHN COSENS OGDEN, RECTOR OF ST. JOHN'S CHURCH.

PRINTED BY GEORGE JERRY OSBORNE, JUN. AT THE PRINTING-OFFICE, GUTTEMBERG'S
HEAD, CONGRESS-STREET, PORTSMOUTH. M, DCC, XCI.

AN ADDRESS, DELIVERED AT THE OPENING OF PORTSMOUTH ACADEMY.
THE BENEVOLENT mind must experience great pleasure in beholding means taking,
and new institutions forming in various places, to educate our youth, and
particularly that valuable part of our species, our young FEMALES. This subject
has engaged the attention of some of our most beloved citizens in these states.
They have justly considered it, as a very important source of national
prosperity. They wish so to conduct it, as will best accommodate it, to the
state of society, manners and government in our country.

THE Principal of the Academy, now opened among us, has called our attention,
my friends and fellow citizens, to a design which it is in our power to make
profitable to him, as well as beneficial to our children. The healthiness of
our climate -- the elegant manners of the people of this town, give us all
necessary advantages: It is by our united aid that it may flourish, even if no
assistance is derived from others.

WHEN we reflect, that early education tinctures or forms our character in a
great degree, for life; we are irresistibly drawn to exert our utmost ability
to afford our youth every possible advantage to gain the best. That small sum
which industry and economy will give almost every parent, is far better
bestowed, than a large patrimony joined with ignorance. A knowledge of business
every day presents men with offices whose rewards are equal to the rent of
large estates, and the annual interest of great sums -- where these persons
have not inherited a shilling, and possess no other riches than a good
education.

BY instructing our females in those useful and necessary branches of industry
which are peculiar to their sex, we also furnish them with a source of wealth
and profit, which is necessary for all conditions in life; which may be laid
aside when affluence permits, or assumed when adversity with its billows rolls
trouble and indigence upon them.

THE mode in descent of lands -- the very equal distribution of property -- and
the equality of rank in our country also demand, that every class of our
citizens educate their children in the best manner possible. The great Creator
of us all, has made no difference in the endowments of the head or heart,
between the child of the monarch or of the peasant. Very rarely does the
property of a frugal ancestor descend to the third generation. These ideas
daily convince us, that a good education, principles of virtue, and useful
acquirements, are to be sought as the most essential benefits for our children.

THIS theme has been discussed so often, that I cannot insure to you, that I
shall say any thing new upon this occasion. The most I can promise is to
refresh your memories, and keep alive the subject. As a Christian Minister, I
can come to you with no better arguments and examples, than those presented in
the volume of our holy religion. The Bible affords the most excellent patterns,
by which to form the great and useful character of men and women. In the 31st
chapter of Proverbs, we find a model for the female character, by which to make
the daughter of every American citizen, that virtuous woman whose price is far
above rubies. Solomon closes this rich treasury of instruction, with a chapter
which records the lesson of a mother to her son, even the words of King Lemuel
-- the lesson which his mother taught him. He was now perhaps in the improving
season of youth, or just advanced to the throne, and seeking a Queen. After
some general instructions upon temperance and chastity, upon comforting and
defending the afflicted, she proceeds with portraying the character of a good
wife The mother of a King is employed in an office highly becoming her rank.
She is presented by the wise King Solomon, as a pattern to mothers in general.
It is their peculiar task to direct the morals of youth. Their care in infancy,
constant attention and society during the critical period of youth -- the many
opportunities which domestic life affords, enable them alone, to do the duty
properly. Business and many cares call the father abroad, but home is the
mother's province; here she reigns sole mistress, the greatest part of her
life. If her children err, she must bear a large share in their guilt and
sufferings This chapter is more valuable when we consider, that in a good wife
are united the characters of a daughter, mother, friend and mistress; most of
the dearest relations in life are concentred in her. Is she such a person as
fills all these stations properly? Behold her rewarding the cares, and cheering
the souls of her affectionate parents, obedient children, tender husband, firm
friends and faithful servants. These live, as by her smiles. Is she useful in
her station? Does she excel? A long train of the good and virtuous attend her
wishes, applaud her conduct, and exalt her praise. Domestic happiness dwells
where she resides; society is adorned and made pleasant by her actions;
religion is recommended by her bright example. She appears like one of those
guardian angels, who are supposed to attend around the good in this world, as
ministering servants, to guide, guard and animate them through life, and convoy
them after death to Heaven.

WHILE fine writers, poets and painters, generally select good women to
represent angels; they also take the bad, to portray the horrid picture of
furies. While we greedily gaze at the one, we turn with abhorrence from the
other. So odious is the sight of the bad, that even vicious men, shun their
company and avoid their acquaintance, in the presence of the opposite lovely
character, whom the poet describes in the mother of our race -- "grace was in
all her steps -- Heaven in her eye -- in every gesture, dignity and love."

"THE price of a virtuous woman is far above rubies" -- is more valuable than
the richest and most costly gems. This description of her worth is enhanced,
when we read Job's representation of wisdom, that excellent gift of God; --
"that it exceeds the gold of ophir -- cannot be valued with the onyx or the
sapphire -- that it shall not be exchanged for vessels of fine gold -- that no
mention shall be made of coral or of pearls, when in balance with wisdom, for
her value is above rubies." The same language is used in the oracles of
Omniscience to recommend wisdom, or true religion, as is employed to represent
unto us, that precious gift, that favor from the Lord, a good wife.

"THE heart of her husband does safely trust in her," -- in her prudence and
knowledge. He is therefore in no fear of waste or spoil by her idleness,
extravagance or prodigality. -- So far from this, she shall help him in
increasing his wealth. -- "She shall do him good, and not evil all the days of
her life."

HER industrious disposition and habits lead "her to seek wool and flax, and
she works willingly with her hands." By this, she is furnished with means to
open a merchandise, which gives her the productions of distant regions. "Like
the merchant ships, she brings her food from far*" Here a wide field opens
for the display of her abilities and ingenuity.

TO prevent excessive sorrow, and needless repinings, her attendants live by
her bounty. She spares not in the prosecution of her duty toward her
dependants, in order to make them faithful and happy, to "rise while it is yet
night, that she may give meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens.
She does not totally confine her cares to merchandise, but knowing the value of
real property -- the quality of lands, and importance of agriculture, she
considers a field and buyeth it. With the earnings of her hand, and fruit
selected by herself, she planteth a vineyard with the best twigs, and most
delicious grapes.

SO FAR is this from being too masculine or improper for her delicate sex, it
gives her health and she girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her
hands by use. Her cares and exertions present her with the pleasing sight of
beholding that her merchandise is good. She tastes, sees and knows that it is
safe and honorable.

DROWSINESS and sluggishness are strangers to her. To be always equipped for
industry, her candle goes not out by night. She improves all opportunities of
honestly increasing her wealth. Without confiding in the uncertainties that
often attend mercantile employments -- without hazarding too far the blasts and
droughts that may injure her crops, or trusting to the mere accidental fallings
of property into her lap, she lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands
hold the distaff.

THESE resources of commerce, agriculture and manufactures (as is natural) make
her rich. She is furnished thereby with means to do good. She has every
necessary food, clothing and medicine in store for the distressed. She
cheerfully stretches out her liberal hand to the poor, and reaches out her
hands to relieve the needy. Her knowledge of business, and the value of
property, awakes a just charity to the distressed, and heightens her
enjoyments, when she reflects that she has done good.

Do storms arise? -- Does the wind blow? -- Or is the cold intense -- the earth
covered and air chilled by snow? -- She dreads no sudden, unprepared for
anxieties, lest the health of her household should be in danger: She has been
provident in season -- her household are already clothed for all weathers; with
dress that is warm, decent and valuable -- even with scarlet.

HER domestics being thus equipped for neatness, and health -- want and
distress having fled from her abode -- she appears with all her beauties
heightened, and her works praising her in her attire. With her own hands she
makes herself coverings of the richest tapestry. Her clothing is silk and
purple. No ruined merchant, mechanic or husband are in her train. She has
industriously provided for every elegance, without injuring any one.

THIS richness and elegance appears also in the dress -- in the valuable
embroideries, and various ornaments, which her needle prepares for her husband.
He is distinguished by the richest garb, and most serene countenance among the
rulers of the land. No brow of care and domestic discontent attend him to the
court or levee. Wisdom, worth and virtue are the important traits, in the
character of the man whose joys she improves.

SHE makes fine linen and sells it, and delivers girdles to the merchants.
Strength and honor, modesty and equanimity are her clothing. Meekness and
quietness are graces which she cultivates, and considers as of infinitely
greater excellence, far more ornamental, than all the appendages of her
wardrobe or toilet. Well may she rejoice in time to come. Her wealth affords
all the pleasures which riches can possibly yield. Her age feels no pinchings
from want -- knows no sigh for bread.

BUT, her cares are not confined to the property, or pelf of this world -- to
her own dress -- to the elegance of her house -- the splendour of her husband --
the cheerfulness of her servants -- the flourishing of her traffic -- the
fertility of her farms, gardens and vineyards; but, she has also furnished her
mind with knowledge; with that true wisdom, which works of piety and morality
afford. She never opens her mouth to utter folly. No scandal -- no rude, angry,
cruel language defile her chaste lips. With her tongue dwells the law of
kindness -- the most mild and gentle language. She gives an example and affords
the precept, in every just and tender sentiment. She consoles the sick and
dying -- she administers a balm to cheer the afflicted. She looks well to the
ways of her household, that they conduct virtuously, both in her presence and
absence. She eats not the bread of idleness; gained by extortion, or wrong
doing: she is not idly sauntring abroad or night walking, while her servants
are rioting at home.

HERE is a truly noble personage, elevated by her merit; she, holds a rank,
that no one can deprive her of, -- which always procures respect, without the
trouble of demanding it ourselves. Such a woman is more useful to the world --
gains more honor to her sex -- more ennobles human nature, than many of those,
who have worn crowns and coronets: who have been saluted with the most
flattering titles -- have been attended with all the parade of royalty, while
they have ruined the minds and morals of thousands.

THE description of this virtuous woman closes with observing, "That her
children rise up and call her blessed -- her husband also and he praises her."
Doing her duty to them -- making their honor, advancement and felicity, the
first motive of action -- knowing that they are all embarked in the same
interest to make each other happy; all other principles give place to this
sentiment. Amusement and dissipation having never been sought by either as a
resource to banish discontent; or made a momentary substitute, for want of
felicity at home. Her partner and children pay her all possible respect and
reverence. -- They extol her virtues -- pass the smile of joy, and echo of
grateful praise, from each to the other. The children reared by her care,
become blessings to the world and imitators of her perfections. -- They are
beheld with veneration and inherit her excellencies. A succession of worth,
more valuable than titles or law can give, descends to her heirs. Her excellent
example is beheld by others, upon which, to form the useful and beloved woman,
wife, daughter, mother and mistress. In the ruins of age, she is venerated, --
is pleasing even in death. -- She lives in the memory of many generations.

THOUGH many daughters have done virtuously in many things, yet such an one
excels them all -- possesses most of the real excellencies of the female
character, and must be nearest perfection.

TO ALL this we may add, that, though one could be found in whom were united all
those things which form the perfect beauty, in the opinion of the painter,
statuary or man of fancy; yet that elegance of form, and motion is often
deceitful -- beauty is a fading flower, soon gone, never to be regained by art,
nor purchased with money, and at best is vain; yet a woman who fears the
Lord, and follows his laws, shall be praised.

WELL may she demand our obedience to the last verse in this book and chapter;
that we give her of the fruits of her hands -- encourage and assist her in
doing good -- to improve her wealth, and gain the applause she so justly merits.

WHILE Job, Lot, Sampson, and others, in ancient times, had wives who afflicted
and disgraced them; Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and others, were blessed with those
who comforted and did them honor. We read the story of a pious Hannah -- a
prudent Abigail, and a patriotic Esther. These are examples of great benefit to
christians in all ages. Much care was taken in early times, to select such for
wives, who had been properly trained to religion and virtuous industry. Rebecca
was addressed by the Ambassador, who came with a treaty of marriage from his
master for Isaac; and he was prepossessed in her favor, while she hospitably
and humanely afforded drink at the well for his retinue. Rachel was first met
and loved by Jacob while she followed the employment of a shepherd's daughter.

WHILE man is called the lord of the creation, and has dominion given him over
all things, woman taken from his side, bears his image, and is placed as his
companion. Their mutual union is descriptive of the union between Christ and
his church.

IT is our duty in the American States, to pay particular attention to the
education of females; that they may preserve their proper station; their rights
and happiness, and be guided in the road to obtain those inestimable qualities,
piety to God -- reverence to parents -- love and obedience to their husbands --
tenderness and watchfulness over their children -- justice and humanity to
their dependants.

THIS theme is more important, where early and virtuous marriage is the source
for increasing the numbers, the wealth and prosperity of a country, and
preserving purity of morals, Idleness, extravagance and pride discourage this.
Very few will connect themselves willingly, in holy wedlock, with those, who do
not in return for love and protection, favor them with generous sentiments,
industry, economy, frugality, neatness, patience, fortitude, temperance and
chastity.

WERE the opulent duly impressed with the uncertainty of riches, and how
suddenly they may flee away; and were the poor instructed in the various
branches of female industry, both would escape one half the miseries in life.

WHEN house, land and friends, are gone forever, the virtuous mind, the well
informed head, and hands taught to work, have found new resources for supplying
their wants, which might otherwise have ended their days, or landed them in
despair. The world is more than half indebted to the female sex, for the
preservation of religion -- for security and prosperity in society, and for
peace and happiness in domestic life.

MEN of libertine principles may affect to ridicule this subject; but observe
their caution, least they become the wedded companion of one who is opposite to
the character of good. How seldom is this the case? How frequently do they
impose their vices and infirmities upon the purest and most angelic part of the
female sex! Their reverential awe, and awkward bashfulness in the presence of
amiable females, proves also that they revere such in their hearts. In no
company is the profligate so soon silenced and abashed, as in that of the good
woman I have described. They are wounded at the envied attention and preference
that she pays to the superior worth, virtue and knowledge of pious and good
men. The harrowed breast -- the jealous h^^d, here show themselves, by the
silent tongue -- the downcast eye, and prudent retreat.

BY spreading such truths as these far and wide, we are doing our duty to God
-- are in the only road to secure the honor and prosperity of our families,
and the blessings of civilization.

THE industry of the good wife we have described, is too important a part of
her character to be passed over without particular notice. In ancient days it
was not unfashionable for a Queen to attend to manufactures; costly dress and
elegant living were as well, if not better known then, than at present. It is
not degrading but exalting the female character to say, that their education is
not complete until they are versed in the various branches of manufactures
which are necessary for their households; I am proud to confess that I am
supported in these ideas, by innumerable examples which ladies of the first
excellence and wealth in America have set. A few voluntary associations, or a
more frequent exhibition of their industry in their dress would extend and
preserve the practice where it is omitted. A knowledge of the distaff, wheel
and loom is no disgrace, but a glory to the most exalted. Every man, by the
constitution, is born with an equal right to be elected to the highest office.
And every woman, is born with an equal right to be the wife of the most eminent
man. Let it therefore be our business, to see that each be possessed of those
virtues and accomplishments which form the useful and elevated character. The
peculiar nature of the occupations of women, gives them every necessary art, at
a much earlier period in life than men can obtain a knowledge of the laborious
and extensive business that naturally fails to their share. The needle and
distaff may be early put into the management of females, and go hand in hand
with the important branches of reading, writing, arithmetic, accounts,
geography, history and poetry.

THE employments of the needle are one of the branches of instruction in this
Academy. The useful first and then the ornamental. This last opens a broad
field to exercise the ingenuity and amuse the mind, while they are forming a
landscape or imitating the various shapes and tinges of a flower, with their
needle or pencil, they are imperceptibly led to admire and adore the power of
the Great Creator, who has clothed the lily of the field with greater beauties
than Solomon was arrayed with in all his glory. Here the opulent may amuse
themselves in decorating their persons and houses. Here the indigent may earn
bread, by delivering their labors to the merchant, as the women of the east
did and now do girdles and other specimens of industry. A general diffusion of
these branches affords an opportunity for each to follow that to which her
fancy leads. Learned women are valuable, but give me leave to observe, that
industrious women generally make the best wives.

MUSIC, and particularly the vocal, deservedly demands cultivation; principally
as it relates to praise -- that sublime part of public worship, in which every
one ought to share; from which pride or any wrong sentiment ought not to lead
us to withdraw. Both men and women of the greatest respectability in our
country have, and their children do every Sunday perform a part in choirs and
singing seats. Much discouragement arises on this head from an ungracious
reluctance: an affected cough or cold: This often disgusts and offends --
affords an opportunity to deny that pleasure which enlivens company and cheers
the sad. Good singers are often the most disobliging persons we meet with.

DANCING forms a part of education as it begets that easy deportment which
makes us appear less awkward and restrained in company. It is an innocent
recreation and relaxation for the sedentary. It promotes health and
cheerfulness. It is part of the amusement of social hours among friends and
strangers -- among persons of various pursuits and principles. It wears away
the rust of prejudice. Seeing each other in their best dress and most pleasant
face, the blood being set into circulation by motion and music, spleen flies --
harmony reigns, and imperceptibly diffuses its pleasing effects. But all these,
under the strictest rules of decorum and good order.

THE character of the virtuous woman I have drawn, is from the bible. The
thoughts are principally adapted to the pastoral and agricultural state. The
patriarchs and their descendents in Judea, were principally engaged as
shepherds and tillers of the ground. Similar in a great degree is the situation
of the United States. Agriculture and manufactures are the foundation of our
national wealth and prosperity; they ought to be promoted by all classes of
citizens. They lead to industry -- and preserve health, virtue and piety. The
volume of inspiration is doubly enhanced, and more worthy to be studied to form
good men and women, as the characters are real. We need not search the writers
of romance and fiction, of poets or fine writers for this purpose. The heart
cannot be so well regulated or head instructed and useful manners formed, as
from that book which also contains the words of eternal life. -- The grand
adversary of man, never invented a better plan to build up his kingdom, than
when he banished the bible from schools, and led men of real abilities and
learning to join in the system, from affected reverence to its character. --
Others improving upon the idea, have made it an engine by which to introduce
infidelity. If this is not the case, why are deists and their abettors, so
tenacious and zealous on this head? I hope Americans will awake to wisdom, and
while they avoid selecting portions of scripture to be committed to memory by
schoolboys as a penance for faults, they will permit it to be read as a
privilege in school, as a mark of honor and favor to those who have farthest
advanced in good morals and reading.

No volume affords so useful a field, for tuning the voice to the various
sentiments of the writers in order to benefit both reader and hearer as this.
The four gospels afford a style peculiarly adapted to all readers. Many of the
most celebrated public speakers, in these States, both in the pulpit and at the
bar, were taught reading in the bible: They have not lost their reverence and
love for it: It has not acquired such indifference in their minds, as to be
idly called in to lengthen out an oration or conversation: Is never used by
them, but upon occasions most worthy the sanction of God's word. They blush for
others, who vilely debase it to common and improper purposes. While our
citizens retain the bible in their possession and the reading of it in our
schools and families, a most important mean is improved, to gain good morals,
pure religion and that happy middle-state between poverty and riches. The
sacred oracles contain a sublimity and purity, which like other excellent
productions, never weary by use. They form pure and elegant manners, free from
pomp and ostentation -- from austerity and gloominess. There we find all the
duties to God and our neighbor. There we are taught subordination to superiors.

UNDER this last is included our duty to our instructors of every kind. Unless
children know how to obey, they will never be qualified to command. -- Those
who are not properly governed at home are seldom orderly in school, but often
disgrace themselves and parents, and injure others by their untoward behavior.
Parents and children are to be pitied for their neglect herein. It is from
defects in family government, that magistrates and instructors have much
trouble.

WE ought also to strengthen the hands of instructors and not degrade them. I
never envied the felicity of those who have erred on this head; -- bad
children, disorderly youth, and proud, unruly men, have amply punished them for
their imprudence. -- Very difficult is the task to regulate the various tempers
in a school: much patience, fortitude, wisdom and prudence are necessary; we
ought not therefore to make the task doubly arduous, by our childish
inteference.

PRIDE is always ready to intrude itself to interrupt our ideas on the subject
of female education, and leads many to despise industry, with the pretense that
it is not genteel to work: As if we had one order of men, who are to be
aggrandized by degrading of another. An American's heart revolts at this idea
-- we know and ought to practice differently. -- True gentility is founded upon
christian charity -- that best of graces, which wishes and endeavors to do
good to all; Its votaries are always humble, courteous, affectionate, wise and
gentle. Riches are often the portion of the vilest of men, they confer no worth
upon the possessor, any farther than with them he makes others happy. They
often conceal a wicked and heavy heart. Luxury and fashions are sometimes
studied and indulged to cast a veil over real faults, and to compensate for
substantial injuries. He who founds an asylum for distress -- He who introduces
an useful art by which the poor may earn bread, or rescues a fellow mortal from
destruction, is more deserving of a statue, than he who conquers a globe -- and
an industrious good wife is a more noble personage than a million of
fashionable flutterers. Virtue and merit are not known by title or parade, but
by generous, manly, humane, disinterested actions. Art and address often
procure means to make an appearance before the world, even in public men; while
a country may basely leave their most meritorious citizens to beggary and
insult from those who are exalted by the revolution of those affairs, which
have made others miserable. Thus uncertain are all those things which dazzle
the eye, and lead the heart to place its happiness in the uncertain pomp and
pelf of this world.

OUR good or bad fortunes are very little in our power. Providence permits one
to rise and another to fall, in the language of mortals; but, many a beggar
will be accepted at his bar, when the rich and the gay may be cast out. The
great concern is to maintain our integrity -- to take heed least adversity
discourage us, or land us in vice. It is criminal to become worse by
misfortune; but to amend is our glory. When I contemplate the real condition of
many female orphans -- the losses of families from the want of knowledge of
business, in widowed mothers, and the cruel rapine and plunder committed upon
their property -- When I recall the lamentations and complaints of many, from
men we would blush to mention, I am irresistibly drawn to wish for that
fortunate hour, when public or private benevolence will found institutions also
for depositing their property or shelters for their persons, and places for
their education.

THAT such asylums may be erected is proved by the experiment already made by a
protestant communion, in our own country; where young females are annualy sent
from other places for education. More specimens of ingenuity, and more useful
manufactures are annually sent from that society to market, than from any other
place in America. They thereby check costly importations in this line from
abroad, and derive profit to their community. All these things are done under
the immediate direction of their own sex, with a constant opportunity to grow
in christian knowledge; free from temptations to learn or commit wickedness.

BUT because we have heard of Roman Catholic nunneries, and idly abhor every
thing that has the approbation of Papists (however excellent) we run into the
opposite extreme. Where is the harm, if men or women choose a state of celibacy
during the whole or part of their lives? why may they not devote themselves in
a retirement, to the duties of piety, humility, humanity and industry? Is not
their labor a sufficient source of profit to compensate for protection? --
But, if we wish to encourage early marriage, can this be effected in any better
way than by giving our youth the best education, to enable them to maintain
themselves and families? Must we permit a promiscuous intercourse of both sexes
-- and give full latitude to all the visionary fancies of poets and romance
writers on the subject of love, rather than form systems of real and permanent
use; and leave youth exposed to fortune-hunters and spendthrifts? Men of real
virtue prefer a companion who is not educated among the crowd of idlers.
Leading or indulging in fashions and gaiety, confers no real excellence upon
men or women: Those who do, are the least esteemed in the opinion of the wise
and good. True gentility needs no plumes, its own excellencies shine without
them.

A VERY powerful argument presents itself upon the subject of education, as we
are a country of professed patriots; who have contended for the rights of
posterity. Shall we neglect to provide for the instruction of that posterity,
and leave them to live and die in ignorance -- and consequently plunge them in
vice and destruction? If we do this by our own children, let us not forget the
memory of those who fought, bled and died in the late war. -- Who have left
large families to be guarded and protected by the country; who have not only
lost their parents, but property also. Shall religion and patriotism have no
influence with us on this subject? What must posterity say? -- What will
Britons judge of our principles and national character? -- Engage in a war --
call it a war of God -- for the rights of men, and neglect in peace to afford
the best blessing in life to our young and defenseless citizens.

AS OUR children are to be made christians and patriots, this subject is of the
highest national concern. It will promote our prosperity far sooner than a
fleet or army. Next to good laws and virtuous lawgivers and rulers, it will
promote our highest prosperity.

ANOTHER important argument, why the education of youth should be national and
not of party care, is that thereby the greatest benefit may arise to our
children, when the encouragement and springs to application are equal. If the
rewards for eminence are not in the public gift, men of the first character for
learning and usefulness may be neglected because they are not the favorites of
partial systems. Nay, what is equally to be avoided, they lose the benefit of
those institutions that their fathers and friends have formed and patronized.
Until the education of youth is more particularly under the public care than at
present, we cannot decently ask the aid of a public purse. If we attempt it, we
unfairly attempt to draw money from freemen without their consent, and compel
them to support systems that conscience leads them to wish might be altered,
and under which many groan.

THESE are true liberty principles: I deliver them to you in love as a freeman.
I am supported in them by many classes of our best citizens; their writings,
valor and sufferings have sealed their belief in them. By undisguisedly acting
up to them, we begin to form a general system -- shall prevent rival
institutions from multiplying unnecessarily, while none are properly supported.
Then may we hope to see the education of our daughters the subject of united
aid. Then shall we sacrilegiously pervert no man's charity -- offend no
christian brother, but with double energy promote the important purposes of
true religion, good government, equal liberty and pure love.

SOME of these last thoughts refer principally to literary institutions, and
where parents are opulent. But foundations to make the children of the poor
useful, and to give them an opportunity to reap the benefit of those good, and
perhaps great abilities, which Heaven has bestowed upon them as a rich gift,
are equally the objects of public care. They are considered as such in other
countries. The mechanic and every other art, has been improved, and the world
blessed by their labors, while many who have been born to inherit great
estates, and were allied to influential friends, have become vicious, and
disgraced human nature.

WHEN we endeavor to form the female for happiness and usefulness, that she
may be able to plead her own cause -- defend her own rights, and in a good
degree protect her own family against the injustice of men; let me also warn
women that they do not oppress their own sex, and betray their interest and
honor into the power of ours: Let not covetousness, unjust resentment or cruel
neglect, lead you to trespass against the laws of piety, or the rules of right,
and debase the native tenderness and delicacy of your part of the creation.
Take heed that artful men do not make you accessory to your own destruction,
and having led you to injure others, plot against, and undermine your own
prosperity. Beware least you encourage vicious, debilitated, diseased and base
men in their wanton outrages upon females. Remember how great is the reward for
protecting the defenseless, the weak and inexperienced: -- Remove them from
temptation -- correct their errors -- restore their spirits -- provoke them to
virtue -- teach them to reverence themselves. Inculcate the importance of the
female character, give them just ideas of themselves and others: -- See to it
that idle visionary thoughts have no place in their minds -- When called to
connect themselves for life, let them be informed, that love is formed in
mutual esteem and mutual interest -- that the eye has a very small share in
forming just and durable attachments. Piety is the foundation, and virtue the
structure to be built by matrimonial alliances. Without this, love will soon be
exchanged for indifference and disgust; and (...) end in those ways which are
the ways of hell -- and lead down to the chambers of death.

VERY many of the thoughts contained in this address are presented to you, my
female friends, of this Academy, for your serious consideration; as well as
others in this every numerous assembly. This subject is copious and pleasing. I
wish it may be beneficial. It depends much upon your conduct and the
application of the instructions you receive from your parents and teachers in
general, and especially from your preceptor and masters -- and that amiable
lady, your governess, whether you are happy and respected in life.

MOST becoming is it for you in their presence and in all other places, to let
a teachable and orderly temper appear. Remember that it is very se^dom that a
stubborn disobedient youth is amiab^^ or revered in age. We trust your
deportment a^^ improvement will do honor to yourselves and friends; and gain
reputation to the Female Academy in Portsmouth, and such rewards to its founder
and director, as may enable him to make it more and more useful.

I NEED not my friends, in general, remind you of the critical situation of the
young female; rendered doubly so, from the shameful neglect in the execution of
the laws by which they are to be guarded. We see their base destroyers rise to
places of honor and profit, from the silence and lost influence of men of
virtue and patriotism; from a depravity of morals that ought to be amended.
While the unfortunate female may be doomed to destruction or disgrace by the
tyranny of custom, end the severity of her own sex. As no recept^cles exist, to
which they may retire from the ga^^ of the world -- as the honor and felicity
of our ^^milies are so largely embarked in their virtu^ and becoming behavior,
it is a subject of the utm^^^ importance, that every one of us, give all
possible encouragement to their virtuous and useful education, and take every
possible pains to make them happy and respected.

MAY God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, bless, preserve and
keep you. The Lord mercifully with his favor look upon you, and give you such
heavenly wisdom and grace, that ^ou may all so conduct yourselves in this
world, that in the world to come, you may have life everlasting.


