APOSTOLIC PREACHING CONSIDERED IN THREE DISCOURSES. DELIVERED NOVEMBER 1790.

By SAMUEL STILLMAN, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by B. EDES and SON, No. 7, State-Street. M,DCC,XCI.

SERMON I.
1 COR. i. 21. "FOR AFTER THAT IN THE WISDOM OF GOD, THE WORLD BY WISDOM KNEW
NOT GOD, IT PLEASED GOD BY THE FOOLISHNESS OF PREACHING TO SAVE THEM THAT
BELIEVE."


THE best method, in my judgment, of determining with accuracy, how far the
light of nature is sufficient to lead mankind to the knowledge of the true GOD
and their duty to him, is, to attend to the condition of the Heathen world: Not
of the most barbarous and ignorant, but of the inhabitants of Greece and Rome
at the periods when they were most celebrated for learning and refinement. Even
then they were gross idolators; and many of their sentiments and practices were
shocking to decency and common sense. The sports of the gladiators, unnatural
lusts, the licentiousness of divorce, the exposing of infants and slaves, the
procuring abortions, the public establishment of stews; all subsisted at Rome,
and not one of them was condemned, or hinted at in Tully's offices. -- The most
indecent revelling, drunkenness, and lewdness were practiced at the feasts of
Bacchus, Ceres* and Cybele; and their greatest philosophers never remonstrated
against it.

"The Heathen philosophers, though they have advanced fine sayings and sublime
precepts, in some points of morality, have grossly failed in others: such as
the toleration or encouragement of revenge, slavery, unnatural lust,
fornication, suicide, etc. -- For example: Plato expressly allowed of excessive
drinking at the festivals of Bacchus, -- Maximus Tyrius forbad to pray, etc.

"Aristotle and Plato both direct that means should be used to prevent weak
children being brought up. -- Cato commends a young man for frequenting the
stews. -- Cicero expressly speaks of fornication as a thing never found fault
with -- Plato recommends a community of women, and advises that soldiers should
not be restrained from sensual indulgence, even the most unnatural species of
it. -- Xenephon relates, without any marks of reprobation, that natural lust
was encouraged by the laws of several Grecian states. -- Solon, their great law
giver forbad it only to slaves. -- Diogenes inculcated, and openly practiced
the most brutal lust. -- Zeno and Cato both killed themselves."

[Bishop of CARLISLE's reflections on the life and character of Christ, --
Appendix.]
Whence it appears, that with all their wisdom and learning, they quite mistook
the nature of God and religion: hence divine revelation became absolutely
necessary. "For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not
God" -- The meaning is, That although the invisible things of Him from the
creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his eternal power and Godhead, the world knew him not; but became
vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the
uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
four-footed beasts, and creeping things." [Rom. i. 20 -- 23.]

IT has been the method of the infinite God, both before and since the fall, to
leave mankind to act out their own characters, and not to interpose until the
necessity of his interposition became evident. Thus it was in the case of our
first parents: he could have prevented their apostasy, but did not. After they
had sinned, and were distressed with conscious guilt, he revealed to them Jesus
Christ under the idea of the seed of the woman. And when the world was
overspread with sin and ignorance, and by wisdom knew him not, having had the
fairest trial, he was pleased, by the foolishness of preaching to save them
that believe. Let us

I. ACCOUNT for Paul's use of this expression, the foolishness of preaching.

II. ASCERTAIN what kind of preaching he had in view.

III. PROVE that God has been pleased to put the most distinguished honor on
it, by making it the means of saving them that believe.

I. OUR first inquiry is, Why does the Apostle use the expression, foolishness
of preaching?

WE are confident, my brethren, he does not speak in his own, but in borrowed
language. He must have been a fool indeed, to have engaged in a service which
he knew would reproach his own understanding. Rather he has respect to the
common opinion of the Greeks, who are said to seek after wisdom; meaning the
wisdom of this world. "We preach Christ crucified, says this apostle, to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto them who are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God."
[Verses 23, 24.] -- This single passage accounts for Paul's use of the
expression. The preaching of Christ crucified was foolishness to the learned
and unregenerate Greeks.

II. WE pass to consider what kind of preaching it was, the apostle had respect
to.

THERE are certain sentiments that the world can hear with patience and
approbation: there are others to which the hearts of natural men rise in
opposition.

I. Few, if any, object to moral subjects, because it is a just and general
opinion, That all men ought to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with God.
Neither Jews nor Greeks would take offense at this kind of preaching; nor even
men of vicious characters; unless the preacher should happen to fix on the
vices of some of his friends, and censure them with severity. In that case
resentment would naturally be excited, and he might expect to be charged with
being too pointed or personal in the pulpit: especially if he had previously
known on whom the reproof would fall.

IN such circumstances what shall a preacher do? Shall he cease to expose vice,
because some of his friends are vicious? God forbid! Far better will it be for
him to lose the attachment of the best parishioner he has; and to make a
sacrifice of his whole temporal interest, than to be unfaithful to his GOD, to
his conscience and to the people of his charge. -- The way for mankind to
secure their feelings from injury on such occasions, is for them to be
virtuous. But if they will violate the laws of God, and injure society by their
wicked examples, they must bear the reproach.

No prudent man will introduce personal matters into the pulpit; nor will an
honest man be afraid of commending himself to every man's conscience in the
sight of God. -- However, as moral subjects are generally approved, because
agreeable to the reason and nature of things, he has but little to fear on this
head; except he should be too evangelical in his manner of treating them: for
the law may be handled evangelically, and the gospel may be preached legally.

2. WE may also insist freely on the christian tempers without giving offense;
because, like moral subjects, they command respect from mankind in general; who
readily acknowledge, that all men ought to be meek, patient, charitable, ready
to forgive, etc. -- And it is confessed, that these are very important
subjects, and should frequently be brought into public view, as evidences of
the truth of personal religion: for, if any man have not the spirit of Christ
he is none of his. [Rom. viii. 9.]

3. WE may also pass without reproach perhaps, if we touch lightly on the
sinfulness of mankind; and assure them, If they do what they can, God will
cooperate with their endeavors, and grant them salvation. -- Such a
representation of things is flattering to the pride of man, because it
extenuates human depravity, and divides the glory of salvation between Christ
and the sinner. -- In this case the offense of the cross cease.

4. IT seems to be a very popular opinion, "That articles of faith are of no
great importance, provided a man's life be good." -- If so, it follows, that it
was not necessary that Jesus Christ should come into the world to teach and
save mankind; because, according to the above proposition, their salvation
might have been accomplished without it. For whether we believe in Jesus Christ
or Confucius is of no consequence provided the life be good. -- It amounts
therefore to a rejection of divine revelation, particularly of christianity.

"SOME persons, upon pretense of the sufficiency of the light of nature,
avowedly reject all revelation, as, in its very notion, incredible, and what
must be fictitious. And indeed it is certain, no revelation would have been
given, had the light of nature been sufficient in such a sense, as to render
one not wanting and useless. But no man, in seriousness and simplicity of mind,
can possibly think it so, who considers the state of religion in the heathen
world, before revelation, and its present state in those places which have
borrowed no light from it.

"THERE are other persons, not to be ranked with these, who seem to be getting
in a way of neglecting, and, as it were, overlooking revelation, as of small
importance, provided natural religion be kept to." With little regard, either
to the evidence of the former, or to the objections against it, and even upon
supposition of its truth; "The only design of it," say they, must be to
establish a belief of the moral system of nature, and to enforce the practice
of natural piety and virtue. The belief and practice of these things were,
perhaps, much promoted by the first publication of christianity: But whether
they are believed and practiced, upon the evidence and motives of nature or of
revelation, is no great matter." Aug. in Psa. 31.
This way of considering revelation, though it is not the same with the former,
yet borders nearly upon it, and very much runs up into it: Bishop BUTLER's
analogy. Edit. 5th, p. 171 -- 173.
-- that is, into deism. This I apprehend will appear by comparing the
principle we oppose, with our Lord's commission to his apostles, [Mark 16.15,
16.] "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved: but he that believes not shall
be damned." To which may be added the following solemn passage of Peter
concerning Christ, delivered by him when he was filled with the Holy Ghost --
[Acts 4.12.] "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

IF we deny the truth of these scriptures the charge of deism is fixed on us:
if we admit it, we can no longer treat christianity with indifference, but must
confess that it is of infinite importance to mankind both in its principles and
practices.

To ascertain what christianity is, as taught by Christ and his apostles, we
must search the New Testament.

THE foolishness of preaching mentioned in the text, the apostle explains by
saying, We preach Christ crucified. -- [Ver. 23.] This general expression
comprehends, I suppose, the various subjects of the ministry of the apostles;
which I proceed to consider.

MORE cannot reasonably be expected under this head, than that the preacher
should give a sketch of the plan of apostolic preaching. A full discussion of
the subject would fill volumes; and will employ the whole time of the ministers
of Christ, provided they are properly attentive to the duties of their
profession.

1st. THE apostles insisted frequently on the great principles, called, natural
religion: Such as the being and attributes of God, -- his creation and
government of the universe -- his love of virtue and hatred of vice -- and that
he will finally render to every man according to his works. These principles
are fundamental to all true religion; and are blended with christianity, which
"is a republication of them: and which is very material, it teaches natural
religion in its genuine simplicity; free from those superstitions with which it
was totally corrupted, and under which it was in a manner lost. Ibid.
"

IF so, natural religion owes much to christianity. Besides, it comprehends all
the great principles of natural religion, and makes us acquainted with the
method of our redemption by Christ; concerning which the light of nature leaves
us in total darkness.

THUS viewed christianity may be considered as a new edition of natural
religion, with additions of the greatest importance to the world. -- Let
mankind determine then, which has the preference: natural religion detached
from christianity; or christianity as comprehending all the great principles of
natural religion in their most pure state; and at the same time revealing to us
God's eternal purpose of mercy to sinners through Jesus Christ.

2dly. THE universal corruption of the world is another part of apostolic
preaching. In Romans iii. Paul considers this subject in a most explicit and
decided manner, where he takes a comparative view of Jews and Gentiles. "What
then? are we better than they? No, in no wise: for we have before proved both
Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin." And after he had quoted
several passages from the Old Testament in support of the affecting truth, he
adds, "Now we know that what things the law says, it says to them that are
under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become
guilty before God. -- For all have sinned, and have come short of the glory of
God." [ver. 19 -- 23.] And so far as our reading and observation extend, we
find the melancholy truth exemplified.

3dly. THE sacred writers assure us that all men, considered in unbelief, are
in a condition of total depravity. [Gen. vi. 5.] We read, "And God saw that the
wickedness of man was great on the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually." -- Jesus Christ declares,
"For out of the heart of man proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies." [Matt. xv. 19.] If so, the
heart of man is the fountain of iniquity. -- In John iii. 6. after Christ had
spoken of the new birth to Nicodemus, he adds, "That which is born of the flesh
is flesh;" -- that is, altogether sinful. Thus Paul uses the term flesh
repeatedly. [Rom. vii. 5, etc. -- ] "For they that are after the flesh," that
is, influenced by a sinful nature, "do mind the things of the flesh" -- "So
then they that are in the flesh cannot please God;" because the carnal mind is
enmity against him. This short sentence is remarkably descriptive of the total
sinfulness of the human heart.

BY this depravity inspired writers do not mean, that there is any loss of the
natural faculties of the soul; these remain entire amidst the ruins of the
fall: man has reason, understanding, will and affections; but that he is
destitute of a spiritual taste, and under the constant influence of aversion to
God. -- If the sinner's heart was right in a moral sense, I can conceive of no
remaining inability to love God for his own sake, and to live to his glory. The
essence of religion is love; and the essence of depravity or wickedness is
enmity of heart to God. And in this awful condition the sinner is, as long as
he remains in unregeneracy.

4thly. IN connection with this representation of human nature, the apostles
endeavored to awaken the attention of their hearers to the infinite danger in
which they were. Often did they thunder in their ears the terrors of the law;
saying, "Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the
book of the law to do them [Gal. 3.10.] "If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be anathema maranatha ^ Cor. 16.22.] -- "When the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: when he shall come to be
glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe -- in that
day." [2 Thessalonians. 1. 7 -- 11.]

WE see that they considered mankind as consisting of two classes, the
righteous and the wicked; and addressed them in language adapted to their
respective characters. They did not preach to a promiscuous assembly as if they
were all saints; but assured the ungodly that they were in the gall of
bitterness and the bonds of iniquity; and that should they die in that
condition, the wrath of God would abide upon them for ever. But if any of the
people were pricked in the heart, and cried out, "Men and brethren what shall
we do?" --

5thly. THEY preached Christ to them as the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes. "For I determined, says Paul to the Corinthians, not
to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified." [1 Cor. ii.
2.] This was their darling theme, and the only remedy for sin-sick souls.

HAD a sermon been delivered in the apostolic age, to a christian assembly,
that had but little of Christ in it, they would at once have concluded, the
preacher had forgot his errand; and with the disappointed woman at the
sepulcher, have cried out, "They have taken away my Lord out of his place, and
I know not where they have laid him." Where should Jesus Christ be as the
object of affection, if not in the hearts and conversation of his disciples? --
Where indeed, if not in the preaching of his ministers?

THE apostles preached Christ in his TRUE and PROPER DEITY as essential to the
christian scheme. This great truth they had learned from his own mouth. [John
x. 31 -- 39.] -- "I and my Father are one. Then the Jews took up stones to
stone him. Jesus says unto them, Many good works have I showed you from my
Father; for which of these works do ye stone me? The Jews answered him, saying,
For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou,
being a man, make thyself God." -- Here was a most favorable opportunity for
Christ to have disclaimed all pretensions to the Godhead. -- He had only to
inform them, that they had mistaken his meaning; that he laid no claim to
divinity; but meant to assure them, that he was one with God his Father in
design and operation, not in nature. -- Shocked at the idea of blasphemy, would
he not at once have acquitted himself of the charge? -- Would not any of his
apostles, or any good man on earth who had been so grossly mistaken, have
rectified the mistake as soon as possible? Our Lord's not doing it, when every
circumstance called for the frank acknowledgment, is in my judgment, no
inconsiderable proof that he was a divine person.

IF we consider him in no other light than as a teacher sent from God to
instruct and to reform mankind, it seems to have been his duty to remove the
prejudices which the Jews had imbibed against him; that so he might answer the
design of his mission. Instead of this, he makes an appeal to his miraculous
works, as proof that he was in the Father, and the Father in Him. The Jews
still believed, that he made himself God; therefore "they sought to take him;
but he escaped out of their hands." He left them, my brethren, under the
influence of a very important error, provided he was not really GOD. "Nor did
our Lord give any intimation, says one, that they had misunderstood him; nor
yet the evangelist, as he does in several other instances of much less
importance; which silence is a strong presumptive proof, that they were not
under a mistake about the sense of the words: for such a mistake, on the
principles of our opposers, might have been an occasion of idolatry in them;
and a mistake of that kind, not remarked by the historian, would be calculated
to answer the same pernicious purpose in succeeding generations. -- But if he
refused to correct so dangerous a mistake on their account, yet was it not
necessary that he should have done it on ours? -- that when we read his gospel,
we might not entertain the detestable thought, that he equalled himself with
the Most High. If, however, he thought it proper not to explain himself, at
that time; yet it might have been expected, that his disciples should have
given us the true sense of the mysterious words, when they reported them." Dr.
ABBADIE's treatise on The DEITY of JESUS CHRIST, etc. p. 246, 247: in which
this important subject is handled in a most masterly manner; and well merits
the attention of both the friends and opposers of the doctrine.


SERMON II.
THE language and conduct of the disciples of Christ prove, that they received
him as a divine person. John tells us [c.v. 23.] That it is the will of God,
"That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He that
honoreth not the Son, honoreth not the Father who has sent him." Compared with
Heb. i. 6. "And again when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he
says, And let all the angels of God worship him." The best comment on such
passages will probably be found, in the conduct of his immediate followers. If
they, who were favored with divine inspiration, actually worshipped him, we may
safely believe that they received him as very and eternal God. This then really
was the case with Stephen. [Acts vii. 59.] "And they stoned Stephen calling
upon GOD, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." -- Here we see a pious
martyr in the hour of dissolution, addressing himself to Jesus Christ in a
solemn act of religious worship: therefore we conclude Jesus Christ is truly
God.

IN 2. Cor. xii. 8, 9. we observe that Paul prays to Christ when there was
given to him a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of satan to buffet him: "For
this thing, I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he
said unto me. My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect
in weakness." What follows proves that by the LORD whom he addressed, CHRIST is
intended. "Most gladly therefore will I glory in my infirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me." The Lord had promised him that his grace should be
sufficient for him; this grace he calls the power of Christ; signifying, that
the LORD CHRIST, to whom he addressed himself, had given him this gracious
answer.

THOUGH there are many other texts in the writings of the apostles that are of
the same import, John xiv. 1. Romans x. 12, 13. Romans xv. xii. 2 Cor ix. 1. Acts
ix. 14, etc.
I shall only mention the following plain, decisive passage, [Rev. v. 11 --
end.] "And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the
throne and the beast and the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand
times ten thousand; saving with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and blessing. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I
saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits
upon the throne, AND UNTO THE LAMB FOR EVER AND EVER." -- I appeal to every
unprejudiced mind, whether there can possibly be a more solemn act of supreme
worship than this, which is ascribed equally to the LAMB that was slain, as to
him that sits upon the throne? And will any man after reading this passage,
hesitate a moment, whether he ought to pay the highest honor to the Son of God?
who is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person.

WHAT idea would a man of common sense form of the character of Jesus Christ,
upon reading Philip. ii. 6. "Who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God?" Would he not naturally think, either that Jesus
Christ is a divine person; or that he was guilty of the most horrid impiety? It
would have been a robbery of the most blasphemous kind, for a creature, however
exalted, to claim equality with JEHOVAH: and instead of his being celebrated
for his humility, he ought to be considered as a monster of pride and
wickedness. But if we admit the idea of his true and proper deity, we are at
once led to admire his unparallelled condescension. "He who was in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." [ver. 7, 8.] The
moment we deny the divinity of Christ, I conceive we destroy the apostle's
argument.

"THE following words, as they stand in our translation, go on to describe the
excellency of his glory, which was so real and transcendent a glory, that he
thought it not robbery to be -- i. e. he thought himself entitled to be --
equal with God. But I shall not insist upon this translation; for it is more
agreeable to the apostle's argument, and to the language made use of, to
suppose him to intend in these words, to express the first degree or instance
of his humility, and that the verse should be rendered by words to this effect:
Who being in the form of God, was not fond, or tenacious, of appearing as God;
but made himself of no reputation. I shall not trouble you with the particular
reasons of this rendering, which would lead us too far into critical enquiries:
but which way soever the text be understood, the (...) will be found to belong
to Jesus Christ. If he thought it not robbery to assume this equality with God,
(whatever is meant by it,) undoubtedly he was equal: or, if it was the effect
of his humility, that he did not hold or insist upon his equality with God,
then certainly he had such an equality; for where is the humility of not
insisting on, or not retaining an equality, which never did or could belong to
him?" Bp. SHERLOCK's discourses on this passage. Vol. 4. p. 24, 25.


IT was in the contemplation of this astonishing truth, that our apostle thus
exclaims, "And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh" -- [1 Timothy iii. 16.] That it was so, is a truth
revealed, but the manner of it is past finding out.

TO what has been said on this subject I will only add [Col. ii. 9.] "For in
him, i. e. Christ, dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily." It seems
that Paul could not say more than this to establish the deity of his Master.
What a striking gradation is here -- In Christ "dwells the GODHEAD" -- "the
FULLNESS of the Godhead" -- yea, "ALL THE FULLNESS OF THE GODHEAD BODILY." --
Then surely he is very and eternal God. Let us then, my brethren, amidst the
numerous attempts that are made to rob Christ of his essential glory, without
any secret reserve, or double meaning, ascribe blessing, and honor, and glory,
and power to Jesus Christ, our GOD and SAVIOR.

IT would be easy to prove by the sacred scriptures, that the same divine
names, titles, attributes and works are ascribed to Christ, that are ascribed
to the Father; but I hope enough has been said to make it evident, that his
true and proper deity was an essential part of apostolic preaching.

SEVERAL of the passages of scripture that we have been considering, prove
also, the incarnation of the Son of God: or, that the divine and human natures
were united in him. For instance, "God was manifest in the flesh." -- He that
was in the form of God was found in fashion as a man. Also [Heb. ii. 16.] "For
verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of
Abraham." The person spoken of is Christ, who existed prior to his birth of
Mary in a nature different from that which he assumed. "Verily he took" -- here
we have a personal action: he who was properly divine, "took on him the seed,
or nature, of Abraham." Thus the WORD was made flesh; i. e. became united to
the nature of man.

I PASS to observe, That the apostles preached Christ as the all atoning
sacrifice for sin. Peter declares that "he bare our sins in his own body on the
tree." -- This language he borrowed from Isaiah [liii. 4, 5.] "Surely he has
borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken,
smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and
with his stripes we are healed." -- "He has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us." "He died the just for the unjust that he might
bring us to God," etc. Such is the current language of the Bible.

IT is observable, that inspired writers lay the principal stress on his death.
Paul says, "We have redemption through his blood" -- that we are redeemed with
the precious blood of Christ, -- that he died for our sins; not for his own,
for he had none: "He was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners."

"CHRIST's satisfaction for sin was not only by his last sufferings, though it
was principally by them; but all his sufferings, and all the humiliation that
he was subject to from the first moment of his incarnation to his resurrection,
were propitiatory or satisfactory." President EDWARD's Hist. Redemp. last edi,
p. 324.
All that he did and suffered make up that righteousness by which the believing
sinner is justified. Through the whole he acted voluntarily: for he had power
to lay down his life, and he had power to take it again; but he knew that it
was necessary that he should suffer these things, and enter into his glory;
therefore he became "obedient unto death even the death of the cross:" not as a
martyr only to seal the truth of his own religion; but that he might put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself: hence he is said to be "the propitiation for
our sins;" [Rom. iii. 25.] not metaphorically but really.

6th. JESUS CHRIST having finished his part of the work of our redemption,
ascended to the Father, and sent the Holy Ghost, whose peculiar office it is to
take it up where he had left it, and to carry it on until the glorious plan
shall be all accomplished. -- "It is expedient for you, said Christ to his
disciples, that I go away; for if I go not away, the comforter will not come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he
will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment." [John
xiv. 7, 8.]

THE work of Jesus Christ is for, or in the room and stead of the sinner; that
God the Father might justify him consistent with his whole character. -- The
work of the Holy Spirit is carried on in the sinner, in order to reconcile him
to God, and fit him for eternal life. Jesus Christ opens the way for his
discharge from the curse of the law; the Spirit of God makes him meet to be a
partaker of the inheritance of the saints in light. Both are absolutely
necessary; the latter no less than the former, because, "Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord.", [Heb. xii. 14.]

IT has been proved already in a preceding part of the subject, that mankind
are in a condition of total depravity: if so, their final condemnation is
certain unless the heart be changed; because a mind at enmity against God, can
not be happy in his presence.

IT may, perhaps, be said, That those persons only who are abandoned to
wickedness are thus depraved; but this is not the case with all mankind. -- It
is confessed, that all men do not discover their depravity by open wickedness.
Many persons are under the restraint of education, sense of honor, or a fear of
the wrath to come; whose hearts at the same time remain disaffected to divine
things. -- Let such persons ask themselves as in the presence of that God who
looks through them, and knows every thought afar off, whether they do not
restrain prayer before him? -- Prefer a crowd of fabulous publications to the
sacred volume? -- Whether they are not strangers to the duties of private
religion? -- Is not God in great measure forgotten by them? -- Do they not lie
down and rise up, without any proper sense of him who holds their souls in
life? -- Are not their hearts wholly attached to the riches, honors and
pleasures of the world? -- Will not a small difficulty detain them from the
place of public worship? -- Would the like difficulty prevent their going to an
evening's amusement? Why not? -- The reason is obvious; they hate the one and
love the other. (...) a preacher happens to exceed his usual length in
preaching, are they not quite out of patience (...) him; though they allow the
sermon was good, and his manner not disagreeable? -- Yet would not these very
persons be willing to remain until midnight at some fashionable entertainment?
-- Are they not fatigued with the one, and in raptures with the other? I ask
these questions, my friends, that you may determine what your prevailing taste
is. You certainly know what you love most: If the world and the things thereof
have the preference, can you believe that you shall be happy in Heaven, where
all is holy? Be not decieved; for however amiable you may appear in the eyes of
the world, one thing is wanting: your hearts must be changed by a divine
influence, or you are (...) done forever.

IT is a clear case with me, That should God leave the sinner to himself, and
not inflict on him any positive punishment at all, the depravity of his own
heart would make him entirely miserable, because the very nature of sin
separates the soul from God. [Isa. lix. 2.] It follows then, "Except a man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." [John iii. 3.] In the 5th ver.
of the same chapter this change is represented as a being born of the Spirit;
because he effects it. Sometimes it is called a translation, a passing from
death to life: -- But in 2 Cor. v. 17, we have this striking passage -- "If any
man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things pass away; behold, all
things become new." His views, his joys, his company, his conduct are all new.
-- -- -- His heart is broken for sin as committed against God; he lothes
himself and repents in dust and ashes. -- The divine character appears glorious
to him -- Christ is precious -- sins of heart his constant burden -- holiness
the thing he longs for. -- He feelingly adopts the language of David, "Whom
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth I desire beside thee."
The greatest pleasure he has, is in communion with God.

HIS conduct is changed also: for having believed in God, he is careful to
maintain good works. -- His religion begins in his heart, and extends its
influence over all his behavior; so that his acquaintance take knowledge of
him, that he has been with Jesus.

THUS the Holy Ghost accompanies the dispensation of the gospel with the
exceeding greatness of his power, and enlarges the Redeemer's kingdom. And thus
will he continue to do, until all the ransomed of the Lord shall return and
come to Sion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: then sorrow and
sighing shall flee away.

7th. THE preceding observations relative to the deity and incarnation of
Christ, the doctrine of the atonement, and the influence of the Spirit of God
in the regeneration of the sinner, naturally lead me to remark, That the
doctrine of the Trinity appears to me to be so interwoven with christianity in
general, and the plan of apostolic preaching in particular, as to make an
essential part of it. The Father is represented as choosing -- the Son as
redeeming -- and the Holy Ghost as calling and sanctifying. [Ephs. i. 4.]
"According as he, the Father, has chosen us in him." -- Of the Son it is said
[Titus ii. 14.] "who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity." And in Titus iii. 5. the apostle assures us, that we are "saved by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost." Thus different
parts of the work of salvation are attributed to different persons in the
Godhead.

BEFORE Jesus Christ left the world he gave the following commission to his
apostles, and to their successors in the ministry; -- "Go ye therefore, and
teach all nations; baptising them in the name of the FATHER and of the SON, and
of the HOLY GHOST:" -- [Matt. xxviii. 19.] -- Here we observe in an act of
religious worship, equal honor paid to each person in the Godhead.

ACCORDING to this commission the apostles and primitive preachers acted. They
could not do otherwise without being disobedient to the command of Christ (...)
consequently, wherever they preached the gospel and baptized the converts to
christianity, they maintained the doctrine of the Trinity. Nor does it appear,
that they had any apprehensions that it would prevent the success of their
mission. They knew it to be their duty, to pay a prompt and implicit obedience
to their master's orders, and to leave all consequences as to themselves, and
his cause with him; being fully persuaded that he would never command them to
believe, or propagate any sentiment that was not perfectly reasonable, though
they could not fully comprehend it. Nor do we find that they ever made a single
attempt to explain, how it is that the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost are
three persons yet one God; nor how the divine and human natures were united in
Jesus Christ. They maintained this threefold distinction in the Godhead; and
assure us, that "God was manifest in the flesh;" but confessed the mystery, and
submited their reason to divine revelation; in which God's "design is to make
known realities and facts, not the manner of them.

"ALMOST every thing in the system of nature, notwithstanding the great
improvements in modern philosophy, is attended with difficulties. If you look
up to the heavens, you stand astonished at their greatness, and feel yourself
incapable of comprehending that immensity which lies beyond those vast spaces
which surround us. If you cast your eyes on the earth, you meet with as many
mysteries as there are animals, plants, and creatures inanimate. You meet with
innumerable difficulties in explaining, the sensation of one, the vegetation of
another, and the motion of a third. -- If you consider material nature in its
wide extremes, of immense greatness, and invisible minuteness, you are struck
with amazement and imagination is nonplussed. -- If, to the consideration of
bodies, you take in that of their duration, time will show you incomprehensible
wonders; both in the succession of ages past, and in that which is future. --
If you turn your thoughts to spiritual essences, every thing surpasses your
comprehension. You cannot comprehend, either their manner of existing, or their
manner of acting. Even the human soul is so great a paradox to itself, that it
long since despaired, not only of comprehending, but of knowing itself.

"AND if so, is there any reason to assert, as our adversaries do, that there
are no mysteries in religion? Or have they sufficient ground to refuse their
assent to our Lord's eternal Divinity? so clearly revealed in the Bible,
because it is attended with such difficulties as are insuperable to the powers
of reason? Is it any wonder if the difficulties with which we meet in the
Christian religion, and especially those that regard the Deity of Christ and
the doctrine of the Trinity, should be found greater, much greater, than those
which attend a philosophical inquiry into the system of nature? It would,
indeed be a wonder if it were not so; because the constitution and capacities
of our minds bear some proportion to natural objects, which are created and
finite; and are much better qualified to inquire into their causes and
properties, their connections and uses, than into those of religion, which are
of a spiritual kind, and particularly what relates to the infinite Godhead."
Dr. ABBADIE on the deity of Christ, p. 326, 327.


THIS threefold distinction in the Godhead is mentioned by Paul [2. Cor. xiii.
14.] "The grace of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the love of GOD, and the
communion of the HOLY GHOST, be with you all, Amen." This is evidently a prayer
of the apostle addressed to the sacred Three, that all spiritual blessings
might be granted to his Christian friends at Corinth: He could bless them in no
other sense than by praying for them.

TO what has been said, I shall only add, 1 John v. 7. "For there are three
that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost* and these
three are one." Those persons who wish to see the authenticity of this text
excellently vindicated, are advised to read TRAVIS's letters to Dr. GIBBON.


"I FREELY grant, says an excellent writer, that had I consulted my own reason
only, I could not have discovered some mysteries of the gospel. Nevertheless,
when I think on the grandeur of God; when I cast my eyes on that vast ocean;
when I consider that immense ALL; nothing astonishes me, nothing stumbles me,
nothing seems to be inadmissible, however incomprehensible soever it may be.
When the subject is Divine, I am ready to believe all, to admit all, to receive
all; provided I be convinced that it is God himself who speaks to me, or any
one on his part. After this I am no more astonished that there are three
distinct persons in one divine essence; one God, and yet a Father, a Son, and a
Holy Ghost. -- Either religion must tell us nothing about God, or what it tells
us must be beyond our capacities; and in discovering even the borders of this
immense ocean, it must needs exhibit a vast extent in which our feeble eyes are
lost. But what surprises me, what stumbles me, what frightens me, is to see a
diminutive creature, a contemptible man, a little ray of light glimmering
through a few feeble organs, controvert a point with the supreme Being; oppose
that intelligence who sits at the helm of the world; question what he
affirms, dispute what he determines, appeal from his decisions, and, even after
God has given evidence, reject all doctrines that are beyond his capacity!
Enter into thy nothingness, mortal creature! What madness animates thee! How
durst thou pretend -- thou who art but a point, thou whose essence is but an
atom -- to measure thyself with the Supreme Being; with him who fills heaven
and earth; with Him, whom heaven, the heaven of heavens cannot contain! Can
thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection?
High as heaven, what can thou do? deeper than hell, what can thou know?"
Mr. SAURIN's Ser. Vol. 1. p. 78, 79. ROBINSON's translation.


SERMON III.
8th. I PASS to observe; That the apostles plainly and repeatedly preached the
doctrine of divine sovereignty: Or, that God has an absolute right to dispose
of all things, according to his own pleasure.

IT has often been objected to this truth, That it represents Almighty God
partial to his creatures, by making a distinction among them. -- But this ought
not to be an objection, because it is a fact, known and read of all men, that
he has placed some in a far more eligible situation than others. In creation
we observe the most palpable distinction among the creatures of God.

ANGELS are first in the order of created intelligences; are said to excel in
strength, continually surround the throne of God, and are employed in the most
exalted and important services. They are dignified in nature and office.

MEN form the next link in the chain of intelligent agents; whom Deity has
created with a nature less dignified, endued with inferior mental powers, and
employed in a manner less noble and interesting. Among mankind there is also a
very obvious distinction. One man is extremely handsome; another, extremely
homely: One has all his part; another is deformed, maimed, blind, halt.

THEY differ in mind likewise no less than in body. One person has great
sagacity and penetration; another is an idiot, or but a small remove from him.
All minds, though formed by the same Almighty hand, are not of the same
dimensions. God himself has made this difference.

THEY differ in place or station in life. They are notfitted for, nor employed
with equal dignity. All are useful in their place, but not equally so.

THIS being the case, I ask, Will any man dare to censure JEHOVAH for making
such distinctions among his creatures? "Has not the potter power over the
clay, of the same lump to make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor?"
-- Shall the idiot, or the man of small powers of mind say to his Creator, Why
was I not made equal to Sir Isaac Newton? -- Or shall that great philosopher
say to his Maker, Why was not I created an angel? We tremble at the idea of
thus arraigning the divine conduct. God has done what he had a right to do;
and has exercised that right under the influence of infinite wisdom and
goodness.

WE observe that the like distinction runs through God's whole economy of
providence. Some persons have all and abound; others are depressed with
poverty. -- Two men shall see out in life with equal prospects and advantages;
one of them shall be successful in almost every thing he undertakes; the other
shall meet with repeated losses, and become poor.

SOME persons enjoy a constant and confirmed state of health; others are always
sick, knowing scarce one day in which they are free from pain; though equally
virtuous and temperate. -- One passes through the most eminent dangers, and
escapes uninjured; another loses his life by the most trifling occurrence. --
One lives to a good old age; another is cut down from the birth. -- One
continues till he becomes a burden to himself and friends; another in the bloom
and vigor of his days, is arrested by the last enemy.

THE Deity has made a difference among mankind with respect to the means of
knowledge. Some people remain in the savage state; while others, favored with
every advantage of information, both divine and human, have arrived at a
surprising height of knowledge and refinement. Yet they all belong to the same
great family, and are under the government of the same infinite God, who for
wise reasons, makes these distinctions among them. He could easily have placed
all men in circumstances equally agreeable, had it been his will: or have made
an entire reverse of condition. He might have ordered your soul or mine to have
animated the body of a Laplander, a Hottentot, or an American savage; but he
has been pleased, as a sovereign God, to place us in more pleasing condition.

THESE are some of the distinctions which God has made in the course of his
moral government: And who shall say unto him, What do thou?

THE sovereignty of God is equally apparent in his conduct toward sinners. He
has passed by the fallen angels. "And the angels which kept not their first
estate, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day." [Jude vi.] Their nature the Son of God did not
assume, because their salvation was not the end he designed to accomplish:
Accordingly we are told, that hell is "prepared for the devil and his angels."
[Matt. xxv. 41.] Whence it appears that they are passed by.

GOD has made a very important difference among mankind by sending the gospel
to some of there and withholding it from others. Those persons who are disposed
to raise objections either against the benevolence of the Deity* or the truth
of divine revelation on this account, would do well to consider, That God
himself has made this distinction, and that he can do no wrong. He is a rock,
his way is perfect nor does he give account of his matters to any (...)

BBSIDES, it is evident that there is a striking analogy in all his conduct in
creation, providence and redemption. -- He has not in either case distributed
his blessings on all men alike. This has been proved already in the proceeding
observations. If it is necessary therefore to vindicate his conduct in this
instance, it is no less necessary in the others. "B^^ who art thou O man, that
reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus?"

AMONG those persons who are favored with the gospel, there is also a
difference. He takes one of a city, and two of a family and brings them to
Sion. "For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and
I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Therefore
has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens," [Rom.
ix. 15, 16, 18.] not by positive influence, but by leaving the sinner to act
out his own character, or follow the wickedness of his own heart. -- And as
mankind universally have by sin subjected themselves to everlasting
condemnation, they that are lost will have no just cause of complaint against
God; but will be obliged to acknowledge his justice; and they who are saved,
will ascribe their salvation wholly to his sovereign grace. God condemns none
but the guilty; nor will he save any that had any claim on him; otherwise
salvation would not be by grace.

IN the chapter in which the text is, this distinction is most clearly
declared. The same gospel that was the wisdom and power of God to some, was a
stumbling block and foolishness to others: hence Paul thus addressed himself to
the Corinthians; "For ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God has
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty:
and base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen,
yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are: that no
flesh might glory in his presence." [1 Cor. ^. 26, 27, 28, 29.] Remark, my
brethren, God is here said to choose some and to leave others. Some persons
were brought to receive the gospel, while others were left in their unbelief.

PAUL always ascribes his conversion to the grace of God. "When it pleased God
who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace" -- In
another place he says, "By the grace of God I am what I am." -- If so, it
follows as an undeniable truth, That God made a difference between him, and
many of his countrymen the Jews. He was converted to christianity by divine
power, while crowds of other sinners were passed by. God could as easily have
converted the whole nation as one man, had it been his sovereign pleasure: but
you all know he did not; therefore he made a difference.

WE see in our own day when the Lord revives his work among us, that one is
taken and another left. The same sermon that is the means of awakening or
comforting one person, leaves others in a secure condition. Under the same
religious advantages some are hopely wrought upon, while others maintain their
opposition to Jesus Christ.

THAT the success of the gospel, or the conversion of sinners is owing to
divine influence, is proved by the current language of scripture. They who
believe in Christ, are said to be "born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." [John i. 12, 13.] Paul says, "I
have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase." [1 Cor. iii. 6.] --
We may safely conclude then, that under the dispensation of the gospel, God
confers a favor on some* that he does not confer on all.

OUR blessed Lord teaches us this doctrine of divine sovereignty in the
following passage, as well as in others that might be mentioned. [Luke x. 21.]
"In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight."

9th. THE nature and necessity of faith and repentance were important parts of
the preaching of the apostles. They assure us, that "faith is, the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen." -- "The belief of the
truth," or, a giving credit to the record God gave of his Son. And that we may
be capable of distinguishing between living and dead faith, they inform us,
that the faith of God's elect, works by love, purifies the heart, esteems
Christ precious, and produces good works: "Faith without works is dead being
alone."

THE importance of faith appears from various circumstances, such as, That
without it we cannot please God -- enjoy the consolations of the gospel, nor
enter into the kingdom of heaven. "If ye believe not that I am he, said Christ
to the Jews, ye shall die in your sins;" [John viii. 24.] that is, under the
curse of the law, and perish for ever. The language of the commission needs no
comment; "He that believes shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be
damned." According to this commission, the apostles constantly urged on sinners
the necessity of believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, whom God had set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood.

THEY also insisted, wherever they went, on the nature and necessity of
repentance, as implying a change in the disposition of the mind, without which
no man can see the Lord. Peter said to the anxious multitude, [Acts ii. 37,
38,] "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins." And Paul assured the Athenians, that "God commanded all
men every where to repent, because he had appointed a day in which he would
judge the world in righteousness," etc. -- [Acts xvii. 31.]

THE most likely method of bringing mankind to repentance, is to hold up to
their view the nature, extent, and perpetuity of the divine law, as holy, just
and good; -- -- reaching to the thoughts and intents of the heart -- requiring
truth in the inward parts, and condemning the sinner for a single inordinate
desire, or wrong temper: which law is perpetually, and universally binding.
Until heaven and earth pass away, Christ assures us, one jot or tittle of the
law shall not fail. -- Now by this law is the knowledge of sin; and when it
comes home in its true nature on the conscience, sin revives and the sinner
dies, i. e. he stands justly condemned by it as a transgressor, but sees no way
of escape. In this condition he remains till Christ is revealed in him: For the
law can do nothing but condemn him. It will not accept repentance as a
condition of his pardon; nor can it discover the atonement. Its language is,
"Pay me what thou owe." At length the sinner is brought to look on him whom
he has pierced, and to mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, and to
be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first born. He
adopts the language of the prophet, saying, "Surely after that I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth."
[Jer. xxxi. 19*]

10th. THE apostles dwelt much on the christian tempers, and the whole circle
of moral and evangelical obedience; such as, supreme love to God -- benevolence
to men -- meekness, patience -- resignation to the divine will, -- forgiveness
of injuries, -- readiness to relieve the poor, etc. Jesus Christ had taught
them these important lessons in his most excellent sermon on the mount, [Matt.
5, 6 and 7 chapters] which contains an immense treasure of most precious truths
and exhortations: after which they copied in their own preaching. Hence they
thus address us, "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his."
-- "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with its affections and
lusts." -- "Let the same mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus." -- "If
ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through the Spirit, do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live," -- These are mentioned as a
specimen of their zeal, to promote personal holiness among the disciples of
Christ.

THEY also persuaded believers to give themselves up to the Lord and to his
church, by a public submission to the two leading institutions of the new
testament, baptism and the Lord's supper; that they might become witnesses for
Christ, and enjoy the special privileges of his house. -- In a word, They urged
with constancy and zeal the great importance of good works, as evidences and
fruits of faith; and that others seeing them, might be excited to glorify their
Father who is in heaven.

11th. THEY often brought into view the resurrection of the dead, the last
judgment, and the final states of men. On the first of these Paul enlarges with
great strength and propriety of reasoning in 1 Cor. xv: to which I refer you.

THEY also assure us in language calculated to awaken all our attention, That
Jesus Christ will descend from heaven with a (...); the voice of the
archangel, and the trump of God: That the heavens being on fire shall be
dissolved, the elements shall melt with servent heat; the earth and all that is
therein shall be burnt up. Then they who have done good shall come forth to the
resurrection of life; and they who have done evil to the resurrection of
damnation. O, how solemn will be this concluding scene! The last trump will
awake the sleeping millions. -- The sea give up the dead that are in it: --
death and hell give up the dead that are in them -- and all crowd around that
throne on which the Judge is seated, from whose sentence there will be no
appeal! -- Amazement all! --

THE different characters of men are marked -- all carry their destination in
their countenances. -- The righteous fly to meet their glorious Judge, their
Savior and their Friend, and bid him welcome ten thousand times. -- Their
hearts beat high with joy and praise -- Each eye beams peace, and all the
innumerable multitude of redeemed sinners sing, "Lo this is our God, we have
waited for him; we will rejoice and be glad in his salvation." -- These he
shall place on his right hand.

BUT the ungodly approach with horror and despair: for their consciences at
this fatal moment more than ever, anticipate their doom; hence they "say to the
mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath
is come; and who shall be able to stand?" [Rev. vi. 16, 17.] -- These the Judge
shall place on his left hand. -- The critical and decisive moment is arrived --
all nations are before him: they are separated the one from the other as a
shepherd divides the sheep from the goats. -- To them on his right hand he
will say, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked,
and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came
unto me. -- Then shall he say also unto them on his left hand, "Depart from me,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels: for I
was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:
I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick,
and in prison, and ye visited me not. -- And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal." [Matt xxv. 31 --
end.] -- Thus the solemn scene is closed -- "They that were ready went in with
him to the marriage, and the door was shut."

"ETERNITY, the various sentence past,
Assigns the severed throng distinct abodes,
Sulphurous, or ambrosial; What ensues?
The deed predominant! the deed of deeds!
Which makes a hell of hell, a heaven of heaven.
The Goddess, with determined aspect turns
Her adamantine key's enormous size
Through destiny's inextricable wards,
Deep-driving every bolt, on both their fates.
Then, from the crystal battlements of heaven,
Down, down, she hurts it through the dark profound
Ten thousand thousand fathom; there to rust,
And never unlock her resolution more." Dr. YOUNG's Night Thoughts; p. 22, 221.

III. I PASS to show, That God has put the most distinguished honor on these
doctrines, by making them the means of saving them who belive.

THEY were not only remarkably successful during the first age of the church,
when thousands were converted to the christian faith, [See Acts ii. 41. -- iv.
4, etc.] but have been so at different periods since down to the present day.

"BEFORE the destruction of Jerusalem the gospel was not only preached in the
less Asia, and Greece and Italy, the great theaters of action then in the
world; but was likewise propagated as far northward as Seythia, as far
southward as Ethiopia, as far eastward as Parthia and India, as far westward as
Spain and Britain." Bp. NEWTON on the Prophesies, Vol. II. p. 237.


DURING the three first centuries, the gospel was preached with great success,
notwithstanding the violence of persecution. The more the christians were
oppressed the more they grew; hence it became a maxim. That "the blood of the
martyrs is the seed of the church."

FROM the time of the death of Constantine till the reformation from popery,
the church passed through various dark and trying scenes. Sometimes she
appeared to be near destruction. "This is the darkest and most dismal day that
ever the church saw, and probably the darkest it ever will see." Yet through
all that period God raised up some faithful witnesses for his cause; among
whom, by general consent of ecclesiastical writers, we are to place the
Waldenses, For a full account of these pious people, see MOSHEIM's Eccles.
History.
who are said by some authors, to have preserved and handed down the apostolic
doctrines pure, from primitive times to the days of Luther. The confession of
their faith shows their attachment to the apostolic doctrines.


REINERUS their violent enemy tells us, "That of all sects that ever were, none
were so pernicious to the church of Rome as the Leonists or Waldenses; and that
for these reasons: 1. For their antiquity and long continuance, even from the
time of pope Sylvester, who was made Pope in the year 316; or, as others have
affirmed, from the time of the apostles. 2. For the universality of that sect,
because there was scarce any country where they were not. 3. When all other
heretics, by reason of their blasphemy against God, were abhorred, the
Waldenses had a great appearance of piety, because they lived justly before
men, believed all things well of God, and had the articles of the creed, only
they blasphemed the church and clergy of Rome." GILLES success of the gospel,
Vol. I. p. 30.


AFTER this long night of error and persecution, during which period, the
witnesses were sew, and were obliged to prophecy in sackcloth, the reformation
took place. Wickcliff appeared in England, whose disciples became numerous --
Luther and Melancthon in Germany -- John Huss and Jerome in Bohemia --
Zuinglius and others in Switzerland. It would be almost endless to mention the
names of the worthy men in different parts of the world, whom God raised up to
befriend the truths of the gospel: many of whom sealed them with their blood.

IF we consult the history of the church since the reformation, we shall find
that God has set his seal to the apostolic doctrines in different parts of the
world, by making them the means of great reformations among mankind. In
England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, America, etc. there have been remarkable
revivals of religion; at which times crowds of sinners have been turned from
darkness to light. Whole towns and villages have become serious and reformed --
places of public worship, at such seasons, were crowded with anxious enquirers;
and converts have come like the clouds and the doves to their windows.
Christian History.


IT is readily granted, That the great end of the preaching of the gospel, is
to make mankind wiser and better. When therefore the wicked are reformed,
churches filled with members who adorn their profession; and the youth
especially are made willing to become the followers of the Lamb of God, at a
period of life, when they are most capable of enjoying the pleasures of sense,
we may safely call this the work of God. And blessed be his name, such have
been the effects of the faithful ministry among all denominations of
christians, who have maintained the apostolic doctrines. You must be sensible,
my brethren, if you have been observant, that those men have been the most
successful, who have been most engaged in preaching the humbling doctrines of
the cross. God has put distinguished honor on them, by giving them many seals
to their ministry, as their joy and crown.

WHENCE we infer,

1. THAT the ministers of the gospel have the greatest encouragement, to preach
the same doctrines in every age of the world.

THOSE persons are quite mistaken who think, that the gospel can be rendered
agreeable to natural men as such: they may be changed into the spirit of it by
the power of God, but the gospel remains the same. Or the preachers of it may
leave out, or explain away its most exceptionable parts, and thereby obtain the
character of rational and moderate men: but let it be remembered in that case,
it is no longer Paul's gospel or christianity as taught by Christ and his
apostles (...); rather something quite different from it by which they may
amuse mankind, but they have no just reason to believe it will be the means of
their conversion.

THE nearer we come in preaching to the sentiments and manner of the apostles,
I humbly conceive, the greater reason we have to expect success. The sentiments
have been considered; of the manner I beg leave to say -- They preached
plainly, that all who heard them might understand them; and faithfully, that
God, their own consciences, or the people might not reproach them. They did not
shun to declare the whole counsel of God; nor use ambiguous expressions, to
prevent its being known what their real sentiments were; but took a side like
faithful men; nor feared any consequences, while engaged in, what they believed
to be, the cause of God and truth.

EVERY man has an undoubted right to think for himself, and to publish his
principles to the world: and in this enlightened and liberal age he has nothing
to fear as to his person. And though his sentiments may be opposed, his
fidelity will entitle him to respect from mankind; who continue to revere an
honest man.

THE apostles were also diligent in the work of the Lord: were instant in
season, out of season. "I have taught you publicly, says Paul, and from house
to house." Their hearts glowed with love to God, and to the souls of men; hence
they were willing to spend and to be spent in the sacred service. In public and
private life they were examples to the flock.

THEY preached with a pathos that arose out of the infinite importance of the
subjects of their ministry; which had a natural tendency to fix the attention
of their hearers, and to convince them that they were in earnest. -- They felt
their subjects, and they made others feel. Felix, a Roman governor, trembled
before Paul his prisoner, while he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and
judgment to come. -- King Agrippa was forced to acknowledge, that Paul had
almost persuaded him to be a christian.

2. WHAT has been said, suggests to them who have been long in the ministry,
and have had but little success, the serious enquiry, Whether they have plainly
and faithfully preached the apostolic doctrines? Or, whether they have not been
ashamed of the gospel of Christ? -- If the latter has been the case, no wonder
they have dragged on heavily in the work; and with very few, if any, seals to
their ministry: for God will reprove such unfaithfulness in his service.

TRUE indeed, it sometimes happens, that the faithful ministers of the gospel
are for a season unsuccessful; yet they ought not to be discouraged, for in due
time they shall reap if they faint not. They who go forth weeping bearing
precious seed, shall finally return rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with
them. -- But suppose they should not see the fruit of their labors in this
life, they will have the testimony of conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, they have had
their conversation in the world. -- Let them who sow, sow in hope: -- The word
shall not return void, but it shall accomplish that which God pleases, and
prosper in the thing whereto he sent it.

3. SHOULD these discourses fall into the hands of any young men, who wish to
engage in the work of the ministry, they will excuse me if I say, They ought
first to ask themselves, Whether they have ever felt the transforming power of
the gospel on their hearts. Ministers of Christ ought certainly to know the
truth by a happy experience, or they will be blind leaders of the blind. "A
preacher's first and supreme quality, that which must give life and vigor to
his compositions, and just scope to all his talents, lies in his being a good
man, I mean a lover of God, and a friend of men. A preacher who has not felt
the power, and imbibed the spirit of christianity, is the most unfit person in
the world, to teach and recommend it to others." FORDYCE's Art of preaching, p.
100.


IN such a condition he will find it a very hard service, to be always engaged
in praying, studying, preaching, answering cases of conscience, visiting the
sick and dying, etc. because, whatever he may be in appearance, his heart is
unfriendly to the work. If on the other hand, he has felt the gospel coming
with power, the Holy Ghost, and much assurance, he will love it, because it
tends to advance the glory of God, and the salvation of sinners. Having been
made happy by the gospel himself, he longs that others should taste and see
that the Lord is gracious. With such a temper it becomes his meat and drink, to
be daily engaged in the various parts of ministerial duty. -- He puts on no
forbidding airs, -- is easy of access; and by his benevolence, affability and
piety, invites the distressed of every description, to enter into the freest
conversation with him: and enjoys a most sensible pleasure, when he is the
means of lessening the distresses of mankind, whether of soul or body.

4. IN fine: We infer, That while the ministers of the gospel are obliged to
maintain all the parts of the sacred system, so far as they understand them,
they ought to insist most of all on those, that are immediately calculated to
promote the greatest good of mankind: -- Such for instance, as tend to awaken
the stupid conscience -- direct the anxious sinner to Christ -- and edify and
build up believers in their most holy faith: i. e. To enlighten and reform the
world.

THE positive institutions of religion are secondary objects; and though good
in their place, ought by no means to be set in competition with the fundamental
doctrines of the gospel, and the various christian tempers.

A PIOUS man of a liberal mind is anxious most of all that sinners should be
converted to Jesus Christ. This end accomplished he feels happy; and is willing
that every man should be fully persuaded in his own mind, with respect to what
are called, the circumstantials of religion. -- He can truly say, "Send Lord by
whom thou will send." -- If the Redeemer's kingdom is advanced in the world, he
rejoiceth let who will be the instruments of it; or, let it be among what
denomination of christians it may.

IT is to be lamented, my brethren, that those christians who are united in the
most essential truths of the gospel, should contend so much as they do about
rites and ceremonies. Such conduct tends to create animosities, separate
friends, and is very injurious to the general interests of religion. It looks
as if we were more engaged to convert sinners to our party, than to Jesus
Christ. Let us walk together as far as we can agree; and when we are brought to
a stop by different opinions or practices, let us agree to differ; and by no
means fall out by the way. -- We are embarked in a common and glorious cause;
let us then contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints. --
Iniquity abounds, the love of many waxes cold, and false doctrines of
extraordinary magnitude prevail. -- Let us then stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free.

"NOW unto Him who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, and
has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father: to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. AMEN."

ERRATA.
The whole marginal note in the 6th and 7th pages, should have been marked for
a quotation.

Page 7. line 7, from the bottom -- for "natural" read unnatural.


