A DISCOURSE DELIVERED IN CHRIST'S CHURCH AT NORWICH-LANDING. IN THE STATE OF
CONNECTICUT, ON WEDNESDAY, THE 24th DAY OF AUGUST, BEING THE DAY OF INTRODUCING
AN ORGAN INTO THAT CHURCH.

BY WILLIAM SMITH, A. M. Rector of Trinity Church, Newport, Rhode Island State.

Praise Him with stringed Ins^ruments, and Organs. PSALM. CL. 4. NORWICH:
PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL, M,DCC,XCI.

TO THE RECTOR, WARDENS, VESTRY, AND CONGREGATION OF CHRIST'S CHURCH, IN
NORWICH-LANDING IN THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT; THE FOLLOWING DISCOURSE, AS IT WAS
COMPOSED AND DELIVERED AT YOUR REQUEST, SO NOW IS IT INSCRIBED TO YOU, WITH ALL
DUE RESPECT AND ESTEEM,

By Gentlemen, Your very humble servant, the AUTHOR.
NEWPORT, SEPT. 1st, 1791.
A DISCOURSE, etc.
PSALM CL. v. 6. Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord.
PRAISE is comely for the righteous, and joyful gladness for the upright in
heart; -- it is good to singoraises unto our God, yea it is a pleasant thing to
give ^anks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto the na^^ of the MOST
HIGHEST; -- to show forth his loving ^^indness in the morning, and his
faithfulness every night, upon an instrument of ten strings and upon the (...).

BUT was (...) so stupid and ungrateful, as to withhold the honor (...) unto
the Name of our God the stones would ^^mediately cry out. -- newborn babes
would li^p his prai^^ -- it is impossible that the Almighty should not be (...)
for all Nature, every morning rises up to give (...) to his Name, and every
evening boweth her h^^d (...) "acknowledge his goodness, love and power. "The
havens ^^clare the Glory of God, the firmament shows (...) handy work" -- day
responsive unto day utters a song of praise, and there is not nation or
people, to whom the sound thereof has not reached.

WHEN the morning ligh^gilds the mountain's brow, behold the cattle on a
thou^^nd hills lowing forth their gladsome h^sanna^s, and the sheep of the
pastures blea^ing (...) of the groves with infinitely varied warblings, join in
the song of praise to the sovereign and gracious Lord of all, who daily opens
his hand, and liberally ^atis^^eth the desire of every thing that lives.

NOR is the animal creation only concerned in sending up this Odor of sweet
smell, this acceptable incense of adoration, before the An^ient of days -- but
(...) nature, nay even the elements continually assert their right to
participate in the glorious privilege -- For whilst the cloud capt hills erect
their heads, as (...) the gates of heaven were lifted up, to do the King of
Glory^ (...) -- so the Valleys sink down before him a Creator of all the ends
of the earth. -- Whilst pines and poplars wave their tops to ^^oner Him, who
bowe^ his head, upon the Cross, as suffering representative of ^^dam's sinful
progeny; the sturdy Oak and all his (...) trees spread forth their strong and
branching ^^^ors, to sing with rustling leaves, as with tongues inn^^^erable,
His strength and wisdom; who bestowed upon them all their usefulness, and who
(...) promised to (...) every tree of righteousness growing in the sorest of
the Jew and Gentile world, in the New, Jerusalem, (...) trees of ever^verda^^
(...) in the ^arden of God. -- A whilst the numerous tribes of aroma^^^ and
(...) exhale their perfumes to praise the sovereign Planer, the humbler flowers
neglect (...) arise in (...) exhalations, like the smoke of the (...) from the
golden Censer, in A^^ron's hand, on (...) of atonement.

To the floo^ (...) and the hills showing forth their (...) Lord the King,
(...) the song of heaven becomes responsiv^, and the elements of Air and Fire
unite to fashion and blow the Trumpet of God; whilst the forked lightning a
species of It is very remarkable that there subsists between sounds and colors
so ^^ti^^ate a connection and analogy. In the Diatonic scale there are but
seven simple natural Notes -- and in the prismatic scale just so many primary
colors. If a musical string be divided according to the respective measures of
the seven primary colors, as measured on the prismatic scale, it will give all
the natural notes of an Octave perfectly in tune. Thus, for the sake of the
curious, I have ann^^ed a scale of sounds and colors, with their mutual
relation, in one octave. --

Length of or musical string or pipe sounding 1 8/9 4/6 2/3 ^/5 ^/^^ 2/2 Sounds
-- names of notes in the Diat scale GABCDEF, Getc

Colors -- names of as in the prismatic scale, Violet Red Orange Yellow Green
Blue In^^igo Violet

Division of the prisinatic scale, for each color 100. 88.6 80. 7^. 66. 60.
53.3 50.

From the consideration that sounds and colors possess the very same
properties, some have supposed that an Instrument might be constructed with
keys, to please the eye as much with colors as the ear is ^^elighted with
sounds; -- but let that be as it may; hence appears the reason why music,
Painting, and Po^try, are sister arts.


music well calculated to affect the eye, performs an accompanyment to the
pealing thunder. -- At beholding these tremendous hallelujahs and ho^annans the
guilty Nations quake, and the song of the feathered tribes gives place to the
sublim^^ music of the skies!

OC^AN too is fain to roar his joy, and wave succeeding wave, when strongly
breathed on by the breath of the Almighty, swells the Concert, with his
^^arse^t, deepest notes of bass.

AND was the most lively imagination to ex^ct itself, in framing an Idea of the
grandest exhibition of praise to Heaven's King that universal Nature is capable
of performing; it could be no other, than the joint accompa^ment of "all things
which breath^," whether animate or inanimate, whether rational or irrational at
once uttering their voices, according to the respective laws of their
existence, together with the roaring of the seas, the thunders and lightnings
of the heavens, the ^^llowing of volcanoes, with their convolving flames!

THAT such an universal hymn of praise will one day be sung, we have many
in^^mations in the book of God Of these, a principal one, is the Something
somewhat fimilar (But ^^^^nitely inferior) to the horrors occasioned by the
Trumpet and Thunders of ^inai never fails to effect people of sensibility, when
at a full Concert of human contrivance and execution; -- as at the
Commemoration of^^ndel, in London, on Wednesday the 28th, of May 1784, where
the number of vocal performers was 245 -- and of instrumental 268 besides the
great Organ, 513 in all, -- During this (p^^hap^ the grandest) musical
performance that ever was exhi^^^^ in any part of the world, several ^ainted --
others involuntarily shed abundance of tears. These effects were sensibly selt
by the Audience during the general performance, but more especially during the
Oratorio of the MESSIAM. I have ^eard several persons ^^deavouring to describe,
but at the same time confe^^ing that, (...) the occasion were far beyond the
power of (...) time they felt all over cold -- next time in^^ (...) around them
-- and having a strange ten^^ (...) the air! -- next a tremor like that excited
by, (...) in (...) the most unaccountable sensations, that (...) through and
through! -- But, to what (...) and surprising an effect, from (...) harmony, if
not to this, that (...) which shall be per^^ (...) shall be delivered up to
(...) alarms, and in^^^ (...) ^^most soul, by (...)
Trumpet, thunderings lightnings and earthquake at giving the Decalogue. Then
appeared in its true colors, the extreme impotency of fallen human Nature,
when even Moses trembled exceedingly! Then was the earth moved to it is center,
the everlasting hills shook -- the clouds poured down water, the arrows of
vengeance flew abroad. All Nature was seized with strong convulsions,
foreboding the pangs of future dissolution!

THROUGH the strong vibrations of the thunders and trumpet, in the day when God
shall visit the wickedness of those who dwell upon this earth, all hearts shall
qua^^^, -- every face shall gather paleness, -- and every leg, which stands
not upon the rock of ages, shall bow down under it is burden! When round the
devoted earth, the thunders roll tremend^ous and the forked lightnings flash
through the heavens; -- when the Trumpet of eternal Judgment sounds louder
and louder, with dreadful clangor rending the rocks, bursting the mountains,
and calling the dead from their graves; -- can this fate be other than that of
JOSH. 6 chapter 3, 4, and 5th v. Ye shall compass the City, all ye men of war, and
go round about the City once: thus shall thou do six days. And seven priests
shall bear before the Ark seven Trumpets of ^am's horns; and the seventh day ye
shall compass the City seven times, and the priests shall blow with the
Trumpets. And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the
ram's horns, and when ye hear the sound of the Trumpers, all the people shall
shout with a great shout; and the wall of the City shall fall down flat, and
the people shall ascend every man straight before him.

In obedience they acted according to the divine command, and the consequence
was agreeable to the prediction, as we read in the subs^quent part of the
chapter. -- But, are we to suppose these instruments were nothing but ram's
horns? More probably they were the same as the Hebrews call Trumpets of Jobe^,
which sounded at proclaiming the year of Jubil^^. Because they somewhat in
their cu^vature resembled the horns of a ram, they had the name of ram's horns:
and being made upon the principles of the logarithmic curve they were
calculated to magnity the vibrations of sound in a wonderful manner There seems
to have been a connection betwixt the blast of the (...) and shout, and the
fal^ing down of the (...), as if the one was the cause and the other the effect
-- but how to account for this in any measure, without lessening the miracle,
seems no small difficulty.

We know, that Air, by the explosion of Cannon, or by the conen^^ion occasioned
by Thunder, vibrates so powerfully, at to shake hou^es, nay whole streets, and
to dash in pieces all the windows, especially if they are shut; that the human
voice can produce somewhat similar effects; that a full peal of instrumental
music (pro tempore) does actually destroy the (...) of matter, in various
bodies, particularly in those, which are naturally sonorous, exciting in their
component parts such a degree of trembling, or (...) to separate, and fly off
from cut another; and this may readily be perceived by the hand, (and would be
observed by the eye, were it not that the rays of vision are to broken by the
instantaneous undulations of the air) during the continuance of the sound. Now,
I say, seeing these effec^^ are obvious to people of observation, where is the
abs^rday in supposing, that the Most High, who works frequently by secondary
causes, making the elements his servants and the winged lightning his
messenger, (...) magnify and increase the formed of the Trumpets and be (...)
of the people, and of consequence the vibration (...) thereby, to such a
degree, as progres^^vely to (...) to un^o the texture of these walls, as
effectually, as if the (...) battering runs had played against them? Howev^^^
satisfactory (...) absurd this may appear in the eyes of (...) yet to second
this opinion Pnenmati^s and Opti^s are (...) the philosophical eye and ear wi^h
ex^^^^ (...) the possibility of the truth of it.


devoted Jericho, whose walls fell flat at the sound of the trumpets blown by
the Priests, as in obedience to the divine command, they walked round it? --
Surely not. -- All the so much boasted glory of this Earth shall then vanish
like the beseless fabric of a vision!

HIGHLY expressive of the much wished for time, when the representative priests
of Him who is both King and Priest for ever^^ore, shall be clothed with
righteousness, and his saints sing for Joyfulness, is the bringing up and
placing the Ark of the Testimony in it is appointed place. Again the Priests of
the Lord blew with trumpets -- the high praises of God was in their mouths: --
Israel rejoiced in him that made him, and the children of Zion were joyful in
their King. They praised his name in the dance; they sang pra^ses unto him,
with the timbrel and harp, with psalteries, and cymbals, and with trumpets they
lifted up the voice with joy.

WITH such melody and rejoicing the Father was delighted -- he smelt the smell
of his sons and daughters, and pronounced them blessed. The spirit of love and
joy rested upon them, and filled their souls with a foretaste of that
exultation and triumph, which shall take place, when the Messiah shall
"triumpl^ gloriously," having overcome every enemy -- "when the redeemed of the
Lord shall return to Mount Zion," with the harp of praise in their hands, the
crown of glory on their heads, and the psalm of thanksgiving in their mouths;
-- insomuch that Jehovah bowed the heavens and came down, he descended from the
throne of his Majesty, and his Glory filled the house of the Lord, so that the
Priests were not able to minister because of the glory of Jehovah!

To this glorious manifestation of the Sh^kinah, the divine presence,
approbating a Concert of Vocal and Instrumental praise, allow me to subjoin
that remarkably beautiful Vision vouchsafed to the beloved John in the Isle of
Patmos, where he, in the spirit beheld the thousands of thousands, and thousand
times ten thousand on Mount Zion saying with loud voices, worthy is the Lamb
that was stain to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in heaven, and on
the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them heard I, saying -- Blessing and honor, and glory, and power be unto him
that firteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. -- And I
heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps; and they ^ung as it were a
new song before the Throne.

BUT until the time arrives in which the song of Moses and of the Lamb shall be
sung, in full chorus, by the redeemed of the Lord; -- well may we at a humbler
distance aspire to join with Angels and Archangels and all the Company of
heaven, in praising God and saying Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of hosts, heaven
and earth are full of thy glory: glory be to thee O Lord most high.

IT is meet and right and our bounded duty thus to glorify God in our souls,
and in our bodies; for both are his property by creation, and his right by
re^^^^^. And what better method can we take to glorify God, next to the
performance of those duties we (...) each other, as men and as christians, than
by ma^^^ the body subservient to the divine impulses in the (...) ^work^ work
with D^^aleel and Aholiab in curious (...) in silver, in (...) in precious
stones, in timber, and in carved work, to beautify the house of the Lord; --
and "in making instruments of Music with David, wherewith to sound the praises
of our God?" -- The same divine and holy spirit which inspired the Prophets,
and filled the Apostles with power from on high, endued Bezaleel and Aholiab
with "skill to work all manner of cunning workmanship, -- and taught the Man
after God's own heart, to cause Harps, and Psalteries, and Dulcimers, and
Trumpets, and Organs, and all kinds of musical instruments to be made," to
celebrate the praises of the Lord.

IN ancient times, The Majian schools in Persia, looking upon music as endued
with a power of preparing the mind for receiving good impressions -- and of
putting it into a serenity proper for meditation and devotion, begin and end
the day with concerts. Travels of Cyrus Vol. 1. page 78. 79. Edit. 4. An. 1730.
instrumental music was in higher and more general estimation, than in these
modern days of extra-refinement, and no man's education was reckoned complete,
who could not play upon some instrument. And history informs us, that the Jews,
received no small favors from the Babylonians, during their captivity, on
account of their excellent skill in music. -- Indeed as early as (if not
earlier than) the days of Samuel, the study of instrumental music was a very
essential part of the "The Sons of the Prophets" are frequently mentioned in
the Old Testament, and it is universally agreed upon among the learned, that
these "Sons of the Prophets" were the students of their respective Masters. We
read of several prophetic colleges or schools; viz One at the hill of God, that
is Gibrah of Benjamin, 1 Samuel, x c. 5 v. Another at Naioth in Ramah, (...) Sam.
xix c. 20 v. Another at Bethel, 2 Kings ii c 3 v. Another at Gilgal 2 Kings iv
c. 38 v. Another at Mount Ephraim, 2 Kings, v c. 22 v. Another at Jerusalem, 2
Kings xxii c. 14 v. Perhaps there were many others of less eminence, but these
are mentioned as under the presidency of Samuel, of Elijah and Elisha, the most
eminent Prophets of their time. Upon teeming up in his Bible the foregoing
quotations, any man will easily find out the meaning of the phrase "sons of the
Prophets" -- when at Naioth he beholds them, and Samuel as appointed over them;
at Gilgal he may behold "the Sons of the Prophets" setting before Elisha, as
distinctly, as upon turning to the 2d v., of the xxii chapter of Acts of the
Apostles, he may behold Paul of Tarsus sitting at the feet of Gamaliel (the
then President or Principal of the College or Sanhedrim of Jerusalem) studying
the Law and the Prophets. In these Collegi^^^ ^^^maries, persons were trained
up to fill ecclesiastical offices, as a^^^ for the Prophetic and sacerdotal
departments; but the (...) of (...) of their studies, was preparing the young
men for receiving the ^^vine ^^slatus, or gist of prophesy. To this, the study
of Psalmody was judged (...) contributive; and as we are ^eldom (...) with a
^ight of "the Sons (...) the (...)," without their musical instruments, we may
warrantably from hence infer, that they were also taught the proper use of
them, and that instrumental music was a stated part of their Collegiate
exercises. So long as these schools remained independent of, and unconnected
with, the state, which was the case during the Theocracy, they flourished, and
were of inestimable advantage to the Nation, as being the permanent guardians
of the sacred rites and the prophetic records; but, from the time that the
Theocracy was changed into a Monarchy, they began to droop. We find, that
henceforward God saw fit to select his Prophets every now and then from the
common mass of the people, and but seldom from the prophetic schools, which,
being greatly corrupted by their connection with, and dependence on, the civil
government, became more and more unworthy the divine approbation, till the
Babylonish captivity broke them quite up. Nevertheless these schools, after the
Restoration of the Jews, were revived by Ezra, and continued in considerable
estimation down to the days of Gamaliel.
Collegiate Education of the Jews, To be ascertained of this, let any
unprejudiced person read the history of Samuel's first interview with Saul in
quest of his Father's asses; (1 Samuel 10 ch.) where the Prophet directing Saul
which way to go, -- among other things, thus says to him -- thou shall go by
Rachel's sepulcher, thence to the plain of Tabor, thence to the hill of God,
and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither, that thou shall meet a
company of Prophets, coming down from the high place, with a Psaltery, and a
Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp, and they shall prophecy. And the Spirit of the
Lord shall come upon THEE, and thou shall prophecy with them, and shall be
turned into another man.

THUS singing and playing the Songs of Zion these "Sons of the Prophets" did
celebrate each festal day, their soul did magnify the Lord, and their Spirit
rejoiced in God their Savior; their hand and voice so employed, they feared
not the attacks of the enemy, neither dreaded they the approach of the foot of
pride. -- The spirit of the evil one dares not come nigh the mansion of melody,
nor can the voice of the ancient murderer find place among the rejoicings of
the redeemed of the Lord. -- But if the heart of man will say unto God "depart
from me I desire not the knowledge of thy ways," -- and will madly welcome into
it the enemy of human happiness, how can the harmony of Zion do it any good? --
The Lyre of David at times could triumph over the spirit of discord in the
person of Saul, but when he leagued with the enemy to be carried away captive
into the Kingdom of death, where is the wonder if even the songs of Zion proved
unable to inspire him with strength to break his chains?

AND here it is not unworthy of being remarked, that, from the hour, in which
Saul drove melody from his presence, the Spirit of the Lord no more strove
with, but, gave him entirely up to the imagination of his deluded and
discordant heart. By joining a company of prophets coming down from the hill of
God, prophesying with a "Psaltery and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp," Saul
formerly "was turned into another man;" -- he became a Prophet of the Lord; --
and now, upon his Very probably, on this piece of conduct in Saul, with it is
after consequences, a great observer of the turnings and windings of the human
affections, built the following sentiment: The Man that has not music in him.
Nor, is not moved with symphony of soft sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
The motions of his spirits are dull as night;
And his affections dark as Erebus:
Let no such man be trusted."
SHAKESPEARE.
driving from his presence Instrumental Musical, the faithful attendant on
prophecy, we behold him changed again -- but alas! he is changed into a child
of death, and Gilboah thirsts to drink his blood. -- Spurning at the Oracles of
the God of the living, he flees to consult a votary of the father of lies, who
pretended to prophecy by means of a communication with the dead. -- In that
sacred Volume, wherein our Creator vouchsafes to become our teacher, we are
amply instructed concerning what things are lawful, and what not; there too we
find the usual methods of celebrating festal days, as well as of observing days
of mourning. When ISRAEL, aided by the outstretched arm of OMNIPOTENCE, had
passed the red Sea, Miriam the Prophetess took a Timbrel in her hand, and sung
his pra^ses "who overthrew Pharaoh and his host, for his "mercy endures for
ever." So in like manner, when JESUS of Nazareth had ascended up on high, from
the death of the Sea of sorrow, which he had engaged to go through when he
undertook to deliver man, -- the morning stars sang together, and all the sons
of God shouted for joy, at the exultation of human nature in our triumphant
Representative -- Behold, says the beloved John, I saw THEM that had gotten the
victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the HARPS OF GOD; -- and
they sung the song of Moses and of the Lamb.

AT the commencement of each returning year of Jubilee, the Trumpet "lifted up
the voice with joy," -- proclaiming liberty to the captives, and the opening
the prison to such as were bound; -- just so, at the commencement of that final
and much to be desired jubilee, to which every temporary one pointed, shall a
louder Trumpet sound, spreading an alarm through all the regions of the Grave.
-- If Herod was troubled and all Jerusalem with him when the Celestial Band
proclaimed in song seraphic the birth of "THE MAN FROM HEAVEN" -- assuredly, at
the birth of the thousands of Mankind from the enclosing tomb, ushered into
life with cele^tial music, and exulting to obey the mandate awake and sing ye
that dwell in the dust, and let melody be heard throughout all the chambers of
the grave -- the tyrant Death shall be troubled indeed and feel the eternal
wound.

INSTRUCTED by Him, who gives breath unto all things, and whose Prophet
enjoins all things that have breath to praise the Lord -- the Church, in every
age and country well knows when to tune her harp to rejoicing, and her Organ to
the voice of them that weep. With the meek and obedient Shepherds, she
rejoiceth on the great days of MANIFESTATION, and during the season, wherein
she commemorates the TAKING AWAY of the BRIDEGROOM, she mou^neth, but still
praises God, and with the Virgi^^ Mother "pondereth all these things in her
heart."

BY faith, accompanying her Lord in his visit to the "daughter of Jairus," she
hears him meekly pronounce the music premature -- "give place, for the maid is
not dead "but s^eepeth;" -- yet he finds no fault with the custom, and what
was unblameable in his eyes, ought to be no less so in ours. And as often, in
the course of her holy offices, as he presents himself before her at the
Paschal Solemnities, she is careful to tune her heart and voice to that Hymn
which he sung with his disciples before he entered upon his passion.

IF ever the soul of man is transformed from sin to righteousness, it must be,
either when he is upon his knees in prayer to God, for "when Jesus prayed he
was transfigured" -- or, when copying the last public transaction of Jesus with
his disciples, It may not be improper to remark in this place, how vastly
different at the hour of death is the behavior of those who have lived piously
and those who have lived otherwise. The latter (if their conscience has not
not got to be so fast asleep that even the terrors of death cannot awake it)
are still of prayers " Lord have m^rcy upon me," etc -- whereas the former are
continually " blessing and Praising God;" ready with Simeon "to depart in
peace."
he sings an hymn -- and in every stage of his life, is prepared to join with
good old Simeon, and say, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace for
mine eyes have seen thy ^alvation.

WONDERFUL indeed is the effect of sacred music, when the Soul is properly
attuned, and in unison with the love of God and the love of our neighbor! We
read that ^^^isha had conceived such a degree ^^indignation against the King of
Israel because of his idolatrous practices, that, although possessed of a
double portion of Eli^ah's spirit he could not prophecy even at the request of
the King of Judah who was a far different character, without the aid of
instrumental music. -- As the Lord of Hosts lives, (says the Prophet) before
whom I stand, surely were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the
King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee: -- but now, bring me
a As instrumental music in the days of the Prophets was principally used on
religious occasions, we have great reason to believe that the Musician the
Prophet called for, was some one of the N^^thanim of the Temple, or some one of
"the sons of the Prophets;" to chant an (...) -- as well at to write down his
prophecy. For "the sons of the Prophets" were always the (...) of the senior
prophets.

As I have mentioned CHANTING, led me add; that, chanting prosaic compositions
(whether hymns or Psalms, the only difference between them being this; that the
former may be sung with or without the accompaniment of instrument music; but
the latter never without it, as is obvious from the very signification of the
word Psalm, which implies literally, praise with the sound of stringed
instruments) was the manner of performing the praises of the true God from the
earliest times of the Jewish and Christian o^conomies* The idolatro^s nations
on the other hand, always praised their duties with measured verse or rhyme.
Against the use of rhyme (because so much used in heathenish worship) the
Christian as well as Jewish church were always uniform in sentiment; and both
were guided in their judgment, by that statute, recorded in the xii chap. of
Deuteronomy; which runs thus -- Take heed to thyself, that thou be not snared
by following them ( viz the (...) ^^^laters) and that thou enquire not after
their Gods, saying, how did these Nations serve their Gods? even so will I do
likewi^^ -- Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God.

But, in process of time, an opinion arose, quite opposi^^ to the (...) and
practice of the Church for fifteen centuries, that the precited injun^^tion was
by no means obligatory on christians; and that (...) psalms might very
warrantably supersede the use of prosaic one^. -- B^cer (that great destroyer
of the beauty of the English Church) first broached this new conceit in
England, and about the year 1540 our forefathers were first taught to praise
God in rhyme! However this innovation in the most exa^ted and celestial part of
public worship, was greatly checked in its progress, by the Cathedral and
Collegiate churches, who stood too firm on the basis of Apostolic and (...) to
be blown away with this new (...) of (...). Sensible they were that the (...)
have in them a great deal more of the spirit with which they were originally
penned, than when clogged and fettered in the jingling cha^^^s of (...) Adding
to all this, upon a critical and exact comparison of the (...) with the pre^a^^
psalms, it will appear that very (...) liberties have been taken, and the (...)
carri^d even out of the confines of orthodoxy. Let the advocates for rhyming
psalmo^y quarrel with the above remarks as much as they pl^^^, (...) author
thinks (...) perfectly secure, and satisfied with the propriety of them, and
the more so, because, though the (...) of London has (...) a^ed the (...) by Tate
and (...) to the (...) of his own (...) yet the English Church has (...) or
ru^rica^^ command enjon^ing the general (...) public worship. And all the
length that the General (...) of the (...) of the United states, have gone
(...) is to (...) their to (...) are very different (...) in this (...) the
Mother church (...)


Minstrel: -- and it came to pass, "when the minstrel played the hand of the
Lord," that is the spirit of prophecy, "came upon him."

AT seeing the prosperity of the ungodly, -- David was tempted to say "surely I
have cleansed my hands in vain" -- but when he joined in praising God in the
great congregation, he learned more perfectly that God is holy in all his ways,
and just in all his works -- and that the end of these men is, that they shall
wither as the green herb, and be brown away like the chaff of the summer
threshing floor.

WHEN Paul and Silas sang praises unto God, not only did the prisoners hear
them -- but their Unfortunately the poets (...) given us so many fabulous
stories of the effects of music, (...) people are hardly persuaded to believe
those that are true and as (...) as any fact in history. An instance of a crew
performed by Music is recent upon the minds of numbers here, as (...) fell
directly under their eye, and but a short while ago. A young Lady distressed
with the disorder called St. Vitus's dance was reduced to the last stage of
distress, far every medicinal application failed. The disorder daily gaining
ground and triumphing more and more over the healing Art; at length it was
suggested to her parents to try what effects a musical application would have
upon her. Hoping against hope they permitted the experiment to be tried. It
proved successful to a miracle, and after plying her constantly with vocal or
instrumental music for a few weeks, she recovered her health, and to this day
continues free from any symptom of that dreadful disorder.

It may not be improper to take notice of a passage in the 5th chapter of
Isaiah which is frequently brought to justify the clamours of the enemies of
instrumental music -- And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and the pipe, and
wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither
consider they the operations of his hands. Passing over the glosses which are
commonly thrown upon this piece of scripture, I conceive that no injury is
done, but rather a true meaning annexed, if I paraphrase it thus -- Although
God has blessed them with abundance, and given them in heart to enjoy it;
although he has endued them with skill of hand and voice, wherewith to sing
his mavelous works of mercy and of grace; yet so stupid and ungrateful are
they, that they forget the hand which protects and nourishes them, they turn
the grace of God into lasciviousness and prostitute the ^^^eats lent them from
heaven, to the basest of uses, that of inflaming their passions, and alienating
their hearts from God. Music, wine and all the fruits of the earth, and every
endowment whether of body or mind may be abused, but the abuse can never
dep^^ve them of their excellencies, for God endued them with it, and the
infidelity and wickedness of man cannot take it away.


song pierced the skies, and "entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath." --
For low! there was an earthquake -- and the prison doors were opened! In like
manner, when the penitent, though bound by the chains of his sins, attempts to
sing praises unto God with a willing heart, instantly his chains fall off; --
he is commanded to arise and walk out of his prison and to publish what great
things God has done for his Soul. -- Thus, when the Lord turns away the
Captivity of any of Zion's children, with great propriety may their mouths be
filled with laughter, and their tongues with singing -- making a joyful noise
before the Lord the King.

NOW -- have we not seen the divine presence approbating a concert of vocal and
instrumental praise? -- have we not seen the prophets prophesying on earth with
the accompaniment of an harp; and the redeemed of the Lord singing praises with
the harp in their mansions of bliss? -- who then is he that shall find fault,
when indeed, I trust, with a suitable portion of David's spirit, we borrow
David's words, and say awake ^u^e and harp, awake up my glory to sing praises
to the Lord? -- Since we have all rebeatedly heard the apostosic injunction,
"rejoice evermore" -- well may those for whom Christ has died obey it -- and
praise him in the sound of the trumpet -- with the psaltery and harp, with the
timbrel and all stringed instruments, in the Organ, cornet, cymbals, and
Sackbut -- so that every thing that has breath may praise the Lord.

FINALLY -- seeing the great and frequent abuse of Instrumental music has
raised such a degree of superstitious resentment against the admission of any
other kinds of Instruments into Churches, except the It is absolutely
impossible to tune the Organ or any keyed Instrument in perfect harm^ny, owing
to a small deficiency in the quantity of sound in an Octave; and therefore must
be tuned in (...) throwing the error upon the thirds and (...). To the same
inconveniency all simple (...) instruments are exposed, (...) as those with
strings, wh^^^ (...) are measured by (...) that they do not play perfectly in
(...) but from this (...) those (...) performers fault if they are not played
in tune. I would submit it therefore, to the judgment of those who have
repeated frequently the words of the Text as a part of divine service; whether
it were not advisable to give the only perfect Instruments we know of, viz. the
VIOLIN, the PSALTERY, and V^O^O^CELLO^ a place in out Ch^^ches along with the
ORGAN; of for no other reason, yet for this very good one, to be correctors of
the MEAN (...) and PAR^^S DISCORDS of that otherwise magnificent and excellent
instrument.
Organ -- let us therewith with be content. And as the placing one in this
Church has occasioned this meeting of the Congregation -- permit me to
conclude with offering some observations and instructions naturally arising
from the Analogy betwixt the Organ of human contrivance and ourselves the
wonderful Organs of God's building.

THE materials of which the various parts both of (...) Organ and our Bodies,
are composed, are of the earth; but what gives life to both descends from
heaven. When the body of man received the breath of life, that wonderful Organ
was ready to praise God, so when the bellows, the lungs of the Organ of man's
building, heaves and in hales the air, it may be said to be alive -- it is
ready to obey the singer of him who desires it to join with the Congregation
in praising God. -- The Spirit of the Lord gives it breath -- it sounds --
and we hear the sound thereof, but cannot tell whence that sound comes, nor
whither it goes. -- How expressive is this of the operations of that spirit
who works is the hearts of the regenerate! Do the pipes stand in rows -- does
each one know it is own appointed place -- and do they all receive their due
proportion of air from the common stock? Just so, the members of the body
natural, social, or christian stand in that relation, which they bear to each
other and to the whole; none can say to the other I have no need of thee, --
for no man lives to himself. -- We are members one of another, and our duty is
to preserve "the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace," always remembering
that, whatever good thing any man has, he must have received it from above.

BUT, alas! expressive of the humbled condition of our nature, are all the
works of man; for all loudly publish their own imperfection, as well as that of
him who made them! -- And are not we hereby admonished to seek for perfection
from God? and this perfection consists in being like unto God, and God, St.
John tells us, is Love.

IN tuning the Organ, the proportion of discord inseparable from the scale of
Music, is distributed among the several pipes of the Octave, in order that they
may all bear their proportion of this inconveniency -- and consequently produce
better harmony, than if the whole error was laid on any one of them. What may
we learn from this -- but "to bear one another's burdens" -- to please each man
his neighbor, for his good to edification? -- and thus to fulfill the royal law
of concord the companion of Charity.

TO the so general neglect of "mutual forbearance and mutual forgiveness," is
owing the great dissimilitude between many of our modern christians and those
of ancient times, when THE MULTITUDE OF THE BELIEVERS WERE OF ONE HEART AND OF
ONE MIND.

NOT more apt to go out of tune, and all sorts of instruments, from the
influences of heat, and cold, of moisture and drought, and of winds and calms;
than are the affections of the human heart, those strings or pipes of this
Organ of God's building from the influences of the various objects which
surround them; the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of
life. How often do one or all of these despire to put out souls out of tune, and
spread the jarrings of discord among us? When comes wars and lightings among
us? come they not even of our lusts?

WHY need I pursue the Analogy further? Beholding Brethren, the weakness of our
mortal nature through sin, in the imperfection insparable from all the works of
skill and genius, -- and the dignity of that nature, to which we are invited,
and of which we have an engaging foretaste (...) the TRANSFIGURED BODY of our
LORD on Mount Taber; -- be it out business and delight, to love, honor, and
obey the Lord our God with all our heart and with all our soul, in every thing
giving thanks and making MELODY in our hearts to the Lord -- and to love our
neighbor as ourselves.

THUS prepared -- we may pray "thy Kingdom come" "come Lord Jesus -- come
quickly."

So when "the AUTHOR OF PEACE, and LOVER OF CONCORD" shall again descend, and
as at the first, breathe into man the breath of life, every one, whose life
has been a life of praise and love, and hope in Jesus, shall again live, they
shall stand in his sight, and enter upon the employment of never ending praise;
and they shall invite the whole creation to join with them, saying O all ye
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever. They
shall in seraphic and alternate hymns, incessantly chant Jehovah's works of
Creation, Providence, and Redemption, with the accompaniment of such
INSTRUMENTS OF MUSIC, of which, those used in the Temple and the Church have
been the emblems types and shadows.

PERSUADED of this, the Church cease not to sing praises unto the Lord, well
knowing that the Celebration of her Nuptials with the Lamb fast approaches,
when the grand hymenaeum shall be sung, to which every hymn performed on earth
is a kind of prelude. Whilst therefore the day of grace lasts let prayer and
praise ascend up to glorify God, and benediction and grace will descend to
sanctify and gladden the heart of man. But, when prayer shall be absorbed in
fruition, and hope shall have fully accomplished its pursuits -- Praise like
her sister charity shall reign triumphant, throughout the endless ages of
eternity.

PRAISE the Lord, ye house of Levi -- praise the Lord ye house of Aaron -- O
all ye children of men bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him forever:
-- be telling of his salvation from day to day; -- for he is good and gracious,
and cannot worthily be praised. -- Salvation be ascribed unto our God, for he
has helped his people -- and redeemed us from the hand of the enemy:
hallelujah, hallelujah, hallelujah; -- he who is the resurrection and the life
-- was dead and as alive again, and lives forevermore, hallelujah, Amen.

NOW to the incomprehensible NAME -- at which good Angles bow -- and evil
angels tremble -- JEHOVAH ELOHIM -- THREE PERSONS in ONE ever gloirous and
adorable ESSENCE, revealed to men under the endearing names of FATHER, SON, and
HOLY GHOST -- be ascribed by the Church visible and invisible -- and by every
part of the Creation of GOD, all glory, honor, dominion, thanksgiving and
praise -- now in time, and when time shall be no more.

AMEN.

