THE NARRATIVE OF WHITING SWEETING, Who was executed at Albany, the 26th
August, 1791.

CONTAINING, An Account of his Trial before the Supreme Court of Judicature
(...) the State of New York, at the July Term, 1791, for the Murder of DARIUS
QUIMBY; the Substance of the Charge of his Honor the Chief Justice to the Jury,
with the Sentence of Death on the Prisoner; an Address to the Public, on the
fatal Consequences of a life spent in Sin, instanced in his own Conduct --
setting forth the great Necessity of remembering our CREATOR in the Days of our
Youth and practicing Religion and Virtue in our whole Lives; an Address to his
parents; to his Brothers and Sisters; to his Wife and Children; with a moral
Instruction, by way of Question and Answer, particularly addressed to them; an
Address to the Parents of his Wife; to his Brothers and Sisters by Marriage; a
few Lines on his Sense of Gratitude to Mr. Ostrander the Jailer; his appeal to
the high Court of Heaven, for the truth of his Declaration that the Murder was
committed without Malice prepense; with a Sketch of the Proceeding; which led
to his being taken -- the Warrant, etc. a few Words on the great Impropriety of
False-swearing, or giving a false Coloring to Testimony, before a Court, in
not relating the whole Truth; the Reason for his escaping from Prison; his
Acknowledgments to the Gentlemen of the Clergy for their Attention to him
during his Confinement; his Sentiments of Free Grace, Free Will, etc. etc.

Written by himself, and published for the Benefit of precious Souls, at his
particular and dying Request

To which are added, An Account of the Behavior of the unhappy Sufferer from
his Confinement to Execution, and the Substance of his Address at the Gallows.
By ONE who had free access to, and frequent Conversation with him.

Printed for SILVESTER TIFFANY, Lansingburgh.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE unfortunate Whiting Sweeting, having confidence in my promise, left with
me his narrative, for publication; his injunctions have been strictly adhered
to, as will appear on comparing with the copy. No other person has had his
writings, nor an opportunity of transcribing therefrom. The spurious
publication, by Mr. Barber, is supposed to have been in consequence of a
merited denial of his application, hoping thereby to injure the sale of, and
bring into disrepute, the true work; and did his and the original agree, it
would deserve it.

SILVESTER TIFFANY.
Sept. 6, 1791.
NARRATIVE, etc.
TRIAL.
The principal part of the testimony against the prisoner.
MARTIN, the constable. A warrant came into my hands to arrest Sweeting the
prisoner, at the bar; on the way to his house we met Quimby and two more men
shaving shingles -- we had rum with us -- we drank with them -- they asked, if
we wanted more people; and they went with us. As we were on the way a man met
us, and I said, he had been and given Sweeting warning. In the evening as I
went toward his house a (...) met us and said, Who is there? We made no
answer, but proceeded to his house, and found the doors shut -- I demanded
entrance, and his wife opened the door, and said Sweeting was not there. I lit
a candle, but not finding him, saw by the snow he had gone out at the back door
into a piece of wood near by -- we followed; and I saw him standing upon a rock
-- I made up toward him, behind him, and struck at him, and said you are my
prisoner; but it being dark and ^^^ing a mitten on my hand, whether I touched
him I cannot say. He jumped off the rock -- I called for help -- he was soon
caught, they fell down, and I fell on them: He said I will give up. I bound
him, we found Quimby was wounded -- he was brought into the house and laid
down. Sweeting said if the man is hurt? I hurt him with my fall: I would not
have hurt him had I known it was Quimby. Said I, then you meant to kill
somebody. Quest. By court. Where was the de^^^sed, Quimby? Ans. When I struck
at (...) he was along with the others. Court, did you call on Quimby for
assistance? Ans. I called on all the people present. Court, was Quimby wounded
when you made Sweeting a prisoner? Ans. I cannot tell -- I called for assistance
-- I did not call on Quimby in particular. Court, did the prisoner know that
you was an officer? Ans. I cannot say. Court, was you then in the district of
which you was chosen constable? Ans. I don't know. Court, look at the warrant,
if it is the same you took him upon? Ans. Yes, Court, what time in the evening
was it? Ans. About eight o'clock. Court, did the prisoner know you had a
warrant against him? Ans. I don't know. Court, how happened it you had such a
number? Ans. The plaintiff who took out the warrant against the prisoner, said
he would get a number to go along with me. Court, did you agree these men
should go with you? Ans. In answer to the plaintiff, I said very well. Court,
was it dark, how could you know Sweeting; did he say any thing when he met you
before you went into his house? No. I knew him by a frock he had on. Court,
when you made him a prisoner did you tell him on what account? No. How long did
he stand on the rock? Ans. He went of immediately. Quest. How long was it
before Quimby and the prisoner were clinched! Ans. Immediately. Quest. When
they fell which way did their heads full? Ans. Toward the rock Court, did the
prisoner retreat when you touched him on the rock? Ans. He jumped off
immediately. Quest. When Quimby and the prisoner lay on the ground did the
deceased complain? Ans. No. What answer did the prisoner make after it was
found Quimby was wounded? Ans. He said if I had known it was Quimby I would as
soon have killed my own brother.

Justice, who issued the warrant. Quest. Did you give out this warrant against
the prisoner? Yes, Are you a justice of the peace? Yes. Has the witness now
delivered much the same testimony as he did before you? Answ. I think he has; I
don't perceive any material difference.

Withey, Martin desired me to go with him at the time that has been mentioned.
Quest. Did he acquaint you with the business? Ans. He said he was going to take
Sweeting for stealing. On coming near his house, we met a brother of the
prisoner in the road -- we had a scussle with him -- then went to his house --
finding the doors shut, we threattened to break the door -- we went in but did
not find him -- I saw him before he was on the rock. Court, what then happened?
Ans. I heard Martin say, he was his prisoner. Did you see Martin touch him?
Ans. No. I saw them living on the ground or snow. Court, had the prisoner any
thing in his hand? Ans. I saw not any thing. Court, what words did Martin use
when he made him a prisoner? Did he say, In the name of the people of the state
of NewYork, he was his prisoner? Ans. I cannot say I heard any more, than that
he was his prisoner. Quest. How many persons were present round the rock? Ans.
I think four. Quest. Did you see Sweeting run? Yes. I saw him running toward
the road.

Waterman, I was with them going toward the house, and heard somebody hail,
Who comes there? by the time I came up, they had just got up out of the snow.
Quest. Did you see any man touch Sweeting on the rock? No. I did not. Quest.
How many persons were present? Ans. Four. Quest. did Martin order them to come
on, in the name of the people? Ans. He ordered them to come on, but not in the
name of the people.

Pratt. Quest. Did you see Martin use any endeavors to take Sweeting? No.
Quest. Did Martin say he had a warrant against him? No. Quest. How near was
Martin to the rock on which Sweeting stood? Ans. I have been there and by the
track in the snow, I think about six feet. Quest. Was it possible for Martin to
reach him? No, it was not.

(...), I was present when the prisoner was on the rock. Quest. Did the
prisoner make toward Quimby? I think not, but made toward the road, when
Quimby came up and seized the prisoner, they both fell and Martin on the top --
I thought I saw the arm of the prisoner move backward and forward as if
striking the deceased. The prisoner declared he heard Martin was coming to
search for stolen goods -- that Baily had been and given him notice that they
were coming.

Magee. That when we met them on the road. Court, Relate the matter respecting
the taking the prisoner. I saw him on the rock, and heard him say he would kill
the first man that should touch him. Martin went up behind him, and struck at
him, and said he was his prisoner, and I thought I heard the blow, and that
Martin touched him, but I am not certain; I saw the arm of the prisoner moving
as observed before; I ran up and seized the prisoner by the throat and put my
knee upon his head and Martin took the knife (...) of the hand of the prisoner
-- then they took hold of Quimby, who said he was wounded. I said secure the
murderer. Sweeting said, the Lord knows how it was done: I think he must have
fallen on the knife. I did not know him in the dark -- had I known him, I would
not have hurt him -- I would as soon have killed my own brother.

THE attorney general, and the counsel for me agreed they would not argue the
cause; but that I might speak for myself to the jury. I had been told by my
counsel, not to say any thing -- they would manage the business. I therefore
depended wholly on them, and did not challenge any of the jury, nor ask the
witnesses any questions.

I conclude the evidence being so different from what my counsel I expected,
and from what they had been informed it. Would be, that they (...) fed the
cause must be against me, and that it appeared a murder of such a black and
horrid nature, and evidently committed with the greatest degree of (...) and
premeditation, that like honest men they were unwilling to hurt their
characters with such a bad cause, and therefore abandoned me in the moment of
surprise, and left it to my own management as to making my defense.

I conceive the providence of God overrules even in the smallest transactions
if men in this world, and that it is to be my fate to die in this way, as a
punishment for my sins and a warning to others. My counsel, though eminent and
learned, did not make the defense which I expected. I know not, to what it can
be imputed, better than an over ruling hard of Providence, that they did not
make some defense. We read of the counsel of Ahithophel being by God turned
into foolishness. It cannot then be strange to suppose that God now overrules
the affairs of men.

On testimony like this, it would not be strange to hear counsel remark -- that
it must be very extraordinary, that a witness in a dark night, at some
distance, in a hurry, pursuing a man, in a deep snow, with a hard crust almost
sufficient to bear a man, should see Martin lift his hand to strike at me to
make me a prisoner; but it is more extraordinary, that under these
circumstances with the addition of the hallowing and yelling they made, a
witness could think he heard the blow of Martin's hand strike me? What mortal
on earth unprejudiced, could better himself to believe that the sound of
Martin's mi^^en against my ^^ock could produce a sound to be heard above this
yelling and the ^ound of traveling in such a stiff snow? Is it now also very
extraordinary that witnesses under these circumstances could think they saw my
arm moving backward and forward, as if striking the deceased: as they say it
was all done immediately And, I think it was said in court. I flew upon Quimby,
tho it has been; said by them he was upon me. If then they saw the arm of the
uppermost man move, It was not mine. If they saw either move it must be
difficult (...) not impossible to determine which, (under (...) stances before
mentioned) and considering we were both buried in the depth of the snow. Would
it not have deserved a moment's thought whether a party of men having a lawful
warrant and though clothed with the authority of law, getting drunk and
committing a riot, ought not to leave a doubt on the mind whether full faith
and credit ought to be placed upon their testimony in a cause of life and
death; and of the truth of so many circumstances related by them, happening in
their heat and zeal; fomented by many extraordinary circumstances, and
plentiful draughts of rum, which they said they had with them? Is it the common
practice of a constable to collect such a number, to execute a trisling warrant
-- to come in such a riotous manner, with an intention to break doors, to take
a man prisoner dead or alive?

If this is law, yet it must leave a suspicion, that those persons when called
as witnesses respecting their own transaction, do not feel that coolness and
calmness which witnesses ever ought to feel in matters of such importance.

My defense to the jury.
Gentlemen of the jury, I desire your attention, and that God would inspire you
to do me justice. You are sensible of the failure of human nature, and that
mankind may be actuated by prejudice. If you bring me in guilty I conceive you
will not do me justice. -- I had no intention to hurt any man -- I was
frightened, and my intention in taking weapons was only to frighten them -- I
knew not why they were coming after me -- I knew not of any warrant -- I feared
they would do mischief. The evidences are prejudiced, and do not know the
truth, or have not delivered the whole truth -- There is ONE who knows the
truth, and before whom I and they must appear. -- If you take my life it will
be unjustly taken as I had no intention of murder, and cannot consider myself
guilty of murder -- If I have not justice here, I shall have it hereafter, and
it I die I hope to die a good man. -- I will relate the story; I heard a number
of men were coming after me; I got my brother to stay with me, at my house, and
they not coming in the evening, my brother proposed going to the next house, on
the way toward where they were; I was loath, but complied: the snow being deep
and but little path he went first and I after him; we heard men coming, making
a great noise, he called to them, I ran back to the house, and through the
house, and back into the woods, they found my track and pursued me. I was
standing on a rock, and finding by the noise I was almost surrounded, and
thinking I had one way to escape, there appearing a vacancy that way, I jumped
off from the rock and made for that way, but the unfortunate Darius Quimby met
me, both fell, a number had hold of me and had me down some time in the snow:
when they let me get up, Quimby said he was wounded.

THIS is about the substance of what I said to the court: being agitated in
mind, and not expecting, I should be called to say any thing, I forgot a number
of circumstances, which I think would have operated in my favor. One of which
is, considering it had been given in evidence, that I said, if I had known it
was Quimby, I would not have hurt him, I would as soon have killed my own
brother, I added at the same time, I would not have killed him, nor any other
man, sooner than I would have killed my own brother. Which last words, "nor any
other man," were wholly left out of the evidence; and I conclude, that saying,
I would not have killed him, led the court to believe I meant to kill some one:
and by the testimony delivered in court, it seemed and was held up, and I
suppose legally proved to the court and jury, that I intended to murder some
one: but as I am now a dying man, and view myself on the borders of eternity,
and know that in a few days my naked soul must appear at the tremendous bar of
a sin-hating GOD, I can now appeal to him for the rectitude of my intention, at
that time, and declare, I had not the least intention of killing any man; and
if malice is necessary, to constitute the crime of murder, I never have, nor do
I at this time consider myself guilty of murder, though I have most earnestly
begged of GOD, that if I was guilty of murder, he would be pleased to convince
me thereof. I know the testimony was such as led the court and jury to believe
I intended to kill some one; therefore killing one whom I did not intend, was
considered a killing by malice. I have not related this with a view to cast the
most distant reflection on the honorable court, it being far from my intention
to cast any reflection on the court, jury, or witnesses, though I have said the
whole truth has not appeared by the witnesses; but it may be it was according
to the best of their knowledge and belief: If it was not so, I from my heart
forgive them, and my earnest prayer is that they may find forgiveness with God,
through the complete and perfect satisfaction of the Redeemer.

The following is the substance of the charge delivered by the hon. Chief
Justice Yates, to the jury.
Gentlemen of the jury, you have heard the prisoner at the bar charged with the
murder of Darius Quimby. It has been given in evidence to you, that the
constable had a lawful warrant to apprehend the prisoner, in an action of
trespass; that the prisoner fled from justice into the woods, and placed
himself upon a rock; and being pursued, and nearly surrounded, the constable
came behind him, struck at him, and said he was his prisoner -- But whether the
constable touched him, or not, it being dark, he is not certain, but thinks he
did -- The constable gives you no account how the stroke was given; but another
witness says that while the prisoner and Quimby were clinched together, lying
in the snow, he saw the arm of the prisoner move backward and forward as if
striking the deceased. Another witness says, that the prisoner while standing
on the rock said he would kill the first man that should touch him. From these
witnesses you are to determine the crime of murder, charged against the
prisoner. -- I will inform you what is the crime of murder, it is a killing
with malice expressed or implied. Implied by lying in wait to kill -- by
intending to kill one, but in fact killing one whom he had no intention to, is
murder. -- With respect to the officers of justice, it is by law declared it an
officer is killed, doing his duty, it is murder, if it be known he was an
officer: resisting an officer is unlawful -- It is also murder if committed on
those called to assist an officer, in the execution of his office. A man has
been killed, assisting an officer in executing a lawful warrant, which warrant
has been before you, and no suggestion of it being illegal. -- it remains with
you then to consider whether there was a warrant -- an officer -- and an
assistant by the orders of the officer -- whether the man killed, was killed
assisting the officer, by the orders of the officer -- and whether the prisoner
at the bar is guilty of the murder laid to his charge -- If you are convinced
in your consciences he is guilty, say so -- If he is not guilty, say so.

I was found guilty -- and afterward being called to the bar, was asked by the
honorable Chief Justice what I had to say why sentence of death should not be
pronounced against me, and not replying, The Chief Justice proceeded, in
substance, as follows: You, Sweeting! It appeared on your trial, that you knew
an officer had a warrant against you -- you sled from justice, which it is a
crime to do -- you gave out high threatening words, that you would kill the
first man that should touch you. -- The officer was in the lawful execution of
his office -- the men assisting him were acting the part of faithful, good
citizens. -- If a man lifts his hand against another, with an intention to kill
him, and kills some bosom friend, it is murder. If a man resist an officer
before he is taken and death ensue, it is murder. -- Let this be aduced to
correct a wrong idea that is entertained by people, that they may resist
officers, doing their duty. Officers doing their duty are under the protection
of the law. You said you should not have killed him whom you killed (had you
known him) sooner than you would have killed your own brother: This indicates
that you intended to kill some one among them. Your crime is not only against
the laws of man, but directly against the laws of the Supreme Being. The
apostle Paul says, the powers that be, are ordained of God, and whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. -- You did not submit to the lawful authority
-- you resisted till death ensued, and a murder committed upon one of your
neighbors -- You shed his blood, and by the divine law he that sheddeth man's
blood by man shall his blood be shed. You are a murderer, and you are condemned
by this court. -- Under the law there was a city of refuge, to which the
manslayer might flee; but alas! for you, there is none, in this world; your
only hope must be through the great atonement and the blood of the blessed
Jesus, to which I earnestly exhort you to apply for pardon; and may you obtain
forgiveness. Nothing now remains, but (however painful,) to pronounce the
sentence of death upon you. We are, by your crime, now constrained to deprive
your wife of a husband, your children of a parent, and your aged parents of a
son. Your sentence is, That you be taken back to the place from whence you
came, and from thence to the place of execution, and there to be hanged by the
neck until you are DEAD, and that your body be delivered to the surgeon for
dissection -- and the LORD have MERCY on your poor SOUL.

Address to the Public.
I Whiting Sweeting, of Stephentown, in the county of Albany, in the state of
New York, being about to pass through the dark and gloomy regions of the shadow
of death; and having ^ut a few days more to spend on this side eternity, before
my departing spirit must be before the throne of God, joining the choir of
angels and the spirits of just m^n made perfect singing and shouting forth
hallelujah, in praise of redeeming love -- or before it shall receive the
shocking and heart-rending sentence of, depart ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, there to take up a long and everlasting habitation -- where the wheels of
time shall roll away thousands and millions of years, and yet be but beginning,
and where a single drop of water will not be afforded to the tongue scalded and
forever scalding with the intense heat of the flames; I have thought it my duty
to write a few lines to leave for the benefit of my family, and the world of
mankind; desiring that what I write, together with the view of the situation of
the writer, may be a means of awakening your attention to the serious and
solemn consideration of death, judgment, and eternity. And of remembering your
Creator in the days of your youth, before the evil days come, when God shall
assume his throne of ^^tribution, and take venegeance on them that know not
God, and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, but live as regardless
of God and of his holy law, as if they were not possessed of immortal souls, to
save or lose. I am conscious to myself, I have undertaken this work, and been
led and induced thereto, from a seeing sense of the frowns of an angry God
against sin and sinners -- for God is angry with sinners every day, and will
assuredly render vengeance on his adversaries. God, out of Christ, is a
consuming fire; but through the great and glorious Redeemer you may find
pardon: He is a present help in time of trouble, as I have found by sweet
experience, to the comfort of my soul, in the most distressing hour when all
and every other resource of comfort failed. I intend to lay before you the
reasons of my being under sentence of death, and the feelings I have had, and
now have of the solemn approach of death. I intend likewise to drop a word to
those who deny the offices of Jesus Christ, and have the hardness to consider
the Savior of sinners, an imposter, and religion a mere notion. I think I can
do this most feelingly, for I freely cousess, I entertained the same
principles, and maintained them by works naturally following from such corrupt
ideas. Which led me into sin, and if I had not been by grace prevented, they
would have led me to death -- not only the death of this body, but to the death
of the soul, or second death -- for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. But now, I hope I may say,
that the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the
law of sin and death, and that I am a new man -- that I am born not of
corruptible feed, but of incorruptible and by the Word of God that lives and
abides forever. I now publish my last farewell to my earthly parents, with some
remarks, likewise, to my brothers and sisters by nature, and those of my
brethren in the Lord, who know that they have passed from death unto like
because they love the brethren. Likewise some advice to my dear wife and
children, who are near and dear by the bands of nature. And now, Oh eternal
God, be pleased to grant that in me may be found an excellent spirit of wisdom,
directed by thee, the true source and fountain of wisdom; that the sword of the
Spirit may awaken convince, convert, and break the rocky hearts and cause them
to fall at thy feet in humble brokenness of spirit, and that the genuine fruit,
of faith and repentance may shine through their life and conversation; that they
may break off their sins by righteousness, and turn onto the Lord, now in time,
while the day of grace lasts, and secure to themselves a title to the
unspeakable joys of being placed at thy right hand -- of being made kings and
priests to God, and of beholding thy peaceful face in righteousness, while time
shall never end; and be considered and owned as the brethren of the second
Person in the Trinity; that they may now avoid the miserty and horror of an
eternal banishment from God, from angels and the spirits of just men, and from
every thing capable of happisying an immortal soul, and of being consigned over
to the lake, burning with fire and brimstone, and to associate with devils and
damned spirits, where the worm dies not, and where the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever.

As to my being under sentence of death, it is the wages of sin that has
brought me into this condition -- as I lived in sin, in the neglect of God, his
Son, his gospel, neglecting the visitation of the Spirit, trampling on his law
and authority, and adventuring as it were on the thick bosses of his buckler,
and even bidding desiance to Omnipotence, as every careless and unconcerned
sinner does, that lives without God in this world, how little soever they lay
it to heart -- for straight is the gate and narrow the way that leads to
life, and few there be that find it; but broad is the way that leads to
death, the death of the soul, and many there are, with the swiftest velocity,
running and entering in thereat, without ever turning a moment's thought upon
(...) dreadful situation that awaits them. Sin has become almost the common
element of mankind - the god of this world has blinded the minds of them that
believe not, and they will not believe, and be actuated by a living faith, that
works by love, therefore God shall send them strong delusion to believe a lie,
that they may be damned who had pleasure in unrighteousness. The world, the
flesh, and the grand adversary of precious of souls, who goes about as a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, all unice their combined force to
destroy the souls, the precious souls of mankind -- one of which is of more
real worth and value than ten thousand worlds. Though our first parents were
created holy, yet listening to the suggestions of the temper, they fall into sin
and thereby introduced misery into the world, which is a natural consequence of
sin. -- And what sad havoc has sin made in this world, not with standing the
glorious means provided for restoration through a Redeemer! who freely
undertook to make reparation, and where sin abounded grace does much more
abound; but our sins must be conquered and we must submit or we shall receive
no benefit by rich free grace, but a more aggravated condemnation: this is and
will be the condemnation of many, that they loved darkness rather than light.
Alas! the awful specticle now presented to your view is brought into his
situation by sin; sin and disobedience to God and his holy law are the causes
which are now listing the hand of death, just ready to str^ke the last and
fatal blow; and has armed the king of terrors, and commissioned him to draw
near a poor prisoner loaded with irons, and to (...) of wife, children,
parents, friends, every earthly comfort, and of every thing in which the men of
this world place their happiness; all this, for disobedience to God, and his
holy law -- but had I, before the fatal might, obeyed God and the gospel of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the strivings of the holy Spirit, which I
have often felt, and as often resisted, while in my wicked course of sin and
disobedience, no doubt, this fatal catastrophe might have been prevented. Says
the dear Redeemer. I am come a light into the world that whosoever follows
me, should not walk in darkness, but have the light of life -- but I did not
f^llow that heavenly light -- I chose darkness rather than light, death rather
than life, and vice rather than virtue, because my deeds were evil: I had no
desire of the knowledge of God, and was to all good works reprobate -- I had
adopted the most corrupt and vicious principles imaginable and resolutely
resolved not to be dissuaded from believing all mankind happy after death, and
that the supreme Being controlled and governed our hearts, both to will and to
do, evil as well as good. And these wicked principles being sufficient ground
for the devil to build upon* he did not fail improving to his advantage; I was
an easy prey -- I was found faithful in his service -- I was not only pursuing
the ways to my own damnation, but also doing all in my power to proselyte
others to embrace the same damnable principles -- even denying the Lord that
bought them, and to bring upon themselves swift destruction. Oh! what an
instrument in the hand of the devil I have been, while the devil was ruling and
reigning in my heart! But though my sins have been as innumerable as the
particles of sand upon the sea shore, and though I have dishonored God and abused
his goodness, not konwing or not considering it ought to have led me to
repentance, and though I have trodden under foot the precious blood of the
everlasting covenant and despised offered mercy, slighted the Savior of
sinners, and his people, and have spoken blasphemously of things of everlasting
consequence, yet, I humbly hope, that I am washed, that I am sanctified, and
that I am justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by (...) Spirit of our
God. And now, O sinners! my earnest desire is, that I may be as great an
instrument in the hand of my God, to alarm careless stupid sinners and to bring
them to accept offered mercy, as I have been in the hand of the devil to
dissaude them from attending to the things which will make for their
everlasting peace and happiness, and to dissaude them from feeling happiness in
the unsatisfactory things of time and sense, where nothing capable of
happifying an immortal soul, where nothing permanent can be found; and to point
out to them the pearl of great price, which if the visitation of divine grace
operating on their hearts leads them sufficiently to discover, receive and
obey, they will fell all, all the vanities of this sading world, for the
purchase of this inestimable jewel, which, I hope I have done, and know it must
be done by all true followers of Jesus: for, says he, if any man love the
world the love of the Father is not in him; and if any man love father or
mother, wife or children, houses or lands more than me, he is not worthy of me.
Can it be an unreasonable command, that we forsake and leave all, for one who
has done so much for us? for one who has left the bosom of the Father, laid
aside his majestic robes of glory, left the realms of bliss and happiness, for
a stable, a manager, to be a man of sorrow, and wear a thorny crown -- in a
word, a God by whom all worlds were created, and on whose shoulders hangs the
government of universal nature, who by his almighty power, holds all the worlds
in their order, and prevents their tumbling into confusion, to condescend to
sacrifice his precious life for the redemption of fallen-men? Oh grace, grace!
free grace, from the foundation to the top-stone! God so loved the world, that
he gave his only Son to die for it, that whosoever believes on him might not
perish, but have everlasting life. And as this life is to be attained only by
faith, repentance and a holy life, let me now, knowing the terrors of the Lord,
persuade you to the real belief, and practice of those virtues, and to come to
Christ for the gracious influences of his Spirit to enable you both to will and
to do: for, faith he, come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest -- and whosoever comes unto me, I will in in no wise cast
out -- and he that believes shall be saved. Should it be said, how shall they
believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher? and how shall they preach except they are sent? I answer, God by his
divine Spirit only can speak to the heart, and Oh sinners! what a glorious
preacher is in every heart, till resisted and drove away! What a reprover of
sin and encourager of righteousness and judgment! Says he, I have called and
ye have refused; I have stretched out my hands all the day, and you regarded
not; what a dreadful denunciation follows! I will laugh at your calamity, and
mock when your fear comes.

Since I have called your attention to the important concerns of eternity, I
beg a moment's attention to the unhappy situation to which my inattention to
those concerns, and my former damnable principles have bro't me. -- On the
third day of January, 1791 in the evening, the fatal accident happened for
which I am now in chains, under the sentence of death, which at first gave a
shock not to be described -- my knees, Belteshazzer like, smote one against the
other -- Oh! how soon then were my false hopes of universal salvation fled, and
left me in despair! to God I dared not look for he was to me like a consuming
fire -- to Christ I dared not apply -- death started me in the face, as if
ready to lay its cold hand upon me. Let him that reads assuredly know and
attentively consider, that inattention to religion or false principles such as
I had adopted, will terminate at last in a situation which my feeble pen is
unable to paint, or to describe.

In the situation of which I have been speaking, I ran to and fro like one
distracted. I would fly to the ^aw, which seemed like ten thousand cannons
ready to discharge themselves at my poor soul, and hell opening her mouth ready
to devour and swallow me up, as the earth did Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Could
mortals know or feel the wrath of an angry God in this world, they would in
some measure be able to realize the following question, Who among you can dwell
with devouring fire, who can inhabit everlasting burning? -- And for false
comfort, the old serpent pent would seem to say to me, you are beside yourself,
why such terror, there is no such thing as h^LL it is only to answer (...)
purposes that such s^are crows are propagated among men; but conscience and the
thoughts of death and eternity would desiray the (...) gleam of comfort. Did
ever mortal feel the terrors of death, the death of the immortal soul as I have
done they never would give sleep to their eyes nor slumber to their eyelids,
till they had place in believing, and intersting their distressed soul in the
arm of an all-sufficient Savior. -- But the lust of the flesh, and the pride
on life has so much power over the earned heart that the laws of God appear
hateful and we cannot be subject to them until one (...) drop of the purchase of
the Son of God take place in the heart, then are we taken out of the horrible
pit, and miry clay -- our feet placed upon a rock, and a new song put into our
mouths, even praise to our God. -- Their hearts are at times touched with
divine love in such a manner as to cast out all fear -- their understandings
are enlightened, that the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ is like honey
dropping sweet and comforting promises, and the most glorious encouragement to
follow and to know the (...). Their hearts are taken from the things below, and
placed on things above, where they have treasure though here in the body. And
though they have been building upon earthly pleasures, they are now crucifying
the flesh with its affection and lusts, and endeavoring to bring every thought
into the obedience of Christ; as faith the apostle, if ye through the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live: and to be carnally minded is
death, therefore the preaching of the cross is to them that believe the wisdom
of God, and the power of God: but to them that perish foolishness; and to them
that continue (...) sin all these important blessings are last, for with out
(...) no man shall see or enjoy God -- and (...) ye live after the flesh ye
shall die; this must be me^^ the death of the soul, for all men die a natural
death, whether they live after the flesh, or after the spirit. -- Whatever
seems to be the road in which mankind are traveling my sincere prayer is that
they, each one for himself, may know his own true state. And may I, with the
apostle, wish them altogether such as I am except those iron bands. As to the
great affairs of my death, my views of it are changed, I can now say, for me to
live is Christ, but for me to die is great gain: And though the flesh sometimes
seems to have a kind of natural reluctance, the spirit quickneth and I consider
death a kind messenger of peace; and when I look on the gilded sirmanent, and
consider the abundant entrance into the expanded heaven; the city of the new
Jerusalem, and of the living God; which I hope to obtain through the merits and
perfect righteousness of the Redeemer. I feel my heart ravished, with such joys
as to banish the terrors of death, and to say, Oh death! where is thy sting?
and Oh grave! where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength
of sin is the law; but thanks be to our Lord Jesus Christ, that I am no more
under the law, but under grace. -- When I was called before the bar for trial,
for my life, I feared I should not receive my sentence in such a frame of heart
as to be reconciled to the will of God. I therefore betook myself to secret
earnest prayer to God, that he would be pleased to pour out on me his divine
Spirit, to enable me to submit to his providential dealings with me, in regard
to my sentence; and I can say, that I feel the rays of divine grace in my soul,
and that inward peace that the world gives not: and that I had no^ a murmuring
thought although my composure was by the ^^anders taken for the greatest degree
of hardness and stupidity, and perhaps by the court; but I consider it an
answer to my prayer. I therefore above all things, recommend secret prayer, and
meditation; pouring out your complaints to God with strong crying. My dear
friends, let me tell you it is a great thing to have union and communion with a
God before whom angels and arch angels vail their faces, being unable to behold
his glory. Many may say, let the will of God be done, but perhaps at the same
time they say his will be done, they have a secret reserve, if it be agreeable
to their wills -- making their own wills the standard. Christian reader! try
yourself and ask your own heart, if you would willingly resign your body to be
burnt at the stake, rather than deny the blessed JESUS. It is an easy matter,
under the smiles of Providence, to be reconciled, but in adversity, when
instead of the smiles of Providence we are called to bear afflictions, if we do
not submit with patience we ought to doubt our state -- we ought to remember it
is through much tribulation we must be made meet for, and be sitted and
prepared for the kingdom of heaven. Those who are not chastified are not sons,
but bastards. And though the would are all against you, and though they kill the
body, yet you ought to rejoice, when under the sentence of death. I can say, on
my receiving the sentence of death, I was not terrified, yet to heart of the
dissection of my body, seemed disagreeable to nature, at first, but I was soon
calmed by serious reflection, which calm has continued with me ever since; my
mind being impressed, with a serious contemplation of the bright mansion of the
realm of bliss, and eternal glory. My dear reader! if you are yet unimpressed
with my solemn history, let me now for a moment, request your serious attention
to your own dissolution. Death, relentless death, will soon arrest you, as well
as me, and should it seize you at an unhappy moment, while in your career of
sin and vanity, it will then be too late to think of heaven, and the glories
you might have attained, had you improved the golden season of grace, now
forever lost to you; you, like the foolish virgins, sleep too long. Alas! you
are now too late, your shocking sentence is not the death of the body, but the
death of the soul: the second death. Will you swallow the sweet morsels of sin
and yet flatter yourself you can with confidence meet God. Remember though sin
seem sweet in the commission, yet it will bite like a serpent, and sting like
an adder. Remember that if you are ever renewed you will mourn with heart
breaking for the commission of all which you falsely call little sins, while in
the love and practice thereof. These reflections are applicable to my wicked
life, before I was the cause of the death of that poor unfortunate young man;
what a scene of mourning and lementation to his parents, his brothers and
sisters, for their son, and their brother. In the morning he left home well,
and at his return is a lifeless corpse! Can tongue express the anguish of your
hearts! then extend your view, and see my body hanging between heaven and earth
as a public example, my poor aged parents, with the most keen anguish of heart,
and tears flowing like rivers from their eyes -- my dear wife made a widow, my
children fatherless, mourning and refusing to be comforted. All this is the
wages of sin. Sinners, are you not as it were thunderstruck and resolutely
resolved to forsake sin! Since the beginning of its consequences are so
dreadful, are you not determined now to flee to the Bock of safety, where all
manner of sin and blasphemies will be forgiven, on your application for pardon.
(the sin against the Holy Ghost excepted) Come then to Christ and plead his
blood and his perfect righteousness; come without money -- bring nothing to
purchase a pardon by way of merit. I confess I was much stumbled with the
subject of coming to Christ, till by divine inspiration of the Spirit of God,
my mind was wonderfully enlightened, to discover the connection, beauty and
harmony of the glorious gospel, which the natural man knows not, for they are
spiritually discerned.

I will then attempt to express my ideas of the work of coming to Christ, or
believing on him, on which depend the salvation or damnation of every mortal
under heaven. It is said by the Savior "No man comes unto me except the
Father, who has sent me, draw him;" and it is by man, assigned as a reason for
not coming, because they are not drawn. But by the same authority it is said,
if I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto me, and they shall be all taught of
God; every one therefore, that hears and learneth of the Father comes unto
the Son. All men are then drawn, and none but those wilfully blind and
rebellious are left in darkness. A measure of the divine Spirit is given to
every man, that comes into the world. I am not that light said John; but faith
he of Christ, this is the light that lights every man that comes into the
world: -- and faith Christ, I am come a light into the world, that whosoever
follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. This
light, I conceive means his divine Spirit, which all have that will follow its
teaching; those who will not, it is taken from them, and they are left in
hardness, darkness; and in the words of the apostle, reprobates; not that they
were reprobated by a kind and merciful God from eternity, but by their
inattention to his calls. Behold, faith the loving Jesus, I stand at the door
and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in; most
clearly then, it belongs to sinners to open the door, and all will open the
door of their hearts and receive the King of glory in, or bar the door of their
hearts against him, to their final and everlasting distructon. I have said much
about the divine quickening Spirit, and in order to lead you further into the
knowledge of this mystery, which is denied by many, though positively expressed
in the sacred oracles, let me turn your attention to the original state of man,
as he came from the forming hand of his Creator. -- He was made holy and fell
by disobedience. In the day thou eat thereof, thou shall assuredly die. In the
same day he did die, not a natural, but a spiritual death; that principle of
divine life was immediately eradicated from the soul, and man left in a state
like devils; without God and without hope; had it not been for the merciful
interposition of the second Person in the Trinity, who, I conceive restored to
Adam and all his posterity, a principle of divine light, or a portion of his
blessed Spirit, which, if believed in, and hearkened to, is sufficient to
convince, convert, sanctify, and bring them to glory. Therefore those that find
in themselves any of this divine light, or resistance against the works of
darkness, may attribute it to sovereign grace: it is of God, it is not
ourselves; it is not from nature's garden, that corrupt root; but those who
have no remains of this divine principle, which was purchased and given by the
Savior, have had it, and lost it. If this is not the case, how can it be said,
the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life, and that Christ
tasted death for every man. Is every man then saved by his death? No. If then
he has performed all that their necessities required, he is a complete
Savior. If he has not, where is the propriety of the angels address to the
shepherd, as being matter of joy to all people? It can be no matter of joy to
those for whom Christ did not die, nor to those who are not the subjects of his
special call; and if they are not included in the great things Christ has done
for the world, how can it be their condemnation, that light is come into the
world, having never reached them -- they not being included in that light. The
tidings of salvation therefore can be no matter of joy to them. And the sacred
oracles say, they are damned for not believing on the name of the only begotton
Son of God. If he did not die for them, and they are damned for not believing
on him, they are damned for not believing a lie. I find the scriptures both of
the old and new testament, hold up to view that all mankind may obtain
salvation if they will: But say some, it is God that gives the will -- and as a
soveriegn, he gives to some and not to others -- I conceive he gives to all
power, liberty and ability, and leaves it to their choice to obey and be happy,
or to disobey, and be miserable; or why are such pathetic expressions to
obedience, used, as, Take heed and observe, for, it is for your life: Oh that
they were wise to consider their latter end! and, How often would I have
gathered you as a hen gathers her chickens under her wing, and ye would not:
And ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life: Do not these texts imply
that all bars in the way of sinners coming to Christ are removed. What means
this coming to Christ? I humbly conceive it is attending to the visitations of
his divine Spirit, which knock at every heart, and in receiving the heavenly
Messenger, and being lead, guided and governed by the dictates thereof -- and
in conforming our lives to the perfect pattern of the sacred oracles. It
appears to me to be a vain hope, to expect heaven and live in sin. "My sheep
know my voice and follow me." What is it to follow Christ, but to follow him in
the way of holiness, and to pattern after his perfect example. "Why call ye me
Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say?' Should it now he said, I expect
to obtain salvation by my works; I say I do, but not for my works nor on the
ground of merit. I do not think so little of the joys of spending an eternal
duration in beholding the face of a reconciled God, as to conceive such an
inestiamble blessing can be purchased by a few good works; but they are
promised to those that yield obedience to God, and do his will, and to none but
such. A question here will arise. "What is the will of God?" I conceive it is
that principle of goodness flowing from the divine perfection and ever
promoting holiness agreeable to his most holy nature; for if God is holy,
nothing but holiness can flow from him. As is the fountain, so is the stream:
it being the height of absardity to suppose a holy God the author of sins, or
of our vicious propensities to evil; and where it is said, ^'s there evil in
the city, and the Lord has not done it? it means natural evil, and not moral,
The exhortation is, Be ye holy for I am holy. Should we adopt the other
principle, the injunction must be inverted thus, Be you unholy for I the Lord
your God am unholy. But say some, if every thing does not take place according
to the will of God, then he is infinitely crossed by sin, and the most
miserable of all beings. But if it is acknowledged, that moral evil is in its
nature infinitely contrary to the law of perfections and government of God. we
may say by the same mode of reasoning. he is frustrated pained and grieved by
sin; viewing it in its nature, as that he chooses it: and is pleased with it,
viewed in its consequences. Does not God say he is grieved at his heart for sin
and that it is his will to have all men saved; not his efficient will, but his
permissive will. He has done all for man, that he could do, consistant with
his plan of government, and his terms are, obey and live. he scripture resolves
our misery to our non- attention and disobedience. Witness the foolish virgins,
the feed sown and the talents: he to whom one talent was given was not
condemned because he had not five, but for not improving his talent, but hiding
it in the earth. So the carnal, unconcerned sinners hide their talent (meaning,
as I conceive, their measure of the holy Spirit) in the earth; they bury it in
things of this world to their everlasting destruction. As every thing is
attracting toward the fountain, God is the fountain from whom flows this
Spirit -- he is the fountain of light and life, and so his Spirit is from the
fountain and leads or draws to God, or to christ, he being coequal, coeternal
one in the godhead, and inseparable. -- This Divine Spirit opens to our view
the great purchase of the son of God; that when we stood justly condemned, and
the holiness of God was such, that he could not, consistant with his divine
perfections, forgive sinners and receive them to favor; God the Son undertook
this work, which he has completed and which by his Spirit, the poor and
helpless are enabled to see believe in, and comply with, to their eternal
salvation. -- You, says the apostle, has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins; you are washed, sanctified and justified by the Spirit of
our God, -- I conceive the whole Trinity fathers the new born soul, and that
each has his different office in the salvation of man though mostly ascribed to
the Son: because the purchase was made by him; it is the Father draws it was
the Son redeemed, it is the Holy Ghost sanctifies and seals -- The soul seems
to be drawn two ways -- God draws it to virtue, and its own inclinations to sin
draws it to continue the practice of sin; the soul then stands on (...) free
choice, to whom to yield or obey; his servants ye are, says the apostle, to
whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, whether of righteousness unto life,
or of sin unto death. God not only draws us by his Spirit but by mercies and
afflictions -- sometimes by judgments on nations, on families and on particular
persons, because they rebel against the dictates of his Spirit, and he by his
Spirit, will bring out the persons bound with chains, but the rebellious shall
dwell in a dry land. When God is pouring out his judgments, they that are led
by the Spirit learn right consness and all things will work together for their
good: but, says the Savior, those mine enemies that will not that I should
reign over them, bring hither and slay before me. This, sinner, will be your
fate, when you shall be called before God's awful bar to render a solemn
account how you have improved these glorious talents and advantages -- your
vain excuses will not then avail you, but the blessing you foolishly have
neglected and despised will aggravate your condemnation -- You have chosen
darkness rather than light; alas! you must now abide the consequence of your
inconsiderate choice: the harvest is ended, and your souls are not saved, but
irrecoverably lost and gone for ever -- While there is yet hope then reject not
the teachings of the Spirit, be baptized into the Spirit, be sanctified by the
Spirit, come with full boldness to the throne of grace, pleading the merits of
an all-sufficient Savior, he has fulfilled the law for you, he has a robe of
perfect righteousness for you, he has done and suffered all for you, unless
you cut yourself off by disobedience, and bar the door of heaven against your
entrance, by your resistance -- The Spirit and the Bride say come; and let him
that hears say, come -- and whomsoever will let him take of the waters of
life freely. The greatness of your sins, need not form an objection on your
part, for though they are like scarlet and crimson, and sands in number, yet
they will be made white as wool or snow; if ye will be willing and obedient,
you may not only be partakers of his death and righteousness, but also of his
ascension and intercession with the Father, pleading his perfect righteousness
for you; he has fulfilled the law for you; and if you submit to him, justice
has no demand on you -- you are no longer under the law but under grace. The
law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made you free, free from the law
of sin and death, unless you choose death rather than life.

My dear reader! don't conclude man's salvation is completed by the Spirit
without sanctification, or that the Holy Ghost has nothing to do in it; it is
first renewed by the Spirit and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, which is the
saints, comforter; it is sent to feed the converted soul with heavenly bread;
for, says Christ, except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood ye have no life in
you; meaning his Spirit; for says he, the words that I speak they are Spirit,
they are life. Oh, poor saint! were it not for the Holy Ghost, the Comforter
with us, how would we be able to support ourselves through tribulation,
persecution and affliction? but, being strengthened by the mighty power of God
in the inner man, we are enabled to persevere, and may become fit temples for
the Holy Ghost to dwell in. -- Is not this enough to bring the hardest heart
into submission, and induce it to shout forth hallelujahs, and join the song of
Moses and the Lamb, in thanksgiving to Him that sits on the throne, who by
his blood, has redeemed us unto God, to live and reign with him for ever and
ever. I have mentioned a day of grace that is the time while persons are under
the visitations of his Spirit, and a time when God with. draws his Spirit, for
says he, my Spirit shall not always strive with man. What a solemn situation
are those in, from whom God has withdrawn his Spirit? they are left in utter
darkness, they are no more the offspring of God; but as our Lord said to Judas,
I have chosen you twelve and one of you is a devil so after they are left of
God, they belong to their father the devil, and are devils incarnate -- The day
of grace once past, lost you are, and must for ever be to all eternity. How
will you then reflect o^ your stupidity in the neglect and abuse of rich fre^
grace and offered mercy? Have you not yet th^^ Spirit accusing and condemning
for sin, for so often and so long rejecting its counsels, and for not harkning
to its reproofs; hark then, fearing it may b^ the last visitation -- in a
matter of such infinite importance delay not a day, an hour nor a single moment
I confess it has been my delay and non-attention the strivings of the Spirit
that has brought me be a public spectacle in my death: when the Spirit was
striving with me, I was striving to resist, grie^^ and quench it; and though it
was like fire to my flesh yet the devil, together with my own wicked hear^
would not fail to suggest to me. that I might yet follow the vanities to the
world* and that what I now know was the Spirit, was only superstition, or the
tradition of my pious parents education, and good counsel, to which I need not
he^d, and if they were right it was time enough ye; I need not so soon begin to
deny myself of vanity and folly -- Repentance and attention to religion belongs
to old age. But I now believe religion rarely takes place in old age; and there
principles proceed from the father of lies, that ought by all means to be
rejected in youth. Oh! that I might be a means to induce poor, though, less
souls, bound to the eternal world, to consider these important truths and how
often they are persuaded by the adversary of souls, to neglect them -- Oh!
consider what a sub^le adversary we have to encounter, and that he is
continually going about as a roaring lion, seeking wh^^ he may devour -- And be
induced to consider that like and death are within our reach, and assuredly
depend on our choice, assisted by a measure of the Spirit, which is freely
given without exception; for, says the Savior to the wicked Pharisees, the
kingdom of God is within you; and the apostle of the israelities, they all
drank of that spirit^al Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ:
which I understand was his divine Spirit; (...) with many of them God was not
well-pleased, and did swear in his wrath that they should not en^er into his
rest. I conclude mankind are (...) agents, and have restored to them, by the
Redeemer, full power and ability to save or damn themselves; to abuse and
obtain life or death, heaven or hell; that they are left at their own free
choice, and may be (...) by the Spirit of God or of the devil, according to
whom they yield themselves to obey -- that they may and often do put themselves
so much under (...) power of satan by yielding to him as to be an ea^^ prey to
him, and to be led captive by him at his ^^easure; which is assuredly death,
and will end in an eternal banishment from God, and from the least gleam of
hope or comfort. And, Oh sinners! stupid sinners; your portion if you remain
such, will be to be turned into hell, into a lake burning with fire and
brimstone, where you will, without intermission, be mourning your fo^ly and
bitterly cursing your deluded and bewitched attachment to the momentary
vani^^es of this vain world; for the sake of which, you have placed your
immortal part, your never-dying souls, under the scalding drops of divine
vengeance; there to remain as long as God lives to punish you. -- But those
which will be led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God; God himself
will be a Father to them, and own them as his children; Jesus, the second
glorious person in the everblessed Trinity, will own them as his brethren, and
though the^, were created below angels, those shining attendants before the
throne of God, they will be raised far above them; and while in this world,
they, in believing views, may anticipate in some degree, their happiness; they
may die in peace, being assured that guardian angels, will, at their souls
leaving th^se mortal bodies, want them, with the swiftness of angelic wings,
into the heavenly Jerusalem, where millions and legions of angels will hail
their happy arrival and where no sin nor sorrow shall ever enter; where they
shall drink plentiful draughts of those rivers of pleasure, which flow through
the Paradise of God: not for days months, nor years, but during the
inconceivable and inexpressible duration of ETERNITY.

APPLICATION.
ALTHOUGH my broken ideas have been lengthy, and my writing unconnected yet it
being the last time of speaking in this world. I beg leave to add a few words
by way of application and am persuaded if you felt the weight of eternity as I
do, you would be as willing to read as I am to write, in a dark place, and my
hands and my feet fast in irons. I have first arrested your attention by my
near and speedy exit to everlasting happiness or misery and my only motive for
addressing you is, the honor of God, and a most ardent with to promote the
happiness of souls; and should I be so happy as to prevail with one precious
soul among the millions of mankind, to forsake their sins, and turn unto God
and be happy, I should think my pains abundantly rewarded; for I consider one
soul of more worth than ten thousand worlds -- I have set before you my corrupt
principles while in my state of unregeneracy, and the dangerous consequences to
which they led me, and urged you to avoid them, and all appearance of evil -- I
have endeavored to move you from a consideration of my change from a state of
sin and misery to that of happiness, in the near views of death and from my
expectation of eternal happiness -- I have endeavored to show the dreadful
consequences of the false principles, which I had embraced, and my desire to be
an instrument in the hand of God to stir you up to repentance; and to induce
you thereto, I have urged the exceeding greatness of the purchase, the freeness
of the grace, the universality of the invitation, and the striving of the
Spirit in every heart -- I have urged you from the horror that awaited me after
the fatal accident, and the subtlety of the devil in trying to dissuade me from
the thoughts of religion, and attending to the striving to the divine Spirit
upon my wicked heart -- I have suggested to you that there is no way to heaven
but in the straight and narrow road of holiness, and the folly of those who
expect to obtain a seat in the Paradise of God, and still continue running on
in the broad road, and where it will assuredly land them -- I have mentioned
the great importance of secret prayer, with an account of the sweet experience
of my own soul, by attending to that great duty and unspeakable privilege -- I
have expressed my ideas of the will of God, and of coming to Christ; the
greatness of his purchase; fearing God and Christ are dishonored, and precious
souls injured, by being taught they can do nothing availing to their salvation;
for, says Christ many call me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say --
I have urged you to receive the Spirit into your hearts and to be led, guided
and governed thereby by the blessing to which it leads, and the insupportable
horrors consequent upon the neglect of this part of the purchase of the Son of
God, who himself has said that he will draw all men unto him -- and that this
drawing is by the sweet influences of his Spirit -- I have urged you by the
consideration, that the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each exert
their office in the salvation of sinners, and the solemn account you will be
called to answer for your wilful abuse, in resisting and despising such offered
mercy -- and how it will aggravate your condemnation; if he that despised the
law of Moses, died without mercy, of how much sover punishment shall ye be
thought worthy, who have trodden under foot the Son of God -- I have considered
the abundant provision made for your return to God, in the way of repentance,
faith and a holy life, and that the neglect is to choose damnation, which is the
consequence of your stupid, foolish and wicked choice -- I have urged you, from
a consideration of the saints' comfort and happiness in this world, in walking
the straight narrow road, and knowing they are traveling heavenward, and
keeping in view the unspeakable happiness, as their portion -- I have
considered the golden season, or day of grace, and urged the consideration
thereof while it lasts before it is too late, and the soul be left in hardness,
and a state of reprobation, without ever being in a state to receive another
offer of mercy -- I have urged my own long conviction, while I was running on
in ^n, resisting the striving of the Spirit, and listening to the charms and
de^usions of the devil, persuading me by many alluring motives to resist the
Spirit, and to continue my bewitched course of sin -- I have urged you, by a
serious consideration, of the misery and horror, which will assuredly be the
portion of the wicked, by the intenseness of their torment and the infinite
length of its duration -- And lastly, I have endeavored to move your attention
to the important concerns of religion, by a consideration of the unspeakable
privilege of being sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty -- of being raised
to a dignity superior to angels -- of your souls being at death received by
guardian angels and winged by them to unspeakable happiness, which will last
during eternal ages.

And now precious, dear, immortal, never-dying souls! consider the fullness,
freeness and efficacy, of the blood of God shed for you; of the great
salvation, and of its important consequences. And now, let old and young, great
and small high and low, rich and poor, apply these lines to their own
particular case, and charge it home to their consciences; that these great and
important realities are their own immediate and particular concern; and God
grant that they may act as the importance of the subject demands; and that my
death may in his hand be a means of awakening, convincing, and converting
sinners savingly; at least, that it may be a means in his hand of saving one
poor, immortal, perishing soul, but this I must leave in the hand of God, and
to Jesus, the only Mediator, cheerfully commit my spirit, with the lovely sound
from heaven in my ears, of Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from
henceforth, says the Spirit, they shall rest from their labors, and their
works shall follow them.

THE Spirit and the Bride, say, come,
The invitation's strong;
Oh, fill my heart with fire of love,
And tarry not too long.
I Will on the stage of life rejoice,
While Jesus stand in view;
And let my lips with solemn voice,
Bid all the world adieu.
Give thy good Spirit, Lord* to guide,
To that bright heavenly day;
Let angels guard me to thy throne,
From which never let me stray.
AN ADDRESS TO MY PARENTS.
DEAR PARENTS,
GRATITUDE and duty, lead me to leave a few lines with you, which. I humbly
hope, may be to your comfort and consolation, when I am separated from you by
the stroke of death. I now in my dying language, to my s'orrow, confess my
disobedience to you and my inattention to the instruction, sorrow and tears of
my tender parents, to induce me to remember my Creator in the days of my youth
and your counsel and advice to me, endeavoring to prevent my running into
presumptuous sins; I thank you for your kindness in giving me learning* which
you expected, when I should take the reins of self-government into my own
hands, might be of service to me, and the community, and be a help to enable me
to conduct in such manner as to be a comfort to you in your declining age. But
alas! mistaken parents, your labor is lost, your expectation disappointed,
yourselves to whom I ought to have been a comfort and support, I am now
bringing with stoods, of tears, and the keenest anguish of heart to the grave.

I, with humble penitence, beg your forgiveness, for my disobedience, and for
what I, by my folly, have brought on you. I am just upon the brink of what the
world considers, an ignominous death: but I can assure you, I have abundant
reason to adore the goodness of God to me in bringing me to death in the way
best suited to his own glory, and my own everlasting good.

And now, my dear parents! let me as a dying child give you a word of advice.
which may turn to your comfort. If you are already in Christ, let this
providence be improved by you, to bring you, and keep you still nearer him; and
be a means of weaning your affections from this vain and unsatisfying world,
and placing them on things above, and of kindling the fire of love to Jesus,
whom may you receive into your hearts, by a true and living faith. But should
it be the case, that you, or either of you, have been till this time standing
idle, who knows but this providence is sent of God to call you, at the eleventh
hour, into his vineyard? And should you neglect, perhaps this may be the last
call to you; if you now disobey, may it not be said to you, These many years I
came seeking fruit, and found none; cut them down, why cumber they the ground?
Lord, grant that this may not be in vain, and that they may bring forth fruit
unto everlasting life. And now my heart and hand must bid adieu to earthly
parents, and close an eternal union with my heavenly Father, who, by his divine
Spirit, has quickened and prepared me therefore, and witnesses with my spirit
that I am a son of God, and heir Jesus Christ.

Therefore, my dear parents! wipe all tears from your eyes, weep not for me,
but for yourselves, if you have not been born of the Spirit. I can welcome
death with all its horrors, and lift my soul on the wings of faith, and say. Oh
death, where is thy sting Oh grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God who
has given me the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Whiting Sweeting.

YOUR son how loved or valued once
By you, avails him not,
To whom he was related
Or by whom; he was begot.
A lifeless lamp remains of him you see,
It Is all thou art, and all the proud shall be;
Death strikes the features dressed once (...) gay,
And leaves behind a lump of lifeless clay.
An Address to my Brothers and Sisters.
Loving Brothers and Sisters,
As these are my last words to you, let them be impressed on your hearts. The
first thought that occurs to my mind, is the following question, viz "Suppose
ye that those Gallileans, whose blood Pilate mingled, were the greatest
sinners? I tell you may, but except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish." If
you, or any of you, are destitute of the Spirit, ruling and reigning in your
hearts, and are not led by the Spirit of Christ, you belong not to him, for
only those that art led by the Spirit of God belong to God: and if any man have
not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his. If you, or any of you, find
yourselves out of Christ, or that Christ, the only sure hope of glory, is not
in you. Oh give not sleep to your eyes nor slumber to your eyelids, while
remaining in your lamentable situation! Come to Jesus, enter while there is
room, before the door be shut, and you in vain say "Lord, Lord, open unto us,"
Alas, alas! too late, the ruin of thousands, waiting till their day of grace is
past, till the everlasting door is shut, for ever shut against them. Oh place
no dependence on work, for justification, yet expect not salvation without
practicing every Christian virtue: vain will be your hope of heaven if ye live
in sin: do not take conviction for conversion, depend not on your conversion,
for unless you are sanctified and cleansed from sin you belong not to God, as
he that commits sin is of the devil; and whosoever is born of God sins
not. Should you, say, the same apostle says, If we say we have no sin we are
liars; I say we have sin remaining in us, or there could be no warfare, no
cross, no fleshly lust to mortify; but if we watch and pray; take the sword of
the Spirit, the Spirit will bear rule: it is not the having sin remaining in
us, but committing sin that will prove our ruin. It is in vain to believe
election will save you, for none are elected but through sanctification: do not
believe that any thing less than receiving the Spirit and attending to its
influence till it becomes the ruling principle in the heart, and conquers and
dethrones corruption can save you. Rest not then in ordinances; rest in nothing
short of true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. -- I hope some
of you are with me in the Lord: that we are born into one Spirit. Oh strive to
perserve, and make your calling and election sure; which you may do: if you are
faithful unto death, you shall receive the crown of life; you must dwell in
Christ, and Christ in you. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die; and if ye
through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: if ye love me,
says Christ keep my commandments, and if any man love me and keep my sayings,
the Father and I will come in unto him, and make our abode with him: if we but
hearken to the voice of God's Spirit, it will bring us to love God: if we love
God it will induce us to keep his commandments; and keeping his commandments
will bring you within the reach of this promise, to make his abode with you.
Here then, is the beginning of true religion, viz an attentive receiving, due
hearkening unto, and closing with the moving of the Spirit, which is offered,
and if received is nourished and strengthened, and increases till it
perfecteth every thing lacking in you, and makes you meet for glory. Let me
exhort you that have named the name of Christ, that you depart from all
iniquity: Shun the very appearance of evil. -- And grant, O Lord! that peace
and love may slow into the hearts of thy children, while in a militant state
here, and that they may experience some of the love of the church
triumphant,and at last to be seated at thy righthand. I must now take my leave
of you, and bid you farewell, commending you to God, and begging that he would
keep you in perfect peace till you appear before him, with inexpressible
rejoicing.

OUR natural union, now is past,
Death seizes me and holds me fast;
And you must soon the tyrant feel.
Though now so loath, yet you must yield.
The arrows fly wherever they are sent,
And soon: he stubborn will relent;
There Is none that is spa^^d, the rich nor poor,
But all must enter at death's door.
Then Oh, dear reader! now prepare,
To welcome death's grim messenger,
That when he strikes the fatal brow
Your hope you may not then let go.
AN ADDRESS TO MY WIFE.
My Dear and Loving Wife,
IN compliance with your request, that I would leave you and my dear children a
few lines, I now take in hand my pen, and with it might be in any power to say
something to calm your bitter sighs; to dry your floods of tears; to soothe the
heartbreaking situation to which you are reduced. -- But the only consolation!
can give you, in your distress, is to hearken to the counsel of a dying
husband, while I humbly hope that under the assistance of the blessed Jesus,
and actuated by his blessed Spirit. I may be enabled, to address you in such a
manner as to have a la^^ing effect on your heart, and induce you to endeavor to
wean your affections from this world, and all worldly things, and to place them
on objects infinitely worthy of your highest love and supreme regard; which if
you do, and continue in the love and practice of obedience to the greatest and
best of all Beings, you will be infinitely a gainer, in obtaining spiritual
blessings, though you loose what you considered the dearest of earthly
comforts. -- Let me then earnestly entreat you, to seek the kingdom of God and
his righteousness; and remember for your encouragement, that all things (...)
shall be added unto you. And let me tell you there is no way of becoming in
favor with God, but by a steady and obedient walk with God, and a steady
uniform practice of virtue, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless. (...) in the fear and love of God: but set not about (...)
concerns of religion, expecting to merit (...) salvation therefrom, for that is
not left for (...) the work is done, a complete salvation is wrought out for
you, if you will believingly receive it. It is offered on the (...) easy terms,
without money and without price, to every one that will come and take offered
mercy. Jesus stood and cried, saying, "If any man thirst let him come unto me
and drink, and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out." The Spirit
of God was striving in my heart a number of years, and I believe it is striving
with you and every mortal under heaven: but mankind are inattentive to the
heavenly Visitor, they know not what it is; many totally deny and ridicule the
idea of a measure of the Spirit being given to every man; but it is my full
belief, I had it in my natural state many years, and that all mankind have it
striving with them till their day of grace is past. Watch then, wait for the
Spirit, pray God to discover it to you, to lead you under it guidance, to keep
you under its direction, that you may walk in the Spirit, live in the Spirit --
and the God of peace be with you, and the dear children now committed to your
care and charge -- you are now a widow -- my children (...) -- take care of
them; use them kindly; (...) them to remember their Creator in their youth;
keep them from bad company; set them good examples and if you should be obliged
to put (...) out put them into families that fear God. (...) pratice what I
have written, ponder it day and night, and pray God to list the desires of your
soul to him for his blessing -- My earnest desire is, that you may close a more
endearing union with the blessed Jesus; then it will not be long until we may
again be united, never more to part, and our union will be more dear than that
in this world has been. And let me, with the words of a dying man, request that
you never rest satisfied until you are assured that you dwell in Christ, and
Christ in you, by the Spirit which he has given you.

And earnestly hoping I may be enabled, by my own experience, to add something
(by way of question and answer) that may be for your benefit and that of my
dear children, I leave what follows, viz.

Quest. What is meant by conviction? Ans. I conceive the substance of
conviction consits in being sensible of sin, and of the dreadful punishment
which (...) the inevitable consequence thereof.

Quest. What are the mooing causes of conviction?

Ans. I conceive they are both external and internal: The external causes are
many, and may be judgments, affictions, disappointments, death of friends, or
perhaps sometimes blessings, mercies, etc. sometimes reading, hearing the word,
etc. operating variously on different persons -- all which judgments or
mercies, serve either to harden their hearts, and drive them farther from God,
or to soften their hearts and bring them nearer to God; and leave them proper
subjects to be operated upon by the Spirit; for while they have their attention
engrossed with the vanities of this world, there is no room for the Spirit, any
more than nourishment on a rock, for seed sown upon it; and the devil (like the
fowls in the parable) is plucking up the good seed sown. -- And though the
Spirit, in its nature is always drawing toward God, yet the effects are
different, according to the different natures of the subjects; as the sun by
its enlivening beams has different effects; it will soften wax, and harden
clay; though its influences and nature is always the same.

Quest. What is the internal cause of conviction? Ans. I conceive the internal
cause is the divine Spirit, a measure of which is given to every man; yet,
though the light shines in darkness, the darkness comprehends it not, until
by some external cause operating with the strivings of the divine Spirit, the
powerful attraction of corrupt nature is weakened, and corrupt principles cease
acting, and then it is that the Spirit begins to take hold of the heart, and
strives for admission therein.

Quest. What is the course of sinners under conviction? Ans. They by praying,
reading, strong crying, etc. strive to recommend themselves to God by their
works; and flying from one physician to another, till, like the woman with the
bloody issue, they have spent all; and finding their own works fall far short,
their rebellious nature submits to open the doors of their hearts, which they
had kept barred, and to let the divine Spirit take peaceable possession;
dethrone fatan, sanctify and cleanse the heart, and make it a sit temple for
the Holy Ghost to dwell in; and when this full surrender is made, the work of
conversion or regeneration is performed.

Quest. What will be the effect of this great change of conviction? Ans. If it
is a saving conviction, it will begit an universal hatred to all sin, and a
determined resolution against it, without the least reserve; turning to God and
the ways of holiness; a love to God and his people; a supreme regard to Jesus
Christ, as the great foundation of eternal happiness; it will take the
affections from this vain world; eternal concerns will be uppermost; the mind
will be enlightened in the knowledge of the sacred scriptures, by an internal
sense of the important truths they contain, which will then be a standard to
prove the Spirit which is in us to be of God, (not of Antichrist,) witnessing
with our spirits that we are the children of God. The sacred oracles to the
natural man are a sealed book; though he knows the letter, he cannot see the
beauty, harmony, and connection thereof until by the divine Spirit they are
opened to him and divine light is let into the understanding.

But my dear wife and children, I must leave you in the hand of a kind and
merciful God, who has styled himself the widow's God and a Father to
fatherless children humbly begging him to keep you and them as the apple of his
eye; and clothed with the perfect righteousness of the dear Redeemer, and
washed in his blood, to present you and them falutless before his throne with
exceeding joy: where eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive the things that God has prepared for those that
love him: Where God of his infinite mercy grant we may again meet never, never
more to part. Amen and Amen. W. S.

I To my little children leave,
A word of my advice,
That they, in youth, their sins may leave,
And live a holy life.
Death will me from these bands unloose,
From fetters will set free;
Oh may each unconverted soul
A warning take by me.
Seek true religion, undesil'd,
And seek it in God's way,
And every disobedient child
Fly, seize the golden day.
There is a pearl of greater wor^
Then all the world beside,
And that it is makes me so loath
You should his word deride.
God's word is given you to dire
His Spirit. you to guide;
His judgment sent you, to corn
And mercies multiplied
He has provided every means,
Great sinners for to save;
May every means attain the end,
To unloose satan's slave.
I leave behind a little book.
TO inform you of my crime;
And in what manner I was took
And left the stage of time.
My counsel pray do not neglect,
But keep both night and day.
And never from my dying words
Do you be led astray;
But print them in your hearts and thoughts,
And often ponder on
The bright and heavenly love, to which
Go you, and I am gone.
Whiting Sweeting. MY heart is drawn from things below,
And placed on things above,
Where I must soon appear before
That Jesus whom I love.
My nature shrinks to hear its doom,
How dreadful is the sight:
May every sinner seek for room
In the bright realms of light.
Oh! don't despair of finding rest
If to the Lord you would come,
For there is plenteous pardoning grace,
And in his house there is room.
With him my soul has found relief,
When struck with trembling fear:
And every other soul in grief
May find a Savior here.
He took me from the horrid pit,
Where souls by nature lie,
(Though, sin had sunk my soul so deep)
And placed my joy on high.
Now I must sing redeeming love,
To Jesus Christ on high;
Oh! angels, wast my soul above
To dwell eternally.
And when I quit this mortal clay,
And leave the world below,
Oh! make the hardest heart to (...)
And eyes like rivers flow.
To parents dear, I bid adieu,
With wife, and children part,
Dear, Jesus, Oh! now stand in view;
And comfort every heart.
Brothers and sisters, trembling stand
Dreading to see the sight;
come holy angels, come in bands,
My soul guard in its flight.
Mourners rejoice, and weep no more,
For a soul called on high,
To meet its Savior, and with him,
To dwell eternally.
WHITING SWEETING. An Address to the Parents of my Wife.
DEAR PARENTS,
GRATITUDE and duty, together with a recent view of the many kindnesses you
have conferred on me and my family induce me, in my last moments, to address a
few lines to you, and although I have been a means of causing you many of the
most bitter hours of sorrow, yet, hoping and believing that you are not under
the power of natural corrupt passions, but that you are under the government of
the blessed Jesus, and are led by his forgiving Spirit, I with the greater
confidence of obtaining your forgiveness, now ask it, for all that I have ever
done aruiss to you and all others -- I hope and doubt not but your kindness
will be continued to the little offsprings I leave with you, and that in you
they may find the same parental kindness that they have before found, and the
same as if I had been separated from them by a natural death.

I hope you will, in this world, be rewarded for all your kindnesses, a
thousand fold, and in the world to come with the joys of our Lord; and
believing, although our natural union here is past, yet a far more lasting one
may be joined in the realms above, where I hope we may receive the reward of
everlasting joy. -- And grant, Almighty God! that they may persevere in the way
of holiness, that they may be faithful unto death, and receive the crown of
life; that we may be admitted to join the choir of angels and arch angels, and
the spirits of the just, in singing the wonders of redeeming love for ever, and
ever: which is the earnest prayer of your son-in-law,

WHITING SWEETING.

THOUGH natural bands of love are strong.
Yet surely must be broke,
We cannot expect to tarry long,
Before death's fatal stroke.
All dust must to its dust return
When souls are called on high;
If unprepared, then must they burn,
To all eternity.
Aged parents, now rejoice
That death to you draws nigh,
And let your lips with shouting voice,
Praise Jesus Christ on high.
Your bodies which, worn out with age,
Your children may survive,
When death takes you from off the stage
Be grace in you alive.
If saints while here, you will rise above,
And join the happy choir,
In singing loud redeeming love
To Jesus the Messiah.
When Christ, the quickening Spirit comes,
Bodies of mouldering dust,
Will then be raised celestial ones,
And dwell among the just.
ADDRESS
To my BROTHERS and SISTERS by Marriage,
THOUGH my writings have been long, and my time is short, yet I am unwilling to
leave the world without leaving a few lines to you, and to thank you for all
kindnesses, and to beg your continuance of the same to my wife and children, of
which I have not any doubt. -- And as I feel for your immortal souls, I with my
dying breath, earnestly request your attention to the great things of
everlasting consequence, and that you, like Mary, may choose that better part,
that will not be taken from you. What will it profit you, to gain the whole
world, and lose your immortal souls? -- Lay up then your treasure in heaven,
that when this earth and the works therein shall be no more, you may have a
city of refuge safe from the storm of almighty wrath -- Which to do, be
assured, there is but one way, that is by receiving Christ -- to receive him is
to open the heart, to receive his Spirit, for this is a part of his purchase:
and if you are not led by his Spirit, you deny him, and own him not in his true
character, and remaining in that situation, you are so far from receiving any
advantage by his great and glorious purchase, that you are meriting an
aggravated condemnation.

Whiting Sweeting.

MY dying words pray don't despise,
Look to that God above the skies;
Seek Heaven and his righteousness
And share a part in Christ's free grace.
Now you are young, robust and spry,
And little think that you must die:
Those ruddy cheeks now dressed so gay,
Will soon appear but mouldering clay.
But that immortal soul you have,
Can never 'be buried in the grave,
But in a moment takes it flight,
To darkness or the realms of light.
Who can endure the flames of hell,
Or with the damned spirits dwell;
There Is none can save you from that place
But Jesus Christ by his free grace.
Oh! I beseech you, contemplate the false joys of youth, pride and vanity;
Alas! alas! how little are they to be compared to the paradise of God: or how
great a degree of stupidity is it, that for the love of them you should lose a
seat in that blessed abode.

I feel a sense of gratitude to Mr. Ostrander, the jailer, for all his favors,
to me in my long confinement; and my thanks and good wishes are expressed to
him in the following lines.

THE g^^ler, has my warmest thanks,
For each humane deed done;
And for each cup of water given,
Be his reward the Son.
Of the great God, whose blood was spilt,
And blessed Spirit given,
Dead souls to sanctify and cleanse,
And fit, and guide to heaven.
Reward him Lord, a thousand fold,
With blessings of thy love,
And do a bright and glorious crown,
Place on his head above.
His family, Lord do thou bless,
And to them be thou nigh,
And fit their souls for holy bliss,
To dwell with thee on high.
SINCE writing the foregoing as I have been accused by many of dying with a lie
and the most malicious murder, which I have not confessed and of which I have
not repented: I now say, I think I can in cool calm reason, and the most
sincere reflection, appeal to the Court of Heaven for the truth of what I have
said and am now saying -- and in the most solemn manner declare, before that
God before whom my naked soul will soon be called to appear and receive
sentence, that it is the truth relating to said murder -- In the first of the
evening as I was sitting by my fire, with my little lovely family in peace,
Stephen Bailey knocked at my door, and spoke to this effect to me; You had best
take care of yourself, for there is a party of men, I overheard say were coming
after you; I got by them; I heard Mr. Eaton rangling with them; they were in
high blood: I advise you to go to your father's. When he saw the men they were
about a mile south of my house. I never heard who they were not the name of
Martin, or any officer; nor any warrant mentioned, nor did I know any against
me -- I being frightened at hearing a number of men were coming after me in
such an uncommon manner, lost no time, but went immediately to my father's,
fearing they would come before I could get away. When at my father's, knowing
my wife to be a timorous woman, fearing she might be frightened or ill used, I
asked my brother to go with me and spend the evening at my house. As we went,
each took a club, not knowing what to expect from a drunken mob, as I conceived
them. We found none at my house, and my wife said they had not been there.
After supper my brother proposed going to Withy's, where was another brother,
and intimated, that said company not coming by that time, Bailey was mistaken;
only hearing the name of Sweeting mentioned, it was my brother they were after
and not me. I was loath to go, but knowing my brother had that day been taken
by execution, which had been paid, and been obliged to pay it again, and
fearing such kind of difficulty. I thought gratitude obliged me to go. My
brother went first, and I followed. We had not gone far before he hailed some
people who were coming toward us -- they rushed on and took him and had him
down; yelled and hallowed beyond description. -- I ran to the house and went in
at the fore door -- but was so frightened at that time, I cannot relate only
what I have been informed since by my wife -- she says I ran about the house as
if I had been distracted, and went to fasten the back door, but could not, and
saying what shall I do, she answered you had best run into the woods; I made
for the woods, from the back door; having got but a few rods before they
surrounded the house, with the same hedious yelling, more like drunker savages
than like Christians, and demanded entrance: I had got over a fence and stood
still the snow being deep, and a crust that would not bear, moving forward
would make a noise which I feared would discover me. I expected they would all
go into the house, etc. then I would, if possible, get away undiscovered: but a
few only went in, and took a candle, by which they found my track in the snow,
and said there he is gone. I then ran as fast as I could from them and toward
a road; having a club and knife in my hands. I fell over a rock, and found by
their noise they were near me; and concluding I could not get away; I got on a
rock and told them to stand off; I had a great knife and a club, and would kill
the first man that should touch me; but I had no intention of killing any one,
and said it only to firghten them, and if possible deter them from coming
nearer; but finding they paid no regard to what I said, and coming toward me
with the same hideous yelling, I observed one way that I might possibly escape;
I sprang from the rock, to get through between two of them that seemed at a
considerable distsance; Quimby being one of the two, young man, sprang and
caught me round the body -- we both fell and he on me, I struggled to get away;
the rest flew on me instant;y, how many I know not, some had me by the throat
and head which they jamed under the snow. I conclude I held fast the knife in
my fright; but I now say that from first to last, I had no intention to kill
any man, my intention was to make my escape. I heard nothing of the words you
are my prisoner till after they flew on me and, Quimby. There was such a noise
by yelling and confusion and I believe they were warm with spiritous liquor,
that there was none of the company who have been able to give any direct
account of the matter; as they had been drinking that day and had rum then with
them after the accident happened. I never did dispute the man's being killed
with the knife in my hand, but how I know not; perhaps he might receive the
first wound by springing against me, and the second in falling on me or when
the company were pulling and halling me in the snow. I heard no complaint of
any wound till after Quimby was up -- whether he was taken off from me, or got
off himself I know not. It has been said the warrant against me was a lawful
warrant, I don't say to the contrary; but I never had any dealing with the
plaintiff who prayed out said warrant. It has been said the warrant was on
account of a suspicion that; had possessed myself of an iron kettle, the
property of the plaintiff. I had sold a large kettle -- the plaintiff claimed
it, and took it away; the person from whom he took it, brought a suit and
recovered damage: then the plaintiff who had taken out his warrant against me,
as I have been informed, brought the same suit or cause before another justice
for said kettle, and brought his father and brother to swear to the identity of
the kettle, which they determined by a small (...) or near the bottom, by means
of which the plaint^d recovered: but very like it was not the same^ for after
so many trials about said kettle, the left kettle was found; which fully proves
the kettle I had sold was not the kettle of him claiming the same; (...) that
so man, oaths proving it his kettle could not (...) -- (...) this, hoping it
will not fail cauti(...) people (...) being (...) in taking oaths, (...) ought
to be with the greatest exactness, and certainty, but I fear many perjuries are
committed and truth and justice perverted to the detriment both of soul and
body -- and I now say the sin that lies with the greatest weight on my
conscience is, inattention to the solemnity of oaths; and as I have often been
called to swear before courts* held by justices of the peace, I fear I did not
consider, and weigh the dreadful consequences of calling the great God to
witness to the truth, when I have had a secret reserve by way of evasion; and I
think I have often seen it done by others. -- I have my fears that the
witnesses that swore against me when on trial for my life, did not fully
consider the solemnity of the oaths they took, to deliver the whole truth; but
if they did not, and gave the transaction any false coloring, I forgive them,
and pray that they may obtain forgiveness of the God against whom they have
sinned.

Oh my friends! let a dying man earnestly exhort all witnesses in future, not
to forget the nature of the oaths they take; and let them weigh well the sense
of what they deliver, and ever let it be the whole truth respecting all
circumstances, without the least kind of false coloring, and without the least
kind of prejudice; remembering, perjury may in some instances be committed by
speaking truth, and in holding back a part of the truth, which would have
placed the whole transaction in a different point of light.

False witness rise against my soul,
King David, once did say,
Their hearts were hard their tongues were false,
They from God's law did stray.
God, will not hold them guiltless now,
That take his name in vain,
That with their tongues do falsely vow,
Or part of truth detain.
God's calling now, with solemn voice,
On that account its clear,
And may those wretches, stand in awe,
That dread not to false swear:
And punish them that don't repent,
And fly to Jesus blood;
To cleanse their hearts, and souls from crimes,
And seal them sons of God.
THE day but one before I was to be executed, my wife and children and other
friends took their last farewell of me, in this world -- the tears and
heartbreaking sorrows of parting, I cannot describe. It having been proposed
that my wife and friends should apply to the doctor to whom my body had been
given for dissection, and beg it might be delivered to them for burial; which
they did and being refused, it so exceedingly affected them, that I could not
help taking a part in their extreme sorrow on that account; and having been
advised to try to make my escape, I attempted, and effected it; and with my
irons on got some distance; but was soon taken and brought back. -- I now say,
I am sorry that I gave way so much to nature, as to try for an escape; it is
what I ought not to have done; I ought not to have resisted the Divine will, in
dying* nor giving my body to be used for the benefit of mankind -- I ought to
have been a diamond in the crown of my Savior, who has done and suffered so
much for me -- I am humbled in the dust, and hope it will be a means of
bringing me nearer my Savior.

I HAVE been attended by a number of the Ministers of the everlasting Gospel,
and I thank them for their kind repeated visits, prayers and instructions --
they endeavored to impress me with the additional sin of not owning malice, and
urged my confession, my answer has been, that to please man I ought not to
confess a lie to God, and thought it was just in God to take my life in this
way, or any other at his pleasure yet he knew I had no malice nor intention to
kill any man. I expect there were some of the clergy to whom my answers were by
no means satisfacory as to the murder, and also some principles I believe, that
they deny; one of which is that Christ only died for a certain number, elected
from eternity, which will be saved, and that others are reprobated to
damnation: I can entertain no such ideas of Divine goodness, as to believe that
he has doomed any part of mankind to eternal misery, without affording them
every thing necessary to escape therefrom: but that his divine character and
perfections are the same as he has revealed them in the sacred scripture; and
that they are not given by divine inspiration to deceive us, which I humbly
conceive would be the case if this doctrine was true -- for God sent not his
Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might
be saved. If then he did not die for the world, the world through him could not
be saved -- the purposes of God then are not answered, but totally defeated:
and when I mentioned that God so loved the world, that he gave his
only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
everlasting life. One of those Rev. gentlemen answered, that the world meant
the elect -- To which I replied, if the term world means elect, in this place,
then the text will read thus: God so loved the elect, that he gave his only Son
that whosoever of the elect believes on him, may not perish. If this be the
sense then it implies, that part of the elect may not believe -- I read Christ
tasted death for every man; that the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life: and it seems as if every man and all men, must in fact,
mean all men under heaven. I read of those denying the Lord that bought them;
if they were not bought by him, how could they deny him, that bought them:
This, to me is unanswerable and unaccountable. An observation was made that
Christ did not pray for the world, but them that the Father had given him: this
to me is far from proving Christ did not die for the world, because he did not
pray for the world: for Christ I conceive could pray for nothing but what would
be granted if then Christ were to pray for all the world, they must all be
saved: for said he I can pray to my Father and he will give me more than twelve
legions of angels. From this I conclude the prayers of the Son are all granted.
I asked if Adam lost every thing good, they agreed he did. I then asked what it
was in us that gave us a check when we did wrong and remorse for having so
done? They answered, natural conscience. I confess I know not what that is as
they hold it. I can find no such principle in nature, and believe there is none
in man, while his day of grace lasts. For in Adam we lost every good, where
then can such a principle spring from: I cannot conceive of but two principles
viz. from God; or, from the devil. If this principle is from God, it is not
natural, but spiritual. I hold that in Adam we lost the last spark of life,
light and inclination to holiness virtue or any thing good, more than the
devil, have. What they conceive natural conscience, I conceive a supernatural
principle, purchased by the Redeemer; represented in scripture, by the light
that lightneth every man that comes into the world, in many places called the
Spirit, a measure of which is given every man to profit withal, and that all
both elect and reprobate have it: The elect improve it, and it is increased; to
him that has shall be given. The reprobate do not improve, but resist till it
is taken away. They who are called reprobate are not made so by an eternal
decree of the greatest and bell of Beings but having resisted till the r^day of
grace is past, become such by their own stubbornness and wilfulness. This
principle, I conceive clearly expressed in those words of the apostle, Examine
yourselves, know your ownselves that Christ is in you except you are
reprobates. -- If every man that comes into the world has that principle ple,
then those reprobates have had it, and have lost it; they by their egregious
and ever to be lamented folly have lost it past recovery.

Another question has been put to me respecting the state of infants: to which
I say that, I am far from believing that there are of those in hell not more
than a span long as some have had the boldness and hardness to assert. I
believe the purchase of the Redeemer extends to all and every infant born; and
that talents, or a measure of the divine Spirit, are given them, according to
their day; and that those of them, that are taken out of the world before
actual transgression, the divine spirit sanctifies and cleanses from original
sin. I conceive the declaration of our Lord confirms the truth of this: faith
he, of such is the kingdom of heaven; and except ye be converted, and become as
little children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. It has been
observed to me, that, in Adam we lost all our moral abilities, but not our
natural. I find no propriety for this distinction, as they make it; for all
natural abilities lead toward the prince of darkness; and it is spiritual
abilities that lead, toward the Prince of light. If we have any thing restored
by Christ, it must be sufficient to place us in a state of probation, and
something above nature; and fully adequate to the purposes for which it was
purchased and freely given.

There has also been held up to me, a distinction between common and special
grace a distinction which I conceive consists in imagination only having no
foundation in the sacred scripture. Say they, God gives his common grace to
all; but his special grace to none but the elect, I believe his special having
grace, like a grain of mustard seed is given all, without exception. I do not
believe spec^ I saving grace, as they call it saving without our most faithful,
earnest endeavors to make i^ saving, and that if we are not faithful unto
death, we never shall receive the crown of life.

Some questions were also made about foreknowledge. It seemed as if those
divines had an idea, that, if it was from eternity known by God that Adam would
sin; then it followed, that Adam could not help it. To which I answered, if
Adam could not help it, then he could not be blameable -- he could incur no
guilt. What man endowed with reason ever thought a man to blame for what he
could by no means prevent? I believe every thing is known by God from all
eternity, that ever has or ever can or will exist, and that it will come to
pass exactly in the manner foreknown; but not merely because foreknown, any
more than because afterknown: knowledge does not cansist in power, or agency.
In all instances those things foreknown as necessary, are foreknown as
necessary, and those contingent, as contingent. -- I believe that Almighty God
is not an efficient in evil, and that nothing evil ever was, will, or can be
brought into existence by him. I believe every thing foreknown, and some thing,
foredetermined to be brought about by his agency. I believe where it is said, I
will harden Pharoh's heart, means no more than that he having sinned out his
day of grace while under the operation of the Spirit, it was withdrawn from
him, and that must be hardness sufficient: His temper and disposition was then
the same as Adam's would have been after sinning without the interposition of
the Savior. The same may be said of Judas in betraying his Lord; the devil
entered into him, and so he does every one when their day of grace is past, and
the Spirit is withdrawn; they are then under the power of the devil and fill up
the measure of their days in his service.

It was observed by some of the divines that the day of grace lasted through a
man's life. In some instances it may be so, in others not. I cannot believe it
true in the instances just mentioned of Pharaoh and Judas: therefore sailing in
any instance, it can be no rule to be depended upon.

Another of the clergy observed, that if Christ died for all then all must be
saved or his power is not sufficient to save all, which degrades the Redeemer.
I answer, first: that Christ, I conceive, did not die to exert his Almighty
power to save one soul, but to satisfy the vindictive justice of God for all,
and place all on a footing to accept his terms, and receive his purchased
blessing; otherwise I see no propriety in his commands and exhortations to
chose, turn, believe and live. All mankind are in scripture considered and
treated as free agents, as rational beings; and are all called, invited and
drawn by the Spirit. The Spirit and the Bride say come -- Behold I stand at the
door and knock; that is at the heart. It belongs to us to open the door, and
receive the King of Glory in; if we will not open, he will not force; if we
bar, he will never brake. He has done all things necessary; what more could I
have done, that I have not done: said he, not that he has exerted his Almighty
power, but has done all that belonged to the work of redemption, and
consistent with the undertaking. Secondly, I say, though Christ died to satisfy
divine justice for all, yet it is no disparagement to him not to save all,
because he never undertook it, only conditionally, and that condition on their
part never has been performed. The contrary principles, I conceive, holding
that Christ did not die for the whole world, is dishonoring God, degrading the
Savior, discouraging souls, and the greatest detriment to the progress of true
religion. -- It appears to dishonor God, by disbelieving his sacred declaration
so often made in the scripture, that he i^ no^ r^specter of persons. It
degrades the purchase of Christ by denying the first necessary step toward
salvation, viz. A light, to lighten every man; and that by means of his
purchase, this light is actually given, and that it is sufficient. If we
believe the sacred oracles, we must believe it sufficient for the great purpose
or salvation, and that all mankind have it. If it is not sufficient it may be
considered worse than nothing, and a means of aggravating the condemnation of a
considerable part of mankind; and the Savior of sinners has done them no
favor, but the greatest injury and rendered their situation infinitely worse
than before. The doctrine of personal election from eternity has a tendency to
exalt self, and appears far from that humble spirit of love and good will to
all men recommended in the gospel. It is discouraging to souls under
conviction; for they from such principles conclude seeking and striving are to
no purpose: for if they are not elected it is not in the power of all worlds to
save them -- and damned to all eternity then they must be. Many in such a
situation go into destruction, and I have heard of many under such
discouragement putting an end to their days by taking their own lives, and
where is the inconsistency of such conduct upon the belief of such principles;
for they are taught the longer they live in an unconverted state they are
adding sin to sin -- and they, considering they are not elected and cannot be
saved, believe the sooner they die the less sin they will have to answer for.

I consider it detrimental to religion, to hold forth the terms of salvation in
a mysterious metaphysical light, and the Divine Character in a different view
from what it is held forth in the word written by inspiration of the Spirit.
Those principles fix on the scriptures so many contradictions, as to create a
suspicion of their being from God or any thing more than human invention; and
lay a foundation for DEIS^. While on the other hand, the principles for which I
contend are most fully set forth in scripture and in the most expressive and
moving manner -- they (...) all, command all, exhort and promise all; Glorify
God, exalt the Savoiur and free grace; appear perfectly reasonable, and plain
to the weakest capacity, so that the that runs may read and understand the
literal sense; but the spiritual sense can be unsolded by nothing less than the
divine Spirit of inspiration, by which they were wrote; operating in the heart
and witnessing with the written word. Some scriptures are spoken to particular
persons -- some to churches, and some to kingdoms and nations. Such I conceive
is Paul's to the Jews, in the ix chapter of Romans, mourning the fate of the
Jews; and not the election and reprobation of particular persons, which I
humbly conceive does not apply to prove any thing concerning election as
commonly contended for -- Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated, is a
quotation made by the apostle, from Genesis xxv, 23, and Mal. i, 2, 3. His laying
waste the heritage of Edom for the dragons of the wilderness, is a different
thing from his appointing the person of Esau to eternal misery, by a mere act
of sovereignty, without any thing done by him to deserve it.

The apostle is speaking of the two nations, and showing the Jews how without
any good works done by them, and long before they were born, they were chosen a
peculiar people, not elected to everlasting happiness, but a people whom it
pleased the Supreme Being to raise above any other people and to work miracles
innumerable: all to bring about the great and glorious event, to wit, the birth
of the Savior of the world, long before promised; which when the apostle wrote
had been brought into existence; and they having abused those great and
glorious privileges, God in his providence was about to bestow them on the
Gentiles -- And that God as a sovereign disposes the fate of kingdoms and
nations, the times and seasons according to his pleasure. -- In considering
this chapter in any other manner, it contradicts and destroys the apostolic and
other writings, and even the whole tenor of scripture, of the old and new
testament. What I understand by the elect is such as are converted unto God,
and have their sins pardoned and live in the exercise of that faith that works
(...) love and purifies the heart. They are such as are chosen through
sanctification of the Spirit, and must be sanctified before they are elected;
and though it is said God from the foundation of the world has elected us in
him; so it is said of Christ, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world;
but brought to pass not two thousand years since: so election, form the
foundation of the world, I conceive, means holy persons that are in time
converted unto God and continue in his love; and that God appoints obedient
believers unto salvation not without, but according to his foreknowledge of
all their works from the foundation of the world. And God, who is unchangeable,
has foreordained all disobedient unbelievers unto condemnation; not without
but according to his foreknowledge of all their works from the foundation of
the world. -- Ma^^'s believing is the cause of his justification from all his
sins: and God is the Justifier of all that believe in Jesus: Therefore a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the law.

Another question was asked respecting the perseverance of the saints. To which
I answered, that I hoped none would ever f^ll away -- I conceived a man (...)
had fallen into the fire, and narrowly escaped with his life, and by means of
his escape had placed himself in expectation of the greatest happiness would be
cautious of running into the miserablest (...) again. Yet there can be no
impossibility in the supposition, that a soul truly converted, may fall back
and be condemned. For nothing can be plainer revealed in scripture. -- Hymenus
and Alexander, had once faith, and left it; and we read of some having
condemnatoin because they have cast off their first faith, they had it, or they
could not cast it off -- And some are turned aside after satan; they had (...)
or they could not have turned aside. Many of his disciples went back and walked
no more (...) him. We read, he that believes shall be said, that is if he
continue believing, otherwise not: Said Christ my sheep know my voice, and I
know them and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My sheep hear my
voice: much depends on this part of the sentence. Hearing in scripture conveys
a most important idea, on which our eternal all depends. In this place then
they that are meant by hearing his voice, are they that hear, receive, obey,
and walk in all the commandments of their Lord: thence none can pluck them out
of his hand -- But if that servant shall say in his heart my Lord delayeth his
coming, and be drunken: The Lord of that servant will cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion where is weeping, wailing and knashing of teeth, --
Says Paul, Romans, viii, 38. I am persuaded, that neither death, life, angels
principalities nor powers, shall be able to separate us from the love of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord. This they conceive a demonstrable proof of perseverance,
and it does effectually prove it to those characters to whom he wrote; and they
were such as were mentioned in the verse just before, viz. That neither
tribulation, distress, persecution, peril or sword could deter or dissuade from
following the voice of the lovely Jesus: and those that were such, nothing
could separate from his love. And as it is at this day, to these who continue
in his love, they are his disciples indeed; and none but such.

Another test, to prove their assertion is, that whom he loves, he loves unto
the end. What end -- the end of their continuing in his love, or the way of
holiness? Some are mentioned as being kept by the mighty power of God through
faith unto salvation. If any are kept in or through faith it is by the mighty
power of God. But that all that have faith, keep it unto salvation, cannot be
proved from scripture. Adam had it and might have kept it; so it is with others
at this day; this mighty power of God is sufficient, if we keep ourselves in
it: if we forsake him, he will forsake us. Says the apostle, keep yourselves
in the love of God. This is our part; God gives it to us; it belongs to us to
keep it. "If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him:" but we
are not of that number, that draw back unto perdition. This does not prove,
that I myself, and you my dear reader! are not of the number that draw back:
nor will our having once believed prove it; nothing less then following Christ
in the ways of holiness, and feeling the internal evidence of grace within
ourselves, witnessing with our spirits to the sacred scriptures, and
corresponding there with can give as any solid ground of comfort: past
experiences are not safe to trust upon. The great and important questions are,
What do we experience this present moment? not, what have we experienced -- Are
our lamps still burning, and is the light within us increasing? Are we growing
in grace? for it is the nature of grace to grow. (...) the affirmative of these
questions I place my hope, joys, comfort, and happiness.

But it has been said by some, all these kinds of faith, are not the saving
faith; the person that ever had a spark of true faith cannot fa^l away finally
and be damned. I beg their serious attention to the following scriptures, and
by examining and comparing scripture with scripture, they, will find that those
that were holy and righteous in the judgment of God himself; those that were
endued with faith that purifies the heart, and produces a good conscience;
those who were Ingra^^ed into the good olive tree; those who were branches of
the true vine, of whom Christ faith, I am the vine, ye are the branches; those
who so effectually knew Christ as by that knowledge to have escaped the
pollution of the world: those who saw the light of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ, who were made partakers of the Holly Ghost; of the witness of
the Spirit* of the fruits of the Spirit; those who lived by faith on the Son of
God; those who are sanctified by the blood of the covenant, made ship wreck of
their faith, and committed the unpardonable sin against the Holly Ghost: and
thus even some of those characters, may so far fall from God as eternally to
perish. Therefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed l^^t he be
deceived and f^ll beyond any recovery, into the gulf of eternal misery. I
depend on nothing less than the Spirit of the blessed Jesus witnessing with my
spirit that I belong to God, and upon being drawn from all earthly things,
sanctified and cleansed from all sin, and from the love and practice thereof;
and with these principles of faith and holiness, operating and reigning in my
heart, I humbly hope and expect to meet death, at the place of execution,
rejoicing.

I freely give my body up,
Into the arms of death,
To God my soul I recommend,
So long as I have breath,
I have been vil^r than the vil^,
There Is none can equal me,
But glory be to God the Son,
And to the holy Three.
I freely now am justified,
And by Christ's blood am clean;
Those sins that were of crimson dye,
As though they never had been:
Now I must join in songs of love
To my Redeemer dear,
For he came down sinners to save
His blood he did not spare.
His blood he shed without reserve,
Our souls for to regain;
His Purchase was extensive, large,
Glad tidings to all men.
W. Sweeting. A short account of the life, conversation, parting advice, and
execution of Whiting Sweeting -- by Wm. Carter.
I Beg leave to inform the public, that I have been intimately acquainted with
Whiting Sweeting, the writer of the foregoing and that I have been present when
he was visited by a number of the ministers of the gospel, to examine into the
state of his soul, and advise and pray with and for him, and have often heard
him give an account of his former wicked life, before he was made a prisoner,
and of his conviction and conversion, while he was confined in the gaol -- A
short account of which I expect will be pleasing to his friends and relations,
and perhaps entertaining to some readers.

WHEN he was first made prisoner, he appeared an exceedingly ignorant man, in
the knowledge of scripture, and one that had never applied himself to the study
thereof; and for some time his countenance looked rough and disagreeable. He
soon betook himself to diligent reading and studying the scriptures, meditation
and prayer; and seemed an earnest seeker of the great things of his everlasting
peace. At a certain time, one Sunday, about the last of January now past, after
prayer and meditation, (as he expressed it) he felt an extraordinary change, in
the powers and faculties of his mind, different from any feelings he ever had
before; he felt calm and peaceable in his mind; had new views of God, of
Christ, of the sacred scriptures; the truth of scripture confirmed, and opened
new views of God as the greatest and infinitely the best of Beings -- as a
Being infinitely lovely and worthy of the highest love and adoration of all
creatures; as a Being at an infinite distance from all sin, and possessed of
perfect holiness and his law such, that he could not forgive the least sin
without perfect satisfaction; that all mankind were guilty, and unable to make
satisfaction to his justice for one, even the least sin; that the Son of God
had undertaken to make satisfaction, and had brought in an everlasting
righteousness, for all that would give up themselves to him, to be saved solely
on account of his merit; and that the terms were to give up all for the Pearl
of great Price: He felt himself drawn to God, and the ways of holiness, and
resigned to God his dearest enjoyments, and said he was willing to be to do and
to suffer just what God pleased: and if it was the will of God to take his
life, (though he could not consider himself a murderer) he was willing to die,
and could not say he had any desire to live, though there was something shocking
to nature in death: yet it was a cup all must drink. -- About this time there
appeared a visible change in his countenance, which was observed by several
that visited him: he appeared calm, composed, pleasant, affible, and ever after
so remained till his execution.

He spent his whole time in reading, praying and in conversation on divine
things. -- He made surprising progress in the knowledge of scripture, and
seemed as if he was able to unfold any mysterious passage in the plainest
manner. -- He was much disappointed in hearing the witnesses against him at his
trial: and after the witnesses were heard, some of his friends who seemed to
have some knowledge of the unhappy affair, observed to him something about
perjury, he said don't mention such a thing: I hope they are not perjured
wilfully, if they are I forgive them; they have not hurt me; I am willing to
die. And when some of his relations said something about a reprieve, he said
no, they need not give themselves any trouble about it; it was the will of God
to call him out of the world in that way, and he hoped it would be to the glory
of God, and the good of precious and immortal souls.

I was present when his father, mother, brothers and sisters and his wife came
to take their last farewell of him; which scene was truly affecting, and
sufficient to melt the hardest heart, but especially the parting with his wife;
he in the most pressing manner set before her the joys to be obtained, and the
misery to be avoided by a strict attention to religion, and coming into the
terms of salvation; which he opened and explained, urging a compliance and as
an engaging motive, (their affection being great for each other) that then they
soon again should meet in those happy regions where no sin nor sorrow can
enter, to disturb their happiness, throughout (...) eternal duration.
Observing, if she chose to follow him in the ways of holiness, she would find
an admission into those realms of bliss, into which in a few hours he was
going. He added, I am a dying man; you have been a kind wife; I must leave you
in the hands of a merciful God; farewell, till we meet again in a better would
never to part.

When the sheriff came to call him to execution, he seemed calm as he had been
before.

It was with much difficulty that he wrote the foregoing pieces (his hands
being in irons) and as they could not easily be read, he desired me to copy
them, and requesting also, that I would add his dying exhortation to the
audience, at the gallows. He also left with me a few lines, in verse, to be
added to his last and dying words.

As to what he said at his execution, as I was not present, and no person took
notes of it, I have it not in power to give it at length -- but from a paper
found in his pocket after he was executed, which contained the heads of his
last and dying words, it appears to have been a kind of abridgment of what he
had wrote -- earnestly pressing an attention to religion as the great thing
needful urged from various considerations -- also the great propriety of
choosing good magistrates, obeying them when chosen, and the incumbent duty of
every citizen to be obedient to the laws; and closed with a servent prayer,
well adapted to the solemnity of the occasion -- the last words of which were
LORD JESUS! into thy hands I commit my spirit. -- And I think it may with truth
be observed, that, as in his conversation he seemed to live in the lively
expectation of a happy eternity -- so to all appearance, he died.

In his last conversation with his relations, he observed that the great and
glorious doctrines of the gospel were not held forth in their true light; but
were by some of the preachers of the gospel so clouded and obscured by
metaphysical reasonings, as to render them hard, if not impossible; to be
understood and received in the true sense held forth in the world; and often
earnestly wished might it be in his power to communicate his internal sense
there of; which he had not received from man, by tradition and education, but
from God, by the influence of his holy Spirit, and earnestly directed them to
have recourse to the Spirit within their own hearts together with the sacred
scriptures, and in that way by earnest seeking they could not fail to find: and
that the way of salvation would be opened clear and plain to them. And that
following Christ, by keeping his commandments, is the way in which he is to be
found; for, says he, John viii, 12. I am the light of the world, he that
follows me shall not walk in darkness; -- vii. 17. If any man do his will he
shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God; -- xiv. 23. If a man love me,
he will keep my words and my Father will love him, and we will come in unto him
and make our abode with him. -- He often observed that he did not believe that
the soul of man came immediately from God, as some suppose, and when joined
with the body was holy and clear of any sin: he believed that m^n consisted of
three parts. viz. sp;irit, soul, and body: and that the soul and body both by
natural generation proceeded from Adam the first parent, and were totally
corrupted: and that the spiritual part was from God and is therefore pure and
holy -- and the following scriptures he thought proved his belief -- Ecclsiaste
iii, 21. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward; xii, 7. Then shall
the dust return to the earth as it was and the spirit shall return to God who
gave it. -- Hebrews iv, 12. For the word of God is quick and powerful sharper
than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing ass^nder of soul and
spirit; I Cor. ii, 2. For what man knows the things of a man, five the spirit
of man which is in him; even so the things of God knows no man, but the
Spirit of God. -- The soul of man and the spirit he considered two very
different things; by the spirit, a supernatural principle purchased by the
Savior, and given for further improvement; represented by the good seed, the
leaven, the grain of musturd seed, the talents, etc. And that this divine
principle is communicated to every man that comes into the world; and that as
many go out of the world, at or near the instant of their coming into it, then
if all have it they must have it a soon as they come into the world, if not
before. And though this divine principle is in every heart yet to many it is of
no use, because they bury it in the earth, and though like a live coal of fire
wholly buried and covered under the ashes, when found and stirred up, begins to
burn* so this divine principle becomes the ruling power; but if it is not found
and improved the powerful principle of corrupt nature grows stronger, the
divine principle is buried deeper and deeper till it is wholly taken away --
And that those who never were favored with the light of outward revelation,
have this divine principle operating on many of them to their salvation. Rev.
v, 9. For thou wast stain and have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out every
kindred, tongue, people and nation. And I saw a great multitude which no man
could number of all nations, kindreds, people and tongues before the throne and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, crying
salvation, etc.

He often expressed that if he could while under his conviction have received
any such directions, as he has been giving in his writing, he should have
found great benefit therefrom: and from such considerations, wishing to promote
the good of immortal souls and lead them from their own works to the Spirit in
the heart, and to induce them to attend to its inward teachings, and to
convince them that salvation is no where else to be found, and in no other way
to be obtained -- induced him to spend so much of his short time in writing --
having not began writing till after he received sentence of death. He often
observed that having in his confinement been furnished with a piece on election
and reprobation wrote by Mr. George Whitefield, in which he says, that they who
believe in God's dooming men to everasting burning, also believe that God
looked on them as fallen in Adam, and that decree which ordained the
punishment, regarded the crime by which it was deserved; he could not believe
mankind were doomed to eternal misery without any preceding fault other than
the sin of Adam, and that infants did not as soon as born, deserve damnation
for a fault committed thousands of years before they were born, which they
could not foresee nor prevent; and though he believed original sin in the
fullest sense, yet he believed none were damned for it without actual
transgrestion; original sin being answered, and a new principle being restored
by the Redeemer -- he could not believe that a covenant was made between the
Father and Son, that the Son should in time descend from heaven to earth, to
redeem a certain definite number, called the elect, and leave all others by far
the greater part of mankind reprobated from all eternity: and he said after
reading said author's assertions and studying the same, he betook himself to
earnest prayer to God to show him the truth, and soon after had the fallacy and
inconsistency of those principles most plainly discovered to him, and in the
most pressing manner he entreated his wife not to be led away with those
principles (though fashionable at this day) so directly contradictory to the
whole tennor of both old and new testament, and observed that if all the men on
earth were to tell him he was wrong, they could not shake his faith; for the
had that which the world could neither give nor take away; viz. the internal
evidence, the witness of the Spirit of God, witnessing with his spirit, and
agreeing with the scriptures and opening them clearly to his understanding --
and that on these important truths he was willing to venture his immortal all;
not in the least doubting, but in a few hours he should be admitted to join in
the happy and never-ending praises of redeeming love, to HIM that has washed
us in his blood, and made us kings and priest unto our God, that we might reign
with him for ever and ever.

To conclude, hoping the foregoing may in same measure answer the (...) wishes
of him who though dead yet speaks; who expressed such a deep concern for poor,
perishing, careless thoughtless, immortal soul, and that he might be a means of
awakening at least one soul, to lay hold of offered mercy; and now in time,
securing a title to a glorious eternity: And that they might not neglect this
great and important business, for trifles and shadows: but be induced speedily,
with an honest sincerity, to begin and persevere to their eternal gain. And
that they may receive the crown that never fades away (which will be given to
those and to those only that are faithful unto death) and that inconceivable,
inexpressible reward, of Come ye blessed. etc. is the most earnest desire of
their Souls, well-wisher,

WILLIAM CARTER,

The following lines were left by said Sweeting, to be placed after his
exhortation at the place of execution.
BY faith I see the heavenly host,
The Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
All seated on the throne above,
With offers of redeeming love.
By faith, I see, a shining band,
Of holy angels, round me stand,
Waiting, my soul's departing slight,
To the bright realms of endless light.
Methinks, the time does pass so slow,
While they all wait for me to go,
Oh haste my speed, to take my flight,
To yonder world of glory bright.
Methinks, the heavenly hosts rejoice,
To see the sight, and raise their voice,
He that was ^ost, is found again,
They praise the Lamb in highest strain.
Methinks, dear Jesus, now is come,
To take my soul, and guard it home,
To set it on a throne above,
To join the saints, in songs of love.
By faith, his love does still my heart,
I hope no more from (...) to part;
It Is perfect love that casts (...) fear,
And joins in union now so dear.
Note -- It should be remarked, that although the unfortunate (...) died under
the apprehension that his body was to be (...), agreeably to sentence, yet the
surgeon to whom it was given, had the humanity to deliver it to a brother (...)
the (...) -- who took it to his friend in Stephen^own, where it was decently
interred.

FINIS.

