THE CONVICT'S VISITOR: OR, PENITENTIAL OFFICES, (IN THE ANCIENT WAY OF
LITURGY) CONSISTING OF PRAYERS, LESSONS, AND MEDITATIONS; WITH SUITABLE
DEVOTIONS BEFORE, AND AT THE TIME OF EXECUTION.

Penitent, -- LORD, remember me when thou come into thy KINGDOM!

JESUS said unto him, "Today shall thou be with me in PARADISE.

(St. Luke, 23.42, 43.) BY WILLIAM SMITH, A. M. RECTOR OF TRINITY CHURCH IN
NEWPORT.

NEWPORT (RHODE ISLAND) PRINTED BY PETER EDES.

PREFACE.
"IF there is joy in the presence of the angels of GOD, over one sinner that
repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons, who need no
repentance;" -- and "if the SON of MAN came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance," certainly it is the incumbent duty of those to whom he
has committed the "DOCTRINE of remission of sins," and "reconciliation to
GOD," not only to "go through the cities and villages," preaching PEACE by
JESUS CHRIST;" but also, to "visit the prisonhouse," even the dungeon, and to
communicate the "glad tidings of salvation" to those "who sit under the shadow
of death."

To turn such "as are fast bound in affliction and iron, from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD, that they may have a portion among
those who are sanctified through the blood of Jesus, is the design of the
following manual, in conjunction with the morning and evening, and other holy
offices of the church.

Though there is in the hands of the public, a great variety of devotional
tracts, yet few or none of them (so far as the author knows) are professedly
written for unfortunate victims of justice: therefore, to render the matter and
the manner of the following devotions, unexceptionable in the eyes of
Christians, and promotive of faith and repentance in convicts, they are written
after the manner of the ancient liturgies; and the matter is principally
selected from the word of GOD.

N. B. As the following devotions are most likely to fall into the hands of the
benevolent and humane, "who weep with those that weep, and mourn with those
that mourn;" the author has to request their candor for any inaccuracies they
may discover, either in the composition or printing, as they were carried
directly from the pen to the press; in order that, with all possible
expedition, they might be put into the hands of James Williams and Thomas
Mount, now lying under sentence of death in the gaol of Newport.

Newport, Wednesday, in Passion week, 1791.
PENITENTIAL OFFICES.
OFFICE FIRST.
Minister. THE Lord have mercy upon you.


Convict. Amen. Have mercy, O Christ.


Min. Ye who are dead to the law, and under the sentence of condemnation,
listen to the voice of your gracious and compassionate GOD calling you to
repentance, in order that ye may find mercy in the day of judgment. Humble
yourselves under the mighty hand of GOD -- If ye do sincerely repent, confess
and forsake your sins, "though they were as scarlet, they shall be made white as
snow; though your wickednesses have gone over your heads, they shall not be your
destruction!" Therefore -- Be afflicted -- mourn, and weep, -- humble
yourselves in the sight of GOD. Turn unto the Lord, with all your heart, with
fasting, with weeping, and with mourning. For, the sacrifices of GOD are a
broken spirit -- a broken and a contrite heart, O GOD, thou will not despise.
He that covers his sins shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes
them shall find mercy. Ye shall remember your ways, and all your doings wherein
ye have been defiled; and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight, for all
your evils that ye have committed. If ye confess your sins, GOD is faithful and
just to forgive you your sins, and to cleanse you from all unrighteousness.
Cast away from you all your transgressions (by confessing them freely and
without reserve) and turn yourselves from all your transgressions (by sincere
repentance) so iniquity shall not be your ruin. " The LAW is made for the
lawless and disobedient. By the LAW is the knowledge of SIN; and SIN is the
transgression of the LAW. The CIVIL MAGISTRATE bears not the sword in vain;
for he is the MINISTER of GOD, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil."


Let us pray.

O most merciful and gracious GOD, who in the midst of deserved punishment, art
wont to remember undeserved mercy; -- in thy wise providence thou have
compassed these thy creatures, our brethren, and taken them in the net of their
own wickedness; by the power of thy grace, so convince them of justice,
temperance, and judgment to come, that they may tremble at the sight of their
guilt, and fearfully cry out, "what shall I do to be saved, and escape the
wrath to come?" -- Grant them repentance unto life, that when the sword of
temporal justice shall have received the drink offering of their blood, -- the
blood of Jesus, which was shed to wash away the guilt of every penitent, may
purify them, both in soul, body and spirit, and qualify them for a portion in
the paradise of GOD. Hear us, O merciful GOD, for the sake of thine adorable
Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Min. O Lord, turn them from darkness to light;


Con. And from the power of Satan unto GOD.


Min. From blindness of mind, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and
commandments,


Con. Good Lord deliver us.


Min. Increase their faith in the divine promises -- alarm their minds with a
view of thy terrors -- and help them to take their station at the foot of their
Savior's cross, that the blood of Jesus may save them from the angel of
eternal death.


Con. I bow to receive thy judgments, as well as thy mercies, O my gracious,
but offended GOD.


Min. Victims of justice, in the words of Joshua to Achan, I further address
you --


Give glory to the GOD of Israel, and make your confession -- meekly kneeling
and saying after me.

The convicts prostrate, or kneeling, and repeating after the minister, each
one for himself shall say with an audible voice, the following

CONFESSION.
Prostrate, on this earth which is soon to receive my wretched and sinful body,
and "spreading out my hands unto the Lord my GOD, I thus make my confession,"
and humbly beseech my good, but highly offended GOD, to have mercy upon me, a
miserable sinner, through the death and intercession of JESUS my blessed and
adorable SAVIOR; who was in the days of his sojourning on this earth, numbered
with malefactors -- died on the cross as one, and on the cross promised pardon
to the penitent thief, under that most expressive form "this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise." -- Grant, O Lord, my repentance may be sincere as his
was, and according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, remember me, when
thou come to judge the world! O my God! I am ashamed and blush, to lift up my
face unto thee; for mine iniquities are increased over mine head, my trespass
is grown up into the heavens. "My iniquities have bound me with iron," and
delivered me into the hands of inexorable justice, which has condemned me to
die "an accursed and ignominious death." Behold I am before thee, O my offended
Father, covered all over with my trespasses, those garments of condemnation! I
bow down, meekly to acknowledge that thy judgments are altogether right, and
that in very faithfulness and mercy have thou stopped me in my mad career of
guilt, and put me in the dungeon under the shadow of death. Behold I am vile:
what shall I answer thee? I will acknowledge my sin unto thee (O my Heavenly
Father, if so vile, so grievously an offending wretch may presume to address
thee by that endearing name) I will confess my transgressions unto my Lord GOD,
that thou may forgive the iniquity of my sins. I will declare mine imquity,
I will be sorry for my sins. My transgressions are multiplied before thee, and
my sins testify against me. Thou, O God, art wroth, for I have sinned in
thought, word, and deed against thy holy commandments, and against the laws of
civil society. Under the scorching heart of thy displeasure, I fade as a leaf;
my iniquities, like the wind, have taken me away from the dwellings of men.
But, O Lord, thou art my Father; I am the clay, and thou the potter -- I am the
work of thy hands -- thy blessed and adorable Son died for me a violent death:
O may the purifying stream of his blood flow upon me, to cleanse me from my
guilty stains! I am made after thy image, O adorable Creator! but, alas! how
have I defaced and abused thy likeness -- forfeited all claim to my heavenly
original -- done despite to the spirit of grace, and trampled under foot the
price of human redemption! -- After this, by what name of connection shall I,
wretched man that I am! address thee? But because thy mercy is over all thy
other works. I will hope, I will lean upon that mercy, I will run from the
wrath to come, to hide myself under the shadow of thy mercy-seat. -- I will
flee to my offended, but compassionate GOD, and will borrow the words of the
penitent prodigal, and say -- Father! I have sinned against heaven and in thy
sight -- end am no more worthy to be called thy son! -- But, O Father, will thou receive me? Is thy Son's blood able to atone for my guilt? Is not thy
mercy gone for ever? -- I know that though mercy stands continually before
thy face, yet justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne! Justly
have thou delivered me over to the tormentors, that I should pay the forfeiture
of my life! and therefore, O my GOD! horror takes hold of me, -- my bowels are
turned within me! -- O that my head were waters, and mine eyes fountains of
tears, that I might weep day and night, to wash away the pollutions of my
guilty soul and body! My soul shall weep in secret, for my folly -- my vanity
-- my ignorance -- my neglect of thy sabbaths and sacraments -- for the
contempt I have shown to thy holy word and commandments -- for my lying,
stealing, and deceitfulness -- for having indulged my depraved nature in every
evil thing; for commission of the sins I was warned against, as well as for
omission of what I ought to have done! -- Woe is me! the crown is fallen from
my head! I abhor myself in dust and ashes! O hide thy face from my sins, and
blot out all my misdees -- grant me the comfort of thy salvation, and redeem me
from everlasting death! Most merciful, most pitiful, most gracious GOD! hear in
heaven the seat of thy holiness, hear my confession and my complaint, and
pardon me, for the sake of thy Christ, who was named JESUS, because he saves
his people from their sins. -- Unto my GOD, I desire to offer up, whether in
life or death, all submission, adoration, and thanks, through Jesus Christ, my
Lord and Savior. Amen.

The minister, lifting up his hands over the convicts, shall say the following.

ABSOLUTION.
The almighty and gracious GOD, who to the impenitent is a consuming fire; but
is full of mercy and forgiveness to those who turn to him by faith and
repentance, have mercy upon you; grant you repentance unto life, a steadfast
faith in your blessed Savior, and charity toward all men. -- GOD deliver you
from the guilt and punishment due to your sins, in the day of judgment, and
receive you into everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our blessed advocate
and redeemer. Amen.

Min. O Lord, hear our prayer,


Con. And let our sighing be heard in thy presence.


Min. and Con. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom
come, thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one; for
thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


THE LESSON.
Our GOD is a consuming fire: clouds and darkness are round about him, justice
and judgment are the habitation of his throne: a fire goes before him, and
burns up his enemies round about. His lightnings enlightened the world; the
earth saw and trembled. The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord;
at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. He put on the garments of
vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal, as a cloak. According to their
deeds, accordingly he will repay -- fury to his adversaries, and recompense to
his enemies. And none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou. Hell
is naked before him, and destruction has no covering. His eyes are upon the
ways of man, and he sees all his goings: there is no darkness, nor shadow of
death where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. There is no creature
that is not manifest in his sight. Now, consider this, ye that forget GOD, lest
he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Con. Blessed be thou, O GOD, for thus giving me warning, -- grant me now at
the eleventh hour, to spend the remainder of my day according to thy word.


Min. The GOD of Jacob hear thy petition -- the strength of Israel be thy guide.


Con. Amen.


Min. Be favorable, O Lord, be favorable to these persons under the sentence of
death: be merciful to them turning to thee in weeping, fasting, and prawing.
For thou art a merciful GOD, full of compassion, long-suffering, and of great
pity. Thou hate nothing that thou have made; and do forgiv the sins of all
who are penitent: create and make in these persons, new and contrite hearts,
that they worthily lamenting their sins, and acknowledging their wretchedness,
may obtain of thee, the GOD of all mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Con. Amen.


Min. O Savior of the world, who by thy cross and precious blood, have
redeemed us -- save us, and help us, we humbly beseech thee, O Lord!


The minister lifting up his hands over the beads of the convicts, kneeling or
fallen prosstrate, shall say this

BENEDICTION.
Unto GOD'S gracious mercy and protection I commit thee: the Lord bless thee,
and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace both now
and evermore.

Min. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;


Con. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.


Min. GOD be merciful to you


Con. Amen. Amen. Amen.


OFFICE SECOND, which may be used daily during the last seven days of the
convict's life.
Min. In the name of the glorious and undivided Trinity, -- Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, one GOD.


Con. Amen. Glory be to GOD now and evermore.


Min. As a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them who fear him;
for he knows our frame, he remembereth that we are but dust. I will not cause
mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not
keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge your iniquity, that ye have transgressed
against the Lord your GOD. When the wicked man turns away from his wickedness
that he has committed and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save
his soul alive. I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him,
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy son.


THE EXHORTATION.
Dearly beloved, -- your iniquities have turned the hand of justice against
you; they have whetted the sword of vengeance: GOD has beset you before and
behind, and shut you up in a place of darkness. A violent death is soon to
remove you from the land of the living, and from the place of hope: Behold, now
is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation! "Confess and bewail
your manifold offenses, and so repent you truly of your sins, as you tender the
eternal salvation of your souls. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord!
for he is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity: sinners cannot dwell with him,
neither can the ungodly stand in his sight." -- What then shall ye do to be
saved, and escape the dreadful sentence of the second death? "Repent, and
believe in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and ye shall be saved." "Knowing the terrors
of the LORD," let me persuade you, brethren, to prepare for that tremendous
day, when the ALMIGHTY GOD shall descend with the voice of ten thousand
thunders, and thousand times ten thousands of angels, to command the sun into
darkness, the moon into blood, the stars from their orbits, and the dead from
their graves! All hearts shall quake; all faces shall gather paleness, when
Jehovah shall visit the wickedness of such as dwell upon this earth; when he
shall scatter hail, fire, and brimstone, upon the impenitent and the ungodly! O
repent in time, and seek an interest in the atonement of JESUS, whilst the day
of intercession lasts. O strive -- wrestle with GOD, as Jacob wrestled of old
with the ANGEL of the covenant, for the blessing: plead with GOD, to have mercy
upon you, for the sake of the world's Redeemer; "for he is merciful and
gracious, and will not for ever turn away his face from you, if ye return to
him. As high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him!" Grieve vehemently, that ye have so long despised the
goodness, patience, and long-suffering, of GOD, when he called you to
repentance, by so many mercies and forbearances; as also by the apprehensions
of, and escapes from justice, during a long series of wickedness. Smite upon
your breasts, and say, "GOD be merciful to me, a sinner!" and lament with the
deepest contrition and heart-rending woe, that ye have been so long led captive
by the Devil, the enemy of GOD and MAN; that ye have hated knowledge, that ye
have abhorred the counsel of GOD, and despised his correction, and repeated
admonitions to amend! No longer abuse that goodness: without delay return to
him, who has promised to receive all true penitents. Although ye have sinned,
sinned grievously both against GOD and MAN, yet, upon your repentance, and
advocate will stand up to plead your cause "even JESUS CHRIST the righteous,
who is the propitiation for your sins. Finally, brethren, number your days so
as to apply your hearts to that wisdom which makes wise unto eternal
salvation! and therefore, examine well your consciences, satisfy all the
demands of justice, disclose every part of the scene of iniquity ye have been
engaged, in, sincerely forgive those who first seduced you into the ways of
unrighteousness, and pray to GOD to have mercy upon them and to reclaim them
from the error of their way; forgive and pray for all who have any way been
instrumental in bringing you under the sword of justice; bless your judges, and
pray that GOD may always render their ministry effectual, for the suppression
of wickedness and vice, and the maintenance of religion and virtue, and that
they may be always endued with grace, wisdom and understanding, to judge
according to truth and justice. Now, and in your last moments, pray for
CHRIST'S universal church, to which ye profess to belong; and in the communion
of which ye desire to die; that every member of the same may live in unity and
charity: pray for the protection and blessing of GOD upon the land of your
pilgrimage, and upon all the people that dwell therein; so that all who have
"sold themselves to work wickedness," as ye in times past have done, when they
hear of your repentance for your crimes, and of your death to appease the
demands of justice; warned by your dreadful end, and encouraged by the example
of your contrition, they may, by a seasonable reformation of heart and manners,
turn from the error of their ways and live. For GOD desires not the death of a
sinner, nor takes he any pleasure in the destruction of the ungodly: he
delights to be glorified in, and to glorify his saints, and proclaims, that
there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents, than over ninety
and nine just persons, who need no repentance. Meditate on these things,
brethren, and may GOD direct and guide your feet into the way of peace, and
have mercy upon you, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST, our only redeemer and
advocate; to whom, with the FATHER and the HOLY GHOST, be all honor and glory,
now and evermore. Amen.

Min. Present your humble confession to the Lord.


Con. I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.


The following Confession, to be said by the convicts, after the minister, all
kneeling.

Almighty and most merciful Father; we have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep; we have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts. We have offended against thy holy laws. We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done; and we have done those things which we
ought not to have done: and there is no health in us. But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us, miserable offenders. Spare thou us, O GOD, who confess our
faults; restore thou us who are penitent, according to thy promises declared
unto mankind, in CHRIST JESUS, our Lord. And grant, O most merciful FATHER, for
his sake, that we (during our appointed time in the body) may live a godly,
righteous and sober life; to the glory of thy holy name.

Con. Amen.


THE ABSOLUTION.
Min. Almighty GOD, our heavenly Father, who of his great mercy, has promised
forgiveness of sins, to all those who, with hearty repentance and true faith
turn unto him; have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins;
confirm and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Min. and Con. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom
come, thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one; for
thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


Min. Glory be to GOD on high,


Con. Peace on earth, and good will to the sons of men.


The convicts repeating after the minisster.

I will cry unto GOD with my voice; even unto GOD will I cry with my voice, and
he shall hearken unto me. When I am in heaviness, I will think upon GOD; when
my heart is vexed, I will complain. Will the Lord absent himself for ever! and
will he be no more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and is his
promise come utterly to an end for evermore Has GOD forgotten to be gracious?
and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? I am become as it were
a monster unto many; but my sure trust is in thee. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee. My
flesh and my heart fails; but GOD is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. Glory be to my merciful and gracious GOD now and evermore. Amen.

Of the seven following lessons, one may be used every day during the last
seven days of the convict's life, either with this office, or with the
penitential offices and collects in the prayer book, as the circumstances of
the penitent's case may require.

The Lesson for the first day.
Jesus said. -- "Take heed and beware of covetousness." Godliness is great
riches, if a man be content with that which he has; for we brought nothing
into the world, neither may we carry any thing out. And having food and
raiment, let us therewith be content. But they that will be rich, fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all
evil; which, while some coveted after, they have erred from the says, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Therefore, let him that stole,
steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands, the thing that
is good, that he may have to give to him that needs. The thoughts of the
diligent tend to plenteousness; but the robbery of the wicked shall destroy
them. Speak every man truth to his neighbor, and love no false oath. Know this,
that the LAW is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for
murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for manslayers, for
whore-mongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for manstealers,
for liars, for perjured persons, and whatever else there is contrary to sound
doctrine. Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
kingdom of GOD. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false-witness, blasphemies; these are the things which
defile a man: because of these things comes the wrath of GOD upon the children
of disobedience.

The Lesson for the second day.
No man can by any means redeem his brother nor give to GOD a ransom for him.
Will the Lord thou be pleased with thousands of rams; or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? Shall I give my first born for my transgression? the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul? Ye are not redeemed with corruptible things, such
as silver and gold; but with the precious blood of CHRIST, as of a lamb without
spot, and without blemish. GOD so loved the WORLD, that he gave his only
begotten SON, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. In this was manifested the love of GOD toward us, because
that GOD sent his only begotten SON into the world, that we might live through
him. Herein is love, not that we loved GOD, but that he loved us, and sent his
SON to be the PROPITIATION for us. This is a true saying, and worthy of all men
to be received, that CHRIST JESUS came into the world to save sinners. CHRIST
being come, by his own BLOOD entered once into the HOLY PLACE, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. -- Wherefore -- GOD willing more abundantly to show
unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an
oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for GOD to lie,
WE might have a strong CONSOLATION who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon
the HOPE set before us. Blessed be GOD, who has begotten us again unto a
lively HOPE, by JESUS CHRIST.

The Lesson for the third day.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head. The desire of all
nations shall come. A VIRGIN shall conceive and bear a SON, and shall call his
name IMMANUEL. The angel GABRIEL was sent from GOD unto a VIRGIN named MARY, of
the house of DAVID, and said unto her, "Fear not MARY, for thou have sound
favor with GOD; and behold, thou shall conceive, and bring forth a son, and
shall call his name JESUS. That HOLY BEING who shall be born of thee shall be
called the "SON OF GOD." And when the days were accomplished that she should be
delivered, MARY brought forth her firstborn SON, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the
inn! And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child,
his name was called JESUS, for he shall save his people from their sins. Unto
us a CHILD is born, unto us a SON is given; his name shall be called WONDERFUL,
COUNSELOR, the MIGHTY GOD, the EVERLASTING FATHER, the PRINCE of PEACE. In the
beginning was the WORD, and the WORD was with GOD, and the WORD was GOD; and
the WORD was made FLESH, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his GLORY, the GLORY
as of the only begotten of the FATHER, full of GRACE and TRUTH.

The Lesson for the fourth day.
John (the Baptish) seeing JESUS coming unto him, faith, behold the LAMB of
GOD, who takes away the sin of the world. JESUS being baptized, and praying,
the heavens were opened, and the HOLY GHOST descended in a bodily shape like a
dove, upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, THOU ART MY BELOVED
SON, IN WHOM I AM WELL PLEASED. John Baptist bare record saying. "he that sent
me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, UPON WHOM THOU SHALL SEE THE
SPIRIT DESCENDING AND REMAINING, THE SAME IS HE WHO BAPTIZETH WITH THE HOLY
GHOST." John sent two of his disciples unto JESUS, saying, "art thou he that
should come, or do we look for another?" JESUS said, "return and show John
these things which ye do HEAR and SEE: THE BLIND RECLIVE THEIR SIGHT, THE LAME
WALK, THE DEAF HEAR, THE DEAD ARE RAISED UP, AND THE POOR HAVE THE GOSPEL
PREACHED UNTO THEM." The whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. I
am come, not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. The Son of Man
is come to SEEK and to SAVE that which was LOST. This is the Father's will, who
has sent me, that of all whom he has given me, I should lose nothing, but
should raise it up again at the last day. I AM THE BREAD OF LIFE; I am the
living bread which came down from heaven; if any man eat of this BREAD he shall
live for ever: the BREAD that I will give, is my FLESH, which I will GIVE for
the LIFE of the world. Except ye eat the FLESH of the SON of MAN, and drink his
BLOOD, ye have no LIFE in you. Whosoever eats my FLESH, and drinks my BLOOD,
has eternal LIFE, and I WILL RAISE HIM UP AT THE LAST DAY. As Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the SON of MAN be lifted up; that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And I,
if I be LIFTED UP FROM THE EARTH, will draw all men unto me. This spoke JESUS,
signifying what death he should die.

The Lesson for the fifth day.
Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and
be very high. As many were astonished at thee; his visage was so marred more
than any man, and his form more than the sons of men: So shall he sprinkle many
nations: the kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been
told them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they
consider. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD
revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out
of a dry ground: he has no form nor comeliness: and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of
men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our
faces from him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he has borne
our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of
GOD, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every
one to his own way: and the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He
was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought
as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he
opens not his mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment; and who
shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living:
for the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with
the wicked, and with the rich in his death: because he had done no violence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he
has put him to grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD
shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his soul and shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he
shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured
out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he
bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

The Lesson for the sixth day.
Caiphas the High Priest, said unto them, it is expedient for us, that one man
should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not; and thus spoke
he not of himself; but he prophesied that JESUS should die for that nation, and
not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in ONE, the
children of GOD that were scattered abroad. Afterward, the chief priests and
rulers of the Jews were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be
crucified. And Pilate gave sentence, that it should be as they required. And
the soldiers crucified him! And sitting down, they watched him; and set up over
his head his accusation, written THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS! Thus,
Jesus bore our sins in his own body on the tree; and by being made a curse for
us, redeemed us from the curse of the law: for it is written, curses is every
one that hangs on a tree. And it was about the sixth hour, and there was
darkness over all the earth, until the ninth hour; the sun was darkened, and the
veil of the temple was rent in the midst. And when JESUS had cried with a loud
voice, "My GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me? he said, FATHER INTO THY
HANDS I COMMIT MY SPIRIT; and having said thus, he gave up the ghost. And with
him they crucify TWO THIEVES; the one on his right hand, and the other on his
left. One of the thieves raised on JESUS, but the other rebuked him, saying,
do thou not fear GOD, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed
justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds, but THIS MAN has done
nothing amiss. And he said unto JESUS, LORD REMEMBER ME WHEN THOU COME INTO
THY KINGDOM! And Jesus said unto him, THIS DAY SHALL THOU BE WITH ME IN
PARADISE.

The Lesson for the seventh or last day.
And Joseph of Arimathea went to Pilate, and begged the BODY of JESUS; and
Pilate commanded the BODY to be delived. And when Joseph had taken the BODY, he
wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his own new tomb, which he
had hewn out in the rock; and he rolled a great stone to the door of the
sepulcher and departed. Then the chief priests and pharisees went and made the
sepulcher sure, sealing the stone and setting a watch. In the end of the
sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary
Magdelene and the other Mary, to see the sepulcher. And behold there was a
great earthquake; for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and
rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His countenance was like
lightning, and his raiment white as snow, and for fear of him, the keepers did
shake, and became as dead men. And the women entering into the sepulcher, saw a
young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they
were affrighted. And he says unto them, be not affrighted; ye seek JESUS of
Nazareth, who was crucified; he is risen; he is not here. Why seek ye the
living (HIM THAT LIVTEH) among the dead? Afterward, the eleven disciples went
away into Galilee, into a mountain where JESUS had appointed them. And JESUS
came and spoke unto them, saying, ALL POWER IS GIVEN UNTO ME IN HEAVEN AND IN
EARTH. -- Go ye therefore, and teach (disciple) all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST; teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always
even unto the end of the world. Amen. And he said unto them, thus it is
written, and thus it behoved CHRIST to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day: and that REPENTANCE and REMISSION OF SINS should be preached in his
NAME, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are WITNESSES of these things. And he led
them out as far as Bethany, and HE LIFTED UP HIS HANDS AND BLESSED THEM. And
when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a
cloud received him out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward
heaven, as he went up, behold two men stood by them in white apparel, who also
said, -- "ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same
JESUS who is taken up from you into heaven, shall so COME in like manner as ye
have seen him GO into heaven." This man, after he had offered ONE SACRIFICE for
sins, for ever sat down at the right hand of GOD; for by ONE OFFERING he has
PERFECTED for ever them that are sanctified. We see JESUS, who was made a
little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory
and honor; that HE, by the grace of GOD, should taste death for every man. Him
GOD raised from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, in the heavenly
places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come; and has put all things under his feet, having made him HEAD over all
things to the CHURCH, which is his BODY, the fullness of him that fills all
in all. Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to GOD, for a sweet smelling savor. He was delivered for our
offenses. Herein GOD commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
enemies, CHRIST died for us. For as by one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of ONE, shall many be made righteous. We are
sanctified through the offering of the BODY of CHRIST once for all. JESUS, that
he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.
Wherefore, GOD has highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above
every name, that at the name of JESUS every knee should bow, of things (beings
or existences) in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth; and
that every tongue should confess, that JESUS CHRIST IS LORD TO THE GLORY OF GOD
THE FATHER. GOD was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
angels, received up into glory. Of the SON, he says, -- let all the angels of
GOD worship him. And again he says -- thy throne, O GOD, is for ever and ever.
Worthy is the LAMB that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. Blessing, and honor, and
glory, and power, be unto HIM who sits upon the throne, and unto the LAMB
for ever and ever. Unto HIM that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, and has made us unto God KINGS and PRIESTS, out of every kindred,
and tongue, and people, and nation, be glory and dominion, for ever and ever.
Amen.

The Lesson for the morning of the execution.
Behold he comes with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also who
pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him! And the
kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every free man hid
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the
mountains and rocks, fall on us and hide us from the face of HIM that sits
upon the throne, and from the wrath of the LAMB; for the great day of his wrath
is come; and who shall be able to stand? I beheld till the thrones were cast
down, says Daniel; and the ANCIENT OF DAYS did sit, whose garment was white as
snow, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz; his body was like the
beryl; his face as the appearance of lightning; his eyes as lamps of fire; the
hair of his head like the fine wool; his arms and his feet in color like to
polished brass; and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude: his
throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream
issued and came forth from before him; THOUSAND THOUSANDS MINISTERED UNTO HIM,
AND TEN THOUSAND TIMES TEN THOUSAND STOOD BEFORE HIM. The judgment was set, and
the books were opened. I was in the spirit, says the beloved disciple, and
behold a throne was set in heaven, and ONE sat on the throne. And HE that sat,
was to look upon like a jasper, and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow
round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald. The SON of MAN shall
come in the glory of his FATHER, with his angels, and then he shall reward
every man according to his works. When the SON of MAN shall come in his glory,
and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his
glory. And before HIM shall be gathered all nations: and HE shall separate them
one from another, as the shepherd divides his sheep from the goats: And he
shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall
the KING say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Then shall he
say also unto them on the left, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels! And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. And I heard (says the beloved
disciple) the number of them which were sealed (on their foreheads) and there
were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand, of all the tribes of the
children of Israel. Then I beheld, and lo! a great multitude which no man could
number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, salvation to our GOD who sits
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

After reading the lesson for the day, may be used the following supplication.
Min. O ye brethren in iniquity, who for your evil deeds, are appointed to die
-- come, arise, shake off your enmity to GOD; make your peace with your
offended Father, whilst the day of grace lasts, before the night of death set
in, and ye be shut up in the silent grave!


Con. O merciful GOD! grant us thy peace and the pardon of our manifold
transgressions, for the sake of thy Christ who was pleased to die for his
enemies, that he might bring them to thee through the blood of his cross -- the
merits of that blood we plead -- to the Savior and blessed Mediator between
GOD and man, we flee for redemption from sin and sorrow, and from everlasting
death.


Min. O most gracious Lord! in mercy and compassion behold them bewailing their
sinfulness, and with tears and sighs lamenting that they have sacrificed the
prime of their years to folly, and the manhood of their days to the enemies of
their everlasting felicity!


Con. Accept of us now at the eleventh hour; receive us now in the evening of
our day, as thou did the thief on the cross, and the labourer into the
vineyard.


Min. Thou, O GOD! have in mercy mixed with judgment, commanded their sun to go
down at noon; thou for their evil deeds (because they hated the light) have
shortened their years in midst and spread over them the thick canopy of death!


Con. O deliver us not finally into everlasting darkness!


Min. Grant them, O thou LIGHT of the world, more and more the light of thy
countenance, and the comfort of thy salvation.


Con. Grant us -- Oh! grant us -- the light of life everlasting.


Min. May the blood of Jesus cleanse them from all sin, and wash them from
every transgression, that at the day of judgment they may be presented before
thee, without spot or blemish, to rejoice in the salvation of GOD, and partake
in the glories of thy kingdom.


Con. JESUS! thou powerful intercessor for fallen man, plead our cause; and for
the glory of thy name blot out as a thick cloud all our transgressions, and
remember them no more.


Min. In pity and compassion to the work of thine own hands, mercifully save
them from the dreadful horrors of the wrath to come.


Con. Pity us miserable sinners, for thy mercy endures for ever.


Min. Thine indignation lies hard upon on them, thy displeasure presses them
sore; thou have put away their friends and acquaintance from them, and so fast
bound them in prison that they cannot get forth.


Con. We bow to acknowledge the justice of thy judgments, and that of very
faithfulness thou have caused us to be troubled: nevertheless, cast us not out
from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from us, lest we despair of thy
goodness, and so add to our other sins, that of offending against thy mercy.


Min. They are counted as dead, ready to descend into the chambers of death, O
grant unto them a resurrection to eternal life!


Con. Remember us, O thou glorious source of immortality, we cry day and night
unto thee; O shut not thine ears against our prayers, nor thine eyes from
beholding our sighs and tears. We are as water spilt upon the ground, but thou
art able to gather us among the gleanings of thy vintage at the last day.


Min. Help them, O holy spirit, GOD equal with the Father and the Son, to
consecrate aright the remaining days and hours of their appointed time.


Con. And graciously be pleased to seal us unto the day of redemption.


Min. Have mercy upon them, O blessed Jesus!


Con. Have mercy upon us, O Savior of the world!


Min. Have mercy upon them, O thou who take away the sin of the world.


Con. Have mercy upon us, O thou who did condescend to die for the ungodly --
thou bought us with the price of thy most precious blood -- we are thine, and
not our own; and therefore thy will be done with us and upon us, whether in
life or death.


Min. Glory be to GOD on high, peace on earth, good will toward men.


Con. Amen. Glory be to GOD.


Or the following short Litany may be used.
Min. GOD, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have mercy upon you! and grant that
as ye are dead to the law,


Con. We may become alive to GOD, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the
resurrection and the life; and in whom whosoever lives and believes, though
he die, yet shall he live, and rise again at the last day.


Min. GOD be gracious to those whom justice has overtaken in the midst of
their sins;


Con. And save us from the sentence of final condemnation, for the glory of thy
Christ.


Min. Grant them repentance unto life;


Con. And the grace of charity to unburthen our consciences by an ample and
free confession of our guilt.


Min. Hear the sighing of the prisoners;


Con. And have mercy upon us, who are appointed to die.


Min. "Lord remember them when thou come in thy kingdom" and glory to judge
the quick and the dead;


Con. And as thou in the days of thy flesh, was numbered with malefactors --
Oh! number us, with the penitent thief, and all thy saints, in glory
everlasting.


Min. O Lamb of GOD, who take away the sin of the world,


Con. Have mercy upon us.


Min. O Lamb of GOD, who take away the sin of the world,


Con. Hear our petitions, and grant a gracious answer to our humble requests.


Min. O Lamb of GOD, who take away the sin of the world,


Con. Own us to be thine, and grant us thy peace.


Min. Unto the Lamb that was slain,


Con. And has redeemed us to GOD by his blood;


Min. Unto him who died to turn away the wrath of divine justice from sinful
man;


Con. Unto him, who loved us, died for us, pleads our cause in heaven, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood shed upon earth;


Min. Who offered up one perfect and all-sufficient sacrifice, and oblation, by
dying on the cross,


Con. That we might not die eternally;


Min. To him, who received the penitent thief upon the cross;


Con. And promised him a mansion in paradise;


Min. Who ascended far above all heavens,


Con. To prepare mansions for his followers and all true penitents;


Min. Who shall come again to judge the world, and reward every man according
to his works,


Con. To him be glory from everlasting to everlasting. Amen.


Let us pray.
"O Gracious GOD, who have set forth thy Son Jesus Christ to be a propitiation
for the sins of all mankind, and have not excluded any from the covenant of
repentance, who desire with sincerity to embrace and apply it:" we present our
supplications in behalf of these persons under sentence of death, who desire to
confess their unworthiness of the least of thy mercies, yet desirous to turn to
thee in acts of contrition and penitence; humbly imploring thy grace to direct
them, the knowledge of thee and of thy Son Jesus Christ to guide them into all
truth: that, before they depart hence, they may evidence the sincerity of their
repentance by fully confessing their sins both against thy laws and those of
civil society. Teach them to know, that a full and free confession of their
crimes, together with a suitable discovery of their accomplices in robbery,
theft, and such like violent and fraudulent deeds, is a debt not less due the
good of their country in general, and the health of their own souls in
particular, than the life of their bodies to the demands of inflexible justice.
May they be deeply humbled under thy judgments, and resigned to the present
dispensation of thy overruling providence: and help them to devote aright the
short remainder of their time in preparing for their departure hence; that as
they have lived to themselves in times past, they may now begin to live unto
their GOD in order to die in his faith and fear. Work in them, O Father of
mercies, every heavenly disposition that shall tend to qualify them for joining
the company of blessed spirits, where the temptations of the Devil, the world,
and the flesh shall never assail them. Accept of their repentance, and have
mercy upon them, for the sake of thine adorable and well beloved Son JESUS
CHRIST, to whom with thee, O HOLY FATHER, and thee, O benign SPIRIT of Grace,
be all glory, honor and praise, now and evermore. Amen.

Then the minister lifting up his hands over the convicts, may say this

BENEDICTION.
The LORD bless thee, and keep thee; the LORD make his face to shine upon thee,
and be gracious unto thee! The LORD lift up his countenance upon thee, and give
thee peace now and evermore. Amen.

OFFICE THIRD, which may be used in behalf of any who are found guilty of
murder.
Min. Remember not, O Lord, our offenses; but in the midst of wrath remember
mercy.


Con. Spare us, good Lord!


Min. Wicked men, because of their iniquity, and because of their
transgression, are afflicted.


Con. The Omniscient has set my misdeeds before him, and my secret sins in the
light of his countenance: therefore do I consume away in his displeasure, and
am afraid at his wrathful indignation.


Min. When the Lord makes inquisition for blood, the murderer can no where be
hid from his all-seeing eye!


Con. If I ascend up into the heavens, there is the seat of thy glory, O GOD!
If I make my bed in the depths of the earth, there will thy almighty hand find
me out!


Min. O most blessed and adorable FATTHER of angels and men, grant this
murderer sincere repentance and thy pardon.


Con. From the guilt of shedding innocent blood, FATHER of mercies, vouchsafe
to deliver me.


Min. O most blessed and adorable JESUS, SON of the FATHER, and SAVIOR of the
world, grant this murderer sincere repentance and thy pardon.


Con. From the guilt of shedding innocent blood, JESUS, SON of the FATHER and
SAVIOR of the world, vouchsafe to deliver me.


Min. O most blessed and adorable SPIRIT OF GRACE, SANCTIFIER of the faithful,
grant this murderer sincere repentance and thy pardon.


Con. From the guilt of shedding innocent blood, SPIRIT OF GRACE, SANCTIFIER of
the faithful, vouchsafe to deliver me.


Min. O most blessed and adorable TRIUNE GOD, THREE IN ONE, and ONE IN THREE,
grant this murderer sincere repentance and thy pardon.


Con. O most blessed and adorable TRINITY OF PERSONS, in UNITY OF ESSENCE, have
mercy upon me, grant me repentance and pardon, and cleanse me from blood,
guiltiness.


Min. Blessed, for ever blessed and adored be the NAME of our most merciful and
gracious GOD, who has excluded none from repentance and pardon, who seek them
in sincerity and truth.


Con. Glory be to HIM, whose MERCY rejoiceth against JUDGMENT, now and
evermore. Amen, and Amen.


THE EXHORTATION.
Man! your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity! The
voice of your brother's blood cries unto the Lord, who has pronounced you
cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive your brother's
blood from your hands! As I live, says the Lord, I will even do according to
your anger, and according to your envy, which you have used against your
brother. The hand of the Almighty has overtaken you, his hot displeasure
flameth against the murderer! Ah! how have you troubled the land, and caused it
to mourn because of the innocent blood that you have shed therein! Did all your
other evil deeds appear but trivial in your eyes, that you must sum them up
with the additional, the horrible guilt of sheeding innocent blood? Had you
then put off the nature of a man, and assumed that of a Devil? But now, that
your murderous passion has subsided, does not the atrocity of your crime harrow
up your inmost soul, and make you, under the most powerful conviction of guilt,
fearfully cry out "what shall I do to be saved and escape the wrath to come?"
Look at your hands, bloody man! do they not appear to the eye of our
distempered soul, all crimsoned over, as when they did the horrid deed! your
clothes, look at them, all blotted with the gore of him whom you have murdered!
-- Influenced by the spirit of the evil one, whose delight is in blood, and the
destruction of the human race, you have outrageously exalted yourself against
the meek and loving spirit of HIM, who came into the world to save men's lives,
and to give his own life a ransom for many; by doing all that in you lay, to
deface the divine likeness stamped upon you by the benevolent Creator, as also
to erase your brother's name from the catalogue of the living and his existence
from the volume of creation! against whom have you lifted up your hand? against
whom have you exalted yourself? against the HOLY ONE of Israel, who is a
jealous and avenging GOD, and whose ears are always open to the voice of blood:
against MAN and the LAWS of civil society; for you have broken down the hedge
of peace, and plundered man of one of the highest blessings of heaven, that of
"sitting quietly under his vine, or under his fig tree, and none to make him
afraid." Also you have sinned against your own life, by incurring a debt, which
nothing can pay off, but your blood. And therefore the arrows of the Amighty
drink up your spirits, and the sword of temporal justice rages furiously to
have your blood. Jehovah, in tremendous majesty, on mount Sinai proclaimed this
law, "thou shall not kill;" and all nations have adopted it into their system
of jurisprudence. Tell me, son of blood, was a man ready to give you the fatal
blow, would you not remind him of this prohibitory command, and beg of him to
spare your life, at the price of all you had? Yes, doubtless. And did not your
conscience forbid you? Did it not again and again, with the stern voice of
prohibition, ask you, "what! will thou do this great wickedness, and sin
against GOD?" But, your conscience, O murderer! your conscience you had
artfully seared as with an hot iron! you had labored hard to extinguish every
seed of goodness, humanity and virtue in your soul! you had despised the
admonitions of conscience so long, that she ceased to warn you! you had long
turned away your eyes from reading the lessons of divine love and godly
instruction, tendered to you on the page of revelation; and rather chose to
copy into your practice the example of him, who was a murderer from the
beginning! GOD was not among your thoughts! Ah! the end of these things is
death! Think -- murderer -- think, if all that is human, except the form, has
not quite abandoned you to most infernal obduracy of heart, and insensibility
to the woes of others -- think, what poignant anguish rends the soul of the
disconsolate widow (here name the kindred, if any) sorrowing with the most
bitter lamentation, for his untimely death, whose blood your impious hands have
poured out, as water upon the ground, that cannot be gathered up again! Suffer
imagination to present you with a view of the helpless orphans bedewing their
father's bloody body with floods of tears! -- See, with bitter cries and
doleful lamentations, the disconsolate widow falling upon his neck and kissing
that ghastly face, which now for wife nor children has no smiles -- no look of
complacency, but the bitterness of untimely death settled in every feature,
expressive of the anguish of the inner man, when your impious hands tore soul
and body apart! That parent-eye, which ere while beamed looks of love,
gladdening with his approbation all the family -- thou -- how shall I address
thee! -- have veiled in darkness, no more to behold the light of day -- no more
to see the jovous objects of industry and love! -- Ah! what have thou done! --
How has thy murderous touch stamped lamentation and woe on every scene of their
domestic happiness! -- No more does the tender glance of paternal eye,
returning from the labor of the day, invite the dependant young to clasp their
father's knee, or climb up upon him to press their spotless breasts to his, and
smile like cherubim in his face! -- No more do the cheeks and forehead,
furrowed with care and honest labor, borrow the appearance of youth, the
instant the lovely babes approach to greet their parent welcome, and to salute
him with their prattling stories and their little loves! O man! bloody man!
what have thou done! what thick cloud of darkness and blackness have thou
brought upon all this gay sunshine of felicity! How have thou blasted, with
thy murderous breath, as with a curse, this fragrant blessing of GOD upon his
servants! That body which rose with the rising sun, in order to go forth to
honest work and labor -- with baneful malice, thou have stopped in its wonted
course, and extinguished its lamp of light and life, at noon day! Who gave thee
authority to save life or to kill? Have thou a right of sovereignty over thy
brother? By what authority could thou presume to exert upon him the power of
the destroying angel of death? But why need I any more to harrow up thy soul!
-- Look inward, base man! and if thou can see through the black darkness
which encaseth it, view thy guilty conscience! Behold upon it engraven the
words of thy condemnation, "He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed." The innocent blood thou have shed, cries against thee from the
dust, with a voice like thunder, -- it will be heard -- and justice would cease
to be justice, were she to stop her ears against it. Justice has heard the
voice of blood, and, miserable man! your own conscience bears witness that
you are justly doomed to die for your offense! to die an ignominious death, to
be reckoned accursed from the earth and the heavens; as it is written, "cursed
is every one that hangs on a tree!" -- GOD is just and holy, but you have
been unjust and cruel; and now the measure you have meted to another is ready
to be meted out to yourself. -- Your body, the instrument of your crime, must
repay blood for blood, -- your soul, by conforming to the conditions offered
you by the covenant of evangelical grace, may, and I pray GOD it may, find
mercy in the day of his righteous judgment, through the merits and intercession
of Jesus. You have therefore no time to lose, no dallying in making up your
peace with your highly offended GOD -- on every moment hangs your everlasting
happiness or woe. If yet, while the day of mercy lasts, before the
intercession of Jesus is finished, you neglect the things that belong to your
everlasting peace -- how will dire agonies, and pangs unfelt before, seize upon
your guilty soul, when you shall feel the full force of the wrath of the
Omnipotent, -- and be delivered over to the inexpressible tortures prepared for
the Devil and his angels!!! -- It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of
an angry GOD! And a wounded spirit who can bear? Murder and idolatry have ever
been obnoxious to the hottest indignation of Jehovah; and have brought down his
most terrible judgments from time to time, to visit the earth! For these crimes
the world has frequently been compelled to mourn! Murder and idolatry provoked
the Almighty to drown the generations of men by a flood of waters; to send down
streams of lived flame from heaven to consume the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah;
they occasioned the several captivities of the Jews, and the amazing
revolutions and subversions of government among the Gentiles; they have caused
famines and pestilences, and the destruction of cities and countries! and
finally, as the EARTH has been in every age and nation so greatly polluted with
blood, whether in the field of battle, or by the ruffian hand of personal
violence, or by the blood of numberless victims offered to Devils, by
idolatrous nations; IT, with all the words that are thereon, shall be burnt up,
in the day of the fierce anger of the LORD: but first IT shall be compelled to
deliver up IT IS dead, and to disclose all IT IS slain. Alas! who shall live when
GOD does this? If, in the day that tribulation and wrath shall be poured out
upon all the ungodly of the earth, the righteous and the penitent obtain
redemption from the second death and the unextinguishable fire, through the
merits and intercession of a Mediator, where shall the ungodly and the
impenitent appear, who have despised the intercession of Jesus? therefore,
flee, O sinner, flee from the wrath to come, lest the long-suffering and
patience of GOD toward thee, become like oil cast on fire, lest thy guilt and
punishment press thee down to the lowest depth of misery! GOD is merciful; if
thou can repent, yea, if with a true heart thou prayest for it, he will grant
thee repentance unto life: but in proportion to the heinousness of thy crime
must be the fervency of thy prayer. Did the world's REDEEMER, in atoning for
the guilt of man -- in paying the redemption-price for penitents, sweat drops
of blood, groan, and voluntarily offer up his pure and holy body to die, the
innocent for the guilty, to reconcile us to GOD; and think thou that a few
"Lord have mercies," will pacify the offended MAJESTY of heaven and earth? No!
If thou desire to enter into life, having so grievously offended by breaking
the command, thou shall not kill, thou must copy so far as thou can, the
example of thy Lord, when he was in an agony for thy sins; a due sense of them
will rend thy heart, then will flow the fountains of thy tears, sighs and
strong crying, with prayers offered up through the merits and intercession of
the ADVOCATE for man, will ascend up before GOD, and prove available for thy
pardon. At the right hand of the Eternal, continually stands the ANGEL of the
covenant, the gracious Mediator, in his human nature, ready to offer up the
sighs, the prayers, and tears of all penitents, who desire to come to the
Father through him. Indeed there is no other way of obtaining mercy, but
through CHRIST; he is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man can come to
the FATHER but by his means. He was called JESUS, because he saves his people
from the guilt and punishment due to their sins; and as he is appointed the
only MEDIATOR between an offended GOD and his offending creature MAN; there is
no other NAME given to men, under heaven, whereby they can be saved, but only
the name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who is GOD over all blessed for evermore.
Think not, sinful man, think not of obtaining the pardoning mercy and grace of
GOD, by any other means, or on any other conditions, than those of his own
appointment; by JESUS CHRIST only, thou may be made whole -- therefore,
labor to embrace with meekness and patience, the conditions and promises of
evangelical grace; pray, earnestly pray for a portion of that spirit which was
poured out upon the penitent thief on the cross. Learn to realize the hour of
thy death, -- let it be as the haven to which thou art to bend thy course, in
order that thou may, in thy death, be conformed to the death of Jesus,
seeing thou would not conform to his life in thine. If thou feel no godly
sorrow, no heart-rending woe, how can thou presume to have any hope toward
GOD? If thou really feel thy spirit so exceedingly disquieted within thee,
on account of the blood that is on thy hands, as to allow thee no rest to thine
eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, reasonably then thou may hope in GOD;
for he is merciful and gracious, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin to
the penitent; and takes delight in the oblation of a troubled and broken
spirit. -- A broken and a contrite heart GOD will not despise. -- According to
thy sincerity and contrition be it done unto thee.

Con. Amen.


Min. Unto GOD, whose mercy reaches unto the heavens, and whose judgments are
a great deep, humbly confess thy sin, and the trespass which thou has
trespassed.


Con. With the most heart-rending sorrow, and profound humility, I do confess
to my highly offended GOD, that my hands are defiled with blood, and my fingers
with iniquity.


Min. The earth, from whence thou wast taken, and to which a violent death is
soon to consign thee, refuses to hide thy guilt: the voice of thy brother's
blood cries loudly against thee unto eternal justice, and his groans, whom
thou have slain, have entered the ears of that omnipotent BEING, to whom
vengeance belongs.


Con. O GOD! Father I dare not call thee, having forfeited all title to be
called thy son! cast me not utterly out of thy sight.


Min. Good Lord, enter not into judgment with thy creature, who earnestly
desires to return to thee, trembling and afraid at thy displeasure; grant him
thy mercy and forgiveness, and incline those whom his guilt has injured, to
pardon him likewise.


Con. Amen.


Min. Give glory to the GOD of Israel, and saying after me, make thy


CONFESSION.
Prostrate Prostration, according to the opinion and practice of their ancient
Christians, is the proper posture of a murderer, for prayer and confession.
on this earth, which is soon to receive my wretched and sinful body, (if thou will deign to look upon a murderer) I present myself before thee, O thrice holy
and blessed GOD, to confess and bewail my sinfulness in general, and
particularly my horrible crime of blood-guiltiness, in violently taking away
the life of (here name the person murdered.) O Lord I am not worthy to take thy
holy name in my sinful and polluted lips -- what shall I answer thee, O my
offended GOD, when thou requirest his blood at my hands? Even now, whilst it is
the day of mercy, I dare not lift up so much as mine eye to heaven; -- Oh! how
shall I appear when the terrible day of judgment comes! -- Mine eyes have
deceived my heart; my heart has conceived all manner of wickededness; my hands
are full of evil, and are deeply stained with blood. To do good I had no
knowledge -- but my feet have run to evil, and to shed innocent blood. -- Have
mercy upon me -- have mercy upon me -- have mercy upon me, O most merciful
Father, for the sake of thine only Son Jesus Christ, my Lord and Savior. Ame.

The minister lifting up his hands over the convict, may say the following

ABSOLUTION.
The almighty and gracious GOD, who to the impenitent is a consuming fire; but
to those who return to him by faith and repentance, is full of mercy and
forgiveness, have mercy upon thee; grant thee repentance unto life, a steadfast
faith in thy blessed Savior, and charity toward all men. GOD deliver thee
from the guilt and punishment due to thy sins, in the day of judgment, and
receive thee into everlasting life, through JESUS CHRIST our gracious advocate
and redeemer. Amen.

Min. and Con. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom
come, thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one; for
thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


THE LESSON.
THOU SHALL NOT KILL. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, because in his own image GOD created man. The murderer shall be put to
death, by the mouth of witnesses; in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall
every thing be confirmed. Moreover, says GOD, ye shall take no satisfaction
for the life of a murderer, but he shall surely be put to death. So ye shall
not pollute the land wherein ye are; for blood defiles the land, and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it. The murderer, rising with the light, kills the poor and needy,
and in the night is a thief, who sleeps not except he has done some
mischief; and whose sleep is taken away unless he has caused some to fall.
Thus the murderer lies in wait for his own blood, he lurks privily for his own
life. The murderer lives not half his days, for GOD shall suddenly shoot at
him with a swift arrow, and shall overthrow him with his bloody companions. The
bloody and deceitful man GOD abhors; and such shall have their part in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Min. Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return: for the murderer's life
shall be cut off in the midst, and the avenging sword of justice shall drink
his blood.


Con. JUSTICE, be thou appeased with the drink offering of my blood; and O,
DIVINE MERCY, receive my soul, washed through the purifying blood of JESUS!


Min. Do thou believe in the salvation of JESUS? The Lord strengthen thy
faith, and have mercy upon thee.


Con. I believe! O Lord strengthen my faith! and graciously deliver me from the
dreadful punishment due to my crimes, in the day of judgment.


Let us pray.

O most compassionate and merciful GOD, who have promised to open the door of
mercy to those who knock, and to grant repentance to those who seek it in
sincerity of heart; look down with an eye of pity and compassion on this
person, who for murder, is condemned to die. Justly has he incurred thy wrath
and hottest displeasure, for violating one of thy most express commands, and
the law of humanity implanted in his nature. We adore the justice of thy
judgment, in that thou have looked through the cloud of thy wrath, and troubled
him with thine heavy hand. O Lord, unto him belongs confusion of face,
because of the blood-guiltiness that is in his hands -- he presumes not to so
much as to lift up his eyes to heaven, but with his mouth in the dust, and
smiting upon his breast, through the ministry of thine own appointment he
prays, "GOD be merciful to me a sinner." Grant unto him true and unfeigned
repentance for all the errors of his life past, and especially for the grievous
crime which has entailed on him an ignominious death: enable him, by the eye
of faith, to see in their proper colors, thy promises to the penitent, and the
terrors of thy judgments against the impenitent and unbelieving, that he may
neither deceive himself with false hopes of thy mercy, nor do despite to the
grace, by throwing himself headlong into the gulf of despair. O holy and
omnipotent RULER of the universe, though he has presumptuously and under the
influence of the evil one, risen up to defy the power of thy hand, and with
impious rage to blot out from the book of life one of those the SAVIOR died
for; now he desires to return to thee, trembling and afraid at thy wrathful
indignation, hoping even against hope, that thou, O Father of mercies, wilt
receive him -- that thou will hear his sighing -- that thou will behold his
tears, and grant him an answer of peace. -- Graciously have thou been pleased
to suffer the involuntary murderer to fly to the city of refuge, and take hold
of the horns of the altar; but the wilful and malicious murderer, where shall
he go? Where shall he find an asylum? he can find none; justice has condemned
him to be cut off from the land of the living, by a violent death. But
vouchsafe, O heavenly Father, that his punishment may end with this life; that,
before he is cut off as a shadow, his soul may, by reparation for the injury
done as far as is in his power, and by faith in thy Son, escape the doleful
mansions of woe and misery, prepared for the Devil and such as follow his
murderous example; and with the penitent have a portion in the paradise of GOD,
through thy merits and intercession, O Savior of the world, who suffered the
fountains of thy blood to flow in copious streams, branching forth into all
lands, to wash away the guilt of sinful man. TO GOD, FATHER SON and HOLY GHOST,
be all glory, honor and praise, now, henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

The minister lifting up his hands over the convict, may say this

BENEDICTION.
Unto GOD'S gracious mercy and peace I commit thee: the Lord bless thee, and
and have mercy upon thee.

Con. Amen. Amen. Amen.


A PRAYER.
To be said by the criminal privately, each day of his preparation; but,
particularly, the day of (and if time allowed, immediately before) the
execution.

To whom shall I go, O Jesus -- to whom shall I go? thou have the words of
eternal life. To thee I desire to live, to thee I desire to die; receive me, O
Christ! -- O GOD, whose never-failing providence orders all things both in
heaven and earth, thou have cut off my days in the midst, and shortened my
life, on account of my sins; thou art just and holy in all thy ways, and I, a
wretched and miserable sinner, here bow down to acknowledge that thou metest
out to me the just measure of reward for mine iniquities. -- My body is about
to be offered up! My forfeited life is doomed the victim of justice! -- O thou,
who art the HEARER of prayer, and to whom of right it appertains to receive all
sacrifice, be graciously pleased to accept of my body as a sacrifice, and of my
blood or life as a drink offering to thy JUSTICE, sanctified and rendered
acceptable to thee, through the divine efficacy of the BODY and BLOOD of thy
dearly beloved SON, my Lord and Savior, who was suspended and offered up upon
the cross, to die an ignominious and painful death; that, by giving his life a
ransom for many, he might restore forfeited life to a guilty world. O my GOD! I
adore thy judgments! -- the voice of temporal justice has doomed me to be
conformed, in a measure, to thy SON'S death, to hang upon a tree! Grant me, O
grant me, that as I am doomed to die a violent death, to be suspended between
earth and heaven, as unworthy of a place in either; that in my last moments,
when my soul and body are violently torn asunder, they may, in love and mercy,
be united unto thee! May thy BODY, O JESUS, save my sinful body! -- thy BLOOD,
O JESUS, redeem my polluted soul! -- thou, O HOLY GHOST, proceeding from the
FATHER and the SON, sanctify me wholly, both in soul, body and spirit! Now, and
at the hour of my death, I forgive my enemies, and implore thy blessing upon my
friends and relations. GOD preserve his holy apostolic church, with all her
bishops, priests and deacons -- and grant that their episcopacy and holy
ministrations may be always precious in thy sight, and accompanied with thy
blessing. Grant to all the enemies of our LORD and his CHRIST, the gifts and
graces of repentance and a better mind; and to those who are going on in the
way that leads to death, and more especially to such as have seduced, or have
been seduced by me -- show mercy, and pluck them like firebrarnds out of the
burning. GOD bless the United States of America, with all their rulers,
officers, judges and counselors, and all their people; and the Lord increase
them a thousand fold. Finally, I supplicate thy grace, mercy and blessing, on
all and every part of the creation, of which I, an unworthy member, desire with
the most perfect fervency of devotion, my sinful soul is capable of, to commit
myself into thy hands. O Jesus! thou did die for me -- I fall a victim for my
innumerable offenses against the laws of GOD and MAN! I bow down to receive the
due reward of my deeds! -- Have mercy, O LORD JESUS! -- deliver me from the
final sentence of condemnation, for "thy mercy reaches unto the heavens, and
thy faithfulness unto the clouds! thy mercy endures for ever!" -- Vouchsafe, O
Lord, unto my body, a happy resurrection -- to my soul, a portion with the
penitent thief -- to my whole man, a merciful judgment, and a happy admission
into thy everlasting glory, for thy mercies sake in Christ Jesus my Lord and
GOD, my Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

MEDITATIONS, which the convict may use whenever he finds opportunity.
MEDITATION I.
I die! -- I die! -- I die! -- tremendous thought! not as other mortals, a
natural, but an accursed and violent death! other mortals die on the downy bed;
but I between heaven and earth, an outcast from both! but this "is the due
reward of my deeds!" -- Oh! these hands, what have ye brought me to! Oh! these
feet, how have ye carried me to do such acts of wickedness! but Oh! head and
heart, what have ye to account for? ye have been my counselors, my prompters
to vice! under the specious pretense of obtaining something good (riches or
pleasures) ye have undone me! For this, O head, be thou lifted from my body!
and thou, heart, break, if possible ye can thereby make some atonement for the
crimes ye have occasioned! Death, come thou to me in all thy terrors, in the
garment of vengeance? or come thou to release a wretch from this body of sin?
Art thou sent for me in wrath or in mercy? Art thou come to tell me with the
stern voice of displeasure, "that had I not been thus stopped in the full career
of guilt, I might have entirely sinned away my day of grace, and at last, in
one fatal moment, launched into misery!" O Death! this intelligence, I
apprehend, is part of thy commission. -- Repentance hitherto has been shut
from mine eyes! I hated the light because my deeds were evil; long have I been
customed to do evil; and can the Ethiopean change his complexion, or the
leopard his spots? no more could I (I verily believe) have turned from the evil
of my ways, without this particular interposition of divine providence.

MEDITATION II.
Behold the hour advances -- every clock that strikes sounds my death's knell!
The awful sentence peals through my heart like the thunders of Sinai! "Dust
thou art and unto dust thou shall return," but not in the way of other mortals,
to enjoy the consolations of weeping friends, and those soothing attentions,
which seem to pluck up by the roots the thorns of death, and smooth the way to
the house appointed for all living: but with a mind harrowed up with guilt,
forsaken of all, the pity of the good and the derision of the bad, my years cut
off in the midst. Oh! the pangs and convulsions of my agonizing heart, when I
reflect, how my youth has been spent in folly, and my manhood in the most
complicated scenes of guilt! Under this impression, my soul! can thou --
dare thou to look up to GOD? Art not thou verily ashamed of thy existence?
Why call thou not to the mountains to cover thee together with thy guilt, or
the sea to bury thee in her deepest caverns, to hide thee from the pure and
holy eye of HIM that sits upon the throne? Ah! wretch! abominable wretch
that I am! how shall I one day appear before his awful tribunal? Will not the
spirits of good men veil their faces, that they may not behold such a monster
of wickedness as I am? O ye guardian spirits, ye providential ministers of the
Most High, will ye not rejoice and triumph in my misery? Ye companions of my
guilt, ye whom I have seduced, will ye not pierce me with your upbraidings and
wishes, that the Omnipotent would hurl at my head the hottest thunderbolts of
his wrath? -- Oh! despicable wretch that I am! unworthy to breathe the common
air -- unworthy to behold the light of day, or the twinkling stars of night,
the witnesses of my crimes -- unworthy to drink out of the footstep of the
meanest animal? How have I, despicable wretch, disgraced the nature of man --
thus to bring a curse upon the image of GOD -- thus to die like a brute? How
have I flown in the face of the Creator, for making me a man, when I strove so
hard to become a Devil? How have I wounded the father that begat me, and the
brothers who suckled the breasts of my mother! The tears of all good people who
behold me, flow in compassion to my wretchedness; and to the bad, what cause
have I given to boast themselves in their wickedness, and to make GOD'S
long-sufering and forbearance an argument against his very existence! And how
have I troubled the land, by the multiplied thefts and robberies I have
committed!

MEDITATION III.
Gracious GOD, look in pity and compassion upon me! Why did I not stop to
consider, that my crimes would unavoidably bring me to this dismal hour of
blackness and darkness? How have I with my companions, made choice of the most
dark and rainy nights (as if heaven frowned upon our intentions, or as if the
clouds wept over our crimes) to break in upon some unsuspecting family, to
plunder them of their honestly-got store, and, if discovered, to spead death
through their dwelling! Alas! often have these accursed hands pilfered the
scanty clothing of the poor, and with hellish boldness, robbed the treasures of
the rich! Industry -- honest, laudable industry, the faithful friend of the
virtuous, had forsaken me: but covetousness, that fiend of hell, the companion
of the thief and robber, dogged me continually at the heels. My soul! thou
had well nigh perished -- carried down the swiftly-flowing tide of impetuous
and dishonest passions, or swallowed up in the whirlpool of unbelief and evil
company! Ah me! every thing engaged my heart, my head and hand, that I ought to
have detested as the gates of hell.

MEDITATION IV.
Wretched man that I am! -- who shall deliver me from the final condemnation,
which I dread, as the due reward of my deeds? Blessed be the Church, the Spouse
of Christ, who in pity prays for me, "that I may take thy judgments patiently,
and repent me truly of my sins; that I, recovering thy favor, (O my GOD) the
fearful reward of my actions may end with this life; and whenever my soul
shall depart from the body, it may be without spot presented unto thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord." O may this prayer be heard, and I trust it will, for
the prayer of the righteous avails much. But, is it, O my GOD, is it in
wrath, or in mercy, that thou have commissioned inexorable justice, to stop up
the way before me, to shut me up in the dungeon, and appoint me an ignominious
death on a gallows? With tears of the most heart-rending penitence, I deplore
-- that I have despised the light, the light of life, and now the Sun in the
heavens disdains to shine upon me. Yet, my soul, because the mercy of my GOD is
over all his works, I will hope he has done all these things to me in mercy. I
will hope he has not cast me off for ever, but by sending his servants the
commissioned executioners of temporal justice, from time to time to call upon
me with the loud thundering voice of the LAW, by imprisonments, by scourgings,
and by various correcting dispensations, he intended that I should learn
consideration, and ask myself, "ah! me, what have I done?" But alas! charmed to
sleep in the lap of impenitence, by the deep and repeated draughts I had taken
of the bewitching cup of vice, I turned away mine ear, and like the deaf adder,
would listen to nothing short of the thunderings of legal condemnation. Now do
I feel, as if awaked out of a deep sleep; before, I was not myself -- carried
away captive both by evil company, and an evil heart; depraved affections
continually ordering me about the Devil's service! Wisely and justly, have thou
thus dealt by me, O offended Father! when gentler corrections were found
ineffectual, in mercy have thou been pleased to compel me, an infamous wretch,
and abominable prodigal, "to come to myself." -- "Come to myself" -- I tremble
-- I stand amazed -- Oh! -- it is impossible for this heart to conceive how
great my guilt has been!!! O how merciful has my heavenly Father been to me,
that when I was so steeled in vice, as to be beyond the reach of gentler
methods, even thus to arrest me, in my way to destruction, and draw me to him
by a paternal but justifiable violence! -- Had my GOD cast me quite out of his
sight, as a mass of crimes and impenitency, no more to be the object of his
care, and delivered me over to the powers of darkness, to whom, alas! I had
entirely devoted myself, what must have been my final portion? -- Think, O my
soul, think seriously -- had the plunge of an avenging sword, or the well-aimed
ball sent me to eternity, with all my robberies, thefts, burglaries, lies,
oaths, crimes, and evil words and deeds beyond number, hanging heavy upon my
shoulders -- no time allowed for repentance -- no power granted, not even so
much as to pray "Lord have mercy upon me!" -- O horrible! horrible! horrible!!!
My soul, thou recoilest at the tremendous thought, like a man from the brink of
some dreadful precipice, ready to fall and involve him in its ruins!

MEDITATION V.
Be collected every serious thought, -- wandering imagination take thy seat --
and O my soul, devoutly meditate on the mercies and judgments of GOD!
"Whomsoever the Lord loves, he chasteneth; and scourges every son, whom he
receives." And does HE, whose dwelling is in the highest heavens -- does HE,
in whose sight all the nations of the earth are but as a drop of the bucket or
the small dust of the balance, does HE vouchsafe to " chasten, to scourge me in
his love and mercy, in order to receive me to himself? O gracious display of
divine goodness! O the length and the breadth, the height and the depth, of the
love of GOD to man, it surpasses all human comprehension! Grateful to my
fainting soul, as the dews of heaven to the parched earth, shall always be
every intimation of the will of heaven concerning me, should it come, even by
the messenger Death! Already have I lived too long without hearing or receiving
any intelligence from my father's house; for though he spoke and wrote to me by
his servants the prophets, and that repeatedly, I despised the information they
offered, their threatening or promises, I impiously countted but "idle tales."
And yet, such is the benevolence of my heavenly Father, that his ministers, to
whom he has committed the "doctrine of reconciliation," in his name and by his
command, continually "beg of me to be reconciled to God!" whilst they open to
me the scriptures, a gleam of light rushes in upon my benighted soul; and
lifting up mine eyes drenched in tears, I perceive even through the intervening
cloud of my transgressions, that, "though justice and judgment are the
habitation of his throne, yet mercy and truth stand continually before his
face!"

DEVOTIONS, suitable for the morning of, and immediately before the execution.
(In the prison.)
Hail thou day, that is to be my last on earth! every hour of thee shall be
employed in walking after my blessed Savior Jesus! "Joyfully I take this
spoiling of my goods," this demolition of my "earthly tabernacle," and take up
my cross to follow thee! Thou wast obedient unto death, though innocent; but,
ah! guilty me, I would still desire this cup might pass from me! -- but, ye
wishes -- ye sinful desires, no more exalt yourselves against GOD: -- with my
mouth in the dust, I pray "thy will be done, O heavenly Father. -- Lord, had I
not forsaken thee, I had not thus died! The apples of Sodom, on which I have so
long feasted, are now to my taste the most poignant gall and wormwood: -- thy
innocence, O Lamb of GOD, pevented thy tasting the gall and vinegar offered
thee, by the hand of injustice -- my guilt commands me to drink "the dregs of
the cup of bitterness, and to wring them out!" -- "Strait is the gate that
leads unto life" -- and to that gate point the arms of the cross! Come then
my soul, rejoice in the cross of thy Savior, and tune thy feeble voice to sing
a song of Zion; -- HE, before his passion, sung an hymn with his "friends" --
let me sing one before my ignominious death, with my fellow sinners and fellow
penitents, the more to be conformed to the death of my Lord. --

I.
"When rising from the bed of death,
Overwhelmed with guilt and fear.
I see my Maker face to face;
O how shall I appear!
II.
If yet, while pardon may be found,
And mercy may be sought,
My heart with inward horror shrinks,
And trembles at the thought:
III.
When thou, O Lord, shall stand disclosed
In majesty severe,
And sit in judgment on my soul,
O how shall I appear!
IV.
But thou have told the troubled mind,
Who does her sins lament;
The timely tribute of her tears
Shall endless woe prevent.
V.
Then see the sorrow of my heart,
Ever yet it be too late;
And hear my Savior's dying groans,
To give these sorrows weight.
VI.
For never shall my soul despair
Her pardon to procure,
Who knows thy only Son has died
To make her pardon sure.
VII.
TO FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST,
The GOD whom I adore,
Be GLORY as it was, -- is now
And shall be evermore."
Hallelujah -- hallelujah -- hallelujah -- praise the Lord! Amen. Amen. Amen.

(At leaving the prison.)
Farewell thou school -- wherein I have learned to know GOD -- my Savior JESUS
-- and the HOLY GHOST! my Redeemer went before me in the dark path of death.
This path was beaten by thy sacred feet, I follow thee -- O receive me at the
end of my journey.

(During the conveyance from prison to the place of death, the convict may
profitably employ his mind with the foregoing meditations and prayers.)

The convict arrived at the place of execution, and ready to ascend the steps
--
O my soul, make haste to follow thy Redeemer -- thou would not follow him in
the way, in which thou might have walked with delight! therefore, meekly
follow him now in the way he orders thee, though the path be so ignominious and
painful, and leads through the gates of death.

The convict on the scaffold --
By my life, I have denied thee, O GOD: be thou glorified in my death! Under
thy banner, O Jesus! I encounter the King of Terrors -- and in thy light I
enter the dark valley of death! May the sacrifice of this body, which is now to
be offered up to appease the demands of justice, be sanctified and rendered
acceptable to thee, O GOD, through the offering of the blessed BODY of thy SON,
my Savior JESUS CHRIST, upon the cross! O Lord my GOD, bless all my friends --
reward my benefactors -- forgive mine enemies -- and shed abroad thy saving
health among all the nations of the earth. O Lord Jesus Christ, who died for
me, redeem me by thy blood! -- O HOLY SPIRIT of eternal purity, sanctify me by
thy divine power! O HOLY FATHER, receive an unworthy, but returning prodigal,
throwing himself into the arms of thy mercy! -- O incomprehensible, gloricus,
and merciful TRI-UNE GOD, forsake me not in my last moments, but grant me thy
peace! let not the pains of death separate me from thee!

Have mercy upon me, O Holy Father!

Have mercy upon me, O Jesus, Savior of the world!

Have mercy upon me, O sanctifying Spirit of Grace!

Lord Jesus, remember me when thou come in thy kingdom! Into thy hands, O
GOD, I commend my spirit!

Giving the signal --
The Lord have mercy upon him.

Amen! --


