The SECRETARY of STATE, to whom was referred, by the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES
of the United States, the petition of Jacob Isaacks, of Newport, in
Rhode Island, has examined into the truth and importance of the allegations
therein set forth, and makes thereon the following REPORT.
THE petitioner sets forth, that, by various experiments, with considerable
labor and expense, he has discovered a method of converting salt water into
fresh, in the proportion of 8 pints out of 10, by a process so simple that it
may be performed on board of vessels at sea by the common iron cabouse with
small alterations, by the same fire, and in the same time, which it used for
cooking the ship's provisions; and offers to convey to the government of the
United States a faithful account of his art, or secret, to be used by or within
the United States, on their giving to him a reward suitable to the importance
of the discovery, and, in the opinion of government, adequate to his expenses,
and the time he has devoted to the bringing it into effect.

In order to ascertain the merit of the petitioner's discovery, it becomes
necessary to examine the advances already made in the art of converting
salt water into fresh.

Lord Bacon, to whom the world is indebted for the first germs of so many
branches of science, had observed, that, with a heat sufficient for
distillation, salt will not rise in vapor, and that salt water distilled, is
fresh. And it would seem that all mankind might have observed, that the earth
is supplied with fresh water chiefly by exhalation from the sea, which is in
fact an insensible distillation effected by the heat of the sun. Yet this,
though the most obvious, was not the first idea in the essays for converting
salt water into fresh. Filtration was tried in vain, and congelation could be
resorted to only in the coldest regions and seasons. In all the earlier trials
by distillation, some mixture was thought necessary to aid the operation by a
partial precipitation of the salt, and other foreign matters contained in
seawater. Of this kind were the methods of Sir Richard Hawkins, in the 16th
century, of Glauber, Hauton and Lister, in the 17th, and of Hales, Appleby,
Butler, Chapman, Hoffman and Dove, in the 18th: nor was there any thing in
these methods worthy noting on the present occasion, except the very simple
still contrived extempore by Capt. Chapman, and made from such materials as are
to be found on board every ship, great or small. This was a common pot with a
wooden lid of the usual form, in the center of which a hole was bored to
receive perpendicularly a short wooden tube, made with an inch and half auger,
which perpendicular tube received at it is top, and at an acute angle, another
tube of wood also, which descended till it joined a third, of pewter, made by
rolling up a dish, and passing it obliquely through a cask of cold water. With
this simple machine he obtained two quarts of fresh water an hour, and
observed, that the expense of fuel would be very trifling, if the still was
contrived to stand on the fire along with the ship's boiler.

In 1762, Dr. Lind proposing to make experiments of several different mixtures,
first distilled rainwater, which he supposed would be the purest, and then
seawater, without any mixture, which he expected would be the least pure, in
order to arrange between these two supposed extremes the degree of merit of the
several ingredients he meant to try. "To his great surprise," as he confesses,
the seawater distilled without any mixture, was as pure as the rainwater. He
pursued the discovery and established the fact, that a pure and potable
fresh water may be obtained from salt water by simple distillation without the
aid of any mixture for fining or precipitating it is foreign contents. In 1767,
he proposed an extempore still, which, in fact, was Chapman's, only
substituting a gun-barrel instead of Chapman's pewter tube, and the hand-pump
of the ship to be cut in two obliquely, and joined again at an acute angle,
instead of Chapman's wooden tubes bored express; or, instead of the wooden lid
and upright tube, he proposed a tea-kettle (without It Is lid or handle) to be
turned bottom upwards over the mouth of the pot, by way of still-head, and a
wooden tube leading from the spout to a gun-barrel passing through a cask of
water, the whole luted with equal parts of chalk and (...) moistened with
salt water.

With this apparatus of a pot, tea-kettle and gun-barrel, the Dolphin, a 20 gun
ship, in her voyage round the world, in 1768, from 56 gallons of seawater, and
with 9lb. of wood and 69lb. of pit-coal, made 42 gallons of good fresh water at
the rate of 8 gallons an hour. The Dorsetshire, in her passage from Gibraltar
to Mahon, in 1769, made 19 quarts of pure water in 4 hours with 10lb. of wood:
And the Slambal, in 1773, between Bombay and Bengal, with a hand-pump,
gun-barrel and a pot, of 6 gallons of seawater made 10 quarts of fresh water
in 3 hours.

In 1771, Dr. Irvin, putting together Lind's idea of distilling without a
mixture, Chapman's still, and Dr. Franklin's method of cooling by evaporation,
obtained a premium of 5000l. from the British parliament. He wet his tube
constantly with a mop instead of passing it through a cask of water: He
enlarged its bore also in order to give a freer passage to the vapor, and
thereby increase its quantity by lessening the resistance or pressure on the
evaporating surface: this last improvement was his own, it doubtless
contributed to the success of his models; and we may suppose the enlargement of
the tube to be useful to that point at which the central parts of the vapor,
passing through it, would begin to escape condensation. Lord Mulgrave used his
method in his voyage toward the North Pole in 1773, making from 34 to 40
gallons of fresh water a day, without any great addition of fuel, as he says.

M. de Bougainville in his voyage round the world, used, very successfully, a
still which had been contrived in 1763, by Poyssonier, so as to guard against
the water being thrown over from the boiler into the pipe by the agitation of
the ship. In this one singularity, was, that the furnace or fire box was in the
middle of the boiler, so that the water surrounded it in contact. This still,
however, was expensive and occupied much room.

Such were the advances already made in the art of obtaining fresh from salt
water, when Mr. Isaacks, the petitioner, suggested his discovery.

As the merit of this could be ascertained by experiment only, the Secretary of
State asked the favor of Mr. Rittenhouse, President of the American
Philosophical Society, of Dr. Wistar, professor of chemistry in the college of
Philadelphia, and Dr. Hutchinson, professor of chemistry in the university of
Pennsylvania, to be present at the experiments. Mr. Isaacks fixed the pot of a
small cabouse, with a tin cap and strait tube of tin passing obliquely through
a cask of cold water; he made use of a mixture, the composition of which he did
not explain, and from 24 pints of sea water, taken up about 3 miles out of the
Capes of Delaware at flood tide, he distilled 22 pints of fresh water in 4
hours, with 20lb. of seasoned pine, which was a little wetted by having lain in
the rain.

In a 2d experiment of the 21st of March, performed in a furnace and five
gallon still at the college, from 32 pints of sea water he drew 31 pints of
fresh water in 7 h. 24 min. with 51lb. of hickory which had been cut about six
months. In order to decide whether Mr. Isaacks's mixture contributed in any and
what degree to the success of the operation, it was thought proper to repeat
his experiment under the same circumstances exactly, except the omission of the
mixture. Accordingly on the next day the same quantity of sea water was put
into the same still, the same furnace was used, and fuel from the same parcel.
It yielded, as his had done, 31 pints of fresh water in 11 min. more of time
and with 10lb. less of wood.

On the 24th of March Mr. Isaacks performed a 3d experiment. For this, a common
iron pot of 3 gallons was fixed in brick work, and the flue from the hearth
wound once round the pot spirally, and then passed off up a chimney. The cap
was of tin, and a strait tin tube of about two inches diameter, passing
obliquely through a barrel of water, served instead of a worm. From 16 pints of
sea water he drew off 15 pints of fresh water in 2 h. 55 min. with 3lb. of dry
hickory and 8lb. of seasoned pine. This experiment was also repeated the next
day, with the same apparatus and fuel from the same parcel, but without the
mixture. Sixteen pints of sea water yielded in like manner 15 pints of fresh,
in 1 min. more of time and with half a pound less of wood. On the whole, it was
evident that Mr. Isaacks's mixture produced no advantage, either in the process
or result of the distillation.

The distilled water in all these instances was found on experiment to be as
pure as the best pump water of the city. Its taste indeed was not as agreeable,
but it was not such as to produce any disgust. In fact, we drink in common
life, in many places, and under many circumstances, and almost always at sea, a
worse tasted, and probably a less wholesome water.

The obtaining fresh from salt water, was for ages considered as an important
desideratum for the use of navigators. The process for doing this by simple
distillation is so efficacious, the erecting an extempore still with such
utensils as are found on board of every ship is so practicable, as to authorize
the assertion, that this desideratum is satisfied to a very useful degree. But
though this has been done for upwards of 30 years, though its reality has been
established by the actual experience of several vessels which have had recourse
to it, yet neither the fact nor the process is known to the mass of seamen, to
whom it would be the most useful, and for whom it was principally wanted. The
Secretary of State is therefore of opinion, that since the subject has now been
brought under observation; it should be made the occasion of disseminating its
knowledge generally and effectually among the seafaring citizens of the United
States. The following is one of the many methods which might be proposed for
doing this. Let the clearance for every vessel sailing from the ports of the
United States, be printed on a paper, on the back whereof shall be a printed
account of the essays which have been made for obtaining fresh from salt water,
mentioning shortly those which have been unsuccessful, and more fully those
which have succeeded; describing the methods which have been found to answer
for constructing extempore stills of such implements as are generally on board
of every vessel, with a recommendation, in all cases where they shall have
occasion to resort to this expedient for obtaining water, to publish the result
of their trial in some gazette on their return to the United States, or to
communicate it for publication to the office of the Secretary of State, in
order that others may, by their success, be encouraged to make similar trials,
and be benefitted by any improvements or new ideas which may occur to them in
practice.

Philadelphia, November 21 st, 1791. TH: JEFFERSON.


