The Doctrine of Election defended and supported. BEING A LETTER FROM THE Rev.
GEORGE WHITEFIELD, In ANSWER to a SERMON, PUBLISHED BY THE Rev. JOHN WESLEY, IN
FAVOR OF Universal REDEMPTION.

Windham: Printed by JOHN BYRNE.

PREFACE.
I AM very well aware what different effects the publishing this Letter against
dear Mr. Wesley's Sermon, will produce. Many of my friends who are strenuous
advocates for Universal Redemption, will be immediately offended. Many that are
zealous on the other side, will much rejoice. Those that are lukewarm on both
sides, and are carried away with carnal Reasoning, will wish this matter had
never been brought under debate. The reasons I have given at the beginning of
the Letter, I think, are sufficient to satisfy all. I desire therefore that
those who hold Election, would not triumph or make a party on the one hand:
(For I detest any such thing) And that those who are prejudiced against that
doctrine, would not be too much concerned or offended on the other. Known unto
God are all his ways from the beginning of the world. The great day will
discover why the Lord permits dear Mr. Wesley and me, to be of a different way
of thinking. And I cannot express my self better in respect to this, than in
the words of a Letter which I lately received from his own dear hands.

London, August 9, 1740. My dear Brother,
I Thank you for yours, May 24. The case is quite plain. There are bigots both
for Predestination and against it. God is sending a message to those on either
side: but neither will receive it, unless from one who is of their own opinion.
Therefore for a time you are suffered to be of one opinion, and I of another.
But when his time is come, God will do what man cannot, namely, make us both of
one mind. Then persecution will flame out; and it will be seen whether we count
our lives dear unto ourselves, so that we may finish our course with joy.

I am, my dearest brother, Ever yours, J. WESLEY.


Thus, (my honored friend!) I heartily pray God to hasten the time of our
union in principles as well as in heart! And then I care not if I go with him
to prison or to death. With Paul and Silas, I hope we shall sing praises to
God, and count it our highest honor to suffer for Christ's sake, and lay down
our lives for the brethren.

BETHESDAY in Georgia, Dec. 24, 1740. Rev. and very dear Brother!
GOD only knows what unspeakable sorrow of heart I have felt on your account
ever since I left England last. Whither it be my infirmity or not, I frankly
confess that never did Jonah go with more reluctance against Nineveh, than I
now take pen in hand to write against you. Was nature to speak, I had rather
die than do it: and yet if I am faithful to God, and to my own and others
souls, I must not stand neuter any longer. I am well aware how our adversaries
will rejoice to see us differing among ourselves. But what can I say? The
Children of God are in danger of falling into error. Nay, numbers have been
misled, whom God was pleased to work upon by my ministry; and a great number
still are calling aloud upon me also to show my opinion. I must then show that
I know no man after the flesh, and that I have no respect of persons any
farther than is consistent with my duty to my Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

This letter also will undoubtedly lose me many friends. But for this cause
among others, perhaps God stirs me up to write it, viz. to see whether I will
forsake all for him or not. I think I have truth and scripture on my side. I
think it my duty to be simple and consistent, and leave the consequences of all
to God.

I fear I have been sinfully silent too long. For some time before, and
especially since my last departure from England, both in public and private,
by preaching and printing, you have been propagating the doctrine of Universal
Redemption; and therefore, if Paul reproved Peter for his Dissimulation, (dear
and honored Sir) O be not angry with me, if I deliver my soul in telling you
that I think in this you nearly err.

It Is not my design to enter into a long debate on GOD's decrees. I refer you
to Dr. Edwards's Veritas Redux; who I think is unanswerable, except in a
certain point, concerning a middle sort between elect and reprobate, which he
himself in effect afterward condemns. I must first inform you, that I think
you had no call to be so explicit in the doctrine of universal redemption.

If I mistake not when at Bristol, you received a letter from a private hand,
charging you with not preaching the gospel, because you did not preach up
election. Upon this you drew a lot. The answer was, "preach and print." I have
often questioned as I do now, whether in so doing you did not tempt the Lord?
Common prudence without a lot would have directed you in that matter.

Besides, I never heard that you inquired of GOD, whether or not election was a
gospel doctrine? But I fear taking it for granted it was not -- you only
inquired, whether you should be silent, or preach and print against it. However
this be, the lot came out, preach and print. Accordingly, you preached and
printed against election. At my desire you suppressed the publishing the sermon
'till I left England; but soon after sent it into the world after my departure.
Oh that you had kept it in! If that sermon was printed in answer to a lot, I
can give no other reason why God should suffer you to be deceived, unless that
thereby a door might be opened hereafter for preaching up election: and that
God might give me another opportunity, as he once did, by giving you such
another lot at The morning I sailed from Deal for Gibraltar, Mr. Wesley arrived
from Georgia. Instead of coming on board to converse with me, though the ship
was not far off the shore he drew a lot, and immediately set forwards for
London. Behind him he leaves a letter for me, in which were words to this
effect. When I saw GOD, by the wind which was carrying you out, brought me in,
I asked counsel of GOD. His answer, you have enclosed. This was a piece of
paper in which were written these words. "Let him return to London." When I
received this a good man telling me he had cast a lot, and that GOD would have
me return to London. On the other hand, I knew that my call was to Georgia, and
that I had taken leave of London, and could not justly go from the soldiers who
were committed to my charge. I betook myself with a friend to prayer. That
passage in the first book of Kings, chap. xiii. where we are told "that the
prophet was slain by a Lion, that tempted to go back contrary to God's express
order, upon another prophet's telling him that God would have him do so -- This
passage, I say, was powerfully impressed upon my soul. -- I wrote dear Mr.
Wesley word that I could not return to London. We sailed immediately. Some
months after I received a letter from him at Georgia, wherein he wrote in words
to this effect, "Though GOD never before gave me a wrong lot, yet perhaps he
suffered me to have such a lot at that time to try what was in your heart." I
should never have published this private transaction to the world, did not the
glory of God call me to it. It is plain that dear Mr. Wesley had a wrong lot
given him here, and justly, because he tempted God in drawing one. And thus I
believe it is in the present case. And if so, let not the children of God, who
are mine and Mr. Wesley's intimate friends, and are such advocates for
Universal Redemption, think that doctrine true, because dear Mr. Wesley
preached it up in compliance with a lot given out from God.
Deal, of seeing what was in my heart, and whether I would be faithful to his
cause or not. Oh that it may be also for the conviction of dear Mr. Wesley;
that we may both think and speak the same things, and consequently be better
qualified to build up those souls that have been lately awakened, in their most
holy faith!

This I think may serve as an answer to the first part of the preface to your
printed sermon, wherein you say, Nothing but the strongest conviction, not only
that what is here advanced is the truth as it is in Jesus, but also that I am
indispensably obliged to declare this truth to all the world, etc.

That you believe what you have wrote is truth, and that you honestly aim at
GOD's glory in writing, I do not in the least doubt. But then, honored Sir, if
by tempting GOD, in casting a lot, as before mentioned, you have thought
yourself indispensably obliged to publish your sermon against predestination, I
think, in this you have been much mistaken.

But farther; as you have been unhappy in printing at all, so you have been
unhappy also in the choice of your text. Honored Sir! how could it enter into
your heart to choose a text to disprove the doctrine of election, out of the
eighth of the Romans? Where the doctrine is so plainly asserted, that once
talking with a Quaker, upon this subject, he had no other way of evading the
force of the Apostle's assertion, than by saying, I believe Paul was in the
wrong. Another friend lately, who was once highly prejudiced against election,
ingeniously confessed, that he used to think, St. Paul himself was mistaken, or
that he was not truly translated.

Indeed, honored Sir, it is plain beyond all Contradiction, that St. Paul,
through the whole eighth chapter of the Romans, is speaking of the priviliges of
those only who are really in Christ. And let any unprejudiced person, read what
goes before, and what follows your text, and he must confess the word ALL only
signifies, those that are in Christ; and the latter part of the text, plainly
proves what I find dear Mr. Wesley will by no means grant, I mean, the final
perseverance of the children of GOD. He that spares not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Viz. Grace to persevere, and every thing necessary to bring us safely
home to our heavenly father's kingdom.

Had I a mind to prove election and final perseverance, I know not that I could
choose a better text than you have chosen to disprove it. One that does not know
you, would suspect you. You yourself were sensible of this. For after the first
paragraph I scarce know whether you have mentioned it, so much as once, through
your whole discourse.

But your discourse, in my opinion, is as little to the purpose as your text;
and instead of warping* does but more and more confirm me in the Belief of the
doctrine of GOD's eternal election.

I shall not mention how illogically you have proceeded. Had you wrote clearly,
you should first, honored Sir, have proved your proposition. That GOD's grace
is free to all; and then by way of inference, exclaimed against what you call
the horrible decree. But you knew people (because Arminianism of late, has so
much abounded among us) were generally prejudiced against the doctrine of
reprobation, and therefore thought, if you kept up their dislike of that, you
would overthrow the doctrine of election entirely. For, without doubt, the
doctrine of election and reprobation must stand or fall togther.

But passing by this, as also your equivocal definition of the word grace, and
your false definition of the word free; that I may be as short as possible, I
frankly acknowledge, I believe the doctrine of reprobation; and that God
intends only to give a certain number saving grace, through Jesus Christ, and
that the rest of mankind are left to perish under the imputation of Adam's
guilt, and will be damned for that and their actual sins. This is established
doctrine of scripture, and of the XVIIth article of the church of England; as
bishop Burnet himself confesses. Dear Mr. Wesley absolutely denies them both.
And why?

For if this be so, (says he, page the 10th, paragraph the 9th) then is all
preaching vain. -- It is needless to them that are elected. For they whether
with preaching or without, will infallibly be saved. Therefore the end of
preaching, to save souls, is void with regard to them. And it is useless to
them that are not elected. For they cannot possibly be saved. They, whether
with preaching or without, will infalliably be damned. The end of preaching is
therefore void with regard to them likewise. So that in either case, our
preaching is vain, as your hearing is also vain.

O dear Sir! What kind of reasoning, or rather sophistry, is this? Has not
God, who has appointed salvation for a certain number, appointed also the
preaching of the word as a means to bring them to salvation? Does any one hold
election in any other sense? And if so, how is preaching needless to them that
are elected, when it is designed by God, to be the power of God unto their
eternal salvation? And, since we know not who are elect and who reprobate, we
are to preach promiscuously to all. If it be useless to the reprobate, it is no
more than what God designed to permit. It Is enough that all are brought home by
it that he intended.

Secondly, You say, page the 11th, That it, viz. the doctrine of election and
reprobation, directly tends to destroy that holiness which is the end of all
the ordinances of God. For, (says the dear mistaken Mr. Wesley) it wholly takes
away those first motives to follow after it, so frequently proposed in
scripture. The hope of future rewards, and fear of punishments, the hopes of
heaven, and the fear of hell, etc.

I thought one that carrys perfection to such an exlated pitch as dear Mr.
Wesley does, would know a true lover of the Lord Jesus Christ, would strive to
be holy for the sake of being holy, and work for Christ out of love and
gratitude, without any regard to the reward of heaven or fear of hell. You
remember, dear sir, what Scougal says -- Love's a more powerful motive that
does them move.

But passing by this, and granting that rewards and punishments (as they
certainly are) may be motives, from which a christian may be honestly stirred
up to act for God; how does the doctrine of election destroy those motives? Do
not the elect know that the more good works they do, the greater will be their
reward? And is it not that encouragement enough to set them upon, and cause
them to persevere in working for Jesus Christ? -- And how does the doctrine of
election destroy holiness? Whoever preached any other election than what the
Apostle preached, when he said, Chosen through sanctification of the spirit? Nay,
is not holiness made a mark of our election by all that preach it? And how then
can election destroy holiness?

The instance which you bring, page 11, to illustrate your assertion, indeed,
dear sir, is quite impertinent; for you say, If a sick man knows, that he must
unavoidably die, or unavoidably recover; though he knows not which, it is not
reasonable to take any physic at all. Dear Sir! what absurd reasoning is here?
Was you ever sick in your life? If so, did not the bare probability or
possibility of your recovering though you knew it was unalterably fixed that
you must live or die, encourage you to take physic? For how did you know but
that very physic might be the means God intended to recover you by? Just thus
it is in the doctrine of election. I know that it is unalterably fixed that I
must be damned, or saved. But since I know not which, for a certainty, why
should I not strive, though in a state of nature, since I know not but this
striving may be the means God has intended to bless in order to bring me into a
state of grace? Dear sir! consider these things -- Make an impartial
application, and then judge what little reason you had to conclude the 10th
paragraph, page the 12th, in these words, -- So directly does this doctrine
tend to shut the very gate of holiness in general, to hinder unholy men, from
ever approaching thereto or striving to enter in thereat.

As directly, say you, (paragraph 11th) does this doctrine tend to destroy
several particular branches of holiness -- such as meekness, love, etc. I shall
say little in answer to this paragraph. Dear Mr. Wesley, perhaps has been
disputing with some warm narrow-spirited men, that held election, and then
infers that their warmth and narrowness of spirit are owing to their
principles. Does not Mr. Wesley know many dear children of God who are
predestinarians, and yet are meek, lowly, pitiful, courteous, tenderhearted,
of a catholic Spirit, and kind, and have hope even of the most vile? -- And
why? Because they know God saved them by an act of his electing love, and they
know not but he may have elected those who are now even the most abandoned.
But, dear sir, we must not judge of the truth of principles in general, nor of
this of election in particular, entirely from people's practice: If so, I am
sure more might be said against you. For I appeal to your heart, whether you do
not feel a narrow-spiritedness toward, and some disunion of soul from those
that hold particular redemption. If so, then according to your own rule,
Universal Redemption is wrong, because it destroys several branches of holiness
-- such as meekness, love, etc.

The apostle St. Paul was not of your opinion, -- For, Col. iii. 12, 13, -- he
says, Putting on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of
mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one
another and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any; even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Here we see that the apostle exhorts them
to put on bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, etc. Upon this consideration, namely, because they were the
elect of God. And all who have experimentally felt this doctrine in their
heart, will feel that these graces are the genuine effects of their being
elected of God.

But perhaps dear Mr. Wesley may be mistaken in this point, and call that
passion, which is only zeal for God's truths. You know, dear sir, the apostle
exhorts us to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints; and
therefore you must not condemn all who appear warm for the doctrine of
election, as narrow-spirited, or persecutors, because they think it their duty
to oppose you. I am sure I love you in the bowels of Jesus Christ. I think I
could lay down my life for your sake; but yet, dear sir, I cannot avoid
opposing you strenuously in this point, because I think you warmly, though I
really believe not designedly oppose the truth as it is in Jesus. -- May the
Lord remove the scales of prejudice from off the eyes of your mind, and give
you a zeal according to true christian knowledge!

Thirdly, Says your Sermon, page 13, paragraph the 12th; This doctrine tends to
destroy the comforts of religion, the happiness of christianity.

But how does Mr. Wesley know this, who never believed election? I believe they
who have experienced it will agree with our XVIIth article, That the godly
consideration of predestination and our election in Christ, is full of sweet
pleasures, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feel in
themselves the working of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the
flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing their minds to high and heavenly
things; as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their faith of
eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ; as because it does firmly
kindle their love toward God: which plainly shows that our godly reformers did
not think election destroyed holiness, or the comforts of religion. As for my
own part, this doctrine is my daily support, -- I should utterly sink under a
sense of my impending trials, was I not firmly persuaded Christ had chosen me
from before the foundation of the world, and therefore will suffer nothing to
pluck me finally out of his almighty hands.

You proceed thus, This is evident to all those that believe themselves to be
reprobate; or only suspect or fear it. All the great and precious promises are
lost to them; -- they afford them no ray of comfort.

And would dear Mr. Wesley give comfort, or dare to apply the precious promises
of the gospel, (that children's bread) to men in a natural state? God forbid!
What if the doctrine of election and reprobation does put some upon doubting?
Is not this a good means to put them upon striving; and that striving a good
means to make their calling, and thereby their election sure? This is one
reason among many others, why I admire the doctrine of election. It has a
natural tendency to rouse the soul out of its carnal security: and therefore so
many carnal men cry out against it. Universal Redemption has a natural tendency
to keep the soul in its carnal security; and therefore so many natural men
admire and applaud it.

Your three following paragraphs, 13, 14, 15, come next to be considered. The
witness of the Spirit, (you say, paragraph 14, page 14) experience shows to be
much obstructed by this doctrine. But, dear sir, whose experience? Not your
own: for in your last journal, you seem to acknowledge you have it not; and
therefore you are no proper judge in this matter. You must mean the experience
of others; for you say, in the same paragraph, Even in those that have tasted
of that good gift, who have yet soon lost it again (I suppose you mean lost the
sense of it again) and fallen back into doubts, and fears, and darkness, even
horrible darkness that might be felt, etc. And was not this the case of Jesus
Christ himself, after that he had received the Holy Ghost? Was he not led by
the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil? Was not his soul
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, in the garden? -- And was he not
surrounded with an horrible darkness, even "a darkness that might be felt," --
when on the cross, he cried out, My God! my God! why have thou forsaken me? And
that his followers must expect the same, is it not evident from scripture? For,
says the apostle, he was tempted in all things, like unto his brethren, that he
might be able to succor those that are tempted. And why then should persons
falling into darkness, after they have received the witness of the Spirit, be
any arguments against the doctrine of election? Yes, you say, many, very many
of those that hold it not in all parts of the earth, have enjoyed the
uninterrupted witness of the Spirit, the continual light of God's countenance,
from the moment wherein they first believed, for many months and years to this
very day. But how does dear Mr. Wesley know this? Has he consulted the
experience of many, very many in all parts of the earth? Or supposing he had,
does it follow that their being kept in this light, is owing to their not
believing the Doctrine of election? No, this, according to the sentiments of
our church, greatly confirms and establishes a true christian's faith of
eternal salvation through Christ, and is an anchor of hope both sure and
steadfast when he walks in darkness and sees no light; as a true christian
certainly may do, after he has received the witness of the spirit, whatever you
or others may unadvisedly assert to the contrary. Then to have respect to God's
everlasting covenant and throw himself upon the free distinguishing love of
that God who changes not; this I say, makes him to lift up the hands that hang
down, and strengthens his feeble knees. -- Without believing the doctrine of
election I cannot see how we can arrive at a full assurance of faith: an
assurance that all my past sins are forgiven, and that I am now a child of God;
but may hereafter, for all that I know, become a child of the devil, and be
cast into hell at last; is no assurance at all, at least not a full assurance.
No, a full assurance of faith makes the soul give men and devils the challenge,
not only for the present, but for the future. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's elect? It is Christ that justifies me, who is he that condemns
me? It is Christ that died; yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also makes intercession for me. Who shall separate me
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword: Nay in all these things I am more
than conqueror through him that loved me. For I am persuaded that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus my
Lord.

This, dear Sir, is the triumphant language of every soul that has attained a
full assurance of faith. And this assurance can only arise from a belief of
God's electing everlasting love. That many have an assurance that they are in
Christ to day, but take no thought for, or are not assured that they shall be
in him tomorrow, nay, to all eternity, is rather their imperfections and
unhappiness, than their privilege. I pray God bring all such to a sense of his
eternal love, that they may no longer build upon their own faithfulness, but on
the unchangeableness of that God whose gifts and calling are without
repentance; for those whom God has once justified he also will glorify.

I observed before, dear sir, it is not always a safe rule to judge of the
truth of principles from people's practice. And therefore, suppose all that
hold Universal Redemption, in your way of explaining it, after they received
says, enjoy the continual uninterrupted light of God's countenance, it does
not follow that this is a fruit of their principle: for that I am sure has a
natural tendency to keep the soul in darkness forever -- because the creature
is thereby taught, that his being kept in a state of salvation, is owing to his
own free will: and what a sandy foundation is that for a poor creature to build
his hopes of perseverance upon? Every relapse into sin, every surprise by
temptation, must throw him into doubts and fears, into horrible darkness, even
darkness that might be felt. Hence it is that the letters which have been
lately sent me by those who hold Universal Redemption, are dead, lifeless, dry
and inconsistant, in comparison of those I receive from persons on the contrary
side. Those on the one side, though they might begin in the spirit (whatever
they may say to the contrary) are ending in the flesh, and building up a
righteousness founded on their own free will. Whilst the others triumph in
hopes of the glory of God; and built upon God's never-fading promise, and
unchangeable, love, even when his sensible presence is withdrawn from them. But
I would not judge of the truth of election by the experience of any particular
persons: If I did (Oh bear with me in this foolishness of boasting) I think I
my self might glory in election. For these five or six years I have received
the witness of God's Spirit; and since that I have not doubted a quarter of an
hour of my having a saving interest in Jesus Christ. But I have fallen into sin
since that; and tho I lay the blame wholly on my own wicked heart, yet, perhaps
it was permitted that I might confute those who hold a man cannot commit sin
after he is born again. I have been also in heaviness through manifold
temptations, and expect to be often so again before I die. Thus was St. Paul
himself. Thus was Luther, that man of God, who did not hold election: and the
great John Arndt, was in the utmost perplexity a quarter of an hour before he
died, and yet he was no predestinarian; and if I must speak freely I believe
your writing so strenuously against the doctrine of election, and pleading up a
sinless perfection, is one great cause why you are kept out of the liberties of
the gospel, and that full assurance of faith which those enjoy who have
experimentally tasted, and daily feed upon God's electing everlasting love.

But perhaps you may say, That Luther and Arndt were no christians. I know you
think meanly of Abraham and David; and have wrote me word, That no baptist or
presbyterian writer whom you have read, knew any thing of the liberties of
Christ. See, dear Sir, what narrow-spiritedness and want of charity arises from
your principles: and then do not cry out against election any more on account
of its being "destructive of meekness and love."

To proceed. Again, says the dear Mr. Wesley, page 15, paragraph the 16th, How
uncomfortable a thought is this, That thousands and millions of men, without
any preceding offense or fault of theirs, were unchangeably doomed to
everlasting burnings?

But whoever asserted, that thousands and millions of men, without any
preceding offense or fault of theirs, were unchangeably doomed to everlasting
burnings? Do not those who plead up for God's dooming men to everlasting
burnings, suppose God looks upon them as men fallen in Adam? How then are they
doomed without any preceding fault? Surely Mr. Wesley will own God's justice
in imputing Adam's sin to his posterity: And also that after Adam fell, and his
posterity in him, God might justly have passed them all by without sending any
one of them a Savior. Unless you own both these things, you do not believe
original sin aright. If you do own them, you must acknowledge the doctrine of
election and reprobation to be reasonable. For if God might justly have imputed
Adam's sin to all, and afterward have passed by all, he might justly pass by
some. -- Turn either on the right hand or on the left, you are reduced to an
inextricable dilemma.

Your 17th paragraph, page 16, I pass over. -- What has been said on paragraph
the 9th and 10th, with little alteration, will answer it. I shall only say,
it is the doctrine of election that mostly presses me to abound in good works: I
am made willing to suffer all things for the elect's sake. This makes me preach
with comfort because I know salvation does not depend on men's free will, but
the Lord makes a willing people in the day of his power, and may make use of me
to bring some of his elect home.

But fifthly, you say, paragraph the 18th page 17, this doctrine has a direct
and manifest tendency to overthrow the whole christian religion. For, say you,
supposing that eternal unchangeable decree, one part of mankind must be saved,
though the christian Revelation were not in being.

But, dear sir, how does that follow, since it is only by the christian
Revelation, that we are acquainted with God's design in respect to mankind? --
And how then has the doctrine of election a direct tendency to overthrow the
whole christian Revelation? For, has not God intended this Revelation as a
means to bring his elect home? And how then in holding this doctrine, do we
join with modern unbelievers, in making the christian Revelation unnecessary?
No, dear sir; you mistake -- Infidels of all kinds are on your side the
question. Deists, Arians, Socinians, arraign God's sovereignty and stand up for
universal redemption. I pray God dear Mr. Wesley's Sermon, as it has grieved
the hearts of many of God's dear children, it may not also strengthen the hands
of many of God's professed enemies! Here I could almost sit down and weep. O
tell it not in Gath! Publish it not in the streets of Askalon; lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice, lest the sons of unbelief triumph!

Further, you say, page 18, paragraph 19, this doctrine makes Revelation
contradict itself. -- For instance; say you, the asserters of this doctrine
interpret that text of scripture, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated,"
as implying that God "in a literal sense, hated Esau and all the reprobate from
eternity." And when considered as fallen in Adam, were they not objects of his
hatred? And might not God, of his own good pleasure, love or show mercy to
Jacob, and the elect, and yet, at the same time, do the reprobate no wrong? But
you say, "God is love." And cannot God be love, unless he shows the same mercy
to all?

Again, says dear Mr. Wesley, "they infer from that text, I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy, that God is love only to some men, viz. the elect; and
that he has mercy for those only: -- Flatly contrary to which is the whole
tenor of the scripture, as is that express declaration in particular: The Lord
is loving to every man, and his mercies are over all his works." And so they
are; but not his saving mercy. God is loving to every man; he sends his rain
upon the evil, and upon the good. But you say, "God is no respecter of
persons." No. For every one, whether Jew or Gentile, that believes on Jesus,
and works righteousness, is accepted of him. Notwithstanding these texts in
the strictest sense, God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; nay, I
will add, and whom he will he hardens.

You go on, page 20. "Again, from that text, the children being not yet born,
neither having done good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to
election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was said unto
her (unto Rebecca) the elder shall serve the younger; they, (i. e.
Predestinarians) infer that our predestination, or election, no way depends on
the foreknowledge of God." But who infers this, dear sir! For, if by
foreknowledge, you mean foreknowledge as it signifies approbation, (as it
does in several parts of scripture,) then we confess that predestination and
election do depend on God's foreknowledge. But if by God's foreknowledge, you
understand God's foreseeing some good works done by his creatures, and
therefore electing them, then we say, that in this sense, predestination does
not any way depend on God's foreknowledge. But I referred you at the beginning
of this letter to Dr. Edwards. Read his Veritas Redux, which I recommended to
you in a late letter, with Elisha Cole on God's sovereignty. Be pleased to read
those; and also Mr. Cooper's sermons of Boston, which I likewise sent you, and
I doubt not but you will see all your objections answered. Though I would
observe that after all our reading on both sides the question, we shall never
in this life be able to search out God's decrees to perfection: No; we must
humbly adore, what we cannot comprehend; and with the great Apostle, at the end
of our inquiries, cry out, O the depth! etc. Or with our Lord, when he was
admiring God's sovereignty, even so father, for so it seems good in thy sight.

However it may not be amiss to take notice that if those texts God wills
that none should perish. "I have no pleasure in him that dies," and such like,
be taken in the strictest sense, then no one will be damned. For God may
prevent every one's damnation if he pleases, and cannot but in one sense, be
said to will it, because he might have prevented it if he would.

But here is the distinction, -- God takes no pleasure in the death of sinners,
so as to delight simply in their death; though he delights to magnify his justice
in their death. As a judge may take no pleasure in condemning a criminal, and
yet justly permit him to be executed (though in his power to procure him a
reprieve) in order that they may satisfy the justice of the law.

I could hint farther, that you unjustly charge the doctrine of reprobation
with blasphemy. But the doctrine of universal redemption, in your sense, is
really blasphemous. For judge, whether it be not blasphemy to say, as you do,
page 20. Christ not only died for those that are saved, but also for those that
perish. The text you have misapplied, to gloss over this, see it explained by
Ridgley, Edwards and Henry. I purposely omit answering this and some other
texts myself, that you may be brought to read such treatises, which under God,
would show you your error. You cannot, indeed sir, you cannot make good the
assertion, "that Christ died for them that perish," without holding (as One of
the Moravian Brethren.
Peter Bolcher, in order to make out universal redemption, lately frankly
confessed in a letter) that all the damned souls would hereafter be brought out
of hell. I cannot think Mr. Wesley thus minded. And yet without this can be
proved, universal redemption, taken in a literal sense, falls entirely to the
ground. For how can all be universally redeemed, if all are not finally saved?

Dear sir! for Jesus Christ's sake, consider how you dishonor God. By denying
election you plainly make man's salvation depend not on God's free grace, but
man's free will. And if so, Jesus Christ died at a venture, and perhaps would
not have had one soul as the purchase of his blood. Our preaching would then be
vain, and our invitations to people to believe would be in vain also.

But, blessed be God! -- Our Lord knew for whom he died. There was an eternal
compact between the father, and the son. A certain number was then given him,
as the purchase of his obedience and death. For these he prayed, John xvii. --
and not for the world. For these, and these only, he is now interceeding; and
with their salvation, he will be fully satisfied.

I purposely omit making any further remarks on the several last pages of your
sermon. Indeed, had not your name, dear sir, been prefixed to the sermon, I
could not have been so uncharitable as to think you were the author of such
sophistry. You beg the question, in saying, "that God has declared
(notwithstanding you own, I suppose, some will be damned) that he will save
all, i. e. every individual person." You take it for granted, (for solid proof
you have none) that he is unjust if he passes by any: and then you exclaim
against the horrible decree.

Dear, dear sir! O be not offended! for Christ's sake be not rash! give
yourself to reading; study the covenant of grace; down with your carnal
reasoning; be a little child! And then instead of pawning your salvation, as
you have done in a late hymn-book, if the doctrine of universal redemption be
not true; instead of talking of sinless perfection as you have done in the
preface of that book, and making man's salvation depend on his own free will,
as you have in this sermon; you will compose a hymn in praise of sovereign
distinguishing love. You will caution believers against working a perfection
out of their own hearts, and print another sermon, the reverse of this, and
entitle it, Free Grace. Free, not because free to all: but free, because God
may withhold or give it to whom and when he pleases.

Till you do this, I must doubt whether you know yourself. In the mean while I
cannot but blame you for censuring the clergy of our church for not keeping to
their articles, when you yourself by your principles; positively deny the 9th,
10th, and 18th. Dear sir! these things ought not to be so. God knows my heart!
As I told you before, so I declare again, nothing but a single regard to the
honor of Christ had forced the letter from me. I love and honor you for his
sake; and when I come to judgment, I may thank you before men and Angels, for
what you have, under God, done for my soul.

There I am persuaded, I shall see dear Mr. Wesley convinced of election and
everlasting love. And it often fills me with pleasure, to think how I shall
behold you casting your crown down at the feet of the lamb, and as it were
filled with a holy blushing, for opposing the divine sovereignty in the manner
you have done.

But I hope the Lord will show you this before you go hence. O how do I long
for that day! If the Lord should be pleased to make use of this letter for that
purpose, it would abundantly rejoice the heart of

Dear and honored sir, your affectionate, though unworthy brother and servant
in Christ, George Whitefield.

Romans ix. 21, 22, 23, 24. Behold the potter, and the clay,
He forms his subjects as he please,
Such is our God, and such are we,
The subjects of his high decrees.
Does not the workman's power extend
Over all the mass: which part to choose,
And mould it for a nobler end,
And which to leave for viler use!
May not the sovereign Lord on high,
Dispense his favors as he will?
Choose some to life, while others die,
And yet be just and gracious still.

FINIS.

