POLITICAL ESSAYS ON THE NATURE and OPERATION OF MONEY, PUBLIC FINANCES, AND
OTHER SUBJECTS: Published during the AMERICAN WAR, and continued up to the
present Year, 1791.

BY PELATIAH WEBSTER, A. M.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, NO. 91, HIGH STREET.

PREFACE Of the Author.
THE first thirty years of my life were spent in the literary way, and
generally employed in a course of hard study, and close attention to some
subject or other; after which, by a turn in my private affairs, I went into a
course of mercantile business, which was indeed more a matter of necessity than
inclination. My old habits of reading and thinking could not easily be shaken
off, and I was scarce ever without either a book or some subject of discussion
ready prepared, to which I could resort, the moment I found myself at leisure
from other business.

My usual method of discussing any subjects which I undertook to examine, was,
as far as possible, to find out and define the original, natural principles of
them, and to suffer my mind to be drawn on without bias or any incidental
prejudice, to such conclusions as those original principles would naturally
lead to and demonstrate, i. e. I endeavored, as far as I could, to make myself
my own original, and draw all my knowledge from the original and natural
sources or first principles of it.

The powerful pressures of the British force during the war, and the obstinate
and determined defense of the Americans, soon threw every thing into disorder,
and produced every day new occurrences and new problems, which America had
never seen before, and, of course, knew not how either to obviate or solve them.

The first operations of the war affected my connexions in trade so much, that
it threw me out of my usual course of business, and left me at leisure to
contemplate those occurrences; and I thought I might render an essential
service to my country by examining them, reducing them to their original
principles, explaining their nature, and pointing out their natural operation
and probable effects.

I conceived that the most important and alarming of these events and questions
were those which respected our resources, and especially the state of the
Continental money, which was the sole supply of the public treasury at that
time. This induced me to turn my attention very seriously to the nature and
operation of MONEY and finance; a subject which I had never before examined,
further than daily practice and private economy made necessary.

Some reasonings and conclusions on this subject were published under the
signature of A Financier in 1776, and make the first of the following Essays;
all the rest were published successively (as dated) under the signature of A
Citizen of Philadelphia.

Whilst I reasoned on the great subjects of the natural operation of money and
of national finances, and drew such theorems and conclusions as appeared to me
to result from their natural, original principles, I had an opportunity to
compare those conclusions with real fact, and to judge of their truth by
experiment of their actual effects; and in this I was rarely mistaken. The
effects or consequences which I inferred from the principles on which I
reasoned, scarcely in one instance failed to follow in the kind, though not
always in the degree, which I expected, e. g. the strength of the States, and
the patriotism, the patience, the firmness, and steady virtue of our people,
were greater than I could expect, whilst I reasoned on human nature and human
passions, as exhibited in the example of other nations, especially in the
instance of unpaid armies. From these sprang resources for continuing the war,
beyond my sanguine calculations, whilst national ruin appeared to me more near
and certain than it really was.

Again, the obstinate perseverance of the British nation in continuing the
American war was less than I computed on. I believe, the American independence
was the only point which that nation ever yielded, after exerting every nerve
of their strength to carry their purpose.

Further, I had no idea that the Continental money could be made to pass at all
as a medium of trade at a depreciation even of 50 or 100, much less of 500, for
1.

It may be worth notice here, that these Essays exhibit not only a discussion
of the principles and nature of money and national finances, but contain also a
kind of history of these principles compared with facts or their real
operation, during the convulsions of America through a seven years' war, when the
dangers, the distresses, the firmness, the terrors, the wisdom, the folly, the
expedients, the exertions, the resources, the strength and the weakness, the
successes and the disappointments, which appeared under all modes and forms,
put every principle into operation, and every conclusion and theorem to the
test, and left no room for false reasonings or idle projections, because their
fallacy was sure to be detected very soon by a failure or deficiency of their
effects.

These Essays were all written at the times in which the several subjects of
them were fresh, and strongly impressed on every American mind, and the
feelings of every body were alive and wound up to the highest pitch of anxiety,
and an asylum of even safety was eagerly sought. It may, therefore, be
agreeable to my fellow-citizens to revise these distressing scenes, as people
sometimes have pleasure in viewing places in which they have passed through
sorrows and calamities that are now over and past.

A review of arguments and reasonings on the abstruse subject of money and
finance, cennected with fact, i. e. with the actual effects and consequences of
them, may afford some gratification and amusement to speculative people, who
are disposed to examine and explore those difficult, but very interesting
matters, errors and mistakes in which have tript up the heels of, and brought
by the board, very many statesmen in every nation.

For this reason it is probable that politicians and statesmen who may happen
to be involved in these inquiries, may find benefit in an attention to American
experience.

Such a connection of principles, theorems, and facts, in the great subject of
money and finance, is a phenomenon rarely to be found in any nation so clearly
exhibited, as in the history of money and finances in our States during the war
and its consequences.

In short, in the history of American distresses, perfect wisdom is not to be
expected; but we have an opportunity of learning wisdom from it. Many projects,
plans, schemes, and maneuvers, some of them hurtful, and others vain and
ridiculous enough, were set on foot, and some of them pushed into execution
with great severity, which either died soon without effect, or were marked with
calamity during their continuance.

Many others more wise and judicious were also proposed, and sooner or later
adopted with success and great benefit.

We have now an opportunity of distinguishing the wise from the foolish, the
good from the bad, by their effects, which may help us much to wisdom in our
future counsels.

We are now at leisure for consideration, and cannot plead pressures and
distresses in excuse for any mistakes; and we have the effects of former
errors, like beacons of caution set up before our eyes to guard us against
repeating them.

Some Essays on different subjects are introduced here, which I leave; with all
the rest, to make their way in the world, according to their merits.

In these Essays Continental money is often considered; to understand the
arguments it may often be necessary to recur to the value of that money at the
date of each Essay: I have, for this purpose, added at the end of this book
four scales of depreciation, viz. the scale of Congress, that of the State of
Pennsylvania, established by law, April 3, 1781, and two others, one for
Philadelphia, the other for Virginia, taken from the merchants' books.

The two first, for political reasons, vary from the true exchange part of the
time; the other two, taken from the merchants' books, are as near the true and
actual exchange, as a thing of such a fluctuating and variable nature can be
expected to be.

I have also added a chronology of remarkable events, as people generally
connect the occurrences of these times with some or other of those events.

I cannot say I had all the success in these publications which I wished.

In some cases, they crossed the favorite plans proposed by influential men,
which, like their children, they could not bear to see killed, or even
corrected.

In some cases they opposed some great and strong interests, which bore them
down.

In some cases, they stood opposed to general opinion in point of real
propriety. The subjects were new, and the public mind had not time to fix
itself on the ground of experience; many errors prevailed at that time.

In fine, most people at the time were wrought up to such a passionate
attachment to the American cause, that they had not patience to examine and
consider coolly the means necessary to support it.

But all men have now an opportunity to compare the various plans and projects
of those times with the facts which followed, and doubtless will have pleasure
in distinguishing the wise and prudent from the wild and idle, by their actual
effects.

In this view, I here present my Essays all together to the reader's perusal
and censure.

Philadelphia, February 22, 1791.
CONTENTS,
AN Essay on the Danger of too much circulating Cash in a State, the ill
Consequences thence arising, and the necessary Remedies, 1 An Essay on Free
Trade and Finance, 9 A Second Essay on Free Trade and Finance, 27 A Third Essay
on Free Trade and Finance, 50 A Fourth Essay on Free Trade and Finance, 74 A
Fifth Essay on Free Trade and Finance, 97 Strictures on Tender-Acts, 128 An
Essay or humble Attempt to examine and state the true Interest of Pennsylvania
with Respect to the Paper Currency, 139 An Essay on the Economy, Policy, and
Resources of the Thirteen States, and the Means of their Preservation, 152 A
Dissertation on the Nature, Authority, and Uses of the Office of a
Financier-General or Superintendant of the Finances, 162 Remarks on the
Resolution of Council, of the 2d of May, 1781, for raising the Exchange to 175
Continental Dollars for 1 hard, 172 Strictures on a Publication in the
Freeman's Journal of May 16, 1781, signed Timoleon, 181 Strictures on two
Publications in the Freeman's Journal of May 30, 1781, signed, Phocion, and
Impartial, 191 A Dissertation on the Political Union and Constitution of the
Thirteen United States of North America, which is necessary to their
Preservation and Happiness, 198 A Sixth Essay on Free Trade and Finance,
particularly showing what Supplies of Public Revenue may be drawn from
Merchandise, without injuring our Trade, or burdening our People, 230 A Seventh
Essay on Free Trade and Finance, in which the Expediency of funding the Public
Securities, striking further Sums of Paper Money, and other important Matters,
are considered, 269 A Plea for the Poor Soldiers; or, an Essay to demonstrate
that the Soldiers and other Public Creditors, who really and actually supported
the Burden of the late War, have not been paid, ought to be paid, can be paid,
and must be paid, 306 A Review of the Principles and Arguments of the two
foregoing Essays, viz. The Seventh Essay on Finance, and The Plea for the Poor
Soldiers; with some Observations on the Finances of the Union, 344 An Essay on
the Seat of the Federal Government, and the Exclusive Jurisdiction of Congress
over a Ten Miles District; with Observations on the Economy and delicate Morals
necessary to be observed in infant States, 376 Remarks on the Address of
Sixteen Members of the Assembly of Pennsylvania to their Constituents, dated
Sept. 29, 1787; with some Strictures on their Objections to the Constitution
recommended by the la^e Federal Convention, 403 The Weaknesses of Brutus
exposed: or, some Remarks In Vindication of the Constitution proposed by the
late Federal Convention, against the Objections and gloomy Fears of that
Writer, 413 An Essay on Credit: in which the Doctrine of Banks is considered,
and some Remarks are made on the present State of the Bank of North America,
427 Strictures on the Net Produce of the Taxes of Great Britain in the Year
1784, as published by Order of their House of Commons, 464 An Essay on
Test-Acts imposed with Penalties, 471 An Essay on the Extent and Value of our
Western Unlocated Lands, and the Proper Method of disposing of them, so as to
gain the greatest possible Advantage from them, 485 Scales of Depreciation of
Continental Money, 501 A Chronological Table of Remarkable Events, 503
AN ESSAY On the Danger of too much circulating Cash in a State, the ill
Consequences thence arising, and the Necessary Remedies.
[Published in the Pennsylvania Evening Post of Oct. 5, 1776, under the
signature of A Financier.]
THE computations of the value of the Free States of America by Conti -- and
Doria, in the Evening Post of Sept. 21, rather prove that value to be immense
than reduce it to a certainty. Perhaps another method of computation might be
admitted, viz. from the quantity of land within the present inhabited part of
those states, which is at least two hundred millions of acres, and worth a
dollar per acre I should think at least, some say two or three dollars, and
perhaps the personal estate may be computed at as much more, which I do not
think is reckoning high, and will make the amount four hundred millions of
dollars. All these computations prove with certainty enough that the funds, on
which the Continental money depends, are sufficiently great to support a very
much larger quantity than is already emitted. The first emission of Continental
money was dated May 10, 1775, but was not really issued into actual circulation
till some months afterward, but the quantity multiplied so fast that it became
somewhat alarming at the time when this essay was written.
I would farther observe that the American States owe nothing to any body but
themselves, and employ no ships, soldiers, etc. but their own, so that they
contract no foreign debt; and I take it to be a clear maxim, that no state can
be ruined, bankrupted, or indeed much endangered, by any debt due to itself
only; nor can it ever be much impoverished by any war, if the war and other
casualties do not destroy mankind faster than the women produce them, and the
people that are left at home can furnish the provisions, clothing, etc.
necessary for themselves and the soldiery, together with all other necessary
stores and implements of the war.

There requires no more to preserve such a state in a war of any length of time
than good economy in bringing the burden equally on all, in proportion to their
abilities; but then I think it very necessary that they should pay as they go,
as near as may be. The soldier renders his personal services down on the spot,
the farmer his provisions, the tradesman his fabrics, and why should not the
monied man pay his money down too? Why should the soldier, tradesman, farmer,
etc. be paid in promises, which are not so good as money, if the fulfillment is
at a distance?

Payment in promises or bills of credit is a temporary expedient, and will
always be dangerous, where the quantity increases too much, at least it will
always have the consequences of a medium increased beyond the necessities of
trade; and whenever that happens, a speedy remedy is necessary, or the ill
effects will soon be alarming, and, if long neglected, will not be easily
remedied. The remedy or rather prevention of this evil I take to be very easy
at present.

If the quantity of Continental currency is greater than is necessary for a
medium of trade, it will appear by a number of very perceptible effects, each
of which point out and facilitate the remedy. One effect will be, that people
will choose to have their estates vested in any goods of intrinsic value rather
than in money, and of course there will be a quick demand for every kind of
goods, and consequently a high price for them; another effect will be
discouragement of industry, for people will not work hard to procure goods for
sale, while the medium for which they must sell them is supposed to be worse
than the goods; and of course, another effect will be a discouragement of
trade, for nobody will import goods, and sell them, when imported, for a medium
that is worse than the goods themselves; for in that case, though the profits
may be nominal, the loss will be real.

These effects all point out their only remedy, viz. lessening the quantity of
the circulating medium, and this can be done by but three ways that I know of:
First, the destruction of it by some casualty, as fire, shipwreck, etc. or
secondly, exportation of it, which cannot happen in our case, because our
medium has no currency abroad, and I think it very well for us that it has not;
for in that case our debt would soon become due to people without ourselves,
and of course less sensible, more difficult to be paid, and more dangerous; the
third, and, in my opinion, the only practicable way of lessening the quantity
is by a tan, which never can be paid so easy as when money is more plenty, than
goods, and of course, the very cause which makes a tax necessary, facilitates
the payment of it.

The tax ought to be equal to the excess of the currency, so as to lessen the
currency down to that quantity which is necessary for a medium of trade, and
this, in my opinion, ought to be done by every state, whether money is
immediately wanted in the public treasury or not, for it is better for any
state to have their excess of money, though it were all gold and silver, hoarded
in a public treasury or bank, than circulated among the people, for nothing can
have worse effects on any state than an excess of money. The poverty of the
states of Holland, where nobody can have money who does not first earn it, has
produced industry, frugality, economy, good habits of body and mind, and
durable and well-established riches, whilst the excess of money has produced
the contrary in Spain, i. e. has ruined their industry and economy, and filled
them with pride and poverty.

But there is, besides this general principle, a special reason in our case,
why we should pay a large part of our Continental debt by a present tax; the
great consumption of our armies, and stoppage of our imports, make a great
demand for the produce of our lands, the fabrics of our tradesmen, and the
labor of our people, and of course raises the prices of all these much higher
than usual, so that the husbandman, tradesman, and laborer get money much
faster and easier than they used to do, and it is a plain maxim, that people
should always pay their debts when they have a good run of business, and have
money plenty; many a man has been distressed for a debt when business and money
were scarce, which he had neglected to pay when he could have done it with
great ease to himself, had he attended to it in its proper season; this applies
to a community or state as well as to a private person.

These last observations will apply with great exactness to those parts of the
Continent which lie nearest to the great scenes of the war, and have suffered
most by it; and if they can bear the tax, I think those who lie at a distance
from those horrors, and have felt little more than a sympathy of the distress
of their brethren, can have no reason to complain, if they are called on for
their share of the expense.

The Continental money is to be considered as a debt fastened on the person and
estate of every member of the United States, a debt of great honor and justice,
of national honor and justice, not barely empty honor, but that essential honor
and credit in which the safety of the state is comprised, and therefore by
confession of every body must be punctually and honorably paid in due time;
otherwise all security arising from public credit must be lost, all confidence
of individuals in our public councils must be destroyed, and great injustice
must be done to every possessor of our public currency, to the detriment of
all, and ruin of many who have placed most confidence in our public
administration: and nothing but shame, scandal, and contempt can ensue, for
which nothing but most inevitable necessity can be any reasonable excuse. The
citizen, at the time of writing this, had no conception that the continental
money could continue to be a quick currency at 500 for 1, and finally run
itself out to nothing, and die, not only without any tumult, but with the
general satisfaction of the people.


And in this great argument is every individual of our United States so deeply
interested, that I cannot conceive one sensible person can be persuaded to risk
these consequences for the sake of a little delay of payment of that which must
one day be paid, or we must all be ruined together. The Continental debt is
already a heavy one, and there is no way of sinking it but by paying it while
we can; it is still increasing fast; and without a speedy tax, and a very
sufficient one, it will grow upon us beyond any possibility of payment. If a
man only suffers his rents, butcher's and tradesman's bills, etc. to be unpaid
a number of years, it will endanger his whole fortune. An expense account ought
always to be paid up as soon as it becomes due; these are accumulating sums,
and it is dangerous to neglect them.

I have heard some people say, it is no matter for the present payment of the
Continental debt, we are a country of rapid increase, and what is contracted by
three millions of people, will soon be paid by six. But how unfatherly and
ungenerous is it to load posterity with an immense debt, which we have an
advantage in sinking a good part of ourselves; besides, it will be a great
discouragement to foreign emigrants to settle in this country, to be told that
the country is loaded with an immense debt, and their first title to an
enfranchisement will be by beginning to pay it.

We are engaged in a cause which, in all annals of time, has ever been deemed
most honorable and glorious, and most characteristic of noble and generous
minds, viz. spurning off slavery, and asserting our liberty. As things now
stand, the most hardened, impudent Tory does not pretend that if we fail of
supporting our cause, we have any other chance but that of absolute submission
and pardon, and even that pardon, doubtless, with numerous exceptions. Good
GOD! Who can bear the thought of absolute submission and pardon? Pardon! for
the greatest virtue of a civil nature that the human mind is capable of! Who
can think, without distraction, of coming under the domination of tories, and
suing to them for favors and intercessions? Tories! with standing armies at
their heels, and soldiers with bayonets ready to enforce all the respect and
submission they may claim.

This dreadful apprehe^sion introduces, with great force on my mind, another
reason why we ought to sink, by a sufficient tax, as much as we can of the
continental debt, viz. That without this it is not possible to continue the
war, and avoid absolute submission.

I conceive the value of the currency of any state has a limit, a ne plus
ultra, beyond which it cannot go, and if the nominal sum is extended beyond
that limit, the value will not follow. No human wisdom, or authority, can be
able to stretch the nominal currency beyond such real value. The consequence of
any attempt to extend such nominal addition, must depreciate the value of the
whole, till it is reduced within said limit.

I will explain my meaning thus: No estimate of the current cash of the
Thirteen States had been made on any sure data when this essay was published,
but it was generally computed at about 30,000,000 of dollars, which is somewhat
less than one third of the current cash of Great Britain; but on a more
critical examination of the subject, this computation appeared much too high:
perhaps, about 12,000,000 of dollars may be near the truth.
Suppose that thirty millions of dollars was the utmost limit of currency to
which the United States of America could give real, effectual value, and they
should emit thirty millions more; I say the last thirty millions would add
nothing to the value of the whole, but would sink the value of the whole sixty
millions down to its limit, viz. thirty millions; i. e. the whole sixty
millions in that case would not purchase more real, substantial goods, than the
thirty millions would have done, before the other thirty millions were added to
it.

It follows from this, that any attempt to continue the war, by increasing the
currency beyond the abovesaid limit, is vain, and must fail of the effect
intended, and ruin all those who possess the currency already emitted. Whether
the currency already emitted rises to the said limit, is a question of fact
that may admit some doubt, but that it is not greatly within it, I think can be
no doubt with people well acquainted with the nature and circumstances of this
great subject; and be that as it may, I think every inconvenience arising from
it is easily remedied by a sufficient tax. I do not apprehend we have yet
suffered by a depreciation of the currency, because I cannot observe that the
general prices of goods are more raised than the circumstances of the war would
make necessary, were our money all gold and silver, and farther extremities may
produce farther effects of the same kind, without depreciating the currency at
all.

No kind of necessaries have risen to the excess of price given last winter in
Boston for fresh provisions, though their currency was all gold and silver,
increase of risk must raise the price of all imported goods, scarcity of
laborers must raise the price of labor, and of consequence the price of every
thing produced by labor, scarcity of tradesmen (many of whom are gone into the
war) and demand for tradesmen's fabrics, must raise the price of them; besides,
many raw materials used by the tradesmen, must be imported at great risk, and I
do not see that the prices of most or all these are greater than they would be,
if every Continental dollar was a silver one.

But should we admit that we are on the verge of a depreciation, or that our
currency has suffered some little already in its value, two consequences will
follow, which deserve great and immediate consideration.

First, That a speedy remedy is immediately necessary, which shall operate
effectually, and prevent the ruin of our currency; and the second is, that the
remedy by this very means becomes more easy and practicable than otherwise it
could be, because a tax will be paid much more easily in this case than it
could be, if money was in credit enough to be avariciously hoarded, and this
holds, let the tax be of any nature, such as general assessment of polls and
estates, excises, imposts, or duties on goods, lotteries, etc. etc. in any or
all these ways, our currency may be lessened much easier, when its credit is a
little doubted, than when it is at its highest. However plain the necessity of
a tax at that time to prevent the excessive increase of the continental money,
may appear to us now, it was then not so clear; for after many debates in
Congress, that measure was not adopted for a long time. I am told, one member
of Congress rose during those debates with this exclamation, Do you think,
Gentlemen, that I will consent to load my constituents with taxes, when we can
send to our printer, and get a waggon-lo^d of money, one quire of which will
pay for the whole?


What contributes not a little to this facility is, that it may be done by
general consent, without public uneasiness and disturbance, for a depreciation
of currency can be wished for by nobody, but those who are deeply in debt, the
weight or numbers of whom I have reason to believe is not great at present in
these States; it is the mighty interest of all the rest of the inhabitants to
prevent a depreciation, and I conceive every man of estate who has cash in
hand, or due to him, would be willing to contribute his share to the lessening
our currency, and so preserving its credit. Ye^, would eagerly choose this,
rather than risk his own loss by a depreciation of the cash he has in hand, and
in debts due.

In this time of distress the public has a right to every man's best thoughts.
I have not the vanity to think I can exhaust the subject, but I have said so
much on it, as I hope will set abler heads and pens on a thorough disquisition
of it, for I think all will agree, that the subject is a very important one,
and deserves most immediate and most serious attention.

AN ESSAY ON FREE TRADE AND FINANCE.
First published in Philadelphia, July 1779, and dedicated to CONGRESS.
FREEDOM of trade, or unrestrained liberty of the subject to hold or dispose of
his property as he pleases, is absolutely necessary to the prosperity of every
community, and to the happiness of all individuals who compose it: this liberty
will produce the following effects:

1. Every industrious man will procure all the goods he can for sale; this is
the way to get most money; and gain is the soul of industry, the hope of reward
sweetens labor, and the most righteous have respect to the recompense of reward.

2. Every man will make his goods for market of the best quality he can,
because they will bring more money and quicker sale than goods of mean quality.

3. Every man will endeavor to carry to market the most scarce goods because
there is the greatest demand and best price for them. All experience shows,
that the most effectual way to turn a scarcity into a plenty, is to raise the
price of the articles wanted: witness, among other instances, the most alarming
scarcity of saltpetre and gunpowder, in the beginning of the present war,
succeeded by the most abundant plenty in less than one year, effected
altogether by the high price and premiums set on them.

4. Every man will go to market and return in good humor and full satisfaction,
even though he may be disappointed of the high price he expected, because he
has had the full chance of the market, and can blame nobody; and should he
indulge fretting on the occasion, he would be the more ridiculed, and less
pitied by his neighbors: and good humor and satisfaction contribute not a
little to the happiness and prosperity of communities, as well as individuals;
and therefore this is an article by no means to be left out or overlooked in
the administration of either public or private economy.

5. In times of danger, distress, and difficulty, every man will use strong
endeavors to get his goods to market, in proportion to the necessity and great
demand for them; because they will then bring the best price, and every man is
fond of embracing golden opportunities and favorable chances.

6. When things grow scarce and dear, every man will use them with the best
economy, and make the stock on hand go as far and last as long as possible; or
if he is destitute, will buy as little as will just serve his necessity. This
naturally preserves the stock on hand from needless profusion and waste, and
converts it to the best and most prudent use for the benefit of the community,
and naturally tends to ward off high distress or total want, till the high
price and great demand, by their natural operation, will bring further supplies
to market.

7. In times of scarcity, every man will have strong inducements to bring all
he can spare to market, because it will then bring the highest price he can
ever expect, and consequently the community will have the benefit of all that
exists among them, in a much surer manner than any degree of force could extort
it, and all to the entire satisfaction of buyer and seller; by which the
numberless feuds, riots, resentments, and mischiefs which usually attend forced
markets, would be entirely avoided; and the market be supplied with all there
is to be had. For no principle can draw into market, all the supplies which are
attainable, so effectually, as the cheerful good will and interest of the
owners.

8. In times of scarcity, when all the goods that are to be had, are exposed to
sale, it is not possible the prices should exceed the degree of scarcity, for
when the prices rise very high, they will soon determine whether the scarcity
is real or not; for if not real the high price will bring such quantity to
market as will soon lower the price; but if real, it is necessary for the above
reasons, that the prices should continue high till supplies are produced.

Restraint of property or The pressures of the war, together with the vast
increase of Continental money had for a considerable time before this Essay was
wrote, raised the nominal price of all goods, to a most alarming degree; to
remedy which the most unhappy expedient had been adopted in most of the states,
of regulating or limiting the prices at which goods should be sold, with high
penalties on those who should sell at higher prices than those limited; and
those ordinances were carried into such rigid execution, that many stores were
forced open, and the goods sold at the limited prices, by committees, etc. when
the owners refused to sell them at those prices; and much pains was taken to
load the merchants with scandal and obloquy for combinations to raise the price
of goods, depreciate the currency, etc. they were called Tories, Speculators,
and many other hard names, etc. etc.
limitation of prices will hurt any community, and will probably produce the
following effects, contrary to the above.

1. Every man will have as little to do with the market, and bring as few goods
there as he can; for the less goods he has for sale, the less mortification and
loss he sustains.

2. Every man will make his goods for market of a bad quality, or at least not
the best; for they must all go at the limited price, and he therefore gets
nothing for any special care or skill he may bestow on his goods to meliorate
or perfect their quality: for the same reason, every man will expose his worst
goods to market, and keep the best out of sight; for example, musty tea, stale
flour, black heavy bread, etc.

3. Every man is induced to keep such goods as are most scarce from market; for
if he carries them there, he can get no more than the limited price, and stands
a chance of a bad hustling in the crowd into the bargain. Whereas, if he can
keep his goods from market, the scarcity will soon force a great price, and he
has a chance of great profits.

4. If prices are limited, and the owner is compelled to sell at the prices
limited, he considers himself injured by every sale he makes for less than he
supposes he could have obtained in a free market; that his liberty is taken
from him, and he can no longer call his property his own. These are hard
feelings to one born to freedom almost perfect, and raised to the expectations
of enjoying it in future time, in its highest perfection. These feelings fill
the mind with anxiety and resentment, and when instances of this become
numerous among the merchants, tradesmen, and farmers, small accidents may blow
up the concealed coal, and most fatal effects may easily be supposed to ensue.
This is a danger of no small magnitude, for the real strength and establishment
of every government consists in the hearty union and satisfaction of the
individuals that compose it.

5. In times of danger, distress, and difficulty, no man will be induced to any
great efforts to supply the market; for an additional danger makes an
additional expense upon the goods; but he must take the limited price and no
more; he will not consequently combat or risk an increase of danger and expense
without any chance of compensation.

6. When things grow scarce, every man will endeavor to lay in great stores if
he can do it without an increase of price, and will not think it necessary to
retrench his expenses, whilst he thinks his stock will last through the
scarcity; the consequence of which is, that all the scarce articles at market
will be scrambled up by a few hands, who will have no inducement to parsimony
in the expenditure of them, by which the scarcity and distress are increased,
and many must be wholly destitute; and as far as this respects the necessaries
of life, the consequences must be dreadful.

7. Add to the above, that in times of scarcity and great demand, every man who
can possibly conceal his goods will be tempted to do it, in expectation that
the great demand will soon break through the unnatural restraint of the
limitation, and he shall be able to obtain a great profit in the future sale;
and in spite of all the vigilance and force that can be used, many will be able
to do this; which I take to be one of the natural effects of any unnatural
restraint of trade, which cannot be avoided.

8. In addition to all these, the difficulties which must attend the execution
of such an act of limitation, may perhaps furnish not the least objection to
it. Must the owner be obliged to sell to every person who applies to purchase,
without knowing whether he wants for use or sale? Must he forego previous
engagements of his goods in favor of the present demandant? Must he be obliged
to sell to every knave and litigious fellow, with whom he would not choose to be
at all concerned in any dealing? Who shall judge how much he may reserve for
his own use, and whether he may give corn to his cattle and hogs, and how much,
and how many of each he may keep, etc. etc. etc. Must he have his house
searched from top to bottom for concealments? Even the lodging-rooms of his
wife and daughters! I must beg to be excused from any further description of
these horrors, which too many know are not mere creatures of the imagination.

9. It is not possible to form a limitation of prices which shall be just, and
therefore the whole scheme necessarily implies injustice. The principles on
which the just prices of goods are fixed, are in a constant state of
fluctuation, and therefore the prices must rise and fall with their causes; all
experience proves this, and it holds true in the most excessive degree, in
times of such public distress and convulsion as we now experience. And as it is
much safer to bind a man in health than a man in convulsions, so it will be
safer to limit trade in peaceable than convulsed times. It is not more absurd
to limit the precise height to which a ship shall be fixed at a wharf, where
the tide is constantly ebbing and flowing. A great force will be requisite to
keep the ship from rising or falling with the tide, and a mighty little use to
pay for the trouble; besides the probability of very essential damage which the
ship must incur by the application of the necessary force: but indiscreet as
this would be judged, it is less dangerous in a calm than in a stormy season.

10. Another mischievous consequence of this fatal measure, and not the least,
I conceive to be its unhappy tendency to corrupt the morals and integrity of
the people. To escape the ruinous consequences of loosing in their sales, they
are in a manner compelled, but to say the least, they have very strong
temptation, either by downright lying, or using little arts, shifts, and
cheats, to avoid the sale of their goods to disadvantage. This naturally brings
them into the habit, and gives them a facility of inventing and practicing low
methods of shamming Abraham, which they never would otherwise have thought of,
and which it is infinitely detrimental to the public, they ever should learn;
instances of this sort might be enumerated without end. But it is needless to
give examples, it were better they and their causes should be removed, than
that they should be repeated. But after all, it is said that a limitation of
prices is necessary to appreciate the currency, and supply the army. Two very
great objects indeed: I will attend to both.

I. I do not conceive that a limitation of prices can possibly appreciate the
currency or prevent a further depreciation.

1. The value of money is nothing in itself, it is a mere relation, it is the
proportion between the medium of trade and the objects of trade; these two will
always be in balance: Therefore, if the medium of trade be increased, whilst
the objects of trade continue the same, the money must depreciate; if the
medium of trade increases, and the objects of trade decrease, the proportion
will alter fast, and the depreciation will increase in a double proportion,
which I take to be the case at present. Money will therefore increase or
decrease its value according to the increase or decrease of its quantity, and
the increase or decrease of the quantity of goods, or the objects of trade.
This principle is grounded on the nature of the thing, and can never be
altered, and consequently any attempt to oppose it must be equally vain, as
opposing any other law of nature whatever. It follows from this, that nothing
can ever appreciate the money, but lessening its quantity, or increasing the
quantity of goods or objects of trade, and all attempts to do this in any other
method, will prove vain and fruitless in the end.

2. It follows, that the price that any article of trade will bring in a free,
open market, is the only measure of the value of that article at that time, and
if this is warped from the truth, by any artifices of the merchant, or force of
power, it cannot hold; but the error will soon discover itself, and the
correction of it will be compelled by the irresistible force of natural
principles, i. e. it is not possible for merchants to raise goods too high, or
the force of power to depress them too low, and make them keep so. Both these
may be done for a short time, but neither can last long.

3. It follows that any limitation of prices, however strongly enforced, if
below the rates required by this great natural proportion, is but temporary
injustice, cannot be of long continuance, will tend daily to lessen the
quantity of goods in market, and so will increase the mischief it was designed
to prevent, and bring with it a large train of evils besides, which will
require much time and wisdom to remedy, and many that will be utterly
remediless, examples of which are obvious.

4. Money is made only for a medium of trade, and must be kept in circulation
and use, or it perishes; for to stop the circulation of money and to kill it is
the same thing, stop its course and it dies, give it circulation again and it
revives, or comes to life again; therefore, the price of goods for sale, or
objects of trade ( i.e. every thing for which money is paid) must always be so
high, as to require all the money there is to purchase them, otherwise the sum
remaining cannot circulate, i. e. there will be nothing to lay it out upon, and
so the owner must keep it by him, dead and useless: so that let what sums of
money soever be in circulation, the objects of trade must either increase in
quantity, or rise in price so high as to take all the money there is in
circulation to purchase them, and as this natural law cannot be restrained, so
neither can it be exceeded by any degree of artifice or force for any long
time, for if the objects of trade rise so high that all the money in
circulation will not purchase them, the overplus must remain dead and
unsaleable in the hands of the owner, which will soon reduce the price; for
goods which cannot be sold, are as useless in the hands of the merchant, as
money which cannot be circulated.

5. Every limitation of prices below their due proportion, checks the
circulation of money, than which nothing can be more dangerous, when money is
over plenty; this has been the constant effect of every limitation of prices
which has been tried in America. Business immediately stagnates, goods cannot
be had, people cannot purchase with their money the necessaries they want, they
begin of course to think that their money is good for nothing, and refuse to
take any more of it, and grow willing to part with what they have on hand at a
depreciated value; so that the certain operation of a limitation of prices is a
further depreciation of the money instead of the contrary. Instead of this, it
is of the last necessity in a plenty of money, that a free circulation be kept
up, people will readily and even greedily take any money which they can readily
pass again. And as long as this lasts, there can be no danger of the money's
stopping; whereas, the contrary chills it at once, and in a short time must
chill it into a torpor, incapable of cure. Much in this case depends on
opinion, which is soon formed by people in general, when they find they cannot
buy necessaries with their money. Specious reasonings, warm harrangues,
declarations of Congress, or even the force of power operate little against
this; it is a gl^^ing intuitive proof of the badness of money, when it will not
purchase necessaries, and as glaring and strong a proof that it is good, when
it will buy any thing in market. Hence appears the necessity of keeping up a
high and brisk circulation of money, and the folly and danger of limitations,
or any other measures which prevent a circulation and obstruct trade. These are
arguments grounded on plain fact, they have their foundation in the laws of
nature, and no artifice or force of man can prevent, elude, or avoid their
effects; their operation is uncontrolable, and therefore I conceive all
opposition to them is the height of absurdity, and dangerous in the highest
degree. -- For ten months before the late limitations, we had a trade perfectly
free, on which two observations are obvious.

1. That any goods at market might be bought for continental money, the
Speculators especially (as they are called) were fond of receiving it, and no
person could be at any loss for any thing at market, if he had that money to
purchase the goods he needed.

2. That imported goods on an average (which were the only articles Speculators
dealt in) were 50 per cent. cheaper on the 25th of May last, than on the 25th
of July preceding, i. e. any given quantity of imported goods would buy 50 per
cent. more articles of country produce, or hard money, on the 25th of July,
than on the 25th of May last; and for the truth of this, I refer to the
merchants' books; from which it follows that the Speculators (however numerous
and however censured) have not raised the price of the goods they have
principally dealt it: -- Indeed all experience teaches, that the more hands the
goods in market are held by, the cheaper they will be, and the more difficult
to raise the price; and therefore, if the merchants ever think of raising the
price of any article, they never fail to say, We must wait till these goods are
drained out of the small stores and get them into few hands. In July 25, 1778,
price current of imported goods, at Philadelphia, was as follows, West India
rum 3l. 15s. Muscovado sugars 30l. molasses 40s. pepper 17s. 6d. coffee 9s.
cotton 15s. bohea tea 60s. Madeira wine 400l. dry goods about 8 to 1 old
prices, and hard money 4 to 1, and price current of country produce, was as
follows, for Indian corn 15s. oats 12s. flour 60s. bar iron 200l. consequently
on July 25, 1778, one gallon of West India rum would bring 5 bushels of Indian
corn, 6 bushels of oats, 1 hundred of flour, and 2/5 of a hundred of iron, or
18s. 9d. hard money; any body may easily compare the rest, and they will find
enough to prove my assertion with large allowance. Price current 25th May last
was, rum 7l. sugars 130l. iron 800l. tea 6l. 10s. etc. Indian corn 7l. 10s.
oats 90s. flour 30l. (hard money 20 to 1) and consequently one gallon of rum
would buy no more than one bushel of Indian corn, 1 bushel of oats, hundred
flour, and 2/5 hundred iron or 7s. hard money, etc. These computations are made
in the face of the world, and grounded on facts which any body may disprove if
they are not true, or correct the reasoning if it is not just. Now I have only
to add; let any body who is disposed to see, open their eyes, and see who it is
that has raised our prices, or which is the same thing, depreciated our money.
Is it the Speculators who deal only in imported articles? Or the farmers, among
whom no kind of dangerous speculation does or can exist? Perhaps it may be
replied here, that the articles of country produce are extremely scarce, which
raises their price beyond the due proportion of other things: if you say this,
you say every thing and yield every thing, viz. that the plenty and scarcity of
goods will govern the price. You must admit too, that the plenty and scarcity
of money will determine the value of that also. Why then will any one pretend
to limit either, against the operation of this great principle? It is easy, in
addition to all this, to prove that the price of imported articles in general
does not exceed the value of them, if computed on the expense of acquirement:
but this I mean only to hint, and wave it for the present; and only wish some
merchants of experience and reputation would take it up, and publish the
needful essay on it.

Nor do I think that the scheme of loans can give establishment to the
currency, or prevent its depreciation. -- For

1. All loans increase the public debt, and the immensity of the sum is one
cause of the depreciation, as it induces people to think it never will be paid,
or the payment will necessarily be delayed to such a distant period, as in
point of use to the present possessor is nearly equal to total failure.

2. If the credit of the Loan-Office is well supported (as it must be to give
it any good effect) the Loan-Office certificates themselves will pass in
payment, and so become an addition to the currency which they are designed to
lessen.

3. If foreign loans are negotiated, and bills sold here, drawn on the loaned
bank in Europe, those very bills will become a currency here, and so add to the
mischief.

4. The discount on all European bills, is not less than 50 per cent. which
loss must immediately be sustained by the Continent on the first sale of them.

5. If hard money, borrowed in Europe, should be imported and sold here, the
insurance, which is more than 50 per cent. must be lost, nor can any man tell
the mischief which would attend any attempt to import hard money, and open
offices for the sale of it for continental bills: but a large group of these
present themselves too plainly to need enumeration.

6. Nor do I think the This was a proposal for a subscription and immediate
advance of money, to be discounted on the future taxes, of the subscribers.
scheme adopted by our Committee promises better success; for that proposes
Loaning without inducement; and if it should succeed to the utmost expectation,
it would drain the best friends to our cause of their money, whilst our
internal enemies would pay nothing, for no compulsion is proposed, and after
all, it will be at best but an anticipation of the revenue, very dangerous in
the end; for the very worst thing that can be done respecting a revenue, is to
destroy it all, principal and use, and the next worst thing is to anticipate
it, i. e. to spend this year the rent and proceeds which will become due and
payable next year, and these two are so connected, that the latter generally
brings on the former sooner or later.

After all these objections to the various methods that have been proposed, it
may be expected that I should propose some method that will be practicable and
effectual to fix the value of our currency; and this I cannot think very
difficult, either in theory or practice, though I have not one new thought to
offer the public on the subject. We are now on the brink of ruin, and the worst
disgrace, in danger of loss of liberty hitherto nobly asserted, and subjection
to shameful slavery to enemies most cruel and insulting in themselves, and all
that heightened in them to madness by the determined opposition we have given
to their scheme of tyranny over us. All this danger arises not from our poverty
or want, for we have officers and soldiers enough, stores of every kind enough,
and zeal, union, and virtue sufficient to insure success; our difficulties
arise only from our having too much money, and the lessening that quantity
would relieve us at once from every difficulty, and dissipate the thickest
clouds that hang over us.

In matters of difficulty and importance, all wise counselors compare well the
end and the means, on which two very weighty matters always present themselves.

1. Whether the means are sufficient to secure and effect the end proposed. --
And

2. Whether the end is worth the means necessary to effect it. When these two
points are settled, there remains no more room for consultation or debate, the
rest is all vigorous action, strenuous exertion to put the means into such
effectual execution as to obtain the end. This is a wise method of planning,
which no man will have any objection to. We will then adopt it in the
consideration of the weighty subject now in view.

1. The end is fixing our currency and preventing any future depreciation, and
so putting an effectual end to all the cheats, delusions, disappointments, and
ruinous losses, which every one who has been concerned in it has hitherto
felt, and giving every one a sure and well grounded confidence in it in future.
This is an end, an object of such vast, such weighty consequence, and so
confessed and acknowledged by all, that no arguments or illustrations are
necessary to be added here.

2. The only means I conceive possible to obtain this end, are to call in such
sums annually by taxes, as shall be equal to the annual expenditures; this will
prevent the increase of the money, will make a great demand for it through the
Thirteen United States, will give it a brisk circulation, will exhibit a most
convincing proof that it may be all called in and redeemed, and that it is the
real design of Congress to do this. No taxes had hitherto been collected, or
other funds but Continental money and loans, provided for supporting the war,
which had lasted four years, no^ had any methods been adopted either to lessen
the quantity of that money, or even to prevent the increase of it, except the
institution of the Loan-Office, October 3, 1776, which proved a remedy
altogether inadequate to the purpose, and of course the emissions of that paper
were multiplied, which together with the emissions of the particular states,
swelled the quantity so much that the depreciation at that time (July 24, 1779)
became very alarming; it was about 20 to 1, i. e. one dollar hard money would
buy 20 dollars continental: the annual expense of supporting an army of 50,000
men and a small navy, amounted to at least ten millions of Mexican dollars.

That Congress should ever think of supporting that expense with such funds, or
that it should be possible to do it, may seem strange to foreigners, and will
appear so to our own posterity; but the universal rage and zeal of the people
through all the states, for an emancipation from a power that claimed a right
to bind them in all cases whatsoever, supplied all defects, and made apparent
impossibilities, really practicable.


Nothing helps the credit of a large debtor like making ample provision for
actual payments; he may promise till he is gray without this, and all in vain;
the larger his promises, the less are they credited, and the more ridiculous
does he become: the cry against him is, Where is the money to come from? let us
see a sample of it: but the cry is altered when large payments are actually
made, and sufficient provision making for the discharge of the whole debt. Let
people see the money collecting through the Continent, and the sources of
revenue actually opened, and the whole matter in train, there can remain no
doubt but the whole of the Continental money will be redeemed, and every one
will venture to trust the credit of it; and in this confidence it will be soon
sought after and grasped with greediness, and hugged and hoarded with avidity.

This will put life into all our public measures, civil and military, will give
our government the command of the fullest supplies of men, money, and stores
that are in the country, and that can be made or procured, will give spirit to
our people, will animate industry, and will be a total cure of the mischiefs we
now feel from the low credit of our currency. Here is an object highly worthy
of our attention, as every one will admit without hesitation: the only thing
then that remains, is whether it be practicable: I suppose the outcry against
it will be, that the people will not bear such enormous taxes, that they would
sink the poor and distress the rich far beyond what they will ever consent to
bear, etc. etc. I conceive a vein of conversation of this sort not at all
founded in truth, for several reasons.

1. It is rare that the people refuse burdens or even grumble under them, when,
by general conviction, they are necessary for the public good. And I dare say,
that the absolute necessity of fixing and establishing our currency is become
obvious to almost every individual on this Continent, and the real necessity of
taxes for this purpose clearly seen by all.

2. As far as my acquaintance with people of middling rank extends, they have
been generally in favor of taxing for three years past; they say this money
must be paid first or last, and we can better pay it now whilst we have little
use for our money, whilst it is plenty and easy to be got, than in future time,
when we can perhaps not so well spare it, and when the getting it will be much
more difficult.

3. The enormity of the sum required for this purpose consists much more in
sound than substance; a quarterly tax of one bushel of wheat, or two bushels of
Indian corn per head, on all persons in the Thirteen States, would be amply
sufficient. The number of souls are computed at 3,000,000, in all the States,
and of course this would produce 12,000,000 bushels of wheat, which at 20
dollars per bushel (the lowest present price) will be 240,000,000 millions of
dollars, a sum greatly exceeding any annual exigence of these States; each
State might apportion this as they pleased, so as to relieve the poor, and
increase the share of the rich, but the middling farmer, who has ten in family,
would have 40 bushels of wheat or its value, to pay in a year.

I admit this would be a high tax; but is there any thing impossible or ruinous
in this. In the best of times, it would have been 40 dollars or 15l. and the
same sum of hard money will probably now pay it, it is to be observed this is
not the tax of a poor man or a new beginner, but of a middling farmer, with ten
in family; such are spread over the face of this fertile country, and few of
them so poor, that such a sum would distress them to any great degree. -- It is
to be observed further this is not a tax to last always, but to be paid only
for a short time, during our strong exertions for the liberty of ourselves and
our posterity; -- again, this sum is not all to be paid at once, but at four
quarterly payments; -- again this is not a tax which demands wheat in kind,
hard money, or any thing else that is scarce and hard to be obtained, but for
Continental money, which is so plenty as to become the great burden of the
country, and the source of most of our public calamities, and which any
valuable commodity will procure in plenty, and with little trouble; and for
which any man may fell any thing he can best spare without difficulty; --
again, this is a sure method to overcome our capital difficulties, and fix the
currency, whereas all others are precarious and uncertain in their effect. This
is a durable, a finished remedy; all others that have been proposed are at best
but temporary, and should they succeed, would involve us and our posterity in
great difficulties, involve us in a vast debt, which would lie so heavy on the
country as would greatly check our future prosperity, and discourage foreigners
from coming to settle with us. For nobody likes to move into a country where
taxes are very high and burdensome.

I^ submit it to every man, whether it will not be much easier for us by a
spirited exertion, for a short time, to collect large sums of our present
currency, and pay our expenses as fast as they arise, than if a foreign loan
could be obtained, to pay a vast debt of hard money with interest to foreigners
in future time, when every dollar we pay, must go out of the country never to
return again. Every man ought to consider that his proportion of the public
debt is as much a debt fastened on his estate, and becomes to all intents and
purposes as much a burden and charge on it, as any of his private debts of the
same amount, and must as surely one day be paid; is it not better then to pay
it now than to have it lie a burden on him, to be paid in in future time, which
may be called for when he may not be in condition to pay it so easy as now.
Every prudent man does this with respect to his private debts, and what reason
can be given why the same prudence should not extend to the debt which he owes
the public? Can any reason be assigned why the States should not imitate the
prudence and economy of a private man, who happens to be involved for a time in
great expenditures, which is, to pay up and discharge as much as possible as he
goes, and leave as little as possible to be settled in future time.

To facilitate this, I humbly propose one thing more, viz. To take off every
restraint and limitation from our commerce. Let trade be as free as air. Let
every man make the most of his goods and in his own way, and then he will be
satisfied. Let every man taste and enjoy the sweets of that liberty of person
and property, which was highly expected under an independent government. It is
a sad omen to find among the first effects of independence, greater restraints
and abridgments of natural liberty, than ever we felt under the government we
have lately renounced and shaken off. Let the laws point out the duty, and be
the bulwark of security of every man.

Nothing gives the people such high satisfaction with any system of government
they live under, as the actual enjoyment of the inestimable blessings of
perfect liberty and full security under it; this will most effectually induce
them cheerfully to support it. No burdens will be thought heavy, or
difficulties discouraging, which the exigencies of government may require, when
every man finds his own happiness involved in the establishment of the State.

If, on the freedom of trade, any articles should rise in their price, the
mischief facilitates this remedy, it makes the payment of the taxes more easy
and tolerable. Whereas, if the taxes were collected during the limitation of
the market and stagnation of business, the payment would be extremely
difficult, and the murmurs high and reasonable; it would be almost like the
Egyptians demanding brick without straw. But when the circulation of money is
brisk, and the price and demand for goods high, every one knows that money may
be raised and taxes may be paid much more easily than in dull times of
stagnated business. And this ought to be noticed on another account.

It is necessary our first taxes should be rendered as easy as possible to the
people; for though high in nominal sum, if they find them easily paid, the terror
and uneasiness which high taxes generally raise, will mostly vanish, and the
payment will be made without endangering the peace of the State, and these
things all considered together naturally lead us to the true answer to the
second great question to be solved, viz.

II. How is the army to be supplied? The method I propose, if it can be
adopted, will undoubtedly fix the currency and create a great demand for money,
and a quick circulation of it; this will of course open all the stores in the
State to any purchasers that may offer, and a little prudence used in
purchasing, may supply the army to the full, at reasonable prices. Indeed I am
rather afraid of overdoing the thing in this way, so far as to cause an
appreciation of the money, which I do not think ought ever to be done, for I
see no reason why the States should be taxed to raise the money in my pocket to
twenty times the current value of it; but this is a great argument, and may be
the subject of future discussion.

I must add here, that this method will not only fix our currency and support
our army, but will afford another advantage of no small moment: it will take
away the capital hope and assurance of our enemies of conquering us; for they
depend more on the failure of our funds than on their own force, for this
purpose; they count high on the quarrels, contention, oppressions, and
mischiefs that will arise from the low, sinking credit of our money; and by
this are encouraged to continue the war, which they would relinquish as
desperate without it.

I will just note here, that however intolerable the means I propose may appear
at first sight, I cannot think them impracticable; the tax I propose is not
more than two thirds of the annual taxes in Great Britain; the whole revenue
raised every year there is about 12,500,000l. sterling, which is somewhat more
than 55,000,000 dollars, reckoning them at 4s. 6d. a-piece; divide this by the
number of souls in Great Britain, which are computed at 9,000,000, and we have
the sum of somewhat more than 6 dollars per head on each of the inhabitants or
living persons there; but, be this as it may, to balance the argument fairly, I
think (...) stands thus: on the one side certain destruction, and on the other
a tax so heavy, that a middling farmer's share annually, will be 40 bushels of
wheat, 40 dollars hard money, or the value of it in any thing he chooses to
sell, to be paid in four quarterly payments. This, if it can be done, will
undoubtedly save us, restore our finances thoroughly, fix our currency, and
supply our army; without this, I do not see how these great objects can be
effected. If any other method can be devised, it is more than all the united
wisdom of America has yet been able to find and accomplish, nor do I conceive
we have any long time to hesitate; something speedy and decisive must avert our
fate.

Thus I have offered my best thoughts freely to the public, and with most
upright intentions; I hope they may be received with candor. The facts and
reasonings are all open to the examination of every one; if they do not
convince, I hope at least they may induce some abler person to sketch out
something more perfect and adequate to the great subject.

A SECOND ESSAY ON FREE TRADE and FINANCE.
First published in Philadelphia, August 1779, and dedicated to the several
Legislatures of the American Union.
IN my last ESSAY I observed, that the value of money was nothing in itself, it
was a mere relation, it was the proportion between the medium of trade and the
objects of trade, which two will be for ever in balance, or equal the one to
the other; therefore, if the money or medium of trade be increased, whilst the
objects of trade or occasions of money continue the same, the value of the
money must depreciate or lessen; and this depreciation must and will be
(coeteris paribus) according to the increase of the quantity.

It follows hence, that the value of the current money in any country, cannot
be increased by any additions made to its quantity. I do not pretend that these
propositions are absolutely universal -- I know that money may be so lessened
in its quantity, as to be inadequate to the purposes of trade; in which case,
an addition to its quantity would doubtless add to its value and use. It is
equally true, that the quantity of money may be increased to such an immensity
of excess, that the very bulk or enormous mass would render it inconvenient for
a medium of trade. I do not mean, nor does my argument require, that my
propositions should be applied to either of these extremes; it is sufficient
for my purpose, that they hold true in any country where the money or medium of
trade is so duly adapted and proportioned to the objects of trade, that the one
is found adequate and sufficient for the other; in which case, any departure
from the said due proportion, either by increasing or decreasing the medium,
must verge either toward one or the other of these extremes, and partake more
or less of their disadvantages.

It follows from the above, that our national debt of Continental money has not
increased in value for three years past, notwithstanding the vast increase of
the bulk or nominal sum; and this proposition is proved from fact (which is the
best possible proof of any principle advanced in theory) for it is evident that
it would not require one farthing more real value, say country produce or hard
money, to buy up every Continental dollar now in circulation, than would have
been necessary three years ago, to purchase all that was then in circulation;
i. e. the depreciation has kept full pace with its increase of quantity.
Indeed, I am of opinion, it rather exceeds this proportion, i. e. that the
money has depreciated faster than the increase of its quantity would require,
and that it would of course require a less real value to purchase it all now,
than would have bought it all three years ago. I think the enormity of the sum
has carried it within the sensible influence of that fatal extreme which must
finally destroy its whole value and use, if the quantity continues to increase.

It appears then that we do not owe a shilling more of real value than we owed
three years ago, except the debt abroad and the loans at home which have been
contracted since; so that our finances are not in so deplorable a state as they
seem to be, and a remedy is much more in our power than would be imagined on
the first view of the matter, and may be adopted for three years to come, if
the war should continue so long, with less burden, hardship, oppression,
danger, damage, and loss than we have, to our sorrow, experienced for three
years past.

It follows then, that all the expenditures of the war for three years past
except the foreign debts and internal loans (in which last I include the moneys
due for lottery prizes) have been actually paid in depreciation of our
currency, which is perhaps the most inconvenient method of levying public taxes
that could be invented.

As this proposition may be new to some people, I only beg they would not be
startled too much at it, but have patience to read a few lines further, in
which I shall consider both parts of it.

Without going into minute calculations of the depreciation, or determining
with precision the present exchange, I imagine it will not be disputed that the
depreciation for three years past has been at least fifty per cent. per ann. i.
e. that one hundred pounds at the end of the year, would not buy more goods
than fifty pounds would have purchased at the beginning of the year. Try it for
the year past: in August 1778, fifty pounds would have purchased sixteen
hundred of flour, fifty bushels of Indian corn, five hundred of bar iron, one
and an half hundred of sugar, twelve pounds of hard money, etc. See if one
hundred pounds will buy as much now.

This is arguing on fact, which is stubborn and yields to the prejudice of no
man. It appears then that a man who has kept one hundred pounds by him for the
space of one year, is to all intents in the same condition he would have been
in, if the hundred pounds had kept its value undepreciated, and he had paid one
half of it in a tax, i. e. in both cases he would have had fifty pounds and no
more left. He has then, to all intents and purposes, paid a tax of fifty pounds
for the year toward the depreciation, and has now fifty pounds less money than
he would have had if no depreciation had taken place, as much in every respect
as his cash would have lessened fifty pounds by paying a tax of that sum.

I have heard that this plea was made use of by the Agents of the New England
colonies, when the matter of reimbursements to those colonies, for their great
expenditures in the two last wars, was debated and granted in the British
Parliament, and the argument allowed to be a good one. The question was, what
sums those colonies had emitted for the service of the wars, and what was the
value of the bills to be redeemed? the Agents pleaded, that the value was to be
estimated at the time of emission, not at the time of redemption of those
bills; for when bills of credit depreciate in any country, the depreciation is
as much a tax on the inhabitants as the depreciated sum would be, if levied in
the usual way of assessment on polls and estates. The argument is indeed a
demonstrable one, and supported and justified by plain fact in every view; yet
there is such a subtle and strong delusion in the depreciation as obscures the
subject, and will almost cheat a man who views it under full conviction, and
feels the effects of it; and this tends to render the mischief more ruinous
than otherwise it would be, because people who feel it, often mistake the
cause, and adopt from thence remedies altogether ineffectual, and sometimes
very hurtful, and which often tend rather to increase than cure the evil.

Of this sort, I take to be the whole torrent of censure and abuse which has
been thrown out and kept up against the merchants, farmers, and tradesmen, for
raising the prices of their several fabrics and goods. Of this sort likewise, I
consider the absurd scheme of limitation of prices, which never fails to limit
goods out of the market, at least out of sight; prevents importations and
manufactures, discourages the adventures of the most patriotic merchants, who
keep their money in trade through all risks, in order to produce foreign goods,
without which, neither the country could be supplied, nor the war be supported;
checks the industry of the farmers and tradesmen, without which all internal
supplies must fail; fills the minds of all with ill humor, and raises the
country into factions and heated parties, zealous to devour one another, etc.
etc.

These are only a few of the evils which arise from mistaken causes of the
depreciation of our currency, and the consequent improper methods adopted for
its remedy, all which prove the absurdity as well as the reality of defraying
the expenditures of the war in that way, which naturally brings on the
consideration of the second part of my proposition, viz. this method of paying
the expenses of the war is very inconvenient.

1. Because this method brings the burden beyond due proportion, on the most
virtuous and useful of our people, such as by prudence and economy have made
money and got a good command of cash, lying in debts due on mortgages, bonds,
book-debts, etc. and at the same time operates in favor of the most worthless
men amongst us, the dissipating, slack, lazy, and dilatory sort, who commonly
keep themselves in debt, and live on the fortunes of others. These
contemptible, useless characters are enabled hereby, after keeping a creditor
years out of his just due, to pay him off with one fourth, yea, one eighth,
yea, one sixteenth, yea, one twentieth part of the value of the debt when it
was contracted, by which the frugal and industrious are compelled to pay a very
heavy tax to those useless, idle men, by which many of them have acquired great
fortunes, and of course great weight among us, to the manifest damage of the
public; for the weight and influence of this sort of men, ought never to be
increased in any community, for wherever we see one of them taking the lead
among the people, we have reason to believe that mischief is a brewing, and
that the public peace and security is more or less in danger. For the truth of
this, I appeal to the experience and observation of all wise and good men.

2. In this way the burden comes very heavy on the most helpless part of our
people, who are most entitled to the protection of the state, and ought not to
have their burdens increased; such as widows, orphans, and old men, whose
principal dependence is on legacies, money at interest, etc.

3. It oppresses the salary-men and all public officers, both in church and
state, whose fees and salaries are reduced to almost nothing, and any
applications for relief are apt to raise an unreasonable clamor against them,
as if avarice and greediness of money was their principal passion. This
prejudices the public service, in which they are employed, and discourages men
of abilities from seeking or accepting such public offices, and lessens the
weight and influence of those who hold them.

4. This discourages industry and trade; for if the profits obtained by these
waste in the desk, there is little inducement to increase the stock.

5. This defrauds the army of their pay and appointments, and discourages
inlistments, and promotes desertions, etc. Many would like the army very well,
if they could live by the profession; but few are so attached to it as to be
willing to be ruined there.

6. It makes supplies for the army difficult to be obtained; because few men
are fond of carrying the fruits of their year's labor to the army, to be sold
for a perishing medium, which every day grows worse and worse.

7. The whole system is grounded in injustice, is contrary to the first maxims
of upright dealing, and corrupts the whole course of trade and commutative
justice, and of course will soon destroy all principles of morality and honesty
in trade, among the people; for here it is to be considered, that money is not
only the instrument or means by which trade is carried on, but becomes a sort
of common measure of the value of all articles of trade; and therefore I should
conceive it would be as dangerous to adopt any measures which would alter its
value and render it fluctuating, as to alter the standard weights and measures,
by which the quantity of goods sold in market is usually ascertained: -- as for
example, to shorten the standard yard, lessen the standard bushel, or diminish
the standard pound weight, or adopt any measures that tend to this, and will
probably effect it. We easily see the dangerous consequences, nor can there be
any necessity to expose here the absurdities and mischiefs which must follow.

Enough has been said on this dreary subject; the mischiefs are too glaring to
need further proof; a remedy is the great thing now to be sought: ought we then
to attempt a remedy of the mischiefs of depreciation, by any endeavor to
appreciate our currency? I think not.

1. Because the sum depreciated has been paid by the country once already, by
the depreciation itself in their hands, and there is no reason why the same
country should be taxed to pay it over again: i. e. every man who has had a
hundred pounds in his pocket a month, has paid four per cent. i. e. four pounds
of tax for it at least; but this is not the worst of it, for he has likewise
paid four per cent. per month on all the moneys that were due to him during the
whole time (by which the public were not benefited.) But execrable as this
method of supplying the public exigencies may be, it has had its full effect,
and therefore there can be no reason that payment should be made over again.

2. The evil arises from the fluctuation and changeable state of the currency.
It matters little to the community whether it rises or falls, the fall of it
has hurt the rich, the rise of it will ruin the poor; but to continue the
fluctuation by appreciating it, is to continue the whole evil in all its
destructive force and ruinous effects.

3. The mischief is done, and ought by no means to be repeated, the widows and
orphans are already ruined, and I think it needs no proof that almost all the
money is now possessed by people who have bought it at the present value, and
shall the widows and orphans, with the rest of the sufferers, be taxed to raise
or appreciate the money in the coffers of the rich, up to twenty times the
present value of it? Verily I trow not.

4. Any PROBABLE attempt to raise or appreciate the value of the money, would
hoard it immediately, and

5. Destroy our trade; for the rise of money in the desk would be better than
the profits of any trade it can be employed in. -- And

6. The scarcity would soon make the payment of taxes impracticable. -- And

7. Every poor man would lie perfectly at the mercy of the rich, who alone
would be benefited by his distress; for if the poor should run in debt to the
rich in the beginning of the year, the debt would be much increased by the
appreciation at the end of the year, and so from year to year, till the sum
would rise beyond the utmost abilities of the poor man to pay it, and he must
of course be perfectly at the mercy of his rich creditor. -- Hence

8. Popular discontents, and perhaps insurrections would probaby be the
consequence, and after all

9. This plan of appreciation would not be any remedy to the principal
sufferers by the depreciation; for not one tenth part of the appreciated
currency would probably be found in the same hands that suffered by the
depreciation; the increase of tax would be more to the greatest part of the
people, than all the profits they would gain by the appreciation.

10. It is not supposable that thirteen General Assemblies would concur in
voting and levying such a useless, burdensome, and pernicious tax: -- nor if
they would, is it likely that the people either could or would pay it. --
Therefore,

11. It appears that these reasons, which prove that this ought not to be done,
all tend to prove that it cannot be done, and this is a good reason why it
ought not to be attempted. But to sum up the whole argument in one word,

12. All the mischiefs arising from a depreciation, would equally arise from an
appreciation; but in an inversed order, and I think it will appear plain to any
person of discernment, who duly and attentively considers it, that inversing
the order, will infer many mischiefs more ruinous to the community, than those
we have already felt from the depreciation: but in any view, the very idea that
we are to live under the curse of a fluctuating currency eighteen years longer
is intolerable.

Therefore I humbly propose, that the foolish method of denying the
depreciation or lowering it below what it really is, may be wholly
discontinued, and that as soon as the value of the currency is fixed, there may
be a This idea of forming a scale of depreciation, I believe was the first ever
proposed in America, and was much censured and even reprobated at first, but
soon afterward was adopted by Congress and all the States.
scale or table of exchange established as near as may be to its then present
true value, and that hard money be received and paid in the Continental
Treasury according to it: this will effectually prevent its appreciation, and
if means can be found to collect moneys sufficient for future expenditures,
which I do not think difficult, no further depreciation need be apprehended,
the currency will become fixed, which is all that the safety of the state
requires, and all that we can reasonably hope for, or even wish to accomplish.

I beg leave to insert here one proposition more, which I think deducible from
the foregoing ones, viz. that if any country which had a medium of trade
properly balanced and adapted to the purposes of trade, should by any means
receive a large addition of money without an increase of the objects of money,
it would be more the interest of that country to call in, and destroy that
additional quantity by taxes (if it could not be drained off speedily some
other way) than to let it circulate among them; for example, if by opening
mines, by large treasure trove, by large success and captures in war, or by too
many presses the money should be increased beyond the due quantity necessary
for the purposes of a medium of trade: in such case, I give my opinion, that it
would be more for the benefit of such country, to call in and destroy such
surplusage of cash, by taxes equally levied on all, than to permit it to
circulate among them. -- For

1. This increased quantity of money, if suffered to circulate, would
depreciate till it had duly diffused itself over the country, when it would
acquire a certain rate of exchange, and its value would become fixed in such a
manner, that the value of the whole would be just equal to the value of the
money which was in circulation before the increase happened, and consequently
the country would gain nothing by it, but an increased nominal sum; just as if
the standard yard should be shortened one half, and thereby increase the number
of yards of cloth in the country to double the former number, but would not add
one inch of new cloth, or enable the owners of all the cloth to make one
garment more than before. But

2. While this was doing, vast mischief would arise from the depreciation; the
legacies of the widow and orphans, the salaries and fees of public officers of
church and state, the pay of the army, the value of all debts due, the standard
of all contracts for money, etc. would be lessened to the most manifest injury
of the creditors. Examples of which dreadful effects we see daily before our
eyes -- this must surely force the most striking conviction.

3. I conceive these mischiefs would prove a much heavier burden on the
country, and would have much worse effects, than could arise from a tax to
amount of the increased quantity of money levied on the inhabitants. -- For

4. The inhabitants could not be impoverished by such a tax, as there would be
as much value of money, and as much goods and other estate in the country after
the tax was levied as before, and all the loss to the country would be the time
and charges spent in collecting it; for all the goods sold for the payment of
this tax, would still remain in the country, and continue as valuable as they
were before they were sold.

5. The contentions, resentments, and ill-humor, which a depreciation naturally
generates, would by this method be prevented, which alone, in my opinion would,
if not prevented, impoverish the country more than the whole tax, even if the
money was all borrowed from abroad to pay it. Only observe two neighbors
inflamed with rage and resentment against each other, and see what time, money,
and labor they will spend, and how much they will engage their several friends
in their quarrel, and how all kind offices of friendship and mutual assistance
are totally lost between them during their anger. By this we may form some
guess at the degree of impoverishment which a country must suffer by general
discontents, and numberless instances of personal injuries and consequent
resentments.

Hence it follows clearly, in my opinion, that it would be more for the
interest of the Thirteen United States to call in and sink their Continental
bills as fast as they issue, than to receive a sum of gold every year equal to
the money issued, from some foreign power, as a perfect gift never to be
repaid, i. e. we had better pay every year, by taxes, the whole expenditures of
the year, than to receive the amount of those expenditures in cash from Spain
as a free gift. Though I introduce this proposition as a corollary, yet as it is
of some consequence, we will, if you please, view it awhile, and consider the
operation and effects of its two parts, and we shall be better able to judge
which of the two would contribute most to the real welfare and happiness of the
country.

1. The tax would fix the currency, and thereby give establishment to every
branch and department of business, trade, war, civil police, and religion,
which has any connection with money; but the gift would make such an increase of
the circulating cash as would depreciate it (for hard money can and will
depreciate as well as paper bills, if increased too much) and thereby every
department of business, trade, war, civil police, and religion which has any
connection with money, must languish and be enervated.

2. The tax will promote the industry, prudence, and economy of the people, but
the gift would naturally introduce and encourage idleness and dissipation. Few
men will rise early and eat the bread of carefulness, when money flows in upon
them without their own anxious care. A man, pressed with a demand for money for
a tax or any other debt, does not yield to his own appetite, or the request of
his wife or child for a luxury, so easily as the same man would do, with plenty
of money, and no pressing demand: for the truth of this I appeal to the
feelings of every man.

No virtue is so fixed in the human mind as to continue long undiminished
without its usual motives and inducements, and it requires no great experience
in the world to show us the danger of lessening any of these; the very
beginning of remissness of virtuous habits ought to be as alarming as the
swallowing of a slow poison; and this, as applied to my subject, is
demonstrated by a very common observation, that fortunes suddenly acquired
without the industry of the possessor, rarely ever increase his happiness and
welfare, help his virtuous habits, or continue long with him; they most
commonly ruin him. Money in a state is like salt in cookery; some of it is very
necessary, but too much of it spoils every dish, and renders the whole dinner
unsavory to the taste, and hurtful to the health.

3. The tax will operate in a way of justice to all, and therefore will give
general peace and satisfaction to all good men, to all genuine Whigs and
well-disposed people, and will silence the clamors and disappoint the hopes of
the Tories, which are grounded principally on the uneasiness and jealousies,
injuries and resentments which wrong steps will raise among the people. The
operation of the tax would be just this; it would compel the man who stays at
home and renders no actual service, and furnishes no supplies to the war, to
pay as much as those do, who render the actual service and furnish the
supplies: those who render personal service and furnish supplies, contribute
those great aids in solid substance within the year; and therefore those who
stay at home ought to pay their quotas of solid substance also within the year.
There can be no reason given why those that go into the war should render their
service within the year, and those who stay at home should pay nothing, or be
trusted to some future day.

This method is grounded on such manifest justice, that no Tory, however
litigious, can with any good face object to it; and therefore, however
chagrined at heart he may be, he must keep his mouth shut, or look out for some
other subject of complaint to make a noise about; but the natural operation of
the gift would be very contrary to this; there would be so many schemes and
pretenses set on foot to draw for the money before it could leave Spain; so
many hungry favorites crowding round every office of distribution in every
department, and in short, such a scramble for the biggest share of it; and so
much chagrin, disappointment, and mortification occasioned; and so many
jealousies, quarrels, and resentments excited by it, as would, in my opinion,
injure and impoverish the States much more than the tax would do. But all this
I submit to those who have been best acquainted with public boards and offices.

4. The most of the above arguments have been confirmed by facts in many
notorious instances, which are the best proofs in matters of this sort which
can be advanced: the spoils and luxuries of Capua ruined Hannibal's army; the
sack of Carthage and plunder of the rich, eastern, conquered provinces
corrupted the morals of the Romans, destroyed their economy, brought in
luxurious excesses, bred the most mortal quarrels, overturned the commonwealth,
introduced tyranny, and ended in the most tragical destruction of the Roman
Empire; the Portuguese (who were once most untainted in morals and most
intrepid in war) it is said, were ruined by the mines of the Brasils, and are
now an enervated people, without manufactures and internal supplies, a nation
of Lords, poor in the midst of money, and proud in the midst of want, and are
scarce a shadow of their ancestors.

And to come nearer home, the successes and spoils of the last war ruined the
English nation; they are no longer that wise, that faithful, that benevolent,
humane nation which we were ever taught to esteem them, but rude, faithless,
cruel, savage, avaricious, sordid, etc. with scarce a single virtue left in
their character; the principal remains of our ancestors is their prowess in
war; but even this is perverted: this, which was heroism in them, is inhumanity
in the present generation; the sword, which was the terror of their enemies, is
by the present race sheathed in the bowels of their brethren.

It follows hence, I conceive, very clearly, that the riches of a nation do not
consist in the abundance of money, but in number of people, in supplies and
resources, in the necessaries and conveniences of life, in good laws, good
public officers, in virtuous citizens, in strength and concord, in wisdom, in
justice, in wise counsels, and manly force.

From all these considerations, it appears plain to me, that sudden
acquisitions of money are dangerous to any country, and have in many instances
proved very ruinous and fatal to states and kingdoms as well as individuals;
from hence I think we may fairly and strongly conclude, that it is not the
wisdom of America to attempt by any means of gift or loan, an acquisition of
money from any foreign powers, but by strong exertions of our own to furnish
our own supplies. We have money enough for our own purposes, and as good as any
in the world, if we can be wise and firm enough, by proper measures to fix its
value, and preserve it from future fluctuation.

But if these arguments should not be convincing, I will venture to add one
more, which with me has great weight.

5. By a tax we shall furnish our own supplies in a sure way, not liable to
disappointment by any caprices of others, nor subjecting us to any sort of
dependence on foreigners; we shall work out our own salvation without
dependence on any power but Divine Providence, which we may ever acknowledge
without danger of insult; but if (...) receive aids from foreign states by loan
or gift, the obligation conferred on us will be ever great in their opinion,
and should we ever have occasion in future time to adopt any measures not
perfectly consistent with their views and demands, we must be insulted with
large exhibitions of the present favors, and as large and plentiful accusations
of ingratitude, and it may be long before we hear the last of it.

As it is more reputable for a man to acquire a fortune by his own industry,
than by heirship, favor of friends, or sudden accidents, so I think our own
deliverance and establishment, wrought out by our own strong exertions and
virtuous efforts, will be more honorable and safe for us, than to receive these
great blessings from the gift of a neighbor, were he willing to bestow them.
The English never will have done holding up to the view of the Dutch the
supplies and aids they received from the English in Queen Elizabeth's time, and
the Portuguese are obliged to hear a great deal of the same sort of language,
on the score of assistances received by them from the English in the late wars.

Indeed I know not how we can call ourselves independent, if we are to lie
under such sort of debts to our neighbors, especially if to the obligations of
gratitude, we are to be loaded with the additional one of large sums of hard
money, with a corroding, annual interest to devour the proceeds of our labors
and trade for ages to come.

I would sooner consent to bear any present burden, not absolutely intolerable,
than find myself and posterity loaded with such a heavy, galling debt, to last,
as other national debts most commonly do, for ever, and the States so oppressed
and drained by it, as to have scarce spirits or strength left to resent any
insults or injuries that may be offered in future time, or repel any invasions
that may be attempted.

Indeed the alliance we have formed with France, is grounded on such generous
principles of justice, mutual interest, and independence, as plainly
demonstrate that it is not the wish of France that our minds ever should be
disturbed by any of these painful feelings; and I think it would be very mean
in us to abuse their generosity, and we might be ashamed to worry them for
supplies, which we could better furnish ourselves than receive from them,
especially to solicit France for money to pay the interest of loans from our
own people, certainly has a bad look. If a son should demand security of a
stranger for moneys lent to his father, people would certainly say something.
--

We hope to form an alliance with Spain on principles of equal justice and
mutual benefit, but we shall soon lessen our character in their eyes, if we
improve our first acquaintance in begging aids, which, with proper application
and industry, we could well do without. But whenever real necessity does press
us beyond our own powers of relief, we may then, without humiliation, apply for
help to our friends, and I do not doubt but they would give with pleasure to
our real necessity, what they would either deny or grudgingly spare to our
laziness or needless solicitations.

I presume it is needless to add any more arguments to prove the necessity or
expediency of taxing equal to our expenditures, but the great groan still is,
that this is impracticable, it cannot be done. To all I have said before, I beg
leave here to add some further arguments to prove the practicability of this
method; three years ago, it was said, there is no danger yet, it will be time
enough to tax some time hence; it is now said, it is too late, we are involved
so much that a tax adequate to our present occasions for money is impossible;
had we begun sooner, it might have been done, but now it is too late. I take it
that all this talk arises from an improper view of the subject.

1. We are under as good advantages to relieve ourselves by taxes now as we
were three years ago, to all intents and purposes, and in some respects better;
we are involved in no more debt, except the foreign and home loans, than we
were then; the circulating cash is no more in value now than it was then, the
increase of nominal sum makes no difference; and therefore, if it was necessary
to call it all in (which, I conceive, is by no means the case) it might be done
at the same expense now as then, i. e. it would not require any more hard money
or country produce to purchase it all in now, than it would have required three
years ago; and we have sundry advantages in favor of taxing now, which we had
not then, viz. 1st. A general conviction of the absolute necessity of taxing.
2d. Established legislatures to levy the tax; both which were wanting three
years ago. 3d. The money to be collected by the tax is more equably diffused or
spread through the Thirteen States than it was three years ago, and therefore the
people in the remotest parts, as well as those who live near the seat of war,
are enabled to pay their tax. 4th. People are more settled in business than
they were three years ago; the violent shock of the war threw very many people
out of their common course of business, or at least much incommoded them; but
they are now more settled, either in new branches of business, in public
employments, or find the profits of their former business in some measure
restored. 5th. The farmer and most tradesmen can pay their taxes much easier
than they could three years ago, because there is much greater demand and price
for the fabrics of the one and the produce of the other, than there was three
years ago. To these many other reasons might be added, all grounded on facts of
public notoriety, and therefore are freely submitted to every person who has
resided three years among us.

2. All the services and supplies for which the tax is wanted, are actually
furnished every year by the Thirteen States, and have been for four years past;
now is it more possible, more reasonable, or more easy to compel a few
individuals to furnish these services and supplies without payment, than to lay
the burden in proper proportion on all, and to compel every individual to
furnish his part? i. e. I do contend it is more easy, more reasonable, and
therefore more practicable, and of course very possible to compel those that
stay at home and render neither personal services nor supplies to the war, to
pay as much real value or substance in money as those do who render the
services or furnish the supplies; and if any of these stayers at home think
this comes too hard on them, let them change places awhile with those that do
render the services or furnish the supplies, i. e. let them go into the army in
person, or send their corn, their beef, or other supplies, and when they have
tried both, they will know which is easiest, and will always have their option
to take the one or the other, and will be convinced that both are possible and
practicable.

Can any man make any reasonable and weighty objection to this? Yet this is all
that is required; for when the services are rendered, and the supplies are
furnished, and both are paid for, the whole business is done, and the tax has
had its full effect.

I will venture to add my opinion, that this reasoning will be verified in fact
to very good purpose, viz. that when it is observed that the man who renders
the actual service is paid fully for it, and the man who stays at home must pay
his full quota toward it, many who now stay at home, will be induced to go and
render the actual service, and thereby avoid making the payment at home, and
become entitled to receive it in the army, which will greatly facilitate the
recruiting service. An object of no small magnitude.

3. The tax which I propose, collected in quarterly or monthly payments, will
occasion such a quick circulation of money, that every bill will probably pay
its value many times over in a year, as it must do every time it passes from
hand to hand; it will fly from the Commissary to the farmer, from him to the
Collector, from him to the Treasurer, from him to the Commissary, from him to
the farmer again, etc. in a circle often repeated in a year; consequently it
would be possible to levy a Sum in a year by taxes, much exceeding the whole
sum of current cash; it would render the whole Thirteen States like a full
market, where all persons are eager to sell all they have for sale, and as
eager to buy all which they have need of, and if this circle of business was
permitted to run without any restraints, it would render the procurement and
payment of money as easy as the nature of the thing admits, would vastly
lighten the burden of taxes, and would give such great advantages, both to the
farmer, mechanic, and trader, as would in good measure reimburse the tax itself.

4. Some peculiar circumstances of this country much contribute to make the
payment of taxes practicable and easy. Those places which have suffered most by
the war, lie nearest to the seat of it, and of course have the greatest plenty
of money, and have the benefit of the quickest demand and highest price for
every thing they have for sale, whilst it happily falls out, that those towns
and counties that lie most remote from the ^eat of the war, and have the
greatest scarcity of money, yet have been least impoverished by the war, and
are almost every one of them fine, grazing, fruitful countries, which produce
great quantities of beef, mutton, and pork, which may be easily conveyed to the
army on foot, and thereby facilitate the payment of taxes and supply of the
army at the same time.

Another favorable circumstance is this, the enemy cannot supply themselves,
especially with those articles we most want, otherwise than by importing them;
and as their vessels cannot always go under convoy, they often become a prey to
our ships of war and privateers, by which we gain a supply of foreign
necessaries, without contracting a foreign debt; those concerned are enriched,
the objects of trade are increased, and the payment of taxes and supply of the
army greatly facilita^ed.

The benefits of this we have often experienced, and perhaps might increase
them, if our cruising business was more properly conducted, and more liberally
encouraged. Upon the whole matter, I beg leave to close this Essay with a short
view of the present state of our finances, then to offer my propositions of
trade and finance, and lastly, point out the effects and operations which I
conceive these will have on our trade, currency, and army.

I. Our present debt is what we o^^ abroad, all our domestic loans, and all the
paper currency now in circulation, with enough more (if more is necessary) to
balance our public accounts.

II. The currency I rate at its present value; and admitting the nominal sum to
be about 160,000,000 of dollars, the real value may be 8 or 9,000,000 of
dollars, and which I conceive is not a larger sum than is at all times
necessary for a medium of trade in the Thirteen States.

III. The great interest of these States, I take to be, fixing the value of the
currency, and preventing the further fluctuation of it, either by depreciation
or appreciation; for I conceive these to be equally destructive, or if there is
any difference, the latter is the worst of the two. -- For this purpose.

IV. I think the further increase of the currency should be prevented, and the
presses stopped as soon as may be, and this I think may take place on January
next, nor do I see how it can be done sooner. What the further fluctuation of
the currency will be in the mean time, is uncertain; but the two most powerful
means I know of, to prevent the future depreciation, are, the heavy tax to be
collected in this time, and taking off all restraints from trade; if this last
is not done, the scarcity of goods will be so great, and the objects of trade
so few, that no wisdom can prevent, or force suppress, the exorbitant rise of
goods before that time, especially of salt, rum, coffee, tea, and other
articles of great consumption, that have been limited much below the cost and
charges of importation.

V. I propose that a course of taxes be instituted, to be paid monthly or
quarterly, equal to the public expenditures.

VI. When the presses are stopped, and an effectual method of supplying the
Treasury by taxes is well secured, the Continental money will in a short time
make for itself an exchange, or gain a fixed value; it is impossible now to say
what that value will be, but however it fixes, it will be right, and then I
propose.

VII. To fix the exchange according to that value, by directing that hard money
shall be paid and received in the Treasury at that exchange, which will
effectually prevent its appreciation; and if an adequate tax is well paid, the
depreciation also will be effectually stopped: e. g. if the exchange should be
fixed at 20 for 1, and any person is disposed to pay his tax in hard money, let
1 dollar be received in full for 20 paper ones, and let all payments be made
from the Treasury by the same exchange.

But you will say, what is to become of the public faith? and I say, what is
become of it already? I leave it where I found it, I do not make it any worse,
but endeavor to preserve it from further decays. If nineteen parts out of
twenty are dead already, I am for preserving the twentieth part which remains
alive; perhaps by good management and proper nursing, it may grow into full
magnitude; but to effect this, it appears to me very necessary to purge it of
all those deadly mixtures and bad adherents which have already brought it
within an ace of total destruction.

However this may be, I think it appears very plain, from what has been before
advanced in this Essay, that continuing the dreadful mischiefs and injuries of
a fluctuating currency for eighteen years Congress, about this time, published
a sort of funding system, in which, they proposed (and plighted the public
faith with solemnity enough too, for) the payment of the public debt in
eighteen years.
to come, will no how atone for the wrongs, or compensate the damages, incurred
by that destructive delusion in four years past, and I cannot conceive on what
principles any man could wish to purchase such a deadly evil for many years to
come, at the expense of heavy, galling taxes, almost as useless, difficult, and
desperate, as the rolling of Sisyphus's stone.

VIII. And for the same reason, all debts due from or to the Treasury, ought to
be paid at the exchange which existed at the time they were contracted; and
therefore, I think it necessary to form a table or rate of exchange, to be
continued from the first depreciation of Continental bills up to the aforesaid
period, when they shall become of fixed value; and that all Loan-Office
certificates be paid according to the exchange which existed at the time in
which the certificates were dated, and that all other debts be paid at the
exchange which existed when they were contracted, and all interest due ought to
be paid at the same exchange as the debt out of which it grows.

This appears to me so manifestly just and reasonable, that I cannot think any
objection can be made to it, and therefore to offer any arguments in support of
it, would seem to call into doubt the justice of my country; I have only to
observe, that great judgment and accuracy will be required in forming those
rates of exchange, as any error in these would introduce an error into the
adjustment of all contracts for money, which yet remain unsettled.

9. The currency fixed as above, will be just sufficient for a medium of trade
and no more, and if we can by firm and proper, steady conduct, keep it fixed,
it will answer all the ends of a medium of trade, without any inconveniency,
for no one can suppose it is of any consequence, whether we estimate a dollar
at three pence, or six pence, or nine pence, or ninety pence, if it continues
the same at all times, with no more variation than is ever incident to the
nature of money. -- Therefore

10. There will be no immediate occasion for further taxes for sinking any part
of the bills, which are or shall be in circulation on the 1st of January next,
for no reason can be assigned why the country should be taxed to lessen the
quantity of money in circulation, when there is no more in being than is
necessary for a medium of trade.

11. The method I propose will, by its natural operation, keep the army full of
men and well supplied, and we may be in good condition to carry on the war any
length of time that may be necessary, till it can be closed by a safe and
honorable peace.

12. And this method will also, by its natural operation, six our finances on
the best and surest footing that can be wished, our currency will be as good as
any on earth, and all the resources of a most plentiful country will be
properly and effectually opened for the use of the public, at whatever time and
to whatever amount the public exigence and necessity may require.

13. When the war shall cease, it will leave us in a manner free of debt and
little impoverished; we may easily, when the war is over, pay our foreign and
domestic loans, and whenever we find it necessary, sink the whole current
bills, all which may be done in a short time, and without any burdens so heavy
as to endanger the peace or prosperity of the States. Every other scheme which
I have heard proposed, leaves us subject to two dreadful calamities: 1st. The
danger of sinking under the weight of the war. 2d. If we get through that, yet
we shall be left under such a load of debt, which must be sunk by such long and
galling taxes, as will almost make our lives a burden and our liberty a dear
purchase, yea, the weight of the debt will abridge our liberty itself, for I
know not how any persons or states can be called entirely free, who are deeply
involved in debt beyond their present powers of payment.

14. This method will be a good criterion by which we may distinguish the Whigs
from the Tories, this scheme touches the present cash, it compels the present
and actual contributions of every one to the great cause of American liberty,
this will rouse the feelings of every Tory, partly because his present cash is
called for, and partly because it establishes the system of liberty which he
wishes to see destroyed. And as we have reason to suppose that much English
gold is spread among us, for the purpose of bribing our most popular and able
men, it will be of great consequence to discover who they are that may be thus
engaged to destroy us, and as they probably will assume the character of
zealous Whigs, they cannot be better distinguished than by the temper in which
they receive such propositions, as promise an effectual remedy of the mischiefs
and dangers which most threaten our destruction, and at the same time blast the
surest hopes and confidence of our enemies.

Thus I have a second time given my thoughts, with the greatest freedom, on the
great subject of free trade and finance, a subject perhaps as difficult and
intricate as any whatever. A good financier is as rare as a phoenix, there is
but here and there one appears in an age, yet in our present circumstances, a
good financier is as necessary as a general, for the one cannot be supported
without the other. I do not pretend to be equal to this great subject, I know I
am not, but in these times of distress, every one ought to contribute what he
can, and my fortunes are so impaired by the depredations of the enemy, and my
health and constitution so broken by their insult and cruelty, that I have
little left but sentiments and kind wishes to bestow, and as the widow's mite
was of great account in heaven, I hope my mite may be heartily received, as it
is most uprightly intended.

I know the limitation of trade, the doctrine of loans, and appreciation of our
currency are ideas much favored by very many zealous people; my Essays are
directly opposed to them all, and I have only to say in excuse, that I should
not venture to face the censure of such characters, if I were not really
convinced of the high impropriety of all the three mentioned doctrines, and the
absolute necessity of adopting sentiments and measures the most opposed to them.

It is with great pain I differ in sentiments from many gentlemen of shining
abilities, great experience, and most undoubted integrity; and was the
importance of the subject at the present crisis less, I should not obtrude my
thoughts on the public, nor have I the vanity to imagine that the feeble Essays
of an obscure individual can correct the errors of a Continent; I only hope my
publications may be so far regarded, as to bring on a most serious inquiry and
thorough discussion of the weighty subject, by men of genius and abilities,
equal to the mighty task, that so the real source of our calamities and their
proper remedies may be discovered, and the wisest measures may be adopted and
pursued with diligence, spirit, and decision.

For however weak or ridiculous my Essays may be deemed, the subject of them
will be acknowledged of sufficient weight to engage the attention of the most
able and respectable characters among us. -- Si nosti rectuis istis, candidus
imperti, si non, his utere mecum.

A THIRD ESSAY ON FREE TRADE and FINANCE.
[Published in Philadelphia, January 8th, 1780.]
CREDIT, either public or private, may always be kept good, where there is a
sufficient estate to support it. Therefore, if private persons, a company of
merchants, or a State, suffer their credit to decay, when they have a
sufficient stock to support it, their management must be bad, but their affairs
can never be desperate so long as their stock or estate continues sufficient to
discharge all demands on them; their bad management only need be corrected, and
a good one adopted, and their affairs may be retrieved, and their credit
restored. Therefore, the Thirteen United States are not bankrupt, nor are their
affairs desperate, though their credit runs very low, and their finances are in
the worst condition. We have men enough for every purpose -- We have provisions
and stores enough. Our houses, lands, and stock on the lands, are little
diminished, and in many places increased, since the war began; yet our credit
runs so low, that it is with great difficulty sufficient supplies can be
obtained.

The error lies in our finances, or management of the public stock, and must be
mended, or we are ruined. In the midst of full plenty we already suffer the
want of all things.

The first thing necessary to correcting an error, is to discover it, the next
is to confess it, and the last to avoid it. Perhaps neither, of these three
things are easy in the present case. An error in finances, like a leak in a
ship, may be obvious in the fact, alarming in its effects, but difficult to
find. The fact in view affords perhaps the strongest proof of this. Our
finances have, for five years past, been under the management of fifty men, of
the best abilities and most spotless integrity, that could be elected out of
the Thirteen States; yet they are in a ruined condition. We have suffered more
from this than from every other cause of calamity: it has killed more men,
pervaded and corrupted the choicest interests of our country more, and done
more injustice, than even the arms and artifices of our enemies; still the
fatal error continues unmended, and perhaps unexplored.

Our admiration and censure will be greatly diminished here, when we consider
that the doctrine of finance, or the nature, effects, and operation of money
may be placed among the most abstruse and intricate subjects, which we ever
have occasion to examine. Not one in ten thousand is capable of understanding
it, and perhaps not one man in the world was ever complete master of it.

As a full proof of this, I adduce the many fruitless attempts to stop the
depreciation of our currency, which have been adopted both in and out of
Congress; all of which have failed of the expected success, and many of them
have greatly increased the mischief they were intended to remedy. The various
schemes and plans for the same purpose, which have been formed and proposed by
many men of most acknowledged abilities, warmly adopted by some, and as warmly
opposed by others, are a further proof of the great difficulty and abstruse
nature of the subject.

The universal distress of the country, arising from this error in our
finances, makes it a subject of the most interesting importance, and the most
universal inquiry, yet the intellectual powers of the Continent, though wound up
to the highest pitch of attention, have not yet been able to find a remedy. The
evil still continues as unchecked as ever. It seems impossible to control or
compute its force; it ba^^les all calculation. Yet so are we situated, and so
critical is the present moment, that a remedy must be found, or we perish.

The morality and industry of our people are declining fast. Our laws become
iniquitous, and the worst of all sin is that iniquity which is framed by a law,
for it fixes the mischief in the very place where a remedy ought always to be
sought and found. The confidence of our people in the government is lessened,
our army suffers, and our credit and character abroad is in danger of contempt.
All these, and no man can tell how many more, evils, hang like a thick cloud
over us, the bursting of which will overwhelm us. But this is no time or place
for declamation; a remedy is the thing to be sought; a remedy or ruin are the
only two alternatives before us.

I have twice essayed to throw some light on this dark subject, with very
little effect; my system, however some of its parts were approved, has not been
adopted. My arguments, perhaps, were not thought conclusive, or were not
sufficiently clear, and therefore were little attended to; I will,
nevertheless, once more attempt to lay before the public, some principles and
propositions which appear to me to have great weight, and which I shall ground
on fact as much as I can; for in this, as in natural philosophy, one experiment
I conceive to be better, and stronger proof than an hundred theorems.

I. In every State where the occasions of money continue unvaried, the incomes
and expenditures ought to be kept equal, otherwise the value of money will
fluctuate, i. e. increase or decrease; by which every money-contract, as well
as all legacies, salaries, fees of public offices, rents, etc. will be altered,
and the money, when paid, will be either more or less than was intended in the
contract, in the law, etc. In this case, it matters little whether the increase
of money proceeds from foreign loans or gifts, from opening mines, or presses;
an increase of money in any of these or any other way, will, with great
injustice, alter the value of the payment, to the manifest wrong and injury of
the receiver; by which the law itself, as well as the contract or donation,
becomes perverted and corrupted, and is made to enure contrary to the original
intention of all the parties concerned; this is proved by very sad experiment
among ourselves.

Hence it appears from plain experiment, that any method that tends to increase
or decrease the quantity of circulating cash, will not prove a remedy, but will
increase the evil, or run us into the contrary extreme, equally unjust and
mischievous, or perhaps more fatal. Hence it follows, that our true remedy,
must, in the nature of the thing, lie, not in appreciating, more than in
depreciating, the currency, but in fixing the value of it where it is, and
keeping it so fixed, that any man who makes a money-contract, may find, when
the day of payment comes, that the money paid is just the same as it was at the
time of contract, that so the money paid may exactly correspond with the
intention of the contract, and be of course a just fulfillment of it without
increase or decrease; which cannot possibly happen where there is any
fluctuation of its value between the times of contract and payment.

Hence, when the value of money is fixed and can be kept so, it is in the most
perfect state its nature is capable of, and does, in the most perfect manner,
answer all the purposes and uses which are desired or expected from it; for it
is impossible that money should exist in higher perfection, than when it is of
such fixed and certain value that all other articles may be compared with it,
and their value safely estimated from that comparison.

Hence it follows clearly, that as far as money deviates from a fixed value,
and becomes fluctuating, it loses its use, and becomes dangerous to the
possessor, and this will of course, without any regard to its quantity, lessen
its value, or increase its depreciation; and this may be assigned as one great
cause of the present depreciation of our currency beyond what its quantity
would require.

Hence it follows, that if money can obtain a fixed value, it is of no manner
of consequence what the quantity is, for its value will ever fix at that rate
or proportion to the occasions for money, which will make the one equal to the
other, and of course our Continental money will have just the same use, if the
value of it fixes at two pence the dollar, as at any other sum that can be
named; but if that value of two pence is variable and like to be reduced to a
penny, every man would prefer two pence of fixed money to it; but if that value
of two pence is fixed, it will be considered by every man just as good, and no
better than two pence of any other sort of fixed money.

II. As the use and design of money is to be a medium of all trade, it is
necessary that the demand for money should be at least equal to the demand for
every thing else which is to be bought or sold, for if there is one thing to be
sold, which money will not purchase, the use of money is not so great as it
would be if it would buy every thing, and therefore its value is so far
depreciated. Trade is carried on by the medium of money easier than in any
other way, and for that reason it was introduced. An over plenty or scarcity of
money introduces barter, which takes away the use of money so far as it
extends, and consequently depreciates it, and perhaps the great practice of
bartering one scarce article for another, which has been introduced by the
great plenty of money among us, may be assigned as one great cause of the
depreciation of our currency beyond what the quantity would require.

Hence it follows that the only possible way to restore our money to its true
value and use, is to increase the demand for it; but this cannot be done by
opening mines or presses, by foreign loans or importations of money, but may be
done by taxes, which make a demand for money all over the Thirteen States, and
from every taxable in it. In this every one is agreed. The only question is,
How far this demand is to be increased? The answer is easy, viz. Till all
supplies which we need can be purchased for money, which will certainly be the
case, when the demand for money is sufficiently great.

This demand may be raised at any time, and to any pitch we please, by taxes;
so that the true and only possible remedy of the great mischief lies constantly
in our power, and may be put in practice whenever we please. But it must be put
into actual practice; talking about it, voting about it, making assessments and
tax bills, will not do without an actual and seasonable collection and payment
into the treasury.

That this may be done, so as to give a fixed and established permanancy to our
currency; and thereby save the States, and at the same time relieve every
individual from the danger, damage, and anxiety he now suffers from the
deficiency of our currency; and avoid oppression of individuals, and thereby
put an end to all uneasinesses in the government: that this may be done, I say,
the several things following must be strictly attended to.

1. That the taxation be fair and equitable, so as to bring the burden equally
or in due proportion on each State, and on the individuals of each State. The
first is the business of Congress, the second of every particular State. As to
the first, it is absolutely necessary that there be an estimate made of the
abilities of each State, on which the quotas are to be grounded; and this I
think cannot be done better than by making the number of souls in each State
the rule of it. It is to be observed here that it was not the practice of
Congress under the old confederation, to institute taxes by any direct acts of
their own, but they calculated the sums wanted, and made requisitions of them
from the several States, in such proportions or quotas as were made pro re
nata, as no established quotas, or rules of forming them, were settled. There
was much conversation about this time and many debates in Congress, concerning
the rule or principle on which the estimates of the quotas of each State should
be fixed; and sundry modes of this estimation were adopted by Congress, with
various alterations and amendments, till at last the long debated matter was
settled by the new Constitution (article I.) on the principle here proposed,
with a small variation respecting Negroes and Indians.

N. B. This matter was taken up again, and the principle or rule of estimation
here proposed, discussed and proved more fully in a future Dissertation.


This can easily be obtained with exactness and certainty, and will be as just
and true a measure of the abilities of each State as can be obtained. If more
need to be said on this, it may be deferred to another time.

2. It is further absolutely necessary, that the quotas of each State be
estimated in hard money, payable in Continental money at the exchange which
exists in each particular State at the time they pay their tax into the
Continental Treasury: hard money is a fixed standard of value, and can never
vary much here from its value in Europe, and therefore fixing the quotas by
this standard, will prevent any irregularities which will arise from
depreciation of our currency between the time of the demand of the quotas, and
the time of payment by each State; without this the depreciation might afford
an inducement, though a very wicked one, to some States, to make their
collections and payments dilatory, for there would be an advantage in delaying
payment of taxes, as well as of every other debt, if the sum should lessen
every day, and it has been found in fact, though little to the honor of the tardy
States, that some States have paid their quotas, when the exchange was four to
one, whilst others have paid their quotas of the same tax at the exchange of
twenty for one, i. e. just one fifth part of the just debt.

I said that the payments ought to be made at the exchange that subsists in the
State that pays the money, at the time of payment, for all supplies which are
purchased for the use of the public in that State, are purchased at that
exchange, and therefore it is reasonable that their quotas of taxes should be
paid at the same exchange, whether it be higher or lower than that which exists
in the other States at the same time.

Besides, if the quotas demanded of each State be not made in fixed money, it
is not at all certain they will be sufficient when paid; for if the estimates
of expenditures were made in money at twenty for one, and the tax demanded be
made out accordingly, it is very certain if it should be paid at forty for one,
it would not satisfy more than half the estimate, and therefore must be
deficient by one half, and the work is all to do over again to get the other
half collected and paid, besides all the dangers and damages which may arise
from the delay.

Nor do I see that any reasonable objection could be made to the justice of
crediting the States for their past payments by the same rule; for it is surely
wrong that a dilatory State that has really paid but one fifth part of the
value of her quota, should have credit for the whole: but whatever may be
thought proper with respect to the time past, I think there can be no doubt
that such scandalous and dangerous mischiefs should be well guarded against in
time to come. To all this it ought to be further added, that when any State
delays to collect their taxes, the money will accumulate, and consequently
depreciate faster in it than in other States where the tax is quickly
collected; and no reason can be given, why any State should take advantage of
that depreciation which their own iniquitous delay has occasioned.

It is further necessary that each delinquent State should be charged with the
interest of all such parts of their several quotas which shall be unpaid at the
time prescribed by Congress, till payment be made; and for the same reason they
should be allowed interest on all such sums as may be paid before the said time
of payment, till such time of payment comes; and if all this, together with the
honor and zeal of the several States, should be insufficient to prevent
deficiencies, further methods should be adopted and effectually executed, till
such deficiencies shall be prevented; for the very idea of supporting the
union, dignity, public faith, and even safety of the Thirteen States, without
good punctuality in each State, is most manifestly chimerical, vain, and
ridiculous; for there can never be any confidence placed in our administration,
if their counsels, covenants, and measures, must be ever liable to be rendered
fruitless or impracticable by the deficiencies of one or two of those States.

3. On the part of the particular States, it is necessary that each of them at
the beginning of each year should have a list or assessment of all taxables
completed, and all appeals adjusted, and good collectors appointed, that as
soon as any tax is granted by their Legislature, it may be put immediately into
the collectors' hands, and the collection be finished and the money paid into
the Continental Treasury, without loss of time. If matters were once put into
this train, any necessary sum demanded by Congress might be collected, and
ready for use in a very short time; and this will fully obviate the great
objection, that taxes, though acknowledged to be the only sure and final remedy,
are yet too slow in their operation to be depended on.

It appears from this view, that taxes are a much more certain and speedy
supply, and may be depended on with much greater safety than any other method
which has been pointed out to me, and they are a final, a finished remedy;
whereas loans, lotteries, annuities, and every other method which I have heard
of, are no more than temporary expedients, are but plausible anticipations of
our revenue, and all look forward to a burden to be imposed in future time,
which had better be borne now, and be finally done with.

And as I propose that all the estimates of Congress, and all the quotas
demanded of the States, should be made out in hard money, so I also propose
that the taxes may be made out in the same money, payable either in hard money
or Continental, at the option of the person who pays the tax. Sundry material
advantages I conceive will arise from this:

1. Many persons out of trade have no money but hard, and when called on for
the tax, may be compelled to part with their hard money, at an unreasonable
exchange, which will be avoided if hard money itself will pay the tax.

2. This will preserve the tax from any possibility of fluctuation, by the
depreciation or appreciation of the currency, for if any person thinks the
exchange demanded unreasonable, he may pay it in hard money, and then he is
sure not to pay either too much or too little.

3. This will gradually bring sums of hard money, perhaps not inconsiderable,
into the Continental Treasury, which may be so used as to prevent drawing on
Europe, and thereby increasing our foreign debt, which I conceive an object
greatly worth attention.

4. This will exhibit the tax to view in its real value, and prevent the
terrors which may arise from the enormous found in Continental money.

5. This would ^^^atly tend in a short course of time to reduce all our p^^^^te
contracts to the fixed standard of hard money, by which we should avoid that
vortex of fluctuation and uncertainty, which has rendered all our private
dealings precarious, and made even our profits rather the effect of chance,
than of wise calculation and industry. Nor do I think that this would at all
prejudice the real use of the Continental money, for it would still pass at its
exchange or value.

Indeed I do not see that the depreciation of the money would have been in
itself a calamity half so ruinous as it has proved, if it had operated only on
the cash in being; it would have been a tax upon every possessor of it, and
would have lessened the public debt, for it is manifest that the public debt at
the exchange of forty for one, is but half what it was when the exchange was
twenty for one; and as that money was perhaps as equally diffused over the
Thirteen States, as any other property, the tax might have operated with a
tolerable degree of justice; but the case was altered when the depreciation was
not confined to the Continental money only, but drew every thing else after it:
when it came to operate on every debt and money-contract, on every legacy,
salary, public fee and fine, yea, on the finances of the States, so as to
destroy all calculation of both supplies and expenditures, the mischief became
infinite: we were both in our private affairs and public councils, thrown into
confusion inextricable.

New objects, new effects, started up to view in every quarter, which no
discernment could foresee, nor wisdom obviate, and like an enchantment of fairy
visions, bewildered us all in such a maze of errors, interwoven with such
subtilty into every branch of our movements, that no one department was free of
them; and we all stand trembling this moment before this monster of
depreciation, like bewildered travelers in a giant's castle, where the bones
of broken fortunes are every where in sight, with the specter of widows and
fatherless, and a thousand others, which the monster has devoured, and is still
devouring as greedy as ever.

This mischief will be greatly lessened, if, by reducing all our debts and
demands, public and private, to the standard of hard money, we can confine the
depreciation of the money to itself, and prevent its operation on all other
money-contracts and securities, and this will, in my opinion, greatly tend to
cure the depreciation itself, because in that case no man can gain any thing by
the depreciation, but every man who has any cash must lose by it; and when
private interest is brought into a coincidence with the public good, they will
greatly help each other.

But be all this as it may, let us not lose sight of the principal argument,
viz. that no project or scheme to stop the depreciation can have the desired
effect, if it does not increase the demand for our currency; and on the
contrary, any scheme whatever that will increase the demand for our currency,
will lessen or check the depreciation. Hence we see how vain all propositions
must be, which, by their natural operation, will increase cash among us, and
thereby lessen the demand for it, or increase the national debt beyond all
probability of payment, and thereby lessen the public credit, and of course
lessen also the demand for the currency which depends on it. Of this sort are
all loans, foreign and domestic; for as long as people can get money without
earning it, without actually raising and paying it, it will not appear so
precious, nor can the demand be so great, as when these great and necessary
conditions are the only terms of acquiring it. Hence also, every project which
lessens the use of our currency, lessens also the demand for it, and cannot
possibly help, but will hurt, it; such as barter in trade or levying taxes in
kind Taxes in kind are taxes to be paid, not in cash, but in necessaries for
the army, such as flour, beef, rum, clothing, etc. etc. A scheme of this (...)
was brisk a-foot, among other wild projects, about this time.
in finance.

My great proposition is, that by taxes we have it always in our power to fix
our currency at any value we please; because, by this way, we may raise the
demand for money just as high as we please, and, if we have not great prudence,
much higher than the public good requires; and if the method and train
proposed, be adopted, the operation of taxes may be made more quick and more
sure, than in any other I know of. This is dealing in realities. We have dealt
in shadows and delusions too long already for our honor, too long for our
safety. It is not only wicked, dishonorable, and dangerous, but it is weak and
absurd, to suppose that we can any longer produce our public supplies out of
shadows and visionary projects; the baseless fabric will vanish; our resources
consist in real substance only, and from thence alone can our supplies be
produced, and let them be collected by an equable tax, and the burden on the
public will not be any thing near so heavy and ruinous, as the numberless
mischiefs of the depreciation have proved for four years past.

But it may be asked, What is to be done in the present distress? How are our
present, immediate wants to be relieved? The answer must lie in a pretty narrow
compass. I know of but three things that can be done in the case: 1. To borrow
money, which is fatal in its operation, and uncertain in its effects. 2. To set
the presses a going again, which will not only increase the mischief, but
destroy the operation of any remedy. Or, 3. do without supplies awhile. If the
crows cannot be killed, nor the carcass be removed out of their reach, the sure
way is to let them eat it all up to the very bones, and then they will go away
of their own accord; and this is better than to have Tityus's vulture for ever
gnawing on our liver, and our liver growing at the same time as fast as he eats
it. Here is indeed a notable difficulty which would vanish into nothing, if
there was a proper connection formed between the great resources of the Thirteen
States, the real substance, the mighty wealth which they contain, and the
credit of the States, necessary to collect them, and bring them to public use,
when the public safety or convenience requires them. The credit of our
currrency is too lax, too enervated, and feeble for this; people have more of
it already than they have use for, and the depreciation makes it a dangerous
article to keep on hand: it is like perishable goods, which are lost in the
keeping. In the nature of the thing there is nor can be no remedy for this, but
increasing the demands for the currency, and this can be done in no other way
than by an universal tax, which alone can create an universal demand, and this
demand must operate on those persons who have the necessary supplies, so as to
make their necessity for money equal to the necessity of the purchaser of the
supplies.

This will put the contracting parties on a par of equal necessity on each
side, which alone can ever produce an equal bargain, and is the real, natural
source of all trade. Filling the Treasury never so full of money by Loans or
any other way, will not effect the purpose, unless demanded of the very persons
who have the supplies in their hands, for in any other way, their necessity for
money will not be increased, and of course they will withhold the supplies, or
demand an unreasonable price, when they see a great necessity on the purchaser,
and none on themselves.

I appeal to every person who deals, whether this is not the true fact. Let a
person who is under necessity of an article, apply to one who has it, but is
under no necessity to sell it, he must give any price that is asked. Let a man
who is under necessity of selling an article, apply to one to purchase, who is
under no necessity of buying, he must take what is offered. This may be thought
a refinement of argument, but I appeal to every man, the least or the most
versed in trade, if this is not the universal principle of all trade, and if it
is not the universal practice of all wise traders, if they are under a
necessity of buying or selling, to conceal that necessity as far as they can,
lest it should put them under disadvantage in making their bargain.

It is further to be observed, that an increased demand for money is the only
thing which will naturally excite great diligence and pains in procuring such
articles as will bring it; therefore, it appears that this is the only true
means of restoring the decayed industry of our people, without which we shall
soon have no supplies raised, and then we must be destitute indeed, for no
demand for money can produce supplies which are not in existence, which to me
appears to be a matter worthy of very great attention.

Every idea of a loan either at home or abroad, operates directly against these
great principles, and directly tends to increase our distress. A small loan had
been negotiated a little before this time in France, and further loans in
France, Spain, and Holland were proposed, and urged in and out of Congress with
great earnestness and zeal. This seems to have been a period of distress and
madness.


I abhor and execrate every idea of a foreign loan to purchase necessaries
produced among ourselves; it may be necessary to borrow in Europe money
sufficient to purchase what we must export from thence, and enough to make
former contracts punctually and honestly good; but to borrow money in Europe to
pay for supplies produced here among ourselves, appears to me the height of
absurdity: this exposes our weakness to all the world; not our weakness in
point of supplies; not the exhausted state of our country, for that is full of
every thing we want, clothing and military stores excepted; but the weakness of
our counsels and administration, that our domestic economy should be so bad,
that we should not be able to call into public use the very supplies in which
the country abounds, is shameful: such an imbecility of counsels, I imagine,
will hold us up in so very contemptible a light in Europe as will effectually
destroy all our credit there, and thereby put it out of our power to destroy
ourselves; but if this should not be the case, I do not see but our
independence, with all the blessings resulting from it, is in danger: for I
really fear that some among us would, without concern, mortgage the Thirteen
States up to the value of every acre they contain, to any foreign power that
will trust us.

It is as necessary that we preserve ourselves independent of France, Spain,
and Holland, as of England. It is manifest beyond any need of proof, that the
nation who is in debt to a superior power, cannot be free and independent, but
is ever liable to demands the most insulting and inconsistent with freedom and
safery.

But if after all, nothing can stop the career of this fatal measure of
contracting a further foreign debt, I beg, at least, that the moneys necessary
be borrowed at home on yearly interest, payable in bills on Europe, or in hard
money at home, and let the delinquent States be charged with this interest, for
if there was no delinquency, there would be no need of a loan: my reasons are,

1. If interest of hard money or bills must be paid, I think it better that our
own people should have it than strangers, that the yearly profits of the loan
should lie among ourselves, and not go out of the country, never to return.

2. It is less dangerous to contract a foreign debt, sufficient for the yearly
interest of this loan, than for the principal and interest too.

3. This method will have one absurdity less than the other, for if bills are
to issue for the money to be loaned in Europe (for our necessities are so
pressing, it is said we cannot wait till the advices arrive that the loan is
completed) they must be drawn on funds of mere imagination, for not one
shilling of the fund on which they are to be drawn, is yet procured, nor do we
know that the loan can be obtained at all; and therefore every bill is liable
to come back protested, to the utter ruin, and most laughable contempt of the
credit of the States. And

4. The uncertainty of the payment of the bills will certainly operate on the
sale of them. I believe nobody expects they can be ^old at a loss of less than
20 or 30 per cent. The present exchange of the currency is 40 to 1; but I have
not heard any body propose selling the bills at more than 30 for 1.

5. The very idea of drawing bills or loaning at a loss of 20, 30, or 40 per
cent. appears to me so very ruinous and absurd, and the fact stands in so
glaring and striking a light, that I do not know how to form one argument for
the conviction of such as are willing to adopt either. The great, sure, and
only supply of all our wants, and remedy of (...) distress, lies in taxes.
Justice requires that this remedy should be effectually adopted: public burdens
ought to rest in due proportion on all, which can be effected in no other way.
This alone will create an universal demand for our currency, and bring it into
such repute, that every necessary article in the country may be readily
purchased with it; this settles and finishes the matter as we go, and relieves
us at once from the anxious terrors of an unsupportable debt, and all future
demands and insults from any power on earth.

Say, Americans, if this freedom and independence, for which you have bled and
nobly dared every danger, and for which you have set at defiance, and incurred
the vengeance of, the might power on earth, is not still worth your most
capital attention: it avails little to change our masters; to have none is our
object, which can never be our case, if we are in debt to foreign powers.

III. I beg leave here to propose one thing more, viz. to take off every
restraint from our trade. Let every man be at liberty to get money as fast as
he can; and let the public call for it as fast as the public exigence requires.
Limitations of our trade have been so often tried, so strongly enforced, and
have so constantly failed of the intended effect, and have, in every instance,
produced so much injustice and oppression in our dealings, and excited so many
quarrels, so much ill will and chagrin among our people, that they have, in
every instance, after some time of most pernicious continuance, been laid aside
by a kind of general consent, and even most of their advocates have been
convinced of their hurtful tendency, as well as utter impracticability.

As experiment is the surest proof of the natural effects of all speculations
of this kind, and as this proof of fact has ever appeared in the strongest
manner, against the practicability and success of all restraints of this sort,
and as every seeming, temporary advantage that has resulted from them, has
constantly been followed by effects so very pernicious and alarming, it is
strange, it is mavelous to me, that any person of common discernment, who has
been acquainted with all the abovementioned trials and effects, should
entertain any idea of the expediency of trying any such method again.

Not less absurd should I conceive a number of adepts in Barclay's system of
ideas, driving their heads ten times going against a wall, and still preparing
to try it again with greater force than before, because they could not believe
there was the substance of a wall, but an idea only there; equally in both
cases must the career of the zealots be stopped in hard fact, and their skulls,
if not exceeding thick, must be greatly wounded.

Liberty and property are the most tender interests of mankind; any kind of
abridgment, restraint, or control of these is ever sensibly felt and borne with
impatience; and the natural course of things seems so adapted to those two
great and favorite rights, that any violations of them will, by their most
natural operation, produce effects very unsalutary, if not fatal. Indeed, this
mischief may at any time be increased till the effects are tragical. Trade, if
let alone, will ever make its own way best, and, like an irresistible river,
will ever run safest, do least mischief and most good, when suffered to run
without obstruction in its own natural channel.

IV. I humbly propose further, that no private property may ever be taken for
public use, against the consent of the owner, without the most manifest
necessity, and in that case, not without paying the full value. If the public
wants any man's property, they are certainly better able to pay for it, than an
individual is to lose it. Paying half or any thing less than the whole value,
is a scurvy and evasive way of robbing the owner, and infinitely unworthy of
the justice and dignity of a State. There has been so much of this iniquity
committed either with or without pretext of Law, that it has been really
dangerous for a man to possess an article of capital demand; he has been in
danger of having the article torn from him, not only without due payment, but
with insult and abuse; and this wicked and shameful practice has really
discouraged many persons of great ability and industry, from procuring articles
of great demand, lest they should be thereby subjected to the mortification of
having them torn away with violence and disgrace.

Many great necessaries have been rendered scarce by these means, and thereby
the price has become enormous, and the procurement difficult. Instances in
flour, salt, etc. are most notorious and obvious. This greatly destroys the
confidence of the holders of the great necessaries, in the officers of
government, and lessens their assiduity and zeal in procuring or bringing their
goods to the public stores. The consequences of this shameful iniquity are most
fatal in their nature, and though slow and not immediately perceptible, yet most
certain in their operation, and most sure of effects.

V. I propose further that there be the greatest care and attention in the
appointment of the men who are to fill all places of public trust, and
especially such as are employed in the revenue and expenditures of the public
moneys and supplies. I should conceive the following qualifications so
necessary as to admit of no dispensation:

1. That the candidate for any place of public trust have sufficient knowledge
and ability to discharge the duties of the office proposed for him. A public
officer, like St. Paul's bishop, ought to be a workman that needs not to be
ashamed. But I am sure any person needs to be ashamed, who appears in a public
office without understanding the duties of it, and therefore utterly incapable
of discharging them properly: and the persons who appointed him ought to be
ashamed of him too, and he certainly will prove a shame to the public; for the
public, i. e. a kingdom, a state, a country, or a city, always shine through the
medium of their public men; if they mean to have their weight, dignity,
character, and interest well supported in a treaty, a Congress, a General
Assembly, or a Court of Justice, they must appoint sufficient men to represent
them and act for them; if they would have their most public and important
counsels, their laws, the administration of public justice and civil policy, or
their revenue well conducted, they must appoint men of knowledge ane abilities
sufficient for these great purposes, to conduct them; these are all objects of
such magnitude, such general importance, and pervade with such subtilty every
interest of the community, that they reach and deeply affect every individual,
and prescribe the degree of security, honor, and peace which he is to enjoy.

How mad and execrable then must be that elector, or person concerned in the
appointment of a public officer, who, from motives of party, personal
friendship, or any worse inducement, will give his vote for a person, who, he
knows, is deficient in the knowledge and abilities requisite to the proper
discharge of the office? Let a man's virtue and integrity be never so great, if
he wants knowledge and ability, he never can shine, he never can serve with
honor or advantage in the office, but must be a shame to himself and to his
constituents, and most probably a damage, and may be a ruin into the bargain.
But

2. Knowledge and abilities, though essential, are not the only requisites in a
public man; integrity and prudence are also most necessary. The true character
of the heart cannot be certainly known indeed, but is best judged of by his
general deportment; therefore the character which a man obtains among his
neighbors, and those who best know him, is the surest rule by which he can be
estimated, and will be most likely to pre-engage the public confidence in his
favor; and it is necessary, not only that a public man should be upright, but
also that he should be generally esteemed so. The wife of Caesar ought not to
be suspected; therefore it must be the height of folly (to say no worse) to
appoint a man to public station, whose private character for integrity and
prudence is not good.

3. Sound judgment and rational discretion is a most essential part of
necessary character in a public man, especially one who is concerned in the
public councils, or important offices of any sort. Nothing can scarcely be
conceived more dangerous to the public, than to have its great arrangements
subject to the influence of a man of wild projection, and extravagant conceits;
such a person, especially if he has a good address and copious invention, is
enough to make errors faster than twenty men of the best wisdom can mend. It is
not strange, to find men, who have great talents at discovering valuable mines,
who, at the same time, have no knowledge in essaying the ore, or making the
proper use of it. But to come more immediately to the point in view,

4. In the appointment of an officer of the revenue, or expenditures of the
public moneys, i. e. one through whose hands the public moneys or supplies are
to pass, it is necessary, most essentially necessary, that he should be a man
of known industry, economy, and thriftiness in his own private affairs. If a
man's regard to his own character, fortune, and family, is not a sufficient
inducement to make him careful, industrious, and thrifty in his own affairs, it
is not to be presumed, that any regard he may have to the public can make him
so; a man's own interest always lies nearest his heart, i. e. self-love is the
strongest of all passions and motives. It was hardly ever known, that raising a
man into public office, mended his private vices, but they most commonly like a
pervading poison, get incorporated into the department, in which he officiates,
and greatly corrupt and injure the administration of it.

Therefore to appoint a bankrupt, a man of dissipation, idleness, and
prodigality, to an office, through which the public moneys and supplies are to
pass, is a sure way to have them wasted or purloined, in which the riches,
strength, and blood of the States are exhausted; not to answer the great ends
of government, the safety, security, and peace of the great whole, but to
gratify the extravagance, dissipation, and debauchery of an individual; it
would be much better, if a man has such a friend, that must be served, to give
him a few thousands, to spend in his own way, than to admit him into the
important offices of revenue, and thereby corrupt its course and use.

Perhaps some errors of this sort may have occasioned a profusion of expense, a
neglect and loss of public stores, and a failure of distribution, all which
tend to increase our distress, and accelerate the decays of our finances; for
as in private affairs, prudence in expense is as necessary to a fortune as the
acquirement of money, so in our public administration, I conceive economy in
expenditures, as necessary a part of financiering, as the acquirement of a
revenue: and I conceive in this, as in all other parts of public
administration, good government depends more on the men who administer, than on
the system or form of the constitution, the wisdom of the laws, or prudence of
the general orders; for let all these be ever so good, if the executive part is
not committed to industrious, wise, and faithful men, there will be a great
failure of justice, security, and peace.

VI. I propose a review of all our departments, and reducing all unnecessary
expenditures in them, as far as possible. It is better to lessen the expenses,
where it can be done with safety, than to increase the revenue; the one
lessens, the other increases the public burden. I am told there are 9000
rations issued daily in this city, where there is not the least appearance of
any military movements, except a few invalids, and sick in the hospital, and
the prisoners, all which do not amount to one third of the aforesaid number of
rations.

I am told there are posts of commissioners, quarter masters, purchasers, etc.
fixed at about 10 or 15 miles distance from each other through this State, and
some say through the whole Thirteen States; if they were all sent out of the (...)
all the supplies within reach of our market, would come of course to this city,
and might be all purchased here by one man, much cheaper, and at less expense,
than by all those posts; spreading them about through the country answers the
same end, as if a private man should send a servant ten miles out of town to
buy his marketing; he must solicit more, pay a higher price, and have a worse
choice than if he stayed at home, and bought in market. But I cannot pretend to
go into the minutiae of these matters; I can only observe, that people out of
doors cannot at all conceive the reason or use of these multiplied officers of
so many different names, that one has need of a dictionary to understand them;
I am apt to wish they were all struck off the list, by one dash of the pen, at
least that their rations and clothing might be stopped, and sent to camp for
the use of our soldiers in real service.

I would add to my wish also, that their horses might be taken away from them,
that they might not be able to parade it through the country on horseback, or in
carriages, as they now do with a gaiety of dress, importance of air, and
grandeur of equipage, very chagrining to the impoverished inhabitants who
maintain them: I conceive this method would supply our camp very comfortably
for several months, till our finances might be recruited by the numerous taxes
which are coming in, and in this way the necessity of Loans might be prevented,
or at least lessened.

If it should not be thought expedient to send their wines to camp, as I do not
know that an abundance of liquors do soldiers or any body else any good, I
propose to send them to vendue, as they have much engrossed that article of
late, it is become very scarce and dear, and would probably bring a great
price, and the proceeds of them might be a seasonable supply to the Continental
Treasury, and further lessen the necessity of loaning.

In fine, my great object is to get our revenue fixed on a sure and sufficient
foundation, and our expenditures reduced within the bounds of use, necessary to
the safety and benefit of the community. In this case our people will all be
willing to contribute the aids necessary; for the intentions of the people at
large are ever upright, and it is rare that there is any difficulty with them
in this respect, when they are convinced that the public moneys are all
prudently expended for necessary uses.

I further conceive that taxes are absolutely necessary, not only to supply the
public treasury, but to reduce our money to a fixed standard, and restore it to
its natural and necessary use, which no other method of supplying the treasury
can do, and which yet must be done, in order to deliver us from the most
dreadful calamity of a fluctuating currency. This I consider as of the most
weighty importance, and at the same time of so critical, difficult, and
intricate a nature, that it will require the utmost attention to the means of
it, and the highest prudence and care to watch their operations, and add to or
diminish their force as occasion may require.

For if the money should appreciate, it will, over and above all private wrong,
increase the national debt. An appreciation of only 10 per cent. which may be
done almost imperceptibly, will add 20,000,000 to that debt, which must be
paid, not in shadows, but by the hard labor of our people. Such is the subtle
nature and imperceptible ^peration of this mighty error, that no degree of
attention to it can be deemed unnecessary. To mend this, I conceive to be the
great work before us, hic labor, hoc opus est.

I am but little concerned or alarmed at the present pinch of the treasury. Our
resources are too great to permit such a temporary, such a momentary distress
to be fatal; a proper reduction of our expenditures, or a small anticipation of
our revenue in any way, will remedy it. If the great springs of our revenue can
be put in motion, we may be easily saved, otherwise we must perish.

I beg leave here to add, that the attention of Congress, however sufficient,
if it were not unavoidably drawn off by an infinity of other objects that
constantly crowd upon them, is not and cannot be practicable in a degree
adequate to this great object. Nor indeed do I think that any board of numbers
or aggregate body would be likely to form a system so exact, and bestow an
attention so accurate and uniform as would be necessary in this case. I
conceive it must be the work of one mind, which ever could investigate and
superintend matters of an abstruse nature and critical movements better alone
than with company; and therefore,

VII. I believe this was the first proposal made in America, for the
appointment of such an officer; I was so much convinced of the importance of
such an appointment, that I repeated the proposal in several subsequent
publications, and about a year after this, at the particular desire of some
members of Congress, published an essay on the nature, authority, and uses of
this office.
I propose, that a financier or comptroller of finances, be appointed, whose
sole object and business should be to superintend the finances, i. e. the
revenues and expenditures of the States, the state of the currency, and all the
funds in which we are concerned, and in short, our whole resources and
expenditures; and keep the one well in balance with the other, all under the
authority of Congress, and in every thing subject to their control. The
Congress would then have the subject examined and formed to their hand, and
would have nothing more to do than correct and approve it.

If a man adequate to this business could be found, I conceive his appointment
would be of the highest utility to the States, as we may easily conceive only
by imagining the benefits which might have resulted from such an appointment,
had such an one been made five years ago.

However, I do but propose this with the same simplicity of mind as I express
my other thoughts; if it is not approved, it may be easily rejected, with any
other of my propositions, and I have only to desire this one favor of my
indulgent reader, that if he does not like this, or any other part of my
Essays, that he would lay them by, and read them again a year or two hence,
after which he has my leave to do what he pleases with them.

Time is the surest expositor and best judge of all plans and speculations of
this sort; the vain and vicious will either vanish or stand condemned before
him; the useful and good only can be approved and preserved by him: and while I
make this appeal, every body will allow that I refer myself to a most equitable
and reasonable arbiter, and I hope all my readers will heartily wait this
decision with me, without censuring too bitterly sentiments on which time has
not yet decided.

-- Quod optanti Divum promittere nemo,
A^der^t, Volvenda Dies en att^lit ultro. --
VIRGIL. A FOURTH ESSAY ON FREE TRADE and FINANCE.
First published in Philadelphia, February 10, 1780.
THE system of taxation equal to the public expenditures, adopted and
recommended by Congress, The first recommendation of Congress to the States to
raise money by a tax (which I recollect) was on Jan. 14, 1777; but this was
done in so indefinite a manner, without any sums or quotas specified, that
little or nothing came of it.

In Nov. 22, 1777, Congress recommended to the States to raise 5,000,000 of
dollars in the course of the year 1778, in quarterly payments, with the quotas
of each State annexed, etc. but this had little effect; small sums were raised
and paid by some of the States, within the year 1778; others made some
remittances long afterward, when the money was 20 for 1, or more, etc. but
great part was never paid at all. -- In the address of Congress to the people
of the United States, May 8, 1778, is this expression; what are the reasons
that your money is depreciated? Because no taxes have been imposed to carry on
the war.

Jan. 2, 1779, Congress resolved, that the States be called on for their quotas
of 15,000,000 of dollars, to be raised by taxes for the year 1779, and of
6,000,000 of dollars to be raised annually for 18 years, commencing with the
year 1780; as a fund for sinking loans and (...) paying interest, etc.

May 21, 1779, Congress resolved, that the States should be called on for their
quotas of the further sum of 45,000,000 of dollars, to be paid into the
Continental Treasury before the 1 st of Jan. 1780.

Oct. 6, 1779, they further resolved, that the States be called on to raise
their respective quotas of 15,000,000 of dollars, monthly; to be paid into the
Continental Treasury on the 1 st day of Feb. 1780, and on the 1st day day of
each following month up to Oct. 1st inclusive; i. e. 15,000,000 of dollars per
month for 9 months successively, beginning with Feb. 1780.

This provision for the year 1780, if continued through the year, would have
amounted to 180,000,000 of dollars; to which if we add the annual 6,000,000 for
that year, it would raise the sum to 186,000,000 of dollars; which, had, it
been rigidly and effectually collected (as might be expected; for every body by
this time, both in and out of Congress, seemed pretty (...) earnest for
effectual taxes) I say, had this sum been rigidly (...), it would doubtless
have produced a very destructive and very (...) of the currency, which it was
my object in this Essay to (...) avoid.

For, by fixing the money at 40 for 1 (which was the (...) time) and directing
the taxes to be paid either (...) that exchange, it would be manifestly
impossible to (...) money above or below that exchange (...) the (...) so much.
A want of (...) (...) have (...) money (...) never could raise the (...)

Nor could such a (...) hard money was at that time (...) large (...) by (...)
^ ^ ^ ^.


is grounded on the most solid and demonstrable principles, and, if there is no
error or defect in the execution of it, cannot fail of producing the two great
ends expected from it, Viz. Supplying the expenses of the States, and reducing
our currency to a fixed and permanent value. These two effects will be produced
by the natural operation of this system, without any force or extraneous helps.

Yet it is to be noted here with care and concern, that when these great and
steady principles come to operate on the present distracted state of our
currency and finances, very sad and perhaps fatal effects will be produced, and
infinite injustice done, even by this forcible remedy, though the most salutary
and only effectual one, if some care is not taken to direct its force and limit
its first effects. The appreciation of our currency is among the first of these
ill consequences which I fear, and would guard against. The evils of this I
have considered in my Second Essay; but as what I there urged either has not
been understood or regarded, I think it necessary here to resume the subject,
which certainly merits the highest attention of every American.

The value of Continental money is what it is now worth to the possessor. The
present exchange of Continental money is to hard money at the rate of about 40
to 1, though it is very fluctuating; at this exchange of 40 to 1, which is very
near the truth, and for which I appeal to the merchants' and goldsmiths' books,
I say, at this exchange, our debt of continental money, i. e. all the
continental money in circulation, is worth 5,000,000 of dollars in hard money.
For the reader need not be told that that value is found by dividing the whole
sum of our currency, viz. 200,000,000 of dollars, by the exchange, viz. 40,
which will make a quotient of 5,000,000 of dollars of hard money.

If this exchange is reduced, say to 20 for 1, it will increase this public
debt to 10,000,000 of hard dollars. Therefore, it follows, that every
appreciation of the money increases the public debt, and to an amazing degree,
by movements, indeed almost imperceptible, yet certain, and to an amount almost
beyond belief. For if the exchange should fall to 10 for 1, the debt would rise
to 20,000,000; an exchange of 5 to 1 would raise the debt to 40,000,000 of hard
dollars, and so on till the debt would rise to 200,000,000 of hard dollars, and
all this without the least benefit to the public, but in every view to its
detriment. For, over and above the vast increase of taxes necessary to pay this
increased debt, many other evils still worse than the tax would follow, to
which I must beg the reader's most serious attention; for however out of sight
and distant it may appear, the mischief is infinite, and must be fatal, if not
prevented.

1. This appreciation will raise the value of the money in the chests of the
possessors, in proportion as it increases the public debt. This will raise the
great money-holders into nabobs, so rich there will be no living with them.
They have already, it is generally thought, much more than their share. Men of
overgrown riches, especially of sudden acquirement, are dangerous to any
community. They are not generally people of the best refinement of manners or
wisest discretion, and therefore, their influence in the community (which will
ever be, caeteris paribus, in proportion to their wealth) will be dangerous;
but were they all the best of men, such amazing and sudden acquisitions of
wealth would be enough to spoil them. We find, by long and various experience,
that human nature cannot bear, without corruption, such sudden leaps into the
heights of greatness, prosperity, wealth, and influence.

2. This same cause will induce all men to hoard their money, when they find it
grows better and better daily in their chests. Money will soon become so
scarce, as not to be obtained without great difficulty, and this will increase
the value (...) appreciation of it; for the value of money will ever be (...)
proportion to its scarcity and demand. Thus every stage of this mischief will
tend to increase the evil, and lead on to further stages of the same calamity
and distress. This is obvious to every one.

3. This same cause will ruin our trade and manufactures; for the rise of money
in the desk will be more profitable than any trade or branch of manufacture.
This will ruin all industry; for the rich will not go into business, and the
poor will not find employers, and this will produce scarcity of all goods, both
home produced and imported, and of course general distress and want must follow.

4. This same appreciation will increase the public debt, and consequently will
increase the taxes by which it must be paid, and that in proportion to the
value or amount of the appreciation. The appreciation of money is like an
account in a merchant's book; there must be a debtor and creditor to it. It is
not possible that one shilling should be gained by one person in this way,
which is not lost by somebody. If you make the money more valuable in my
pocket, it will cost the public more to redeem it; and therefore, if it was to
be appreciated up to its original value, every man's tax must be multiplied by
the present exchange, i. e. made about 40 times greater than it need be, to
redeem all the money at the present value; and therefore it is probable those
who think the present taxes are not more than the fortieth part of what they
should be, will be zealous promoters of the scheme of appreciation.

5. This same thing will increase every private debt. For nothing is plainer
than this, viz. if the money is more valuable at the time of payment than it
was at the time of contract, the debt is thereby increased, i. e. it will take
more hard money, or more wheat to pay the debt, than would have paid it at the
time of contract. This brings on the inevitable ruin of many poor people, who
cannot avoid being more or less in debt for rent or some other necessary thing.
It is hard enough for them to pay their debts at their just value; but when the
sum comes to be increased, perhaps doubled or trebled in a few months, the
payment becomes either extremely difficult or impossible. This might at first
please the rich pretty well, but they would find their mistake, for they would
be obliged soon to accept a notice of bankruptcy, instead of payment from their
debtors.

6. The great cry for appreciation is, that those who have suffered by
depreciation ought to have the benefit of a compensation by the appreciation of
the currency; but this is nugatory, and will prove in the end a perfect
deception. For not one tenth part, perhaps not an hundredth part of the money,
when it shall appreciate, will be found in the hands of those who have suffered
by the depreciation. It will be no adequate remedy to any of them, but will be
an increase of distress and injury to far the greatest part of them.

Those persons who have suffered by the depreciation, but by the chance of the
times have been able to make it up some other way, so as to be able to hoard up
sufficient (...) of money to take advantage of the appreciation, those, I say,
are not the great objects of my concern; but the helpless widow, the fatherless
infant, and a thousand others, who have been obliged, through the deficiency of
their interest, to spend on the principal, till it is all or mostly gone,
those, I say, are the great objects of pity; their cries for justice and
compensation ought to be heard; the appreciation does them no good, for they
have not cash on which it can operate; for nobody can take any benefit of the
appreciation, but such as have more cash on hand than all their taxes will
amount to; but the aforesaid widows* etc. are by the appreciation plunged into
an increased (...) and injury; for if they have an acre of land, or (...) ^ow
left, they must be loaded with a vast incre^^^^ (...), in order to appreciate
the money which they have l^^t, and which now lies hoarded in the coffers of
their rich neighbors, who have gotten it from them.

From this view of the matter, it appears that many people may imagine that
they shall receive an advantage from the appreciation, and therefore cry loudly
for it, who will, in the end, be greatly hurt by it. It seems they ask they
know not what, like the mother of Zebedee's children, who, in the ardency of
maternal affection, petitioned our Savior that her two sons might sit, the one
on his right hand, and the other on his left, not considering that the purport
of her petition was, that one of her sons might be saved and the other damned.

7. The appreciation of the Continental bills will continue through the whole
course of it, all the mischiefs of a fluctuating currency. This destroys or
varies the standard or common measure of value of all things bought or sold;
renders all money-contracts and debts uncertain; corrupts the equity and alters
the force of our laws, by varying the fines, forfeitures, and fees limited by
them; and in short, throws both the private man in his dealings, and the judge
on the bench, into such perplexity and confusion, that neither can have due
knowledge of right, even when they may be disposed to do it, whilst the wicked
have the greatest latitude in which they may practice shocking wrongs, and that
in the face of the sun, and with impunity. This suspends the rewards of virtue
and the punishment of vice, corrupts the morals of the people, and in the end
produces every evil work. Surely this picture is dreary.

8. From all these mischiefs no one benefit can arise to the public. Every
advantage of the appreciation goes to the rich men who have got the money
hoarded, and to them alone. Why then all this more than Herculean labor of
appreciating the money? why all these risks and public dangers? why all this
multiplied burden and distress on our people? The uses of the currency are to
every purpose as great to the public, if fixed at the present value, at two
pence or three pence the dollar, as at any other value that can be named.

9. The appreciation of the currency will destroy the equity of the taxation
itself, according to the known and received principles of it, viz. that all
estates ought to be taxed in proportion to their value, in such manner that
every man's estate, after the tax is paid, shall bear the same proportion to
his neighbor's as before, i. e. so that no man should be enriched or
impoverished by the tax more than his neighbor.

But if the money is appreciated, the tax will have a very different effect, as
will be obvious at first sight, only by viewing its operation in one very
familiar instance, viz. Suppose two brothers have each a plantation of equal
value, say worth 1000 l. hard money each, and one of them ^ells his plantation
for 1000 l hard money, and changes that money into 40,000 l. continental money,
and the tax comes on; and we will further suppose they are both taxed according
to the value of their estates, i. e. equally, and that the tax necessary to
appreciate the money be 20 per cent. on the whole value; it appears then plain
that the tax of the one, who keeps his plantation, will be 200 l. hard money,
and the tax of the other, who has 40,000 l. continental money, will be 8000 l.
of that money; consequently, the first will have a clear estate lest of 800 l.
hard money value, but the other will have an estate worth 32,000 l. hard money,
for by the supposition all the money he has left will be appreciated up to its
original value, i. e. to the value of hard money, and will be worth 40 times as
much as his brother's estate. But if all these arguments do not convince, I
have one more, which, I think, must do for the hardiest opponent; it is this:
--

10. The scheme of appreciation will destroy itself; it is in its nature
impracticable, and its own operation will work its destruction. For the
appreciation of the currency will increase the taxes and public burdens to such
an enormous and insupportable amount, that the people neither can, or will, or
ought to bear them. When they come to be told that all their taxes are not at
all for the benefit of the public, but are for no other purpose than to
increase the value of the money hoarded by their rich neighbors (and they
certainly will (...) this out) they will join in one general cry against the
oppression, with one voice damn the taxes, and swear they will not pay them.

Then the mighty bubble will sink into nothing, and with it will go all our
revenue, public faith, defense, honor, and political existence.

Very many things more might be added on this fertile subject; but if what I
have said in my Second Essay on this subject, and what I have repeated and
added here, is not sufficient for conviction, it is vain and useless in my
opinion to add more, and shall only here beg my reader's patience and attention
a moment to an affair of my own.

I do here, as an individual, enter my protest most solemnly against this most
fatal, useless, and chimerical scheme of appreciating the currency, and am
determined to leave a copy of my Essays with my children, that my posterity may
know that in 1780 there was, at least, one citizen of Philadelphia who was not
totally distracted, and that they may have the honor and consolation of being
descended from a man, who was able to keep in his senses in times of the
greatest infatuation.

But all this notwithstanding, and although appearances are strong against me, I
will still hope that there yet is a judicious majority on my side, who are
thoroughly sick of all visionary projects, and wish to adopt the substantial
and sure remedies which still remain in our power. With such as these I will
most cheerfully join in company, and sit down with them with great pleasure,
and unite in farther consultation on the important subject, begging this favor
at the same time of the rest, who do not like our employment, that they would
not come into the room to interrupt us; and this they cannot think a hardship,
as they certainly can lose nothing by it, for I really have not one word more
to say to them.

If it is granted that the currency ought not to be appreciated up to its
original value, I cannot see a shadow of reason why it should be appreciated at
all, and not be fixed at its present value. The truth is always better than any
thing near it, although ever so near. Every shilling that it may be appreciated
is added to the public debt, for which the public receives not the least
advantage, but all the profit goes to the great hoarders of our currency; for
those who have no more on hand than just the amount of their whole tax get
nothing by it. There remain then but two things to be considered: 1st. What the
present exchange of the currency is; and 2dly. How to fix it to that exchange
or value.

I. As to the first of these there is a difficulty, principally arising from
this, viz. that the exchange is not the same in all the States, but different
in the different States, and this difference is not fixed in the different
States, but sometimes varies in the several parts of the same State. But it is
here to be observed, that the exchange of the several parts of the State
differs very little from that which prevails in the great capitals nearest to
them, and what little variation there is, most generally appears to lie in
this, viz. that the exchange rises first in the great capitals, and the out
towns, of less trade, follow pretty quickly after them; so that the exchange of
each State may be pretty safely taken from that of its capital, or the great
capital to which it is most contiguous.

The rule by which I find the true exchange at any given time is, to take the
exchange which prevailed at the given time in each State, and add them all
together and divide the sum by 13, and the quotient will be the mean exchange
or value of the currency. For instance, by the best advice I can collect, the
exchange last Christmas, or December 25, 1779, was, in the four New England
States, New York, North and South Carolina, and Georgia, i. e. in eight States,
at 35 for 1, and in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia,
i. e. in five States, at 40 for 1, their sums will stand thus, -- 8 into 35 is
280 And 5 into 40 is 200 Sum, 480 which sum divided by 13 gives a quotient of
36 1^/23 or 37 nearly, which I suppose to be the true mean exchange or averaged
value of the currency, through all the Thirteen States, at that time.

The present exchange in this city is 45 to 1, and the exchange was rising both
to the eastward and southward when the last advices came away, so that I
suppose the present mean exchange may safely and truly be fixed at 40 for 1,
but our future advices will soon determine this beyond all doubt. This is
throwing aside all theory and speculation, and grounding my computation
entirely on fact, and is a method which I expect will be allowed to be fair,
true, and unexceptionable; and at this value I propose that the currency should
be fixed at present, and be finally redeemed at the same. Both these I conceive
very just and practicable.

I do not think there is any justice in taxing the public to appreciate any
man's money in his chest beyond the present value. This would be burdening the
public, merely for the benefit of a few individuals of monied men; for I before
observed that no person could take benefit of such an appreciation, but such as
have more money on hand than all their taxes for redeeming the whole currency
will amount to; and those few among us who have such a surplus of money are the
men who have the least occasion of assistance from the public, and in general
have the least right to expect or even to wish it. For a further consideration
of this I refer back to all the reasons I have given against an appreciation.

On the other hand, it will be readily granted that every principle of justice
requires that any further depreciation of our currency should, if possible, be
prevented. The practicability of both these, i. e. of fixing the currency,
deserves our most serious consideration; and here, notwithstanding the
unaccountable and seemingly capricious fluctuation of the exchange, both in
progressive and retrograde motion (for we have frequently seen both) yet I say,
this notwithstanding, I do contend there are great natural principles, which,
if properly applied, will confine this slippery subject, fix it to a point, and
prevent such fluctuation as will greatly prejudice its use. -- To prevent an
APPRECIATION,

I. As the currency has no real fixed value in itself, it is necessary that it
should be connected, tied, or fastened firmly to something that is fixed, which
may hold it steady, as an anchor does a ship, which keeps its place by that
connection, let the wind or tide set either way. Such a fixed medium is hard
money, the value of which cannot vary much from its value in Europe, and
therefore its permanency may be safely depended on. To this end I propose,

1. That an order of Congress be passed, that hard money shall be received for
taxes and all other payments into the Continental Treasury, at the present
value or fixed exchange; say 40 for 1. For as the demand for taxes will be very
great and universal; if the present system of taxation be carried into
effectual execution, as it doubtless will be, it will not be possible for any
man to get a better exchange than is received in the public treasury.

2. I propose that a resolution pass to redeem the whole currency finally at
the present value; say 40 for 1. This will effectually take away all inducement
to raise the value of it beyond the exchange which can finally be obtained for
it, when it shall be redeemed. I do apprehend that my reasons before assigned
against the appreciation will prove the justice, good policy, and necessity of
these resolutions, to which I therefore refer.

3. I propose that all public estimates, quotas, payments, etc. be made in hard
money, or Continental equal to it at the current exchange, and also that all
judgments of courts, fees, salaries, etc. should be made up in the same manner,
that so no public community or private person should receive either injury or
benefit from any future fluctuation of the currency, either up or down, if such
should happen, any farther than his cash on hand might be affected by it. This
would not only be an effectual remedy of the crying injustice, both public and
private, which has too long prevailed among us, but will also take away the
principal inducement and temptation to attempt any fluctuation of the currency.

4. I propose, for the more effectual operation of this remedy, that all the
tender acts, all laws against dealing in hard money, and every other of that
nature which now subsist in any of the States, may be repealed. As those acts
were mostly made on the recommendation of Congress, I apprehend a
recommendation of that honorable body to the several States for such repeal
might be necessary. -- It appears to me that these propositions will most
effectually prevent any future appreciation of our currency.

But it may be said here, we are sufficiently out of danger of that, the
present labor is stop the depreciation. But I do not know all this. I have many
reasons to fear an appreciation, which would be a very ruinous calamity if it
should happen, and I think we may do well to use precautions against a possible
evil; and I have at least the common argument of quacks in favor of my
propositions, that they are innocent, they can do no hurt, and they may do
good. If the event to which they are designed to be applied should happen, they
will be of the utmost use and benefit; if that event should not happen, their
operation will be prevented, and no bad effects can proceed from them. I am as
sensible as any man of the urgent necessity of preventing a farther
depreciation, and therefore recur to such great natural principles as I think
will most effectually and assuredly remedy the mischief; and here I hope it
will not be taken amiss, if I repeat some things I have heretofore advanced;
for great truths, and weighty principles of decisive importance, ought often to
be repeated, that they may be better kept in mind. I proceed then, to prevent
DEPRECIATION,

II. To observe, that one great cause of depreciation is the increase of the
quantity of our currency, and therefore the quantity must by no means be
increased. For it is not possible to prevent the operation of such increase on
the depreciation. It matters not in what shape such an increase may appear,
whether of Continental bills, certificates, bills on Europe, or bills of
particular States. If the quantity in circulation is increased, it is not in
the nature of the thing possible to prevent the effect of depreciation, which
must and will flow from that increase. Therefore, the incomes must be made
equal to the expenditures. This will give the currency a quick circulation,
sufficient for every purpose, without any increase of its quantity, will raise
that demand for it, which is essential to its nature and use, and from its
natural operation will prevent any possibility of depreciation, if the
confidence of the public in its final redemption can be made entire and free of
doubt.

And this brings me to the consideration of another great principle, on which
the credit of all bills must depend, viz. the final redemption of the bills
must be made certain, and the value or exchange at which they shall be finally
paid or redeemed must be certainly known. If there is any doubt of either of
these in the minds of the people, that doubt will lessen the value of the
bills; for a certainty will always be better than an uncertainty, i. e. the
credit of the States must stand so firmly connected with their real substance,
that there can be no doubt but the one will be supported by the other. The life
and use of money lies in a quick and ready circulation; yet, although this
circulation should be ever so brisk, if it passes from hand to hand, like
Robin's alive, in constant danger of dying in the last hand, it must,
notwithstanding all its signs of life and vigor, depreciate fast; and I
conceive a general confidence or doubt of this kind has operated more on our
currency than people are generally aware of.

In the gloomy aspect of our affairs in the winter of 1778, when the British
army had possession of Philadelphia, the exchange rose to 6, 7, and 8 for 1. In
the summer and fall of the same year, when we began to feel the great effects
of General Gates's success, the English sued for peac^ and their army left
Philadelphia, our alliance with France was formed, with a prospect of the
accession of Spain, and a powerful French fleet was on our coast, the exchange
fell to 4 for 1, and kept down for many months to (...).

But when our sanguine expectations began to (...), new difficulties arose, and
the multiplied emissions had swelled the quantity of our currency to an
enormous amount, beyond any probability or even possibility of payment at full
value, there ensued a great abatement of the general confidence, and mighty
doubts arose whether it would ever be redeemed at all, or, if it was, at what
value; and these doubts increased with the increase of the quantity, and some
other causes, till the exchange rose up to the enormous height which now
exists. The principal causes of these doubts, and consequently of the
depreciation, I take it, have been the uncertainty of the fate of the war, or
support of our Independence, and the increasing enormous sum of our currency. I
conceive all doubts arising from the first of these causes are pretty well done
away.

I think it is so far from remaining a doubt whether we shall support our
Independence, that I do not apprehend it is in our power to give it up if we
were willing, and to fall back into the dominion of Great Britain. I am of
opinion that France and Spain, and perhaps some other powers, must be
conquered, before the trade or government of America can be permitted to be
monopolized and controlled by Great Britain. The vast extent of our country,
the fertility of our soil, salubrity of our climates, with other natural
advantages, together with the rapid increase of our people, agriculture, and
arts, make us an object of vast importance, expectation, and attention with
every trading country of Europe, and they will not easily give up the share of
profit which they expect to derive from us.

If we continue to increase as we have done in time past, that is, to double
every 25 years, the Thirteen States will contain more people at the end of the
next century, than France, Spain, and Great Britain together all contain at
present. All Europe gaze with attention on our rising greatness, and it is a
pity that America, like some careless beauty, should be the only person in the
company, insensible of her charms. It is time for us to know our own
importance, and not throw ourselves away in a needless despondency.

As to the doubts arising from the great quantity of our currency, and the
consequent uncertainty of its redemption, I conceive they will be effectually
removed by the foregoing propositions. The present debt of Continental money
ceases to appear enormous; it does not exceed 5,000,000 of hard dollars, which
is less than 2 dollars per head on the inhabitants; a light burden! a trifle!
not adequate to the abilities of the poorest town in the Thirteen States. The
only remaining doubt is, whether the States will in fact pay this sum, small as
it is. This doubt appears to me ridiculous; for were we to suppose there was
not a grain of honor or honesty left in the Thirteen States, on which we could
depend for the payment of their debts, yet they have suffered so much by the
depreciation of their currency, that they will, from a principle of
self-preservation, remedy the mischief, and prevent it in future. A burnt child
dreads the fire, and certainly we have not lost all the feelings of human
nature, however callous we may be to the inducements of moral principles.

But my confidence, even in the morality of the States, is not shaken, it is
entire. It is my opinion our people are able and willing to do all that is
necessary to be done in the present crisis. Nothing more is or can be
necessary, than to put the matter in a proper train of operation.

Let the people see the expenditures made with prudence and economy; that the
demand of public money is grounded on public necessity only; let them see men
acting in the offices, through which the public moneys are to pass, in whom
they can have confidence; let them see a system of finance formed, which shall
appear both practicable and sufficient, and put under such direction as shall
afford a good probability of prudent management and effectual execution; let
these things be done (and I do not take them to be mountains impracticable) and
I conceive our public faith will be effectually restored, and rise to such a
degree of respectability, that ^o branch of the revenue will dare to defraud
the treasury, or withhold the supplies necessary to the public safety; no^, on
the other hand, will our public faith prove a (...) and infamous trap to those
who have trusted their fortunes to its security.

I do not pretend these are light matters and without difficulty. The f^rming a
system of finance is an arduous work, fully (...) to the abilities of a person
of the strongest intellects, steady attention, and aptitude to the subject. It
must be the work of ONE MIND, capable of the necessary attention to all the
parts, and able so to comprehend and arrange the (...) as to form a system both
practicable and sufficient. I do (...) think any aggregate body of men on earth
able to do this. I am of opinion, that we might as well expect that a General
Assembly, a Parliament, a Diet of an Empire, or a Congress, could describe and
demonstrate the properties of the sphere, compute the force of falling bodies,
define the laws of hydrostatics, or make an almanac, as form a system of
finance.

The power of superintendence and legal sanction is theirs; but the calculation
and execution of the system is not, in my humble opinion, compatible to the
senatorial body. The British Parliament, some years ago, abolished the Julian
style, and adopted the Gregorian, and gave it legal sanction, to the great
satisfaction and benefit of the kingdom; but I never heard any man suppose that
that Parliament was ever capable of calculating or demonstrating either of the
styles; yet I do not apprehend that it is any reflection on the dignity,
abilities, or competency of that Parliament to suppose, that, if nobody could
have calculated styles better than they could, we might have done without any
till this time, and computed the advance of the spring by the budding of
white-oak trees, as the Indians do.

The consequence from all this is, in my opinion, that if a senatorial body
want styles, systems of finance, or any things else which require peculiar
abilities, such as by common probability cannot be presumed to exist in such a
^^dy, they can only manifest their wisdom and employ their authority in
appointing men of proper abilities to make them; then the Senate can examine
and correct them, and add their sanction and authority, put the ^^^cution of
them under a proper direction, and keep the superintendence only in themselves.
I think it may easily appear, that the nature of the subject limits the powers
of a Senate to this line of conduct.

But were it not so, good policy would prescribe this method; for the ground of
finance is, every step of is, most dangerous ground. Errors are at first
imperceptible and easily made, but soon shoot up into capital importance, and
often assume a most hideous and ghastly appearance; all which is apt to throw
disgrace and censure, and sometimes contempt, on the authors. That which
proceeded from ignorance may be attributed to bad design. In any view, mistakes
and disappointments prove the ignorance or imperfection of the managers, and
there will always be some degree of contempt due to persons who undertake
things which they know not how to perform.

Bodies of supreme dignity ought never to incur censures or aspersions of this
sort. The public always suffer, when the wisdom or integrity of their supreme
power is called at all into question. They ought, therefore, in all good
policy, to appoint proper persons to do all business of this sort, were it only
that they might have a scapegoat to bear away from themselves the censure,
disgrace, and contempt which any errors might occasion, when they came to be
discovered; for it is very observable, that when any error or misconduct
happens in any great department of the State, the blame always falls on the
officer under whose direction it was made. No part of the censure ever falls on
the supreme power, unless it is that of making a corrupt or injudicious
appointment of the officer, or taking the management of the matter out of his
hands by too particular instructions.

On the whole matter, our country abounds with men and every sort of supplies
which we need (military stores and clothing excepted, which are easily
attainable from abroad). Our public counsels and measures are very little
obstructed by disputes or parties in opposition. The great thing wanted is, to
put our finances into such a train, order, or system, as will revive the public
credit, bring our currency into such an established value and demand, as is
necessary to its nature and use, and enable the public to call into use such
services and supplies as are necessary to the public safety.

The abilities requisite to form and execute such a system are not to be found
or expected in any senatorial body; i. e. by common probability it cannot be
presumed, that the component members of such a body should be possessed of the
rare and peculiar abilities requisite for this great purpose.

It remains then a matter of the highest and most urgent necessity, that a
suitable person for the great office of Financier-General, or Superintendent of
Finance, should be looked up, and appointed as soon as may be, whose sole
business should be to inspect and control our whole revenue and expenditures,
and keep them in balance with each other.

I imagine this high office will not be very greedily sought or eagerly
accepted by any person capable of it. It will require the most unwearied,
unremitted application, the most intense and fixed attention to a subject of a
most intricate nature and great extent; the heartfelt interests, the loss or
gain, the injury or benefit of millions, will stand closely connected with his
conclusions and management, and of course his errors, if he makes any (as from
the intricacy and vast extent of the subject he undoubtedly must) his errors, I
say, will incur the severe resentment, and raise the merciless cry of the
inconsiderate and ill-natured, which make a considerable part of the world; and
after all, if he conducts with success, he will get little praise; for every
thing in his way will go smoothly on in a regular train, which will soon grow
familiar, and of course unnoticed, and not one in a thousand will know to whom
they are indebted for their tranquillity.

Besides, I do not know that the present confusions of our revenue are capable
of being speedily reduced to order by any address of wisdom, skill, and
diligence; and should he fail, the weighty burden might crush him in an
instant, and he may fall, like Phaeton, ridiculous and unpitied, for
undertaking a work for which, perhaps any degree of human wisdom or ability may
prove insufficient. Be this as it may, much will depend on the choice of this
officer. Should an insufficient man be appointed, his defects or mismanagement
will not only be severely felt while he is in office, but most probably his
successor may find a more difficult task to correct his errors, than to have
taken up the matter new, and set out right at first.

But to return to the main point; the great question seems now to be, whether,
in any practicable train or method, it would be possible to raise money among
ourselves equal to the necessary expenditures, i. e. whether the people could
pay such a large sum. To this I answer, the best method of judging of the
mighty wealth and abilities of the States is, by reflecting on what they have
paid in times past. The expenses of the war for 5 years past have been about
11,000,000 of hard dollars per annum, besides the loans, as will easily appear
by computing the value of the bills emitted each year; and this has been all
paid, except 5,000,000, and that in the worst, most distressing and oppressive
method that could be devised, viz. by the depreciation of the currency.

The payments of the last year, 1779, which were actually made, were much more
than the said sum, for on the last day of the year 1778, the whole currency was
somewhat more than 90,000,000, and the exchange was 6 to 1: consequently,
90,000,000, divided by 6, will give in hard money the amount of our debt of
continental money, viz. 15,000,000 of hard dollars, to which add the
expenditures of the year 1779, viz. about 140,000,000 of dollars, It may be
objected to this calculation, that 33,000,000 of the 140,000,000 of dollars
emitted in 1779, were for exchanging the emissions of May 20, 1777 (8,000,000
of dollars) and of April 11, 1778 (25,000,000) which were called out of
circulation; but this does not diminish but increases the loss by depreciation,
which the States suffered in that year^; for the whole 140,000,000 were really
emitted (it matters not on what occasion) and all that the bills s^nk in value
by depreciation from the time of emission to the end of that year, was lost by
the States.

And as to the 33,000,000 of the said two emissions called in, it is to be
observed, that on the last day of the year 1778, they were worth at 6 for 1
(which was the exchange at that time) 5,500,000 of hard dollars; but on Aug. 1,
1779 (the day appointed by Congress for their redemption) the exchange was 20
for 1, and of course they were worth but about 1,700,000. which, subtracted
from their value on the last of the year 1778 (5,500,000 hard dollars) leaves a
loss of 3,800,000 of hard dollars, which the States suffered that year by the
depreciation of the said two emissions only.


which is somewhat less than was emitted in that year. To find the value of
this, we must divide it by the mean exchange of the year, which I conceive may
be found by multiplying the exchange at the end of the year 1778, viz. 6 for 1,
by the exchange at the end of the year 1779, viz. 40, which makes a product of
240, the square-root of which, viz. 15 nearly, is the mean exchange, and the
sum of expenditures of 1779, viz. 140,000,000, divided by said mean exchange.
viz. 15, gives for quotient 9,000,000 of hard dollars, which, added to the
amount of the debt at the end of the year 1778, viz. 15,000,000, makes somewhat
what more than 24,000,000; out of which subtract the debt now remaining, viz.
5,000,000, there remain 19,000,000 of hard dollars, which have been actually
paid by the Thirteen States in the year 1779. This proves the prodigious
strength of the American States, and the very great burdens they can bear, as
well as their firmness and Patience in bearing them.

Indeed in the above calculations a very heavy, impoverishing part of their
burdens was not brought into the account, viz. over and above what is there
mentioned, they had to support a tax which the war itself imposed, more than
four times as heavy as all the present duties of impost, with all the new
additions, which the States now support, i. e. multiply the present impost laid
on every article of imported goods by 4, and add the product to the old
price-current of the same goods in 1774, and it will not raise them so high as
the average price at which the same imported goods were sold through the war.

Add to this the losses which were sustained by the extreme scarcity and want
of some necessary articles, e. g. much meat was spoiled and lost for want of
salt to preserve it; many trades and manufactures were either wholly stopped or
greatly diminished for want of materials, etc.

To all this may be added the dire effects of the depreciation of the currency
on all debts and money-contracts, all fees, salaries, taxes, fines, etc. etc.
Also the distresses and losses arising from the limitations of the market, the
ruinous effects of which were innumerable, and in many instances shocking and
almost tragical.

Another hardship very sensibly felt, was the force which was used with all
descriptions of men in seizing their goods, wagons, stock, grain, cattle,
timber, and every thing else which was wanted for the public service; most of
which, if ever paid for, were paid in certificates, or depreciated money, the
real value or exchange of which at the time bore but small proportion to the
value of the supplies for which they were given.

The bad management of the finances, and of course their deficiency, made some
of th^se methods indeed necessary to carry on the war; but at the same time
they operated not only by way of great injury and oppression of individuals,
but as a very heavy tax on the States.

Under all the for^mentioned pressures, a murmur at the expense of the war was
scarcely heard, but the last mentioned incidental evils and hardships were
matters of very great and universal complaint.

To all these direful sufferings may be added the captures, the ravages and
depredations, the burnings and plunders of the enemy, which were very terrible
and extensive; they had possession first or last, in the course of the war, of
eleven of the capitals of the Thirteen States, pervaded the country in every
part, and left dreadful tracks of their marches behind them; burned in cool
blood a great number, not only of houses, barns, mills, etc. but also of most
capital towns and villages.

The losses arising from all these, which were really sustained by the American
States, must be immense.

Yet all this notwithstanding, such are the riches, strength, and resources of
the States, that had any prudence in their finances and police been adopted and
practiced from even the close of the war, our country would by this time have
recovered itself, and might have possessed and enjoyed all the blessings of
general prosperity and full supplies.

But whils;t we rejoice in the riches and strength of our country, we have
reason to lament, with tears of the deepest regret, the most pernicious shift
of property which the above mentioned irregularities of our finances
introduced,a nd the many thousands of fortunes which were ruined by it; the
(...) suffered the injury; the avaricious and idle derived (...) from the said
confusion.




The question is then reduced to this, viz. Whether it is not only possible,
but much easier to pay 11,000,000 of hard dollars in some equitable mode, which
distributes the burden on all in due proportion to their abilities, than it was
last year to pay almost double that sum in the most unequal and oppressive way
imaginable. I know it will require strong exertions, but we began the war with
this expectation and resolution, and I do not think our people will shrink or
give back under the burden when it comes.

Besides, it does not appear to me possible to increase our circulating cash in
any way, without further depreciating it, which at once destroys its use, and
the very end we should have in view by increasing it. Loans will do this; for
every loan makes a new certificate or bill of some sort, and all these will
slow into circulation as soon as they gain that established value which they
ought to have, and which they must have, before we can borrow without a loss or
discount.

I think it manifestly reasonable, that all loan-office certificates should be
redeemed at the exchange which existed at their dates, and that there should be
a rate of exchange from the first depreciation down to the present time made,
to ascertain the exchange at the time when each bill was dated, and a sure
interest, in proportion to the value of the principal, should be secured to the
possessor, until the certificate shall be paid. If this was done, we might
borrow, perhaps, without a discount or loss, and keep our debt at home, which
would be much better than drawing bills on Europe at a loss of 30 or 40 per
cent. and contracting a hard money debt abroad. But this is digression. To
return to my subject.

I do not really see but that general and heavy taxes are most absolutely
necessary to give demand to our currency, animate the industry of our people,
and banish idleness, speculation, and a thousand visionary projects, which
prevail to ^n alarming degree, and which must vanish into nothing soon, and
therefore the sooner the better. Taxes will increase the circulation of our
currency, which will increase its use quite up to the full amount necessary to
all our needs, nor can I see any other way in which we can carry on the war,
without incurring such an enormous debt at the end of i^, as will mix the very
joys of established liberty with bitterness, and even endanger that very
liberty itself, for which we have so strenuously contended, and for which the
debt itself was contracted. The writer of three letters on appreciation, has
advised us to set the presses a going again, and in the plenitude of
calculation made out that the depreciation or exchange, at the end of the year
1780, would in that case be about 68 to 1; but had he founded his calculation
on fact (on the supposition that the depreciation would be no greater this year
than it was last, which is not true) he would have found the depreciation or
exchange, at the end of the year 1780, at least 260 to 1, and probably it would
be more than double, perhaps the treble of that exchange, if it should continue
to pass at all through the year, which is far from a certainty. This method then
will not do. The exchange of the currency at the end of the year 1780, without
the presses, or additional emissions, was up to 75 to 1; but on man can tell
what it would have been, had the presses kept going through that year.

Indeed the final redemption of the Continental money began to be much doubted,
or rather considered desperate, about that time, which increased the
depreciation far beyond what the quantity only in circulation would have
produced, for the value of the whole of it at the end of the year 1780 (when
the exchange was 75 for 1) was less than 3,000,000 of hard dollars, which is
not more than one fourth part of the current cash of the States.




From all which it appears pretty plain we have but two things before us, viz.
to raise as much money as will be sufficient to pay our expenditures as we go;
or, if we cannot do this, to reduce our expenditures to the sum which we can
pay. For to talk of keeping up a greater expense than we can pay any how, is
absurd and ridiculous to a very contemptible degree. To borrow abroad is
ruinous, and nothing is plainer than that we cannot hold it out long in this
way; and what is worse, our enemies must know this, and thereby be encouraged
to continue the war against us. To borrow at home destroys the very end and use
of the loan as it goes. The great purpose cannot be served in this way. What we
can raise among ourselves is all that we can pay, and we cannot attempt
expenditures beyond this without bankruptcy.

A peace cannot be expected till the end of the great contest between three of
the greatest powers of Europe, which may involve more powers in the dispute. It
is a matter of such high point of honor, pride, and interest with them all,
especially Great Britain, that they will strain the last nerve for superiority
before they will yield an ace, and the war may last many years; the consequence
of all this is, that we must take up the matter as we can hold out.

A man who has a long race before him is mad, if he exhausts all his strength
in the first mile. A certain degree of exertion we are capable of, beyond which
we cannot go; within this we must keep and confine ourselves. This degree ought
to be calculated with great judgment, and used with great economy, and with the
most effect it will bear, but it cannot be exceeded without the mighty and
tremendous danger of final ruin.

These are my best thoughts, the subject is too vast, too unexplored for my
comprehension. This is my fourth address to the public on this weighty theme. I
am obliged for the favorable reception of the other three, hope the same candor
will be extended to this. My thoughts are free, the nature and incidents of the
subject dictate my argument. Great natural principles will always make their
own way in the end; and if they are ever rejected, it is because they are not
rightly apprehended, and any departure from them will be checked and reformed
by dear experience.

My close attention to this great and intricate subject has taught me that it
baffles all speculative theory and calculation. The only safe basis of every
principle of reasoning on it must be fact or experiment. Here I drop my pen,
ready to stand corrected by the better thoughts and more useful discoveries of
any superior genius.

A FIFTH ESSAY ON FREE TRADE and FINANCE.
First published in Philadelphia, March 30, 1780.
THE expenditures of the present year 1780, are estimated (as I am told) at
about 10,000,000 of dollars hard money. This sum must be raised and paid, or
our defense must be discontinued; we must lose our liberties and probably many
of our heads too; our struggles must vanish into smoke and disgrace; and our
glorious revolution must be dubbed rebellion, and punished as such, and how
much more God knows. The said sum must be raised, or these miseries must ensue.
We have no other alternative, and it is vain and idle to amuse ourselves with
any hopes or even shadows of any other. Our defense cannot be continued without
the necessary money; if that ceases, we instantly lie open to the full power of
our enemies, and must submit to any conditions they may prescribe.

This I take to be the plain state of the facts; stubborn facts, which can
neither be removed, eluded, or softened, by any possible finesse, coloring, or
evasions. We may as well keep them in sight as to shut our eyes against them;
for facts they are, and will have their operation, which we must feel, whether
we will see them or not. If the expenditures, on which the estimates are made,
can be reduced, doubtless every possible attention will be paid to such an
object, but we cannot flatter ourselves that any very considerable savings can
be made in this way; it only remains then that we set ourselves immediately to
raise the money, or give up the cause in despair. I say IMMEDIATELY, for it
will soon be too late; every department will be so involved in debt, and the
difficulties, disappointments, and confusions thence arising will multiply so
fast, that no remedy can be admitted. To this Essay, when first published, the
following preface was prefixed, viz. "The urging taxes, I know very well, is an
unpopular task, and generally meets a ^our reception and very little thanks;
but the belly must be fed, or all the members must perish, and it is not
possible it should convey nutriment which it does not receive. When we find a
general decay and weakness spreading into every limb and nerve of the body, it
is time to attend very seriously to the malady, and every other consideration
must give place to the remedy. If there is a disorder or worm in the bowels
which devours much of the food, it is a sad circumstance indeed, but still the
belly must be fed, while we are taking every method in our power to extract or
kill the worm. Truth, however disagreeable, will force itself into notice and
attention, and to know it is always safer than to be deceived; our deception or
ignorance will not retard the hasty steps of ruin. The man who points out the
real distresses and dangers or errors of the State, does not make them; the
knowledge of them tends to a remedy. I therefore hope my humble attempt may be
received with candor, however disagreeable the subject, a present and diligent
attention to which, I conceive absolutely necessary to the public safety. If
any man can avoid my propositions, or substitute better, he may serve the
public, and will not disoblige me."


In a crisis of danger, when the most spirited and resolute efforts are called
for, to see men like children stand with one hand in their eyes, and the other
in their mouths, blubbering out with voices half assured, I cannot! I cannot! I
dare not! I dare not! is ridiculous, argues such meanness of spirit, such
heartless cowardice, I am ashamed of it. If I really thought the people of
America capable of this, I would not move a finger to save them from that
slavery and subjection for which they must, in that case, be so well fitted by
nature; it would not move my pity to see them lashed by their masters into that
severity of effort, which their cowardly souls had not animation enough to
exert in defense of their own liberties.

The very taxes which we now hesitate to impose on ourselves to defend and
secure our liberties, will, I dare say, be imposed and rigidly extorted by our
enemies, whenever they shall get their yoke on our necks: the price which they
will make us pay for our chains, will be greater than that which is now
necessary to pay for our liberty; the temporary burdens which are now demanded
to secure the well-being of ourselves and posterity, will be made perpetual on
us and them by our enemies, when they shall find it necessary to secure our
slavery and their luxury: for did any man ever know or read the history of any
country, governed as an appendage of a distant empire, that was not fleeced, if
not skinned and peeled to the bone, by their distant, unfeeling, unsympathizing
despots. Such countries are never, in such case, estimated by any other scale,
than the amount of the revenue and other advantages that can be drawn from them.

I do not really think that the people of the United States are at all the
proper subjects of this kind of government; I do not think a meanness of
spirit, a gross stupidity, or cowardly diffidence makes any part of their
character; they have, in fact, resented injuries, asserted their liberties, and
nobly dared to defend them, with a degree of exertion, perseverance, and
firmness, unparalleled and almost beyond belief. It is my opinion that we may
safely depend on any degree of exertion and spirit in our people, which is
necessary to their safety; and if this is not all called out and put in force,
when and to any degree the public safety may require it, the fault will lie in
the rulers, not in the people.

Indeed I am of opinion, there are few instances of any countries overrun or
enslaved, through any defect of virtue in the people, which does not originate in
their rulers; the natural and common source of remedies lies in the rulers, and
if they are good, they will see the mischief, and apply the remedy, before it
rises to such force as to endanger the liberties of a country. If vice or
corruption gets ground in any popular state, it generally discovers itself
pretty early in the appointment of officers of notorious improper character, or
insufficient abilities, to fill and manage the important departments of the
state; for where any corruption or prejudice prevails in any state, they will
generally endeavor to get into place, such officers as are likely to support
such corruption or prejudice.

In this case, the mischief is carried into the very source of remedy, and
corruption gets a whip-row, which gains by every movement; and if this whip-row
can be broken, the game must soon be up, and there remains nothing to do, but
to set again, and try a new game. But as all that is not our case, this may be
deemed a needless digression: we will come then directly to what is our case,
which I will here endeavor to state as it stands in fact, which no fretting,
or jesting, or shrugging can alter.

I. The estimates of the present year amount to about 10,000,000 of hard
dollars, or the value of them, which must be paid by somebody, or our defense
cannot be continued. If this ceases, our country must lie-open to the
unrestrained ravages and plunders of our enemies, and every obnoxious
individual be exposed to their vengeance, and we have seen enough of them to
know that their tender mercies are cruelty. And the only question I conceive
that can arise here is this, Whether this heavy burden shall be laid on a part
only of our people, and crush them into ruin; or whether it shall be laid
equably on all? In the latter case, heavy as it is, it may be borne; it will
not amount to more than 4 dollars on each person, or 20 dollars on a middling
family of 5 persons. If there is a beggar in the Thirteen States who cannot pay
this, he must have some rich neighbors who can pay it for him; and it lies
with each State to apportion their taxes in such manner as to ease the poor,
and increase the share of the rich, so as to bring the burden on all in due
proportion to their abilities.

If, instead of this, the whole weight must lie on a few, viz. such as happen
to have the supplies necessary for public use; if the wheat, hay, etc. must be
torn from the farmer; the rum, salt, etc. from the merchant; the services of
the soldiers, waggoners, etc. be compelled by force; if in this way our
supplies and services are to be extorted from a few, whilst the rest bear
nothing, the community must suffer much more than it would do, were the burden
equally proportioned on all.

For to say nothing about the execrable injustice and wickedness of this
method, the resentment and rage it will excite, the discouragement to the
future industry of the farmer, or adventure of the merchant, the reluctant
recruits of the army, hereby occasioned; to say nothing of these, it is as
manifest that a heavy burden may be borne by a whole community with more
convenience than the same can be borne by a part only; as that a large beam of
timber can be borne by 20 men, each bearing in proportion to his strength,
better than by 10 only who are crushed by the weight, whilst the other 10 bear
nothing, or perhaps some of them hang on and increase the weight. The 10 who
are crushed and overstrained will be rendered unfit to bear any burden in
future time, and of course their future services will be lost to the community;
whereas if the whole 20 bore each his due proportion, it might be a heavy lift
indeed, but none of them would be overstrained, and they would all be fit for
future service.

II. Our currency is in such a feeble and fluctuating state, that the ends and
uses of it are much decayed, and in a manner lost; it ceases to be a certain
security to the possessor of any determinate value, and of course cannot be a
common measure of value for other things; so that it becomes impossible to
calculate or carry on our private business or public operations with this
medium, and of course both must cease, or be greatly impaired by this mischief.

This may be easily and speedily remedied by taxes; for if every bill of our
currency was a Turkish turban, we might easily set any price on it we pleased,
and make the demand quick at that price, in this way; for was an adequate tax
made, and speedily and rigidly pressed, obliging every man to pay a turban or
10 dollars into the public treasury, it is manifest the price of a turban would
immediately be 10 dollars, and the demand quick at that price. For the same
reason, we may raise the value and demand for our currency to any pitch or
degree we please, in the same way, viz. by making a tax for any sufficient ^um
of continental dollars, or the value in hard money, at any exchange we please
to fix. This would immediately raise the continental money up to that exchange,
if the tax was large enough, and sufficiently pressed.

Indeed we manifestly have it in our power to increase the demand and value of
our currency to a much higher degree in this way, than either the fixing the
currency or the public exigencies require. This is a matter that requires great
judgment and nicety of observation. Some may think there may be danger of
oppression here; but I answer there is neither danger nor possibility of
oppression, if the exchange is not fixed higher or lower than the current
exchange or real present value, nor more money required than is necessary for
the public use, and the States apportion the tax on their people properly
according to their several abilities; all which ought to be very carefully
attended to; and if any part is not done right, the fault will lie on those
that do it, but not at all on the principle here advanced.

But before we quit this idea, I beg leave to add one observation more here,
viz. every honest individual, I conceive, loses more in a year by the present
fluctuating state of our currency, and the present mode of procuring the public
supplies, than his whole tax would amount to; he loses his business on which
the support of himself and family depends, and must live on his dead stock, or
at least is subjected to most material disadvantage and discouragement; for I
submit it to every man to judge, whether any man, either in the occupation of
husbandry, mechanic arts, or merchandise, can compute his business in such a
manner, as to make it safe to put his whole stock in action in any of these
ways, while he has no reasonable assurance what the produce of his diligence
may be, or whether he may have the selling his produce, fabrics, or
merchandise, when he has procured them.

The occupations of life are of such great importance to every man, that it is
manifest that even small embarrassments in them, involve a damage much greater
than any man's tax would be to the whole expenditures of the war. This opens to
our view another actual circumstance, another fact, which is too obvious to be
overlooked, and too serious and interesting to be neglected, viz.

III. The whole sources of our supplies are dying away fast, are lessening to
an alarming degree, and threaten not a mere scarcity, but universal famine,
want, and deficiency in a short time. Most people are lessening the business of
their several occupations down to a pitch just sufficient for their present
occasions and necessities, and many have wholly thrown up their occupations,
and live on their dead stock, and very few are calculating their business on
any large scale. I submit the truth of this to common observation. The present
great demand for merchandise, fabrics, and the farmers' produce, which would be
the sharpest spur of industry, were our public counsels wise, and our currency
good, now becomes the terror of the possessors, and induces them to hide and
conceal their effects, instead of exposing them in open market: our public acts
(for taking supplies by force) demonstrate this, for such acts are always
supposed to be suited to the circumstances of the times.

This is a direct and manifest consequence of the numberless instances of force
and fraud which have been practiced to rob and cheat the possessors out of
their goods. These methods are in every view mad, wicked, and absurd; mad in
those who do not see the consequences of them; wicked in those who do see them;
and absurd in both, because by their natural operation they soon defeat and
destroy the very ends for which they are adopted, viz. mending the currency,
and procuring supplies.

The great Creator has not given to all men equal discernment; some politicians
are short-sighted, and cannot see the distant ill consequences of measures
which yield a present advantage, but he must be a stupid blockhead who cannot
see such effects when they stare him in the face, and stand in full fact before
his eyes.

The proper remedy of these terrible mischiefs is to lay the public burden
equally on all by taxes; this is easier, more reasonable, and more safe for the
community, than to suffer it to rest upon a few. The burden must be borne by
the community in some way; the supplies and services cannot be procured for
nothing; we have too lately tried it out and out, and have full proof that
something cannot be paid for with nothing, and therefore if something is to be
paid for, it is vain and ridiculous to be casting about, and starting and
chasing one visionary project after another, of new emissions and better
emissions, of loans foreign and domestic, etc. We must recur to solid wealth to
pay for all our solid supplies. The nature of the subject will drive us to this
at last, and the longer we put it off, the longer our miseries will increase;
and God grant that we may not put it off till all remedy is desperate.

We must at last have recourse to the solid wealth of the States, and every
individual must be called on for his share. In this there can be no reason of
complaint; the cry of oppression will cease; that demand will be given to our
currency which is essential to its nature and use; and every possessor of
supplies will hasten to offer them: this will stimulate the industry of men of
all occupations, and fill our country with virtue and plenty. But it may be
objected here,

1. That our old currency is got so much out of repute, that it cannot be
reformed, but may be called in, and replaced with a new and better one. I
answer, all that ails the old currency is, that it is not, it carries not in
it, a sufficient certain security of any determinate value to the possessor;
and this same thing will all the new currency or any currency we can make,
unless we can mend the public faith on which it depends, and connect it so
manifestly and firmly with the real wealth of the States, that the security may
be undoubted. It is impossible this can be done by any thing but payment,
either present or so secured, that there will remain no doubt in the mind of
the possessor that it will be bona fide made. If this can be done, there is no
doubt but we may make our currency good, yea, better than hard money, because
it is sooner counted, and more easily conveyed.

There is indeed one reason for calling in the old currency, and issuing a new
one, which appears to me to have real and great weight, viz. Many of the bills
of the present currency are counterfeited, and it is very necessary the public
should be freed from these impositions; and to this another may be added, viz.
It would be very desirable to have a currency which should express the true
value of the bills in the face of them. The present bills carry but a fortieth
part of the value expressed in their face; and this holds out the feeble,
enervated, and debilitated state of our public credit in so glaring a light,
and publishes our shame and distress so very undeniably and universally, that I
should be willing to have them out of sight; as people generally endeavor to
keep out of view, brands and marks which indicate the disgrace of their
families.

Besides, there is a sort of deception in the bills, which I conceive to be
hurtful; when a man gets a great bundle of them, he is apt to be cheated in
spite of the convictions of his own heart, into an opinion that he is richer
than he is, and of course to abate a little of that economy which he would
think necessary if his mind was not dilated by that delusion; whilst, on the
other hand, the taxes appear more heavy and terrible when heightened under the
enormous denomination of the currency, than they would do were they offered and
demanded in a shape that corresponded to their real value.

These may perhaps by general consent be allowed good reasons for calling in
the present bills and issuing new ones, and this may be well enough, if the
mode and regulations of the measure are limited to its uses.

But the substance is yet wanting, every thing necessary to give fixture to the
currency is still to be done, and all remains to be done, and will remain so,
till we can fix the funds of our currency so sure as to make it a certain
security of real value to the possessor, and call it in so fast by taxes as to
limit its quantity within the uses of circulation, and prevent its increasing
to such amount as to render the final redemption difficult, improbable, or
uncertain. This is the grand gift of the whole matter; this will effectually
save us; less than this will not; all the rest is but shifting the weights in
the scale, without adding a single ounce to help a balance or preponderation;
this therefore is our great object, from which our attention must not be
diverted, no, not for a moment; on this our fate depends.

2. It may be further objected, that no nation of Europe can carry on a war
without loans, or some way anticipating their revenue, and running in debt, and
how can it be supposed that we can do it otherwise? I answer, their case
differs from ours very materially.

1. They have credit to borrow on, which we have not, unless we allow such a
ruinous discount as makes our affairs desperate, and must soon put it out of
our power to preserve our liberty.

2. Our country is richer, more full of men and stores necessary in war, than
those of Europe in general, and of course the carrying on the war without
running in debt is more practicable by us, than by them.

3. They have such sure and established systems of finance fixed and settled,
on which they can issue internal bills, as furnish a certain security to the
possessor, of payment; their treasuries are the safest repositories of their
nation's wealth; we have not these advantages, our treasury has hitherto proved
the destruction of the wealth that has been trusted to it, and of course every
body is afraid of it, and therefore loaning at home to any great amount is
impracticable, and what cannot be done need not be urged as politic, eligible
or salutary.

4. If any nation of Europe borrows specie, and thereby increases and of course
depreciates their cash but 2 or 3 per cent. that discount is enough to spread
it all over Europe, by which the balance is soon restored, and the depreciation
is checked; or if any nation, as Spain, imports money from Peru, and makes it
over plenty and of reduced value, it spreads over Europe directly; and so by
covering a larger surface the depreciation becomes insensible, and the
inconvenience little felt; but this is not the case with us; our currency
cannot be exported, were it ever so good, therefore, any increase of quantity
must have its full effect by way of depreciation among ourselves; and of course
any increase of the quantity destroys at once the very end and use of such
increase, as the value cannot be thereby increased, but instead of this, the
whole deluge of mischiefs arising from a fluctuating currency must ^low in upon
us.

5. The very operation of this method of loaning, and anticipating of the
revenue, adopted and practiced by the nations of Europe, is in itself enough,
were it ever so practicable by us, to deter us from following so fatal an
example. See Great Britain enervated and benumbed under the pressure of an
enormous debt, the very interest of which consumes the best part of the richest
revenue which the wealth, industry, and oppression of the nation can produce.
How disheartening must it be for that people to struggle through the year merely
to pay a corroding interest, which brings them not the nearer to the end of
their misery, but only keeps alive that gnawing vulture that must for ever feed
on their very entrails. I cannot but wonder that any man in his senses should
hold up such a sad spectacle for an example to the Americans.

6. The nations of Europe never attempt to borrow money, till they have first
raised all the revenue they can within themselves, and find it not sufficient;
but this is so far from our case, that we have never yet taxed half enough to
drain off that surplusage of money which the war has occasioned, and our
capital distresses and difficulties have all along arisen from that flood of
money which made it too plenty for use; even hard money will buy little more
than half so much country produce as it would purchase before the war.

This mischief cannot be remedied by increase of the quantity, by loans or any
other way, but must in its nature be checked by draining off and lessening that
quantity, and thereby raising the demand for it which is essential to its use.
From all this it appears to be weak and silly as well as absurd, to urge for
our imitation the example of other nations, the very convenience, necessity, or
even practicability of which depends on circumstances which do not apply at all
to our case.

It is not the least danger of this practice that it operates insensibly, saps
and mortgages our wealth before we know it; it operates like a slow poison,
which is certain death, and more painful, though more slow and lingering, than
the sudden execution of the ball or sword. Indeed I look on all insensible
taxes to be highly dangerous; a fatal instance of which we have in the
depreciation of our own currency. I think it necessary that the people should
see and feel what they pay, should earn the money before it is spent; this
would prevent a thousand stupid, foolish, and needless ways of spending the
public money; this would make the rulers careful how they adopt any expensive
operations, and attentive to the strictest economy in the expenditure.

Insensible taxes are like insensible perspiration, which weakens the body, and
wastes the constitution before the patient knows he is sick. Nature generally
marks places of danger with signals of notice, and every mariner looks on one
sunken rock as more dangerous than twenty that are above water; for this reason
I think that every branch of the revenue should originate in such sensible and
visible demands on the wealth of the people, that they may all feel and know
what they pay, and what they pay it for; and this is, in my opinion, the surest
way to keep a treasury always supplied with enough by the cheerful
contributions of the people, when the public safety or convenience requires it,
and to prevent more than enough being ever demanded or granted: a due attention
to both these I take to be no small branch or even pillar of policy in every
state. The foregoing survey of our mischiefs and remedies brings up to view
another circumstance which appears to me a very plain fact, viz.

IV. Our distresses, dangers, and difficulties do not consist in a want of any
thing, but in over plenty, in surplusage of cash, which is become so common and
easy of acquirement, that it is slighted, it is little thought of, it is scarce
an object of desire, much less of animation; our burdens are burdens of cash,
that which is the wish and want of most other distressed people is our misery;
like plethoric constitutions, whose stamina are all good, but are overloaded
with too much blood. A sufficient bleeding, a proper draining off of this
superfluous matter, would set us all right in a short time, and every part of
the constitution would find ease, relief, and a speedy return of life and vigor
from the simple operation of this most obvious, natural remedy. On the whole
matter, I think that one more fact offers itself to view, which were we in a
less torpid state, might animate us to some spirited efforts, some lively
exertions to extricate ourselves from distress and danger, viz.

V. Every circumstance conspires to demonstrate that the most sure and
effectual remedies are in our own power, are very practicable, and the present
time is the most suitable for the application of them that any nation in
distress ever had or could wish. We are free of debt, at least of the pressures
of debt; the whole public debt at home and abroad does not exceed our
abilities, and may be paid in two or three years without any painful exertions.
We are yet on this side of that bottomless abyss of debt, into which our
enemies find themselves plunged; that insupportable but everlasting burden that
presses and exhausts them in so fatal a manner, that they are become the sport
of their enemies and neglect of their friends; none appears for them in this
their day of distress.

This enervating, disheartening circumstance we are yet free of; our strength
is our own, and in proper condition for use; we are yet to receive the fruits
of our own labors; none of our crops are mortgaged or sold before they are
reaped; our wealth is entire; our country abounds with most of the supplies and
stores we need; we have no difficulty but in the disorders of our finances, and
they are not only capable of being restored, but self-preservation will compel
us to it. We are like a strong man who is obliged to labor, but the labor
required is but just enough to afford that degree of exercise which is
absolutely necessary to his health, and which he must practice or be sick.

The same kind and degree of exertion necessary to restore our currency,
reinstate our finances, establish our credit, and animate the industry of our
people, will at the same time pay our civil list, and carry on the war. Our
enemies are in a declining state, under great degrees of embarrassment, and
have their hands full in every quarter, and every body against them; whilst we
are courted, like the rising sun, by every body; our alliances and connexions
are of the surest and best kind, grounded on such interests as cannot deceive
us; a general union prevails among ourselves; our public counsels are all
dictated by the same views and ends, and if ever we differ, it is only about
the means of obtaining the same end; our relief indeed requires the animated
exertions of our people, but the very distress they all feel, makes them
willing to put into vigorous practice, any efforts which tend to their
deliverance.

Here I beg leave to call the reader's attention to the act of Congress of the
18 th of March 1780, respecting our finances, that we may, on the best
examination, judge how far that important act, if duly executed, will reduce
our finances into such method, and give them such establishment as the public
safety requires. It is necessary that the nature, design, and use of that act
should be thoroughly discussed, because the efforts for its execution will
probably take their tone from the degree of conviction which generally prevails
of its utility. The substance of said act is as follows, viz.

1. The monthly tax of 15,000,000 of dollars, from Feb. to Aug. 1780
(recommended to the States, Oct. 7, 1779) is continued to the 1st of April,
1781, inclusive.

2. That hard money be receivable in payment of said tax, at the rate of 1
Mexican dollar in lieu of 40 Continental dollars.

3. That the Continental bills paid in for said tax, except for the months of
Jan. and Feb. 1779, be not re-issued, but destroyed.

4. That as fast as those bills shall be brought in to be destroyed (and other
funds shall be established for other bills) other bills be issued, not to
exceed on any account one twentieth part of the nominal sum of the bills
brought in to be destroyed.

5. That the new bills which shall be issued, be redeemable in specie within 6
years from Jan. 1, 1781, and bear an interest of 6 per cent. to be paid in
specie at the redemption of the bills, or, at the election of the holders, in
sterling bills of exchange, at 4 s. 6 d. sterling per dollar.

6. That the said new bills issue on the funds of individual States to be
established for that purpose, and be signed by persons appointed by them.

7. That the United States be likewise pledged for the payment of such of said
bills, as shall be signed by those States, who, by the events of the war, shall
be rendered incapable to redeem them; which undertaking of Congress shall be
endorsed on said bills, and be signed by a commissioner of Congress.

8. That the several States shall receive 6 tenths of the bills which they
sign, for their own use, and that the remaining 4 tenths shall be subject to
the orders of Congress, but shall be credited to the several States who signed
them.

9. That the said new bills be received in taxes at the same rate as specie.

10. That the several States be called on to provide effectual funds to sink 1
sixth part of their respective quotas, annually, after Jan. 1, 1781.

11. That this act be despatched to the Executive of the several States, to be
laid before their Assemblies, who are requested, as soon as possible to provide
certain funds for the purposes of it, and take every other measure to carry it
into full and vigorous effects.




I do not pretend to be adequate to such a discussion, and shall only beg leave
to make a few remarks on it; and this I am induced to do at this time, because
the act is but lately published, and our people have not had time to make up
their minds on it, and I conceive many persons misapprehend the real design and
true construction of it.

1. I take it that the design of the act is not to be a substitute for taxes;
our public credit or finances want the same support and supplies from our real
substance, our material wealth, as they did before the act. If the new bills
are no better supported than the old ones were, they will depreciate as fast,
become as useless and more ruinous than those, as these involve us in a vast
debt of interest, which those did not. The past error of our finances is
clearly seen, and the deluge of mischiefs resulting from it is severely felt,
and the design of this act is not to continue but prevent those mischiefs in
future, not to repeat our former error, but to mend it.

2. The act contains in it a declaration or fixture of the present value or
exchange of the public bills, making them redeemable at 40 for 1, or 6 d. in
the pound, and this on the highest reason, grounded on such rigid facts, such
real change of circumstances, as render the fulfillment of the promises
contained in the old bills, impracticable, injurious to the public, absurd, and
useless, as I think I have fully proved in my Fourth Essay; and all clamor and
exclamation on this subject is as idle and void of reason and sentiment, as a
clamor against any other promise, which, however properly made at first, is
become, by a change of circumstances, either impossible or highly improper to
be performed, of which we have daily instances in every part of human
experience.

We are to con^ider the depreciation of our currency as a public calamity, like
a blast, a deluge, a drought, or ravages of an enemy, which affect every man as
he happens to stand in their way, and to become their object; in all these
cases the mischief must lie where it lights; it is doubtless so directed by
Divine Providence, that each individual receives that degree of correction from
it, which is suited to his own particular case.

In point of remedy, it is vain to inquire whether this calamity arose from the
public necessity, or from the fault of any individuals or boards of our policy;
for could we find and punish the faulty delinquents, their heads or gibbets
might hang up in terrorem, as monuments of caution to future financiers, but
can avail nothing to the easement of the calamity; our duty at present, and all
we can do is, to correct the mischief in time, and prevent it in future.

3. It is objected to this act, that it doubles the quantity of circulating
bills, because it issues 2 dollars out for 1 that is brought in, for 10,000,000
of the new bills are equal to 400,000,000 of the old ones, at the exchange of
40 for 1, prescribed in the act itself; that this will clash with a former
resolution (of Sept. 1, 1779) "that the quantity of bills should not be
increased beyond 200,000,000;" will tend to a depreciation; and render the
fixing the medium more difficult, if not impossible. But I beg leave to observe
here, that few laws would be salutary, or even tolerable, if they were executed
up to the height of their letter; and I conceive that a prudent execution of
this act will obviate all the ill effects arising from the above objections.

I do not conceive it to be the design of Congress that any part of the new
bills shall issue at all, if it shall be found that it cannot be done at their
full value, without any depreciation; or that they shall issue any faster, or
to any larger amount than can be done, without any depreciation; for I can by
no means admit the supposition, that the new bills are to be issued in a
depreciated state, because that very depreciation defeats their use, renders
them insufficient for the procurement of supplies, and involves us over again
in the miseries of a fluctuating currency, whilst we are at the same time
loaded with a vast debt of hard money to pay the interest of them. I never
doubted the integrity of Congress, and therefore cannot attribute to them such
absurdity of design, even though the letter of their act might admit such a
ruinous and absurd construction.

They reserve, in their act, 4, tenths of the new bills for their own disposal,
which they will doubtless issue in a manner safe and useful to the States;
whilst the other 6 tenths are left to the discretion of the States, who have
every inducement to a prudent issue of them, as each state will stand bound to
redeem both principal and interest of all they shall issue.

I am further told, that the Congress have it in contemplation to appoint a
Financier-General, of known gravity, judgment, and economy, to superintend this
great department, who can either let out or withhold the issues in such manner
as to give the bills all the effect and use their nature will admit, without
overloading the public credit, or increasing the quantity so far as to lessen
their demand, and, by that means, lose the whole benefit by grasping at too
much. This error is so fatal and recent, and the apprehensions of the people
wound up to such a pitch of alarm, that I much doubt if half the proposed
quantity of the new bills can be issued without a sensible depreciation; but
experience will best show this, and prudence at the time must dictate the
practicable degree which may be ventured on; and it is my opinion, that no
possible height of public necessity can justify exceeding such degree, because
that excess is a sure way to defeat the uses of the currency, and of course to
increase the public necessities, let them be ever so high before.

The exchange is a sure barometer of the public credit, as it is of the trade,
and will always serve as a safe monitor and guide to our counsels of revenue.
It is the vainest of all vanities to imagine that a public bill is worth a
dollar when it will not bring it, or that it is worth any more than it will
bring. If it shall be sound on trial that any larger sum than I have supposed,
or that the whole 10,000,000 can be issued without depreciation, the public may
safely receive the benefit of the whole; and the addition of the interest,
which will be received by every individual that holds the bills, will
compensate for the increase of his taxes to pay it.

This matter cannot be computed on with any exactness, without knowing the
whole amount of the current cash of the Thirteen States, which I have not yet
seen any where ascertained. I have heretofore on a few data made a sort of
loose, rough computation of it, to be about 12,000,000 of hard dollars; but I
have of late been collecting documents for a more exact calculation, and on a
nearer view am induced to believe the amount will rather fall short of that
sum, and perhaps very considerably; and I think farther, it is very manifest
that we must have a promiscuous circulation of both hard money and paper, in
order to keep the exchange of them equal: but this by the bye.

4. It may be further objected to this act, that we can have no security that
some necessity or other will not be urged next year to make a further addition
to the emissions of circulating bills, till they will depreciate.

But in answer to this, I am clearly of opinion, Congress will not be able to
issue the whole 10,000,000 already voted without a depreciation; and also, that
they will not dare to issue any of it in a depreciated state; this will so
manifestly and immediately ruin the use of the whole, and defeat its whole
purpose, and bring on afresh the mischiefs of a fluctuating currency, that I
can have no idea that any men in their senses can think of adopting it.

But if we are to suppose our wisest men capable of such idle frenzy, it is
needless to reason any further about it, we may as well give up all use of our
intellects, and follow where wild distraction roves, and take the fate which a
concourse of whim and accident shall provide for us: but I augur better things;
I am full of expectation that before our affairs come to this pass, our wisest
men, both in Congress and State-Assemblies, will be convinced of one great
truth, dictated by nature and our present circumstances, viz. that we must pay
our expenditures as we go: and this is the only practicable method before us;
this will make any scheme good, which is not wretched indeed, and without this,
every devisable scheme is but whim, vision, and frenzy.

5. The sum of 10,000,000 is not more than the States are able to make the most
sufficient and undoubted security for, if they please. But let that security be
ever so good; to give it a currency, and prevent a depreciation, they must
raise a demand for it by general taxes. These are recommended by Congress in
their act of the 18th instant, and others foregoing; and were they put under
rigid collection by all the States, we might judge whether the demand thereby
raised was sufficient to give life and use to the currency; if it should not be
so, it is necessary that the taxes be still increased till that effect shall
appear, at which time, and not before, the grand point will be gained, viz.
that of fixing our currency. We shall then have the two great things necessary
to fix any paper currency, viz. good funds, which may give the possessor a
certain security; and a quick demand and circulation of the currency itself.

6. It appears then, that if the said act was put into proper and wise
execution, duly limited and sufficiently vigorous, it will answer the great and
important ends expected from it; and though it may not be thought the best
possible, yet as it appears to be sufficient for its purpose, were it duly put
into operation, and properly supported, I think it clear that the States ought
not to hesitate adopting it, nor starve it by too languid and dilatory
movements; the best plan possible may be rendered useless and ineffectual this
way; wisdom and decision in counsel are not more necessary in any important
plans of this sort, than vigor in execution.

I do not consider the act so much a scheme of increasing the revenue as of
fixing the currency; but if it is to include both, the first certainly depends
on the last, and is limited by it; for Congress cannot think of issuing any
part of the new bills in a depreciated state; they must fix their value, or it
is idle, dangerous, and ineffectual to the last degree to issue them; if they
can be issued in a fixed state, yet no more of them can be issued than can be
kept in a fixed state; for to exceed this limit, will be to destroy their whole
use at once, and involve us in more distress than before. I look on it a very
bold step to put the revenue on such a risk; but I suppose the public
necessities require it, and of this the Congress are the best judges, and
doubtless acted on more reasons than we out of doors can see.

The fixing the currency, and incomes of revenue are of of the last consequence
to us all in the present crisis; and therefore it appears to me absolutely
necessary that every State should exert themselves in the most speedy and
effectual manner to give sanction and force to this act, lest, by their defect,
the important chance should turn against us, and we should be left without
revenue or currency at this critical time, when our political existence, as
well as the occupation and means of living of every individual, depend on both.
In my Fourth Essay on Trade and Finance, published Feb. 10, 1780* I calculated
the exchange of Continental money at that time to be 40 for 1, and strongly
urged the fixture of it at that exchange, that the fatal mischiefs of a
fluctuating currency, either by appreciation or depreciation, might be avoided.

From this I suppose that some people have surmised that the first idea and
original plan of this act was formed by me and suggested to Congress, and my
opinion here expressed, "that the States ought to adopt it without hesitation,"
confirms their conjecture: this induces me to observe some things on this
matter, viz.

1. This act was not the absurd, inefficient, and ridiculous thing, which some
people have represented it to be; there was no error in its principle; it
wanted nothing to complete its purposes but decided support and effectual
execution. The taxes then instituted by Congress, with the arrearages of former
requisitions, would have been (if punctually paid) sufficient to call in every
bill of the old money, and a large sum of the new bills, in the course of one
year, and would doubtless have raised such a demand for what remained, as would
have kept up its value, and prevented any depreciation.

Yet, 2d, I did not approve of it, but in all conversations I had with Members
of Congress, whilst it was under debate, I constantly opposed it; principally
because I did not expect, as the state of things then was, that it would
receive that support and vigorous execution which was necessary to give it a
due effect.

The people of the States at that time had been worried and fretted,
disappointed and put out of humor by so many tender-acts, limitations of
prices, and other compulsory methods to force value into paper money, and
compel the circulation of it, and by so many vain funding schemes,
declarations, and promises, all which issued from Congress, but died under the
most zealous efforts to put them into operation and effect, that their patience
was all exhausted; I say, these irritations and disappointments had so
destroyed the courage and confidence of the people, that they appeared
heartless and almost stupid when their attention was called to any new
propositions.

Besides all this, I had objections to several clauses of the act, viz. our
people were pretty well accustomed to the old bills (bad as they were) but to
call them all in, and substitute a new sort in their stead, I thought would be
a novelty that might have danger in it; at least, it would require great
expense, time, etc. and all to very little use or benefit; for the same energy
of taxation absolutely necessary to support the credit of the new bills, would
be quite sufficient to make (...) for the old ones as would prevent their
further depreciation, and receiving hard money in their stead at 40 for 1.
would prevent their appreciation.

I could not see any benefit in the signature of the States, and feared this
might bring into doubt the full powers of Congress to issue bills, or do any
other like acts under their own signature.

Nor could I see any advantage arising from the interest annexed to the bills;
it being payable six years afterward would create mighty little inducement to
their present circulation; but if the bills succeeded, this would greatly
increase the price of their final redemption.

But I had another material objection to the act; for when I calculated the
exchange, Feb. 10, 1780, it was really 40 to 1; but when this act passed, viz.
the 18th of March following, the exchange had increased to 60 for 1, and
consequently, all the provisions of the act which related to the exchange,
became essentially wrong, and of course rendered the act itself utterly
impracticable, without new provisions conformable to the exchange which really
existed at the time, or making all the requisitions of the act in hard money or
Continental bills of the same value, i. e. at any exchange that should exist at
the time of payment.

But notwithstanding all this, when the bill was actually past, and the
revenues and supplies of the year depended on its success, I readily offered my
little mite of aid to give it an effectual operation, as I suppose any Member
of Congress would and ought to do, when it was past, though he opposed it in
every stage, whilst under debate.




To have a currency of fixed value, and the same as is expressed in the face of
the bills, is an object most important and desirable, but can be obtained in no
other way th^^^ by keeping the quantity within due bounds, and ascertaining its
value, by such connection with our real substance as will make it a certain
security to the possessor. The value of money being wholly grounded in the
proportion of two objects, viz. the quantity of money, and the objects of
money, it is demonstrable that if either varies, whilst the other continues the
same, the proportion must vary likewise, and of course the value of the money
must fluctuate, as appears most plain to any person who has the least knowledge
of the nature of proportion.

All experience justifies and confirms this reasoning, and puts the truth of it
beyond all doubt; yet so strongly does the infatuating bias, like some darling,
favorite lust, work itself into our public counsels, that after the longest and
gravest consideration of the subject, they will, in the face of the clearest
demonstration, in spite of repeated experience and the fullest proof of fact,
still work up their deliberations into the vain issue, the fruitless resolution
of trying new methods, adopting new plans of increasing the currency, and
thereby defeat their own purposes, render their counsels ridiculous, and leave
us all without remedy. The mischief lies in the nature, not in the modification
of this fatal charm; there is too much already, and it is not possible that any
increase of quantity, however modified, should help the matter, nor is it
possible to fix the value in this way; for the increase of the quantity will
for ever render the punctual redemption of it more difficult, and therefore
more uncertain, and of course of less credibility or credit.

The nature of money is such, that its quantity cannot be increased beyond a
certain degree, without losing its use; this has already been far exceeded, and
it is not therefore possible that our remedy should lie in further increases of
it, however modified. I have known people try to fatten their hogs with
pumkins, turnips, and bran, to save corn, but without success, I have known
people who had not milk enough, add water to it, but the nutritious particles
of milk were not increased thereby; I have known children change their
pis^ereens into coppers, and gain a greater heap of money; in all these cases
the substance was wanting; the show, though increased, was delusive; and the
counsels puerile and without effect, to say no worse of them.

Impending destruction is no longer a matter of empty declamation. All
occupations of town and country are embarrassed and near to a full stop. Our
public debts are every where increasing, and supplies failing. Famine, want,
and total enervation of all strength and effort must be the speedy consequence.
When the springs, the fountains, the resources are dried up, it is not possible
but the streams must fail soon. We are in every respect well and safe, except
in the article of finances. Were they restored, every thing else would
immediately flourish and gain vigor sufficient for every purpose of safety and
happiness.

There is in nature but one way to restore these, viz. by immediate recourse to
our solid substance, by taxing equal to our expenditures. This I have often
urged in vain; whenever it comes in view every countenance gathers paleness.
True, but it is impossible, is the cry. Had it been a spectre, or goblin of
terror, it could not have been started from and avoided with more
precipitation. People will even take fatal leaps into certain destruction, to
get away from it.

Pray, my countrymen, let us muster up a little courage and firmness of mind,
and not, like a distempered imagination or guilty conscience, start with terror
at a distant movement of we know not what. Let us compose ourselves, and take a
little nearer view of this dreadful expedient; it is not so frightful in near
view as in distant apprehension. There is such a thing as being penny wise and
pound foolish. We may lose the ship for fear of hurting the sails.

Presence of mind and courage in distress,
Are more than ar^ (...) to procure success.
^
A cool and careful examination of the subject will at least let us into the
truth of it; and be that truth ever so hard and dreadful, our knowing the worst
of it, is preferable to suspense.

Many things which strike us at first as intolerable or impossible, lose much
of their difficulty and terror by growing familiar to us. Could we have thought
it possible to support the dreadful war which we have hitherto sustained, had
it been held up to our view five years ago? The remedy now proposed is but
trifling in comparison of what we have suffered. And shall we sink disheartened
in sight of a desirable shore, after we have surpassed the tempests and billows
of the ocean through the voyage? The remedy I propose, is allowed by all to be
effectual and sufficient, if it can be practiced; and we shall find it the only
one that can save us from ruin; at least this is my opinion, after more than
six months' close attention to the subject, and viewing it in every light in
which I can consider it.

I conceive, if it should appear that each industrious individual loses more
for want of the tax, than his tax would amount to, that every doubt of the
expediency of the tax would instantly be removed and vanish at once; and I
think this may be made very clear and plain. I shall attempt to prove this.

I. The tax demanded will amount to about 4 hard dollars in a year to each
person in the States, or 20 such dollars, or the value of them, to a middling
family of 5 persons; and this will, by the due apportionment of the tax, be
lessened to the poor and increased to the rich, in proportion to their
abilities. This is the height of it; this is the worst that can happen; this is
the dreadful price demanded for our salvation, to save us from sure
destruction, and which the Thirteen States are deeply hesitating and
contemplating whether they will pay or no; at least this tax is what the
Congress are hesitating to recommend, and the States to levy and collect, though
I doubt if the people would hesitate a moment to pay it, if it was put under
collection, especially if it was demanded in monthly rates, which would render
the payment much more practicable than it would be, if it was all called for at
one payment. Now we will consider what is lost for want of this tax.

1. Every industrious man loses his business, his occupation, or at least finds
it greatly embarrassed, and subjected to great difficulty and discouragement:
for, I submit it to every man to judge, whether, in the present fluctuating
state of the currency and mode of procuring the public supplies, whether, I
say, it can be safe or prudent for any man to lay out any business of
husbandry, mechanic arts, or merchandise, on any large scale, whilst he knows
not what he must sell his proceeds for when he has got them, or whether he may
have the selling of them at all or not? These embarrassments are very sensibly
felt through the States, but would all vanish, if our finances were restored. And
I think it very plain, that a man's occupation must be very poor indeed, if
these embarrassments are not more damage to him, than his whole tax would
amount to.

2. For want of the tax, the supplies of the country are daily lessening, our
plenty wastes away fast, and scarcity and want are succeeding in the place of
them. This makes every man's estate in the country less valuable, as it is
apparent that an estate in a country of poverty and want, is not so good, or
worth so much money, as the same estate would be in a country full of riches
and plentiful supplies. All means of living will of course become harder to be
obtained, as it is more difficult procuring supplies in a country where they
are scarce, than in one where they are plenty. What may be the amount of loss
to each individual from these causes, is not easy to calculate; but as they
affect the whole bulk of estates, and operate on the whole means of livelihood,
they cannot be supposed small, and I think will readily be allowed to exceed
any man's share of the tax necessary to prevent them.

3. For want of the tax, the morality and industry of the people are greatly
diminished. Frauds, cheats, and gross dishonesty are introduced, and a thousand
idle ways of living are attempted in the room of that honest industry, economy,
and diligence which heretofore blessed and enriched this country. And as an
estate in a country of honest, industrious people, is better than in one filled
with idle rogues; and as all property is hereby rendered more unsafe and less
valuable; it is very easy to see, that the loss of each individual in this
respect, will be very considerable, and must, on a very moderate computation,
much exceed the tax required to remedy the whole mischief.

4. For want of the tax, our trade is decaying fast; and this not only ruins
the merchant, and renders the procurement of such necessaries as are usually
supplied by our trade, more dear and difficult, but it enervates the whole
system both of husbandry and mechanic arts, as these can never flourish without
a market, where the produce of the farmer and the fabrics of the mechanic may
be sold, when ready for sale. This affects the whole country in a most material
manner, and must at least involve each individual in a loss of more than his
tax would amount to, sufficient to give a fixed value and use to our currency,
and thereby restore our trade and husbandry to their former vigor.

5. For want of the tax our defense must cease, and we must lie open to the
ravages and plunders of our enemies; the very risk and danger of which involves
many distresses that must occasion loss to every individual, far greater than
the whole amount of his tax would be toward such defense as would render the
country quite safe and secure. Add to this, the danger of being finally overrun
and conquered by our enemies, and falling under their unrestrained power; in
which case, they would doubtless extort perpetual taxes from us, to as great
amount as are now required for a short time to secure us against their power.

6. The want of this tax enervates our laws, renders their fines, penalties,
and forfeitures uncertain and ineffectual; destroys the salaries, fees, and
rewards of our civil and religious officers, and of course prevents men of
abilities from serving in the character of judge, sheriff, gospel-minister,
schoolmaster, etc. and of course the whole system of our civil and religious
polity, and education of youth is clearly on the decline to a very dangerous
degree; but as all these institutions tend much to the happiness of society,
any decline of them must greatly prejudice the value of every estate, and the
prospects of happiness and utility arising from it, to an amount greatly beyond
the tax required to secure all these wholesome institutions in their fullest
use, respectability, and general influence.

I might add here more instances of loss incurred by individuals from the
fluctuating state of our currency and disorders of our finances, which would be
all remedied by the tax I recommend; but it appears to me, those already
adduced are grounded on such obvious and notorious facts, are of such
interesting concern, and of such forcible conclusion, that if they do not
convince, it is needless to offer more on the subject; it is vain to offer
arguments to people who will not give a shilling to save a pound; and yet this
is much more than the tax I propose, requires, however it may be aggravated and
heightened by stingy, timorous, or corrupted men, into an exorbitancy utterly
insupportable.

II. As the money collected by taxes, or other money to the amount will be
constantly issuing, the payment of heavy taxes will be rendered as easy as the
nature of the case admits; while at the same time the great demand for money
occasioned by the tax, will be sufficient to keep its value fixed, and its uses
well secured and preserved. The facility of raising sums of money when the
circulation is brisk, and the demand quick for goods on hands, is easily
conceived, by any person in the least acquainted with trade. This mightily
lessens the burden of the tax below what it would be, if collected in a dull
time of business, and scarcity of cash, and consequently the tax itself becomes
less sensibly felt under these favorable circumstances of easy procurement,
than the same would be, if deferred to some future time, when there might be
less demand for goods, and greater scarcity of cash; therefore it is the
interest of every individual to pay his dues to the public whilst he can do it
with the greatest ease, rather than defer it to some future time, when he may
happen to be called on for it at a juncture when the payment will be more
difficult and distressing than now.

III. The price of most kinds of country produce is much higher than it is
usually in times of general quiet, and therefore the tax may be paid much
easier now than then; as a bushel of wheat, a cow, a sheep, etc. will bring
much more now than it will do when quiet is again restored, and of course ought
to be sold now, that the payment may be made whilst it can be done with most
ease and advantage; for what is not paid now must lie as a debt to be paid in
future time, when it will probably take near a double quantity of wheat, beef,
mutton, park, etc. to pay it, as would now be sufficient.

IV. Further, a prudent man will never let a demand lie against him when he can
conveniently satisfy it; and a public debt is the worst of all kind of demands,
when a man is not ready for them; for I submit it to every man if he would not
see any sort of creditor come to him when he was unprepared to pay, rather than
a public collector. Present payment avoids all this trouble and mortification,
as well as saves much by the high price which that produce will now bring,
which must be sold to pay the tax.

V. The tax will procure a good market, and sure, sufficient payment to
individuals who have such articles for sale as are needed by the public;
whereas for want of the tax, thousands who have sold their goods to the public,
have been paid in a useless currency, or have not been able to get any payment
at all, to their great disappointment and damage. This is a consideration of
great importance to most people in the States, as there are few who would not
choose to supply the public with some kind of goods or services in their power,
if they could be sure of punctual and sufficient payment. The having a quick
and profitable market for what is made ready for sale, is no small advantage to
every individual; for without this all his goods which he does not need for his
own consumption, lie useless on his hands, or his time may be lost for want of
an employer, who would pay him for his services.

The advantages resulting from this one circumstance would be equal to the tax
to many thousands of individuals; as the goods or time they would lose for want
of a market or employers, would be more than equal to the tax, as they have
experienced to their sorrow, who have lost their goods for want of a market, or
sold them where they could not get their payment either in due time, or in
currency of certain value.

VI. The tax would remove all cause of complaint, and put an end to the great
oppression which has taken place much too long; for if the burden is laid
equally on all, no one can have any cause to complain of oppression when his
share is demanded; but without this the supplies wanted for the public must be
taken by force or fraud from the owners, without payment, to their great
oppression and injury. Indeed if supplies are not procured and sent to the
army, these oppressions must be multiplied to a very tragical degree; for to
disband the army and send them home, when their present supplies are spent,
will not probably be either safe for the country, or agreeable to them; they
must therefore live in free quarters; they will probably be directed to march
into such States and towns as have been most deficient in furnishing their
quotas: but even in that case, thousands of individuals will suffer, who have
not been guilty of any deficiency or delays; for in cases of such extremity,
the innocent must be involved with the guilty, and of course oppressions must
be infinite, and very terrible. The burden of the tax bears no proportion to
the ruinous and most dreadful effects resulting in this one instance from the
want of it.

VII. The tax in a few months will restore our finances, fix our currency, and
put us in condition to unite our force with every possible advantage; and this
will so clearly demonstrate our unbroken strength, union, and firmness, that
the hearts of our enemies will die within them, and they will soon break up and
leave us in despair. Their only hope of conquest has long been from the
confusions of our finances; they have not attempted for two years past to
oppose their capital force to ours, but have hung on us in hopes that we should
soon sink under the pressure of our own expenses, and so fall an easy prey into
their hands; and they will continue in this hope as long as they see us ringing
the changes on visionary schemes, and trying in new shapes and attitudes an old
delusion, that always has deceived us in every shape, and probably always will.
Nov. 19, 1779, Congress earnestly recommended to the several States, forthwith
to enact laws for a general limitation of prices, to commence from the 1 st day
of Feb. (then) next, on the principle of the exchange of the currency being at
20 for 1.

The real exchange when this resolution passed, was 38 for 1; and on Feb. (when
their limitation was to commence) the real exchange was 47 for 1.

Various other methods equally idle and visionary were set on foot about this
time to fix the currency, such as, modifying the loan-office with many
proposals of supposed advantage, exclamations and threats against such as
refused to sell their property for Continental money, setting on foot
subscriptions for supplying the Treasury etc. vide Journal of Congress.




VIII. This same thing will show to foreign powers our unbroken strength, great
resources, wisdom of policy, and vigor in execution, give us great
respectability in their eyes, and enable us to demand and expect any aids from
them which we may need; for the state of human nature is such, that those can
get least help who need it most, and those can procure most friends who need
them least; and the best way for a man or a nation to get assistance from his
neighbors is to be able to do without it.

On the whole, I do not see that any thing more is necessary, than wi^e,
decisive counsels, put into action with spirit and resolution. We have enough
to do with, if we had but spirit and wisdom to call it into use; and I think
this spirit is much more wanting in our rulers than in the people. In old times
of distress among the Israelites, it was a sign of approaching deliverance when
the Spirit of the Lord came on their great men, i. e. in the Hebrew dialect, a
great spirit, great courage, and resolution, adequate to the work; as the trees
of the Lord mean great trees; the sons of God were their great men, and thunder
is called the voice of the Lord, because it is greatest of voices in the
natural world. The Romans, without inspiration, somehow catched the same idea.
Audentes fortuna juvat. They esteemed Fortune a divinity, ready to help those
who had spirit and courage to help themselves. Little is to be expected from
languid counsels, half assured resolutions, plans that want extent adequate to
their purpose, and vigor of execution equal to their extent. If I could see a
little more of that Spirit of the Lord which animated the brave old worthies, I
should soon expect to see the sword of the Lord follow, and our troubles and
troublers all melting away before us.

But before I quit this subject, I beg leave to add one thought more, which
appears to me of the most capital importance, viz. that no plan of taxation, or
any thing else, can be of any good effect, if there is not some method adopted
to bring all the States into an union and punctuality of execution. The least
company of men, who have a common concern, if it is but in a ship or piece of
banked meadow, find it absolutely and essentially necessary to have some way to
compel their partners into a punctual discharge of their quotas. The very
existence of our union requires this. If one State hangs back, another will,
and the best concerted plan possible may be rendered ineffectual by delays and
defects in the execution.

It is essential to the very being of any independent community, that it has in
it all the powers necessary to its own preservation. These powers doubtless
exist in the Thirteen States, as perfectly as in any other community in the
world. And though I do not pretend to understand the constitution of our union
well enough to decide where these powers lie, yet I should suppose they must be
vested in the Congress, as I know of no powers which extend over the whole, but
theirs. But if it is thought that these powers are not sufficiently explicit
and declared to be in them, it is necessary that this declaration should be
made without delay, and put into such force as is absolutely necessary to give
effect to our public counsels, preserve the union, and concentre the force of
the whole, and prevent that destruction which may ensue for want of such union
of effort for the common safety.

If it was possible for the tardy States to go to destruction alone, without
dragging the rest after them, it might be best to dismiss them from the union
with contempt. But as this cannot be done, it is necessary to the preservation
of the whole, that some means be found to compel such States to keep pace with
their neighbors, and bear their due proportion of the burden and duty, as well
as receive their share of protection and benefit.

In fine, we want nothing but united and spirited efforts for a short time, to
restore our finances, establish our currency, retrieve our honor, secure our
safety, give vigor to every kind of business and occupation, recover our
virtue, and make ourselves the laudable and envied example of wisdom and
happiness to all the world. Our posterity expect and have a right to demand
this from us. The eager eyes of all Europe are on us, ready to give their
plaudit to our virtue, decision, and success. Our enemies tremble, for fear we
should grow wise and virtuous; and Heaven opens the scene favorably, and has
given us the lucky cards, and we have nothing to do but to play them out well.

Et dubitamus adhu^ virtutem extendere factis,
Aut metus, hac libera, prohibet consistere terra.
STRICTURES ON TENDER-ACTS. The fatal error, that the credit and currency of
the Continental money could be kept up and supported by acts of con^^^^sion,
entered so deep into the mind of Congress and of all departments of
administration through the States, that no considerations of justice, religion,
or policy, or even experience of its utter inefficacy, could eradicate it; it
seemed to be a kind of obstinate delirium, totally deaf to every argument drawn
from justice and right, from its natural tendency and mischief, from common
sense, and even common safety.

Congress began, as early as Jan. 11, 1776, to hold up and recommend this maxim
of maniasm, when Continental money was but 5 months old (for its actual
circulation commenced the beginning of August 1775, though the bills were dated
May 10, preceding, that being the first day of that session of Congress)
Congress then resolved, that "whoever should refuse to receive in payment,
Continental bills, etc. should be deemed and treated as an enemy of his
country, and be precluded from all trade and intercourse with the inhabitants,"
etc. i. e. should be outl^wed; which is the severest penalty (except of life
and limb) known in our laws.

This ruinous principle was continued in practice for five successive years,
and appeared in all shapes and forms, i. e. in tender-acts, in limitations of
prices, in awful and threatening declarations, in penal laws with dreadful and
ruinous punishments, and in every other way that could be devised, and all
executed with a relentless severity, by the highest authorities then in being,
viz. by Congress, by Assemblies and Conventions of the States, by committees of
inspection (whose powers in those days were nearly sovereign) and even by
military force; and though men of all descriptions stood trembling before this
monster of force, without daring to lift a hand against it, during all this
period, yet its unrestrained energy ever proved ineffectual to its purposes,
but in every instance increased the evils it was designed to remedy, and
destroyed the benefits it was intended to promote; at best its utmost effect
was like that of water sprinkled on a blacksmith's forge, which indeed deadens
the flame for a moment, but never fails to increase the ^eat and force of the
internal fire. Many thousand families of full and easy fortune were ruined by
these fatal measures, and lie in ruins to this day, without the least benefit
to the country, or to the great and noble cause in which we were then engaged.

I do not mention th^se things from any pleasure I have in opening the wounds
of my country, or exposing its errors, but with a hope that our fatal mistakes
may be a caution and ^^arning to future financiers, who may live and act in any
country which may happen to be in circumstances similar to ours at that time.

N. B. The act of Nov. 29, 1780, herein referred to, was passed into a law,
Dec. 19, 178^.



[First published in Philadelphia, Dec. 13, 1780.]
THE Tender-Act of November 29, 1780, is published by order of the Assembly of
Pennsylvania for public consideration, and therefore the duty and respect due
to the Assembly and the Public obliges every one to consider it, and offer such
remarks on it as deserve public notice. In compliance with this duty, I have
considered the said act, and the following Strictures appear to me of
importance sufficient to engage the public attention.

The nature of a Tender-Act is no more or less than establishing by law the
standard value of money, and has the same use with respect to the currency,
that the legal standard pound, bushel, yard, or gallon has to those goods, the
quantities of which are usually ascertained by those weights and measures;
therefore to call any thing a pound or shilling, which really is not so, and
make it a legal standard, is an error of the same nature as diminishing the
standard bushel, yard, gallon, etc. or making a law that a foot shall be the
legal yard, an ounce the legal pound, a peck the legal bushel, or a quart the
legal gallon, and compelling every body to receive all goods due to them by
such deficient measures.

Further, to make any thing the legal standard of any of these, which is not of
fixed but variable nature, is an error of the same kind and mischief as the
other; e. g. to make a turnip the standard pound weight, which may dry up in
the course of a year to a pith of not more than two or three ounces, or to make
a flannel string the standard yard, which will shrink in using to half its
length. The absurdity of this is too glaring to need any thing further said on
it.

But to come to the matter now in question.

The first observation which occurs to me is, that the bills, which are made a
tender, contain a public promise of money to be paid in six years. On which I
beg leave to remark, that the best and most indubitable security of money to be
paid in six years, or any future time, is not so good or valuable as ready
cash. The truth of this proposition is so evident and obvious to every body,
that it cannot need proof.

Therefore the law, which obliges a man to accept these bills instead of ready
cash, obliges him to receive a less valuable thing in full payment of a more
valuable one, and injures him to amount of the difference; and is so far a
direct violation of the laws of commutative justice -- laws grounded in the
nature of human rights, supported by the most necessary natural principles, and
enjoined by the most express authority of God Almighty, and which it is not
possible that any legislature on earth should have right to infringe or
abrogate.

Again, the security arising from the public promise is not generally deemed
certain. The public faith has been so often violated, and the sufferings of
individuals thence arising have been so multiplied and extensive, that the
general confidence of our people in that security is much lessened; and as a
chance or uncertainty can never be so valuable as a certainty, those bills must
and will be considered as less valuable than they would be, was the security on
which they depended, free of all doubt or uncertainty; and consequently, the
discount of their value will always be estimated by, and of course be equal to,
this difference. Therefore, the injustice of forcing them on the subject at
full value of present cash, is greatly increased.

These positions and reasonings are grounded on such notoriety of fact, that
any explanation or proof is needless; and I hope an objection against a law,
drawn from the most manifest and acknowledged injustice of its operation and
effect, will not be deemed trivial, or be easily set aside or got over.

Naked facts are powerful things, and arguments sometimes do best, and have the
greatest effect, when addressed to the feelings of mankind; and that I may
press the matter as close as I can, I beg leave to propose the following case,
viz.

Suppose a man of grave phiz and character should, in distress, apply to his
neighbor for the loan of 1000 silver dollars, with solemn promise on his honor
and truth to repay them in a month, and in the mean time the tender-act under
consideration should pass into a law, and the borrower, at the month's end,
should tender 1000 of the new paper dollars in payment.

I beg leave here to propose to every Member of the Assembly who voted for that
law, and to every other man, who is a member of this State, what their
sentiments of that action would be, and in what light they would view the
borrower, who tendered the paper dollars (i. e. 2/(...) of the debt) in payment
of the silver ones he had received; i. e. would they consider him as an
upright, honest man, or a shameless rascal?

In whichever of the two characters they may choose to consider such a man, it
may be proper to note, that the act in question, if passed into a law, would
protect him, and not only so, but would subject the lender to the loss of the
whole money if he refused to receive it. This is a somewhat delicate matter,
which it is painful to dwell long upon. I will therefore close what I have to
say on it with a few very serious remarks, the truth, justice, and propriety of
which I humbly submit to the reader.

1. The worst kind of evil, and that which corrupts and endangers any community
most, is that iniquity which is framed by a law; for this places the mischief
in the very spot, on the very seat, to which every one ought to look and apply
for a remedy.

2. It cannot be consistent with the honor, the policy, the interest, or
character of an Assembly of Pennsylvania, to make a law, which, by its natural
operation, shall afford protection to manifest injustice, deliberate knavery,
and known wrong.

3. No cause or end can be so good, i. e. so heavenly in its origin, so
excellent in its nature, ^o perfect in its principles, and so useful in its
operation, as to require or justify infernal means to promote it. By infernal
means I mean such as are most opposed to Heaven and its laws; most repugnant to
natural principles of equity, which are all derived from Heaven; and most
destructive of the rights of human nature, which are essential to the happiness
of society, the laws of which are engraven by Heaven on the heart of every man;
some wicked men have formerly said, "let us do evil, that good may come, whose
damnation is just."

But perhaps this sort of argument may not have all the effect I could wish on
the mind of every reader. I therefore proceed to another argument, which goes
to the nature and principle of the act itself, viz. that the credit or value of
money cannot, in the very nature of the thing, be supplied, preserved, or
restored by penal laws, or any coercive methods. The subject is incompatible to
force, it is out of its reach, and never can be made susceptible of it, or
controllable by it. The thing which makes money an object of desire, which
gives it strength of motive on the hearts of all men, is the general
confidence, the opinion which it gains, as a sovereign means of obtaining every
thing needful. This confidence, this opinion, exists in the mind only, and is
not compellable or assailable by force, but must be grounded on that evidence
and reason which the mind can see and believe; and is no more subject to the
action of force, than any other passion, sentiment, or affection of the mind;
any more than faith, love, or esteem.

It is not more absurd to attempt to impel faith into the heart of an
unbeliever by fire and faggot, or to whip love into your mistress with a
cowskin, than to force value or credit into your money by penal laws.

You may, indeed, by force compel a man to deliver his goods for money which he
does not esteem, and the same force may compel him to deliver his goods without
any money at all; but the credit or value of the money cannot be helped by all
this, as appears by numberless examples. Plain facts are stubborn and
undeniable proofs of this. Indeed, this has been tried among ourselves in such
extent of places and variety of shapes, and in every instance been found
ineffectual, that I am amazed to see any attempt to revive it, under any
devisable form whatsoever. Numberless are the instances of flagrant oppression
and wrong, and even ruin, which have been the sad effects of these dreadful
experiments, with infinite detriment to the community in general, without
effecting in any one instance the ends intended. The facts on which this
argument depends, are fresh in every one's memory.

I could wish, for the honor of my country, to draw a veil over what is past,
and that wisdom might be derived from past errors, sufficient to induce every
one to avoid them in future. In fine, from the contemplation of the nature of
the thing, and of the facts and experiments which have been made in every
variety of mode, and supported by every degree of power and exertion, it
appears as plain and undeniable as intuitive proof, that the credit or value of
money is not in its nature controllable by force, and therefore, any attempt to
reach it in that way, must end in disappointment, and the greater the efforts,
and the higher the authority which may be exerted in that way, the greater must
be the chagrin, shame, and mortification, when the baseless fabric shall vanish
into smoke.

The only possible method then of giving value or credit to money is, to give
it such qualities, and clothe it with such circumstances, as shall make it a
sure means of procuring every needful thing; for money that will not answer all
things, is defective, and has not in it the full nature and qualities of money.
In this way only it will grow fast enough into esteem, and become a sufficient
object of desire, to answer every end and use of money. Therefore, when the
question is proposed, how shall we give credit or value to our money? the
answer, the only true answer, is, bring it into demand, make it necessary to
every one, make it a high means of happiness, and a sure remedy of misery. To
attempt this in any other way is to go out of nature, and of course into
difficulty, only to obtain shameful disappointment in the end.

There is nothing better than to take things in their natural way. A great and
difficult work may be accomplished by easy diligence, if a good method and a
wi^e choice of means are adopted; but a small work may be made difficult, very
soon, if taken at the wrong end, and pursued by unnatural means. There is a
right and a wrong method of doing every thing. You may lead with a thread what
you cannot drive with whips and scorpions. The Britons have found this to their
cost, in the unnatural means they have pursued to preserve and recover their
dominions in America. I wish we might be made wise by their errors. Felix quem
faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

I would be willing to learn wisdom from Great Britain. Fas est ab host
doceri. Amidst all their madness, and in all their distresses for money, they
never once thought of making their bank or exchequer bills a tender, or
supporting their currency by penal laws. But these considerations may have
little effect on some minds, who are not very delicate in their choice of
means, but seem resolved to carry their point, volente nolente Deo.

I therefore hasten to another topic of argument, viz. It appears to me the act
is founded in mistaken and very had policy, and by its natural operation must
produce many effects extremely prejudicial to our great and most important
interests.

1. It seems plain to me, that the act has a fatal tendency to destroy the
great motives of industry, and to dishearten and discourage men of every
profession and occupation from pursuing their business on any large scale or to
any great effect, and therefore will prevent the production of those supplies
derived from husbandry and manufactures, which are essential to our safety,
support and comfort. Few men will bestow their labor, attention, and good
money, with zeal, to procure goods and commodities for sale, which they know
they must sell for money which they esteem bad, or at best doubtful. This
proposition is so obvious and natural, that it strikes the mind with conviction
at first sight without proof, and is so amply confirmed by our past experience,
that it can admit no doubt as to its truth or consequence.

The extent and dreadful effects of this are unavoidable and immense. If the
industry of the farmer and tradesman is discouraged, and they cease to lay
themselves out for large crops and fabrics, the consequence must be an
universal diminution and scarcity of the produce of the country and most
important articles of living, as well as commerce. The general industry of the
country is of such vast importance, is an object of such magnitude, that to
check it, is to bring on ruin, poverty, famine, and distress, with idleness,
vice, corruption of morals, and every species of evil; but enumeration or
enlargement is unnecessary here.

As money is the sinews of every business, the introducing a doubtful medium,
and forcing it into currency by penal laws, must weaken and lessen every branch
of business, in proportion to the diminution of inducement found in the money.

2. The same thing will render the procurement of supplies for the army
difficult, if not utterly impracticable. Most men will hold back their goods
from the market, rather than ^ell them for money of a doubtful credit; and
there will be no possible way of collecting them, but to send a superior force
into the country, and there take them by violence from the owner, which will
occasion such an expense as will double the cost of the supplies by the time
they get to the army, be subject to a thousand frauds, etc. etc. etc. This is
the most obvious and ntural operation of the act, if we consider its own nature
only, and is confirmed by such ample experience, recent in the memory of every
man, that it can leave no doubt but all this train of michiefs must follow the
act from its first operation.

3. I apprehend the act will, by its natural operation, tend to corrupt the
morality of the people, sap the support, if not the very foundation, of our
independence, lessen the respect due to our Legislature, and destroy that
reverence for our laws, which is absolutely necessary to their proper
operation, and the peace and protection of society. Many people will be so
terrified with the apprehension of seeing their real substance, the fruit of
their labor and anxious attention, converted into a bundle of paper bills of
uncertain value, that, to avoid this evil, they will have strong inducements to
rack their invention for all devisable ways and methods of avoiding it; and
this will give rise to such numberless frauds, ambiguities, lies, quibbles, and
shams, as will introduce the habit and give a kind of facility to the practice
of such guile and feats of art, as will endanger the uprightness, plain
honesty, and noble sincerity, which ever mark the character of a happy and
virtuous people.

Many, who wish well to our independence, and have many necessaries for our
army which they would wish to supply, will be yet held back from offering their
goods, from the sole consideration of the doubtful value of the bills in which
those supplies must be paid for; and instances of this sort I conceive will be
so numerous, as greatly to affect the supplies of our army, and of course the
support of our independence. The injuries and sufferings of people, who are
compelled to take said bills in satisfaction of contracts for real money, will
induce them in their rage to use the legislature, who formed the act, with
great liberty, and perhaps gross disrespect; whilst the habit of reproaching
the legislature, and eluding the injurious act, will become general, and pave
the way to an habitual and universal abhorrence of our legislature and contempt
of our laws, with a kind of facility and artful dexterity in eluding the force
of the whole code.

I freely submit it to my reader, if these consequences are at all unnatural or
ill-drawn, if the surmises are at all groundless, or the painting a white too
strong. No art of government is more necessary, than that of keeping up the
dignity and respectability of the legislatures, and all courts and officers of
government, and exciting and preserving in the hearts of the people a high
reverence for the laws; and any thing which endangers these great supports of
the state ought to be avoided as a deadly evil.

4. The act, I apprehend, will give a bad appearance to our credit, honor, and
respectability, in the eyes of our neighbors on this continent, and the
nations of Europe, and other more distant parts of the world. For when they
come to be informed that our own people must be compelled, by the loss of half
their estates and imprisonment of their persons, to trust the public faith,
they will at once conclude there must be some great danger, some shocking
mischief dormant there, which the people nearest to and best acquainted with
it, abhor so much; and of course, as they are out of the reach of our
confiscations and imprisonments, will have little inducement to trust or esteem
us. And

5. Will give great exultation and encouragement to our enemies, and induce
them to prolong the war, and thereby increase the horrid penalty of
imprisonment, which is to last during the war. When they see that our money is
become so detestable, that it requires such an act as this to compel our own
people to take it, they must at least be convinced that its nature is greatly
corrupted, and its efficacy and use nearly at an end. When we see the
passionate admirers of a great beauty forced by lashes and tortures into her
embraces, we at once conclude that she has lost her charms, and is become
dangerous and loathsome.

It cannot be fairly objected to these Strictures, that they suppose the bills
funded by this act are of less value than hard money. The act itself implies
this. The Assembly never thought of wasting time in framing an act to compel
people to take guineas, joes, and Spanish dollars, under penalty of
confiscation and imprisonment. Besides, the fact stands in such glaring light
in the eyes of all men, that it is mere trifling to dispute it.

I dare think that there is not a man to be found, either in the Assembly or
out of it, that would esteem himself so rich and safe in the possession of 1000
of these dollars, as of 1000 Spanish ones; and the most effectual way to
impress a sense of the deficiency of the act on the minds of all men, and even
discover the idea which the Assembly themselves have of it, is to enforce it by
penalties of extreme severity; for were there no deficiency in the act, it
could not possibly require such penalties to give it all necessary effect, nor
is it supposable that the Assembly would add the sanction of horrid penalties
to any of their acts, unless they thought there was need of them.

The enormity of the penalty deserves remark. The penalty for refusing a dollar
of these bills is greater than for stealing ten times the sum.

Further, the act alters, and of course destroys, the nature and value of
public and private contracts, and of consequence strikes at the root of all
public and private credit. Who can lend money with any security, and of course
who can borrow, let his necessity and distress be ever so great? who can
purchase on credit, or make any contract for future payment? in very deed all
confidence of our fellow-citizens in one another is hereby destroyed, as well
as all faith of individuals in the public credit.

Upon the whole matter, the bills must rest on the credit of their funds, their
quantity, and other circumstances. If these are sufficient to give them a
currency at full value, they will pass readily enough without the help of penal
laws. If these are not sufficient, they must and will depreciate, and thereby
destroy the end of their own creation; and this will proceed from such strong
natural principles, such physical causes, as cannot, in the nature of the
thing, be checked or controlled by penal laws, or any other application of
force.

These Strictures are humbly offered to public consideration. The facts alleged
are all open to view, and well understood. If the remarks and reasonings are
just, they will oarry conviction; if they are not so, they are liable to any
one's correction.

AN ESSAY OR Humble Attempt to examine and state the TRUE INTEREST Of
PENNSYLVANIA with Respect to the Paper Currency.
[First published in Philadelphia, Dec. 13, 1780.]
I PROPOSE, first, some remarks on the subject of paper money, and, secondly,
some particular consideration of the Acts of our Assembly for issuing the new
Continental bills, with some reasons why I think the true interest of
Pennsylvania requires that those acts should be repealed, and the issuing of
those bills should be stopped or suspended for the present, and I hope to do
this without offense; for the great interests of a State, in which 400,000
citizens are concerned, cannot be too well understood, nor the utility of its
laws be too carefully examined, or the errors of them be discovered and amended
too soon.

Two things are essential necessary to give paper bills a credit and currency
equal to hard money. 1. Such certainty of HONEST and PUNCTUAL REDEMPTION, as
shall fully satisfy the mind of the possessor. 2. That the CREDIT and DEMAND
for said bills should be so constantly kept up, from the time of their EMISSION
to that of their REDEMPTION, that the possessor may be able, at any time, to
pass them at hard money value. The first of these is provided for by the
Assembly, if their act shall produce the certainty of redemption required,
which I am not here to dispute: but the second is equally necessary; for should
the bills pass from their emission to their redemption, or any part of that
intermediate time, at a depreciated value, say 2, 3, or 4 for 1, though they
should be redeemed at full value at the expiration of their currency in the
most punctual manner, yet the mischiefs they would occasion in the mean time
would be infinite.

One of which would be, that the depreciation itself would render the final
redemption of the bills at full value both unjust and pernicious, as well as
very hard and oppressive to the body of the people; for, in this case, the
people must be taxed, say two, three, or four times the value or current
exchange of the bills; not to the public benefit, but solely to increase the
wealth of those rich people, who will hoard up the bills, and have them in
possession at the time of their redemption. From which it appears (and indeed I
think it may be demonstrated from the plainest principles) that public bills
ought always to be redeemed at that value or current exchange, at which they
usually pass at the time of redemption, let their nominal value be whatever it
may. Indeed, the infinite and ruinous mischiefs of a fluctuating currency are
so generally felt and well understood, that I conceive there is no need of
proof, that it is equally necessary to keep the value or exchange of bills
stable and unvarying through the whole time of their currency, as to provide sure
funds for their final redemption, and that the first of these does not depend
solely on the last. The first of these depends on opinion, persuasion, and
general practice; the last on the ability and integrity of the redeemer.

If you offer a bill to a stranger, he never thinks of asking when, by whom, or
how certainly that bill is to be redeemed, but his only question is, whether he
can pass it again? Not one in a thousand who takes a public bill, takes it with
a design to lay it up five or six years, though its redemption be ever so sure at
that time, but his object is immediate use, to serve his present occasions by
instantly passing it again, or at least having it in his power to do it
whenever occasion may offer. I take it that these principles and reasonings are
perfectly plain and clear, and will afford, by the clearest inference, the
following consequence, viz. That no public bills ought ever to be issued, which
have not these two great and essential supports, 1. a CERTAINTY of final
redemption; and, 2. such general confidence and demand, as will insure their
currency at full value without depreciation, during the whole time of their
circulation.

Indeed, it appears to me, that to issue public bills without these supports is
the plainest folly, bordering on insanity, and must be very criminal, when done
in the face of clear evidence and conviction. It further appears to me, that
the new Continental bills have not these supports at present, and therefore
ought not to be issued till these supports can be obtained, and of consequence,
that the great interest of the State requires that the laws for issuing them
should be repealed; or at least that the issuing them should be suspended till
these supports can be obtained; for which I offer the following reasons, which
seems to me to be of weight and force sufficient to engage the most serious
attention of the public.

1. The quantity ( viz. 10,000,000 of dollars) is at least four times as much
in value as all the old Continental bills, and therefore must, from the nature
of the thing, depreciate it, were its funds ever so indubitable, and the public
confidence in it ever so great. -- I conceive the present mean exchange of the
Continental bills is about 100 for 1, at least they cannot be set at less than
80 for 1, on any sure facts, which makes the whole quantity ( viz. 200,000,000)
worth 2,500,000 of hard dollars, which is but one fourth of 10,000,000; -- and
further, that increasing the quantity of money will (caeteris paribus) decrease
its value. This will always be a natural truth, as long as the value of money
is nothing but the proportion between the quantity of circulating money and the
occasions of money (as I think I have demonstrated in my Essays on Free Trade
and Finance, and especially in the Second Essay) and which now is become such a
received truth, that it cannot need further proof here.

2. The sum of 10,000,000 of dollars, added to the other bills which will
continue circulating, such as State money, and certificates of various kinds,
etc. is much more paper money than the Thirteen States ever did or can bear.
The whole circulating cash of the Thirteen States, on the best calculation I
have been able to make, never did exceed 12,000,000, I rather think it not more
than 10,000,000 of hard dollars in value, and not more than half, or at most
three fifths, of the circulating cash in this State was paper in 1774; and I am
convinced, by very good documents, that that proportion was not exceeded in the
other States, where paper money was circulated; and as most of the trade and
business that requires stock or cash, is now in stagnation, there cannot be
occasion for so much circulating cash as in 1774, when every business, trade,
and occupation was in full vigor.

Indeed, it is easy to make a pretty just estimate of the quantity of
circulating paper which the country can now bear, from fact, viz. from the
value of the present circulating paper, of which the Continental bills are much
the greatest part; by which it will appear, that the present circulating paper
cannot exceed four millions of Spanish dollars in value, -- and that it is as
much as the Thirteen States can bear, or rather more, is plain from this, --
viz. that the paper of all sorts continues to depreciate. Now, in these
circumstances, to pour on 3 or 4 times as much new paper as we are found, by
experiment, by plain fact, able to bear, is in my opinion a sure way to
depreciate it. I think it is not more certain, if you pour three or four
buckets of water into one that is already full, that some of it must run over;
yea, I think that the whole quantity you pour in must all run over.

3. We have already too much money circulating among us, for it is certain that
even hard money will not purchase more than two thirds as much labor, country
produce, or other necessaries, which are not heightened in their price by the
extraordinary expense of importation, as the same would have purchased in 1774.
Hence it follows, that the quantity of money has increased beyond the occasions
of money in that proportion. This is reasoning on sure principles, which any
body may disprove that can; the price of market, rents, and even real estates,
afford a most plain and striking proof of this; it is further to be noted here
that the French and British armies import much money, which they are daily
spreading among us, and thereby rapidly increase our circulating cash. It
follows then, that our best policy is to reduce the quantity of our circulating
medium, especially that dangerous part of it which consists in paper, that we
may avoid, as far as possible, the further horrors and mischiefs of a
depreciating currency, rather than to increase the evil by pouring in immense
additions.

4. The present Continental money passes at its exchange through all the Thirteen
States readily enough; any thing* even hard money, may be purchased with it;
therefore it answers well the ends and uses of a circulating medium. But the
new bills, however well established their funds may be, have not the confidence
of the public in general, nor will they be readily received. They are a new
thing, and their fate uncertain. This will naturally depreciate them in the
first beginning of their circulation, by which the whole commerce of the
Thirteen States, as well as the public finance and expenditures, will receive
the most essential injury. Now to call in a currency that is well received, and
which answers well the ends and uses of a circulating medium, and issue of it
one of doubtful credit, which will probably be received with diffidence, if not
disgust, appears to me the height of absurdity.

5. The new bills, however funded, must stand on the same basis as the old,
viz. the PUBLIC FAITH, which however modified, is neither better nor worse in
the one case than the other, and therefore the new bills will depend on no
better supports than the old ones, and of consequence nothing can be gained by
the exchange, the trouble, risk, and expense of which must therefore be wholly
lost.

6. If the old bills should depreciate, the public will gain the depreciation;
but if the new bills should depreciate, the public must lose the depreciation,
or must suffer a second bankruptcy to avoid the loss.

7. If the new bills should be emitted, they will not answer the purpose of a
GENERAL CURRENCY, which is one principal end of their creation: but, like the
State money, will be confined to the State that signs them. For it is very
certain, that one State will no sooner take the new bills signed by another
State, than they will take any other bills signed by the same State; for the
Continental security, added to the new bills, is neither expressed nor intended
to mend the credit or make good the deficiencies of any of the States, but such
as are rendered incapable of payment by the power or possession of the enemy.
The present Continental bills have a general currency, and therefore ought to
be kept in circulation in preference to the new bills, if no other reason could
be given for it.

8. Most of the other States who have emitted the new bills, have issued them
at 40 for 1, i. e. at about half their nominal value, and it is in my opinion
pretty much in vain for us to attempt to give our bills a better exchange or
value than theirs have, in as much as their funds of redemption and means of
intermediate circulation are as good as ours; besides, to attempt this would be
to introduce such a variety, such a jargon of exchanges, as would defeat every
purpose of a general currency of those bills.

9. If the new bills should be issued at half value, or should speedily
depreciate to 2 for 1 (and I think on every natural principle they must
depreciate to 3 or 4 for 1 by the time they are all out) I say, at 2 for 1 the
States will not only -- 1. give 4^ s. for every 20 s. which they issue; and, 2.
give 10 per cent. interest in hard money for it all; but, 3. when they have
issued it all, it will pay but half the expenditures of the year, if those
expenditures are 10,000,000 of hard dollars, as they are generally computed;
for it is plain that 10,000,000 at 2 for 1, will pay but 5,000,000 real money;
and if the whole 10,000,000 should be called in by taxes within the year, yet
at the end of the year, the States would find themselves in debt 5,000,000 of
hard dollars, over the above the heavy balance now against them, and the annual
increase of the public debt abroad.

But if (as will most likely be the case) most of the new bills should be
outstanding at the end of the year, we must add to the aforesaid 5,000,000 of
hard dollars debt, the amount of all the outstanding bills, with one year's
hard money interest on them all -- a vast chaos this, equal to the dreary
regions of ancient night! My reader may think my reasoning is sanguine, and
expression strong, but both proceed from the real convictions of my own mind,
from the force of truth.

If I have discovered and described properly these operations of the new bills
on the Thirteen States, it follows that this State must take its sh^re of these
consequences if they issue their quot^ of them.

What I would humbly propose, instead of this measure, is, to repeal the acts
for issuing the new bills, or suspend their execution till we are in condition
to give them a currency truly and really equal to hard money, and keep them so*
and in the mean time to continue the circulation of the present Continental or
State bills, or both, till we can get hard money enough for (...) currency, or
till time and wisdom shall discover some other resource, less fraught with
dishonor, disappointment, and ruin.

In fine, taxation equal to the public expenditures is, in my opinion, the only
method in nature by which our defense can be continued, our independence be
^^served, a destructive increase of (...) public debt be avoided, our currency
(hard or paper) be (...) in a state of fixed value, the natural springs of
industry be given to every profession of men, our supplies made plentiful, the
public confidence be restored to the public counsels, the morality of our
people be revived, and the blessings of heaven be secured to ourselves and our
posterity. All this, I conceive, is proved fully in my five Essays, especially
the Fifth, to which I refer every one who is not already weary of my thoughts,
and would wish to be further acquainted with my sentiments on this subject.

Upon the whole matter, I conceive that union in counsels, uniformity of method
in our finances, and the benefits of a general currency, were the principal
objects of the resolution of Congress of the 18th of March, 1780 (though I
confess I never could see the advantages of that resolution.) I further
conceive these objects are already lost; for the different exchange at which
the different States issue and pass the bills, and the want of confidence of
the States in each other (for one State will not take the bills of the other
States, as we find by experiment) together with the deficient and dilatory
supports given to those resolutions, I say, all these together destroy the
intended union of counsels and uniformity of finances, and render a general
currency of the bills impracticable.

Indeed, I ever considered the enormous quantity of bills proposed for emission
in the said resolution, to be a seed of mischief, which would grow up with
force in the course of its operation, and defeat its effects; the ill
consequences of which could no otherwise be avoided, th^n by the most strenuous
and united efforts of the States in its support, and using the greatest
prudence and caution as to the quantity issued; all which I noticed with great
freedom in my strictures on said resolution, in my Fifth Essay, published ten
months ago. It now appears that the efforts of the States in support of said
resolution have been very dilatory, far from decisive, and widely differing in
the manner of exertion; that the general confidence of the public in the
success of the bills is greatly shaken; and that the general currency of them
is rendered impracticable, and not to be expected, and of course that the g^^^
design, and benefits of the measure are already become desperate.

I cannot see that it would be wise in our Assembly further to pursue a scheme,
the principal objects of which are already defeated, and which, of course, has
already lost its capital uses; especially when there are so many and important
objections lying in the way of its operation: to suppose that we can cut our
way through all these difficulties, and force the bills into circulation by penal
laws is an idea which I cannot think admissible, for the reasons I alleged in
my Strictures on the Tender-Act, whilst it was under consideration; at least
this dependence is dangerous to a great degree, for should it fail, we shall be
left dreadfully destitute, without any cash at command, and without time or
means of recurring in season to our more sure resources.

If the emission of the new Continental bills should be laid aside, we may be
able well to support our new emission of state bills; if the demand for them is
sufficiently increased by taxes which is very practicable; and if the
legislature could be prevailed on to take off the penalties of the tender-act,
which were designed to enforce their circulation, but which, in my opinion, add
horror to the currency itself, and raise doubts and fears which otherwise would
not be thought of; and, in any view, stand as a monument of the weakness of our
public credit, which requires such unnatural supports to keep it in existence,
and will be a monument of our folly, shame, and inadequate policy, if it should
fail of producing the effects intended.

I apprehend it would be much more sure, natural, and advisable, if we need
money for any use, e. g. to pay and feed the army, etc. to lay a tax on our
people for it, and solemnly appropriate it to that purpose ONLY, and tell them
so. I am of opinion such a tax would be speedily and cheerfully paid, and let
the same be done for every other branch of expenditure. This will be settling
and finishing the matter as we go along, and will keep our State and counsels
free from the confusion of perplexed finances, the endless labor of settling
public accounts, the pressure of a public debt, and the disheartening horrors
of future endless taxes, to discharge the Lord knows what of interest and
principal, which will remain to be paid in future time.

If other States are disposed to involve themselves and posterity in an endless
labyrinth of confused accounts, fluctuating currency, and immensity of debt, it
does not follow that it is either prudent or necessary that we should imitate
their example. If we satisfy the quotas (demanded by Congress) as well as they,
we do our duty as well; and if this be done in a way of more ease and safety to
our own people, the other States cannot be prejudiced by it^ and if they should
apprehend that our method has more advantages in it than theirs, instead of
blaming us, they may, if they please, follow our example. If this should not
suit them, they will be at liberty to load themselves with paper, whilst we
shall draw their hard money to ourselves, which will be the natural and
unavoidable consequence of their continuing, and our restraining, the emissions
of paper money.

The same thing will fill our State with the best inhabitants; for it is plain
that every sensible man would choose to settle himself in a State free of debt,
rather than in one loaded with a debt which would require the galling taxes of
an age to discharge it.

But, all this aside, I would rather discharge the expenditures as we go, though
it should prove heavy, than to leave a legacy of debt on posterity, which will
mix bitterness with the sweets of that liberty which we are endeavoring to
procure for them, and induce them to censure the humanity of our counsels, and
lessen their gratitude to us for a most valuable blessing secured to them,
because they will find themselves charged with the expense of it.

But still I expect to hear the old cry against my principles, that they are
good in theory, but not admissible, because impracticable; that taxing equal to
the expenditures is impossible, because the people cannot bear such weight of
taxes; but there is no disputing against necessity, I therefore beg the
reader's patient attention to the following short propositions.

1. Taxing equal to the expenditures is the only possible method of keeping our
currency to a fixed value; for if there is more money in any country issued
into currency, than is taken out during the year, there must be more money in
circulation at the end of the year than there was in the beginning of it, and
an increase of quantity will depreciate the value of any currency (hard or
paper:) this depends on principles as natural and unalterable as the laws of
gravitation, or powers of the magnet.

2. A fluctuating currency is by all men confessed to be a calamity, much more
dreadful and ruinous than any degree of taxation necessary to prevent it.

3. The mischief of a fluctuating currency is dreadfully increased by all
regulations, tender-acts, and every other application of force made use of to
prevent it; the noise, force, and devastation of an irresistible current are
dreadfully increased by obstacles thrown in its way, beyond what would happen,
if it was suffered to take its natural course without interruption; for a
practical proof of these two last propositions, I appeal to the experience of
every man of any business, with this plain question, "Sir, would you not rather
pay your share of the whole expenditures of the year in monthly or quarterly
taxes, than suffer, through the year, the pains, injuries, and inconveniences of
a fluctuating currency, with regulations, committees, tender-acts, and
penalties in force?" I dare believe that scarce a man of business and character
can be found in this State, who would not readily answer, and from full
conviction, that the tax would be much the least burdensome of the two. -- I
will then state my propositions with freedom, and submit them to the candid
examination and censure of the public. I propose,

1. To repeal the acts for issuing the new Continental bills, of March 18th,
1780; and

2. All the tender-acts; and

3. To let the laws have their free course to oblige every man to fulfill his
contracts as plain justice requires; in order to this, a scale of depreciation
The Assembly of Pennsylvania, by their act of April 3, 1781, made a scale of
depreciation, by which all debts, accounts, contracts, etc. were to ^e adjusted
and settled.
for some time past may be easily made for the government of the courts; or the
court and jury may be empowered to give judgment for what appears to be in
justice due, on the full hearing the case; i. e. I humbly propose to be honest
once more, to revive our old notions and practice of justice and equity; i. e.
to suffer justice and judgment to run down our streets, and overflow our land.
My reason for this proposal is, because I really believe it is both a natural
and revealed truth, that " righteousness exalts a nation, but SIN is a
reproach to ^^y people.

4. To issue a tax for whatever money we want for public use, which will lay
the public burden on all equally, in proportion to every one's ability, and
cannot wrong or ruin any body.

5. To continue the new State money, or old Continental ^ills, or both, in
circulation. I do not think that Congress will object to this on a review of
the case; for the old Continental bills are the only paper money among us,
which has any chance of a general currency through the Thirteen States, and I
look on a general currency to be an object of such indispensable necessity,
such vast magnitude, that Congress will rather choose to relinquish an old
resolution already in ruins, than attempt to support the vast expenses of the
Thirteen States, without any general currency at all.

6. I propose to call in the old State money (i. e. all the old State money
made since the last bills under the crown) at its present exchange or current
value, The money here meant is resolve-money, shilling-money, and in short, all
bills of this State, dated prior to 1778; the nominal amount was great indeed,
but the value was so reduced by the depreciation (the exchange being at about
100 for 1) that a small tax of hard money would have sunk or redeemed it all.
which may be easily done by a tax made for hard money, or that money at the
present exchange. We shall then have no bills to redeem, but the new State
bills, The new State bills were such as were dated since 1778, of which the
Island money (100,000 l.) was the principal emission then extant; but an
addition of 500,000 l. more was made afterward with tender, April 7, 178^.
and our share of the old continental ones. -- These things I conceive to be
more practicable and less burdensome than the omission of them would be, and
will be a good introduction to our reinstating our public finances, and
restoring the industry and morality of our people, and of course recovering our
trade, manufactures, and husbandry.

The whole is freely submitted to the consideration of the public. -- It is
undoubtedly min^ as an individual to examine, remark, and propose; it is the
public that m^^^ adopt or reject, and may God give the wisdom necessary to the
due exercise of this great privilege.

I beg leave to conclude, by observing that this State, and our posterity, born
and unborn, are yet on this side the bottomless gulf of infinite debt, Our
circumstances were extremely dreary at this time; the (...) pressed us very
hard; the burden of the war seemed insupportable; our visionary revenues all
^ailed; and our public counsels (though all firm and united in the great idea of
establishing our independence at all events, and of sacrificing every other
consideration to this most capital object) yet, I say, our counsels were much
divided in opinion with respect to the means of obtaining it.

Schemes and projects various enough, and some of them wild enough, were
proposed and urged; the great difficulty lay in the deficiency of the revenue;
ways and means of procuring money engrossed every one's attention.

Among other things the scheme of negotiating immense loans in Europe, had long
been proposed and at this time began to gain ground in Congress; and the ruling
powers of Pennsylvania, seemed disposed to adopt the same idea for the
particular supplies of their own treasury.

This raised in every body the alarming idea of an immense foreign debt, which
would drain the country for ages to pay the interest, with little hopes of
getting clear of it, by ever paying the principal.

The horrors of this almost swallowed up the dreadful apprehensions of the
domestic debt, for the burden of this still lay heavy on the public mind; for
the idea of sinking it by depreciation had not yet gained establishment in the
public opinion. The author of these Essays, from first to last, reprobated
every idea of foreign loans beyond a sum sufficient to purchase such articles
in Europe, as were essentially necessary for us, and which could not be
procured among ourselves.

He thought the resources of the country were by no means exhausted, and that
by proper wisdom and exertion, we could much better furnish all necessary
supplies within ourselves, than by loans abroad.

This idea he not only adopted fully himself, but endeavored to impress it on
his countrymen to the utmost of his power, by every argument and means of
conviction which he could possibly lay before them.


shame, and slavery, but they stand trembling on the brink of it, and it
depends much on our present counsels, whether they shall be pushed in or not.

AN ESSAY ON The ECONOMY, POLICY, and RESOURCES of the THIRTEEN STATES, AND The
MEANS of their PRESERVATION.
[First published in Philadelphia, in January 1781.]
THE exhausted state of the public treasury, and the universal disorder of our
finances, the pressing demand for supplies for every department of the public
service, the convulsions which begin to appear, and the general confusion that
threatens us, are become very serious and alarming, are become matters of very
anxious concern, and even painful despondency, in the minds of many very wise
and good men; and the public necessities are thence arisen to such a pitch of
urgency, as must convince every thinking man that a speedy remedy or ruin must
be the consequence. In this dreadful crisis, I will venture to lay before the
public some thoughts on the present state of our affairs, and the ways and
means of deliverance, which appear to me most wise, natural, and practicable;
and this I propose to do with the same openness and freedom of mind and
expression, which I have heretofore used, and hope for the same candor and
indulgence from the public which I have heretofore experienced.

1. Our country is not exhausted; it is full of supplies of every kind, which
are needed for public service. We have men enough who would wish to serve in
the army, if they could be properly supported and paid. We have provisions and
all other supplies enough in the hands of our own people, who wish to sell them
to any body who would pay for them.

2. We have unanimity and general zeal for the great cause of liberty, for
which we are contending. Neither our public counsels nor movements are
obstructed or weakened by strong, opposite factions, wasting our wisdom or
force in counter-working each other. The most dangerous and alarming commotions
among us, show such firmness, zeal, and unshaken attachment to the great
American cause, as plainly demonstrate that they do not at all arise from
disaffection, but from other real, distressing causes.

3. We want nothing but wisdom, to draw into use the force and supplies of
which the country has sufficient plenty. Like the foolish prodigal, we are
feeding and starving on (...), while there is bread enough and to spare, within
our reach; and if we fall at last under the power of our enemies, we shall fall
a sacrifice to our own folly, not to their wisdom or power; to the weakness of
our counsels, not to the want of sufficient strength; if we fall at last, no
nation or people ever fell more despised, or less pitied. Our absurdities of
counsel will be topics of ridicule and by-words of scorn, whilst our posterity
will be noticed groaning under the iron rod of oppression, and lashed into that
effort for the benefit of their masters, which would now be sufficient to
secure their and our liberty; but which we have not now wisdom and virtue
enough to call into use.

How will the bystanders laugh, and our poor posterity groan, at the absurdity
of our plans of appreciating our currency month by month, whilst every cause of
depreciation continues and increases; -- of lessening the number of buyers, in
order to increase the sellers; -- of limiting, forcing, and reducing the
market, in order to increase the quantity of goods brought for sale; -- of
forcing credit, value, and desirableness into our currency by tender-acts and
penal laws; -- and of procuring the vast supplies for the public service, by
taking away every inducement of industry, and throwing every branch of our
trade, mechanic arts, and husbandry into stagnation; -- and, which caps all the
rest, the sacred scheme of supporting our government, and securing all the
blessings of liberty by a shameless departure from every principle of honesty
and justice, which is essential to the very existence of civil society.

These are but few of the absurdities in politics which we have seen adopted,
and forced into practice by every application of compulsive methods, and with a
perseverance incredible. Nothing but the absolute impossibility of the practice
could compel the chimerical zealots to discontinue their mad career; but,
however laughable to our enemies, and distressing to our posterity, and
incredible to both, these things may appear, they may be of use to us, as the
dreadful and destructive consequences, the shame, disgrace, and ruin, which we
have seen resulting from them, and which now threaten us in a manner that makes
every considerate face gather paleness; these, I say, all tend to work an
universal conviction in the minds of all men, of their total inutility and the
absolute necessity of an immediate reformation.

And as a necessary means of it, to reject for ever from our public counsels,
those weak, unprincipled men of wild projection and madness of design, who have
infatuated the land with their extravagant chimeras, and drawn many of the
honest, unthinking, but too easy people into their methods of shame and ruin. A
man will not kill his own child, though ever so monstrous; nor is it to be
supposed, that these authors of our present distress will ever heartily concur
in the rejection and public censure of their own darling schemes, or that they
are capable of that wisdom necessary to bring about a total reformation. Though
the principle of the American revolution was perfectly just, and the necessity
of adopting it unavoidable, yet the same great evil and inconvenience happened
in the course (...), which, I conceive, always did take place, more or less, in
all public commotions and revolutions which have existed in all States in the
world; viz. that many very improper men worked themselves somehow or other into
places of great trust and importance, both in the legislative and executive
departments; by which the vices, the whims, the wild projections, and visionary
plans of individuals became diffused and almost incorporated into the
character, counsels, laws, and administration of the States.

Such men are ever dangerous, but most peculiarly so in times of general
calamity and distress, when wisdom, fortitude, and prudence are most
indispensably necessary in rulers and leading men. But however unfortunate our
States have been in that respect, they were still happy in this, that the evil
did not reach their most capital departments; the army, foreign affairs, and,
in most instances, the presidency of Congress were under the direction of men
of most unblemished integrity, adequate abilities, and most consummate
prudence; and had not our confusions been in some degree under their check, it
is hard to say to what lengths they might have extended.




Here I must stop a little, and observe that the thing which makes one nation
excel another in glory, political prudence, and happiness, is most commonly
this, viz. That men of genius, abilities, integrity, and industry, are placed
at the head of their public departments. The public will ever receive its tone,
in respect of its dignity, fame, good order, and happiness, from the men who
are entrusted with the management of the public affairs. This observation is so
manifestly true, that every man, in the small circle of his own domestics or
neighbors, can judge well how any business will be done, if he knows who is to
do it. We cannot hope for reformation and good management of our public
affairs, unless we see judicious, upright, and steady men in the several
departments of the State; men adequate to the offices they fill, and
industrious and persevering in attending thereto. But to return,

I will suppose for once that every public department was filled with the best
and most suitable men, and that every individual was willing to adopt and
pursue the best methods of safety and deliverance which our case admits; what
then can and ought to be done? I answer,

1. Every man is to be called on for the debt which he owes the public. Every
man stands indebted to the public for his share or proportion of all the money
or supplies necessary to the public safety, and this debt must be paid, or the
public safety must be insecure, must be in danger. The public safety cannot be
put off, as some people serve their Maker, with empty prayers and good wishes.
This payment can ruin nobody. It is manifest, that if any individual, even the
least able to pay, should, by some accident, lose as much money or other estate
as his share of this debt amounts to, it would not ruin him, it would not
greatly distress him; for the truth of this I appeal to every man's knowledge
of his own and his neighbor's circumstances; but on the other hand, how many
thousands of individuals are ruined for want of this payment? Dreadful and
swift witnesses of this are, all those who have suffered by the violations of
our public faith, by the depreciation of our currency; all those who are not
paid for the produce of their lands, or personal services, or other fruits of
their labor, with which the public has been furnished.

The people of the Thirteen States are almost in the same condition which they
would have been in, if they had sold their principal produce to bankrupts or
broken merchants, who could not pay them. They, by this means, have not money
to pay their debts, to trade with, to buy of the merchant, to lay in their
stock for the ensuing year, to increase their scale of business, etc. etc. One
disappointment creates another; an universal stagnation of business is the
consequence; and all industry is checked even in its first principle, as well
as in practice; and of course the produce of the lands, and the fabrics of the
tradesman are daily lessened, and of course the great stock for home
consumption, and the great staples of trade, are daily dwindling away. These
are facts notorious to every body, and arise directly from this, viz. that
there is not public money enough to pay the public creditors.

Whereas, if every man was called on for his share of the public debt, there
would be money enough to pay every body, and all this dreadful deluge of
calamity would be remedied at once, and every individual would be a gainer by
the tax he would pay, because he loses more every year by the confusions and
disappointments arising from this want of public moneys, than his tax would
amount to. This is all mighty well in THEORY, but impossible enough in
PRACTICE. Do you say this in earnest? I do most seriously contend, that it is
very possible in practice; it is possible, it is practicable, it is necessary.

2. To make out a true estimate of the public debts and demands, and issue a
monthly tax for the amount, in which every one shall be called on for his
share, and no more than his share. The money which is collected in the first
month's tax will go out again among the people, and help them to pay the next
month's tax; that will go out again, to be again called in by the third tax,
and so on; and the quickness of circulation hereby excited will supply the want
of medium; for it is plain to every man, that a guinea, which passes from hand
to hand thirty times in one month, pays as much, and of course goes as far, as
thirty guineas which are paid but once in a month.

It is further manifest, that such an universal demand for money will give it
value, will make it an object of universal desire; this will give spring to
industry, motion to every method of obtaining money, and security to every man
who has obtained it. It is necessary for us to know the worst of the matter,
let that worst be as bad as it will. Let us know how much it will cost to save
our country, to restore our morality, our industry, our safety, and happiness.
The profits of the year at most will do it, because no more is or can be spent
in the year than is raised or produced in the year; for we loan abroad enough
to pay for all we import from abroad for the public use.

It is impossible indeed to increase our husbandry or manufactures, without a
free, open, and sufficient market. Shut or diminish the market, and the
supplies of it will soon lessen; open and increase the demand of the market,
and all supplies of it will soon increase. All this is too manifest to need
proof; therefore it is necessary to remove wholly all obstructions of our
market, all fetters, and restraints, and discouragements of business, such as
embargoes, tender-acts, limitations, regulations, etc. etc. Let every body be
at liberty to get money as fast as they can, and be put under every natural
advantage for doing it.

I am of opinion that our people would receive an enfranchisement of this sort
with as much joy, as the inhabitants of Greece received the declaration of
their liberties from the mouth of the Roman Ambassador. If premiums had been
offered for stupid plans and wild projections, I think worse could not have
been offered than such as we have seen, viz. laying embargoes on the exports,
to increase the produce of the country for the army; forcing people to sell
their goods below the market price, in order to induce them to bring more to
market; offering money with horrid penalties, in order to make folks love and
esteem it; embarrassing all business, to get the more of it done; etc. etc.

Such wild, stupid, horrible, and unnatural projects, with the effects of them,
discourage our people, and render the wheels of government heavy, and destroy
all confidence of the people in the public counsels, much more than the real
weight and burdens of the war. These bear no sort of proportion to the
distresses which are produced by the madness of our counsels, and unnatural way
of doing every thing. Laws ought to be conformed to the natural course of
things; but we have been absurdly endeavoring to control the natural course of
things, and bend it to our laws.

I think it impossible that further arguments should be necessary to prove the
expediency, yea, the strong propriety, and urgent reason of dismissing at once
all these most unnatural and destructive measures, these absurd scandals of
human reason, and of American policy; that so our minds may be open to
impressions from the true state of our case; open to the real difficulties we
are under, and to the proper measures which will, by their natural operation,
afford us relief. We ought to study hard for this. Perhaps we may by strong
exertion, by close attention, and the blessing of God, be able to find out,
that means must be adequate to their ends; that the way to restore our credit
is to pay our debts; that the way to pay our debts is to get money to pay them
with; that any burden laid on the whole community is safer for the whole, than
when the same burden is laid on a part only; that the only way to keep the
members strong and in health is, to keep the belly full of substantial food,
not of husks, etc.

But the absurdity of our measures is not all the objection I have to them.
They are inadequate to their own purposes. What can it signify to plague the
continent, and exhaust all the patience of our people with difficult, intricate
plans of raising money, when all the plans put together, and fully executed,
would not produce half, perhaps not a quarter, of the sum necessary to our
preservation? This is like bailing a leaky ship with a spoon, when buckets are
necessary to keep her free. I think it would be far more natural and
satisfactory to our people, to make out estimates and demands equal to our
necessities, which will give this strong inducement to the efforts of each
individual, viz. that it will be adequate to the purpose; that the means,
however difficult, will be sufficient to produce the great ends designed. When
the great demand is made known, the first question will be, Is this enough?
Will this be sufficient to the purpose? An assured, affirmative answer will
inspire great courage and effort, when the object is the great wish, the
passionate desire of almost every individual, as is most manifestly the case
with our people. It is a false delicacy, a shameful timidity, a dangerous
injury to a nation, to keep them ignorant of their true circumstances and real
danger, and not give them an opportunity to put the means of their safety in
practice.

I am clearly of opinion, that scarce a man of any weight could be found in the
Thirteen States, who would not readily and with joy pay a much larger sum than
his tax would amount to, if he had reasonable hope that the distresses,
oppressions, and dangers of the country could be thereby removed, a free course
of justice be restored, every man's person and property be protected, and the
natural inducements of industry be favored and encouraged, and our insulting
enemies be effectually opposed.

The yearly incomes of the country are much more than sufficient to do all
this, if properly called into use. We have two armies in the country to feed,
and the produce of the country is amply sufficient for both. The supplies of
the one we are paid for, it is only the other which must be supported from our
own resources; and after supplying both armies (if our husbandry and trade
could be suffered to take their natural course) we should have large produce to
spare for exportation.

In addition to all this, I am clearly of opinion that our resources are so
great, that with proper management (even though the war should continue seven
years longer) the treasury of the Thirteen States might be filled with silver
and gold coin, and be made a BANK as safe and useful as that of Amsterdam or
Venice; and all this within a very short time, as may be clearly demonstrated
to any body who is acquainted with the nature and constitution of this kind of
subject.

The Dutch, as soon as they found out the secret of inspiring their people with
the true spirit of industry and enterprise, soon recovered their national
credit, and grew amazingly rich, long before their wars with Spain ceased. We
have vastly greater means in our power than they had, and want nothing but
their wisdom to improve them to as great advantage. I conceive it to be very
certain and manifest, that our national character, honor, and safety are yet in
our own power, and depend on nothing for their full and perfect establishment,
but our own wisdom and effort, and the blessing of Divine Providence.

I will conclude this Essay with one proposition, which, however much like a
paradox it may appear at first sight, I think is very demonstrable, and I
conceive will require little more than mere inspection for a short time, to
convince every man of discernment and serious attention of its truth, viz. it
would be easier and cheaper for every man of business, whether farmer,
tradesman, or merchant, to pay his share of the whole annual expenditures of
the public within the year, than not to pay it; i. e. he would live more easy
through the year, and be richer at the end of it, by paying such tax, than by not
paying it. This was the great Postlethwait's grand doctrine in England thirty
years ago, and every body now sees the great advantages which would have
resulted from his advice, had it then been adopted and pursued. --

"Oh! that we could know the things of our peace, in this the day of them." God
forbid they should be hid from our eyes. Men often look abroad for things that
are at home, and seek at a distance for things that are near. I apprehend that
union of sentiment and effort, in the practice of means, which it does not
require any great sagacity to discover, would be quite sufficient for our
safety. A plain simplicity is more to our purpose, than any depth of delusive
policy. Every reader will easily obse^^^, that the grand principle of revenue
every where recommended in these Essays is this, viz. an actual recourse to the
solid wealth of the States for the public supplies, i. e. a tax of sure
product, payable in hard money or paper at the exchange which should be current
at the time of payment; and this tax must be so really productive as to be
equal to the expenditures. These are the ME^^ (...) here referred to, on which
the States could safely rest, and all visionary projects (which multiplied in
abundance at this time) would of course v^^^^h before the true means of our
deliverance, and become soon as manifestly useless as they were really vain and
ridiculous.


An honest integrity and natural prudence always create dignity, confidence,
and respect. On these I would wish to build our national character, on these I
would ground our defense, and in the practice of these I would hope for the
divine blessing on ourselves and on our posterity.

A DISSERTATION ON THE Nature, Authority, and Uses of the Office of a
FINANCIER-GENERAL, OR SUPERINTENDANT of the FINANCES.
[First published in Philadelphia, Jan. 24, 1781.]
AS the appointment of a Financier-General, or Superintendant of the finances
or public revenues, has been some time in contemplation, it may not be
unacceptable to the public to see a dissertation on the nature of that high
office, and the duties, powers, and privileges annexed to it, with some notes
on its importance, dignity, and uses.

This is a new subject in America; The office of Superintendant of finance was
first created by resolution of Congress, Feb. 7. 1781; and on the 20th of the
same month, Robert Morris, esquire. was appointed by vote of Congress to execute
the office under the name of Superintendant of finance, though he was commonly
called the financier-general, or simply the financier.

He continued in the office till Nov. 1, 1784, when he resigned, and no
successor has been since appointed under that name; (the business of the
treasury was put into commission afterward, and continued so till the
dissolution of the old Congress) but I take it that the same office is revived
and continued by the present Congress under a new name, viz. that of Secretary
of the treasury; which office is at present held by Alexander Hamilton, esquire.
and the appointment of this officer lies (among others) in the President of the
United States, with the approbation of the Senate.


(...) may therefore be expected that the first essays on it will be imperfect.
Nothing but experience in so immense a subject can give a full and
comprehensive knowledge of all its parts, and of the duties, powers, and
privileges necessary to the proper management and due execution of it. I have
thought much on the subject, and find it greatly exceeds my comprehension. I
can only give the public such thoughts as occur to me, which, without further
preface or apology, I shall do with freedom, and hope they may be received with
candor.

The duty of a Financier-General, I humbly conceive, is,

I. To inspect and take account of the whole finances or public revenues of the
States, and the whole funds or stock out of which they are to grow; i. e. every
sort of public property, all sources of all kinds out of which public moneys
are to be derived to supply the public treasury, and superintend all these, i.
e. take due care that they are well kept, free from waste, destruction, and
embezzlement, and that they be managed and improved to the best advantage.

II. To inspect and point out, arrange and put into action, the ways and means
by which the necessary supplies of the public treasury may be derived from all
these sources or funds, that the same be done with most ease to the subject,
and safety to the States, with all that effect, decision, and expedition
necessary to all public movements, and at the least expense which can be
adequate to these great ends; i. e. to make estimates of the yearly
expenditures, and point out the ways and means of supplies, and to arrange both
in so clear and particular a manner for the inspection of Congress, that they
may have at once a view of the whole and all the parts, to the end that, having
such a state of all the facts and materials before them, they may be able to
form the most wise and proper resolutions thereon, which the safety and
well-being of the States require.

It is further necessary that this be done in such season, as to give
sufficient time for the deliberations of Congress, and carrying their
resolutions into effect, in the most natural and easy way, that thereby the
dangers, mischiefs, and confusion of precipitation, hurry, and extreme urgency
of these very weighty matters, may be avoided.

III. To inspect and control all officers who have the keeping, disposal, or
management of each and all of said funds, to the end they may be properly
directed, encouraged, checked, and supported in the discharge of their several
offices, in such manner that their management, accounts, and payments may be
completed with least delay and most advantage to the States.

IV. To call on the several States for such quotas as may be assessed by
Congress, and to keep them advised of every thing that the demands of Congress
and the public exigencies may require of them, respecting the revenue.

V. To inspect all the expenditures of the States, of every kind, to the end
they may be made with the best economy, and to the utmost benefit of the public.

VI. To inspect and control all officers, concerned in the payment or
expenditure of the public moneys or revenues, and to demand a return of all
such expenditures from such officers, with the balance of all their accounts,
that so he may be enabled to keep an exact balance of all the public revenues
and expenditures, ready for the inspection or information of Congress, whenever
they shall call for the same.

VII. To inspect all debts due to and from the States, all bills of credit, and
all treaties and contracts relating to the revenue or public moneys, to the end
there may be collection and payment made, with that punctuality and decision
necessary to the support of the public faith, that so the States may receive no
detriment from any failure or delay in this delicate and important particular.

VIII. To keep an account of the whole revenue, and all its parts, and of the
whole expenditures, and all their parts, in so clear and digested a manner, as
to be able, on reasonable notice, to report to Congress the state and amount of
each, with the deficiency or surplusage of the revenue for purposes of
government.

IX. To procure such certain documents of the whole funds or resources of the
public revenue, and all their parts, and make himself so acquainted with the
same, as to be able to point out the best ways and means of increasing the
revenue, for any purposes of public safety and advantage, when Congress shall
require such service from him.

X To make discovery and report to Congress of any department of the
expenditures, which are more expensive th^n necessary, and of any that are
starved through want of such supplies and allowances as are necessary.

XI. To be in all things subject to the control of Congress, and to be
accountable to them only.

This view of the extensive duty of a Financier clearly discovers the nature,
importance, and uses of his office. The great design of it is, to range the
several sources of the public revenue in order, that the whole system of it may
be clearly understood, that any part that is wanted may be at hand, that the
whole may be raised with the least burden possible to the people, and be made
to go as far, and produce as much benefit, as possible.

The invention of ways and means of improving the revenue, or raising public
money, is not a more necessary part of the business of finance, than economy
and prudence in the expenditures. Perhaps the latter is the more important and
difficult of the two. For I conceive there may be found ten men who know how to
get money, to one who knows how to keep it, or pay it away with proper economy
and prudence; and I apprehend that our present distresses, and the exhausted
state of our revenues, arise more from defects in the last of these, than the
first. The natural operation of this office discovers these errors, and leads
to a remedy. For,

1. It is manifest that the man, whose duty it is to find all the money which
is to pay every department, will be most likely to study and introduce economy
in the expenditures, and to spy out and check any excessive expense or waste.

2. It is further very natural to suppose, that when the Congress are informed
with certainty of the extent of the revenue, they will calculate their
expenditures within the limits of it; so that this office becomes a restraint
even on Congress itself, if we can suppose them capable of any want of due
consideration or prudence in this respect: And,

3. Every officer of expenditure will find himself under some check also, when
he reflects that he must bear the penetrating eye of the man who finds all the
money which he spends or pays out of his office. Further,

The powers, rights, and privileges of this great office are also obvious from
the above survey of its nature and uses.

1. It appears that this office is of great extent and importance, and
therefore ought to receive from every department of the States all such
suitable helps, countenance, and support, as are necessary to procure and
preserve its uses, proper operation, authority, and dignity.

2. That this officer ought to be kept constantly advised by Congress, of all
such resolutions of that body as respect the public revenues and expenditures.

3. That he should have right to demand all accounts, and inspection of all
books, which respect the public revenues and expenditures. And,

4. That he should be vested, by commission from Congress, with all the
authority necessary to the full and perfect discharge of all the duties of his
office, and be indulged with all the privileges necessary to the success, use,
and dignity of it.

As this ground is all new and untrodden, (...) dangerous to define too
particularly the duties, right^ (...), and privileges of this office. A little
practice on (...) and general principles on which it is founded will gradually
open the particulars further necessary, which may be added by future
provisions, if such shall be ^ound expedient.

As I am ignorant of the present arrangement of the revenues and expenditures,
I cannot tell how far any of the above particulars may fall within the
departments already established, and have here only to add, that as far as any
of them are provided for, a return only will be necessary from the subordinate
officers, of such particulars as may be requisite to complete the accounts, and
furnish the materials of this great office.

From which it appears, that this office does not interfere with any other
offices of the revenue or expenditures; such as the office of Treasurer or
Treasury Board, Auditor of Accounts, etc. etc. This office begins where they
end. This office takes the state and balance of the accounts of all the other
officers, as they make up and finish them. This office arranges and brings them
all into one view, and states in order every branch both of revenue and
expenditure, from the aggregate of which the amount of the whole is made.

This brings into distinct and plain view, the whole stock, cash, credits, and
incomes of the revenue of every kind, and also all the debts and expenses which
are to be provided for and paid.

With these documents, a man endowed with the proper skill, great comprehension
of mind, and natural aptitude to the subject, necessary for this great work,
will be able to see the excesses and deficiencies of each branch of revenue and
expenditure, and to judge in what manner every error may be corrected and
reformed; and what makes this reformation easier is, that the error may be soon
discovered, and the particular branch or place in which it lies be pointed out,
and the natural and proper means of amendment put into direct and speedy
operation, which nips the evil in the bud, before it has time to grow into such
fatal magnitude, as (...) only to corrupt the department in which it lies, but
also to (...) into other contiguous departments, so as to become ruinous in its
continuance, and very difficult in the (...)

^^^^ther, this great officer, with such a comprehensive view of the whole
stock and resources of the revenue, will be furnished with the best advantages
to consider the nature and strength of each of them, and to form such
arrangements and put them all into such operation and effect, as to produce the
greatest supply with the least burden to the people.

This is of mighty importance. This may be done, and often is, in such an
injudicious and unnatural way, as to double the burden of the people, without
increasing the supplies; and the worst way that perhaps ever was or could be
thought of, is that which has been adopted for five years past, viz. paying the
expenditures by the depreciation of the currency. This has done it indeed in
some measure, but with such an inundation of calamities as are enough to draw
tears.

A good Financier is much the rarest character to be found of any in the great
departments of state. France has had but three in 400 years, viz. the Duke of
Sully, under Henry IV. Colbert, under Louis XIV. and Mr. Neckar. England has
not had one since Queen Elizabeth's time: perhaps Lord North is equal to any
that have gone before him, but his whole talents at finance are all exhausted
in running his nation in debt, and contriving ways and means of paying the
interest by the endless oppression of his people.

The great Postlethwait indeed, about thirty years ago, had the true genius of
financiering, as appears by his various treatises on that subject; but the
stupid ministry of his time had so little conception of the matter, that they
did not know a Financier when they saw one, or, like the cock in the fable, did
not know the value of the jewel which shined in their ^ight.

We rarely read in history of any wars, or other movements of expense,
undertaken by any nation, but we find their finances soon fail, and then the
movements (be they ever so important) must be discontinued, or starved into
very trivial effect. This generally happens because they have not an able
financier, who can calculate and balance the expenses and resources, and keep
the latter in such effectual operation, as will be sufficient for the
exigencies of the former. This calamity does not always arise from the expenses
being greater than the resources; it more commonly takes its origin from some
or all of the following capital errors of finance:

1. In the assessment and collection; as when the tax is not laid in season, or
is so laid that it does not operate by way of equality on every part of the
community; when the tax is consumed in the collection of taxes; by an over
number of officers or other needless expense; by the embezzlement of the
officers; etc. etc. ^f this kind of error are, all free quarters of troops, all
forcible impressing of supplies, or services for the public, etc. etc. because
these bring the public burden in an over proportion on a few, by which not only
the few are oppressed, but the whole community suffers. Injustice always
carries damage with it; those who do not suffer^ see they are liable to like
injury, and of course are in fear -- their peace and ^ase are not secure.

2. By waste or want of economy in the expenditure; as where the money is paid
for purposes diverse from those for which it was granted, and appropriated;
when the public movements are so ill contrived and managed, as to cost more
money than is necessary; when useless projects are undertaken; when the public
property is suffered to waste, decay, or perish for want of due care and proper
disposal of it; want of discernment and discretion to pay the most pressing
demands first, and let those debts lie unpaid, that can remain with the least
damage, whenever it so happen^ that there is not money on hand enough to
satisfy all the demands. A great deal depends on this kind of discretion, when
the demands may happen to exceed the supplies, etc. etc.

3. By suffering the public credit to decay; this is an amazing waste of the
public wealth; for when a man's credit runs low, he must be in difficulty to
find people that will trust him at all, cannot expect a good choice, or to be
well served, and after all, over and above the interest and other douceurs, he
must expect to pay heavily for the risk of trusting him. When a prodigal's
estate comes to be devoured by premiums, interest, and discount, when he begins
to receive 50 l. or 80 l. and give security for 100 l. his fortune must grow
desperate soon. It is the same case with the public; and in this way no nation
on earth can hold it out long. Every degree of this misery brings an increase
with it, and if it cannot be stopped, a bankruptcy must ensue.

I mention these particulars only to show, that a Financier is the most natural
and sure guard against these mischiefs, as well as the most able and likely
person to remedy them. The man who finds all the money that is to be expended,
is the most likely man on earth to spy out any errors in the revenue or
expenditures, and to keep the public faith sacred and inviolate; as his own
personal happiness, fortune, and character, will be immediately affected by
these errors; and as he is supposed to be a man of the best abilities and
strong attention to business, and that he devotes his whole time and powers to
this branch or department only, he must be presumed to understand it the best,
to inspect every part of it with the most pervading eye, to spy out the errors
soonest, and to have the best ability and disposition to apply the most
natural, speedy, and effectual remedy. That which is every body's business is
commonly nobody's.

In all aggregate bodies, where many men make up a board, they can throw off
the blame of any mismanagement from one to another, etc. which cannot be the
case when the trust is committed to a single person. Besides, from the nature
and duty, the design and uses of this office, it appears most plain and
evident, that it must be the work of ONE MIND.

Its object is so vast and complex, and the action consists in comparing,
fitting, and balancing so many different things to and with each other, that it
cannot be otherwise done than by the attention of a single mind. In a state of
quietude, when small expenditures are necessary, little experience, skill, or
economy may do; but when the expenditures grow vast, and require a strong draft
on every resource of the revenue, then skill, attention, order, and method
become essentially necessary. A small shed may be built without skilful
workmen, but in a building which requires a thousand pieces of timber to be
framed together, a head workman, of skill and attention, becomes absolutely
necessary to regulate and control the whole work; in the smallest frames
indeed, such a workman is very desirable and useful, though not so essentially
and absolutely necessary.

It follows then, that every community, every nation, every state, ought to
have a Financier to control the revenues and expenditures, and preserve the
public faith inviolate. We have tried it on five years without one, I am fully
of opinion that we cannot be worsted the five next years with one; and
therefore, as the quacks say of their nostrums, it will do no hurt, there is a
probability of success, the expense is small, it is at least worth a trial.

As this is the first essay of the kind that has appeared here, it cannot
reasonably be supposed that it should be perfect; and I hope those who find
faults in this, will mend them in more perfect exhibitions of their own, that
our country may reap all advantage from the best and most correct wisdom of all
its inhabitants.

REMARKS ON THE RESOLUTION OF COUNCIL, Of the 2d of May, 1781, for raising the
Exchange to 17^ Continental dollars for 1 hard. Humbly offered to the Public.
[First published in Philadelphia, May 9, 1781.]
I HAVE read President Reed's defense of the resolution of Council of the 2d
instant, for raising the exchange of the Continental currency from 75 to 175
for 1 of specie, or State money; but am not convinced that that resolution was
grounded on the interests of this State, much less, that it was indispensably
necessary in our present circumstances.

I agree perfectly in his opinion, that it is not beneath the dignity of a
government to explain any public measures which may be misunderstood through
ignorance; but should they be misunderstood any other way, I do not pretend to
say how far the dignity of government might suffer by an explanation.

I am also clearly of his opinion, that there has long been a number of persons
in this city, who have fermented uneasiness, sparing neither art, nor
falsehood, nor violence, to effect their purpose. We have seen uneasinesses,
tumults, and ferments among our citizens rise even to the shedding of blood, We
had many tumults during mr. Reed's administration; the most memorable of which
was, the riotous assault of mr. Wilson's house, Oct. 4, 1779, in which the mob
proceeded from insulting language and violent abuse, to actual firing with
muskets, with which they were all armed.

A great number of most respectable citizens, who were in the house, returned
the fire on the mob, and in fine, a number of lives were lost.

Many of these rioters were taken up, and held under legal prosecution for
their offense; but the Assembly, by their act of March 13th following,
indemnified and pardoned them all.


which doubtless originated with very bad men, and I could have wished that
inquiries and prosecutions might have gone on, till the true, guilty authors
could have been discovered, held up to public view, and punished; but
government has found this inconvenient, so I have no more to say about it.

I will only observe, that I do not think the character of our citizens is that
of uneasiness, tumult, and faction: I rather think they have exhibited an
example of great meekness, of tame patience, almost bordering on stupidity. Nor
am I at all convinced, that the objections that have been made to the abovesaid
resolution of Council, arise at all from faction, or any disposition to impose
on the unwary. When a man finds that eleven shillings out of every pound of his
cash, is annihilated by a public resolution, we may allow him to be uneasy,
without calling him factious.

I proceed, with all respect due to the honorable Council, to make some remarks
on their defense. I have no pleasure in cavilling at the measures of
government, but only wish to cast light on a subject, in which our whole State
is interested. And, as I have never been concerned in factions, ferments,
tumults, or riots, but ever have been a peaceable citizen, and hearty
well-wisher to the true interests of our State, I expect a candid attention of
my fellow-citizens to the arguments I offer. The facts referred to in these
Essays were, at the time of their publication, fresh in every one's memory, and
matters of general notoriety; but that is not the case with strangers, or even
our own people, at this distance of time; therefore a statement of these facts
may be necessary to enable the reader to understand these remarks, and the
reasonings on them.

The Assembly of Pennsylvania, 25th of March, 1780, issued 100,000 l. paper
bills, funded on the faith of the State, some city lots, and the Province
Island, which at that time belonged to the State (hence this emission was
called Island money:) they also issued the bills on interest at 5 per cent. per
annum.

These bills, thus propped up, were ushered into the world with great
confidence of the Assembly. They, however, passed in a depreciated state, much
below their nominal value: to remedy which, a subsequent act was passed, Dec.
23, 1780, by which these bills were made "a legal tender; with penalties for
refusing to take them for goods, etc. viz. forfeiture of double the value
offered; and for the second offense, of half the offender's lands, goods, and
chattels, and imprisonment of his person during the war."

This act had several uncommon clauses inserted in it, viz.

1. That agents for the public, collectors of taxes, etc. should account to the
treasury for such of these bills as they had received, at the price or rate at
which they received them, i. e. at their depreciated value.

2. That the exchange, till Feb. 1, then next, between Continental currency and
these bills, should be 75 for 1; but the real exchange of Continental to hard
money was 100 for 1, at that time.

3. The Executive Council were empowered and required to publish the rate of
exchange between specie and Continental money, in the first week of every month
after said Feb. 1: and

4. That exchange, so published, should be the exchange between Continental
money and these bills. On May 2, 1781, the current exchange of these bills to
hard money was 3 for 1, and to Continental, was 75 for 1; but the exchange of
hard money for Continental was about 220 or 225 for 1; and the practice was, to
multiply the exchange of the State bills reduced to Continental, by their
exchange with hard money, viz. 3; which gave 225 Continental for the value of
one hard dollar.

At this time, the Council declared the rate of exchange of hard money for the
month of May, to be 175 for 1, which was the same thing (according to the
operation of the said act of the 23d of Dec. 1780) as declaring the exchange of
the State bills to Continental to be 175 for 1; and the practice still
continued of multiplying the State money reduced to Continental, which was now
become 175 for 1, by its hard money exchange, viz. 3; which made the exchange
of Continental money three times 175, viz. 525 for 1 of hard; a vast and sudden
leap indeed, and which became the current exchange in less than a week from the
declaration of the exchange by the Council.

So that every person who had one week before given a hard dollar for 225
Continental ones, found that he had lost above half the value of his money, as
it would, at the end of the week, purchase but 3-7ths of a hard dollar.

This made a mighty noise, and deeply affected every body; as Contitinental
money was then the general currency, and all prices in market were set or
estimated in it, as much as they were in old Tenor at Boston, at the close of
the last French war in 1763.

This roused the feelings of mr. Reed, who was President of the State at that
time, and was supposed to be the prime mover, not only of the said declaration
of Council, but of the act on which it was grounded, and induced him to publish
his defense of said declaration, on which these remarks were made.

The error really lay in the absurdity of the law itself, which limited the
State money to a certain exchange of Continental ( viz. 75 to 1) with such
variations of exchange of hard money, as should be published by Council the
first week in every month; which exchange of hard money, by the operation of
the act, became the legal exchange of the State bills, and of course raised
their exchange 4-7ths higher than the real, true exchange of them was at that
time, and made them bring indeed more than double the continental money which
they would have purchased before, but did not enable the^^ to buy any more hard
money than before.

Had the Council pursued the act, they might have been excused; but their error
lay in declaring a false exchange of hard money, much below the true one, with
design, by way of trimming and bending facts, to reduce a little the absurd
effects of the act itself. The true exchange of Continental for hard money, the
first week in Feb. 1781, was about 100 for 1, where it had stood several
months; in March it was about 115 to 1, and in the beginning of April, 130; but
rose fast through the month, and got up to 220, the first week in May.

These exchanges and the interesting effects of every variation of them, will
appear to a stranger as intricate and hard to understand as the price of stocks
in Change-alley; but they were perfectly understood by people of all ranks at
that time, in as much as every variation of the exchange altered the value of
all their cash on hand.

One thing makes these maneuvers very important, viz. they not only raised the
exchange of Continental money up to 500 or 600 to 1, but in a few days stopped
the currency of the Continental bills entirely, after which they never passed
at all as money; or any otherwise than as an article of speculation, at most
desultory and capricious exchanges from 400 to 1000 for 1.

The same cause so disgusted the minds of all men with paper bills of all
sorts, that our State money (though undoubtedly well funded) depreciated in less
than a month to 6 and 7 to 1: the final redemption of which, by a future
appreciation, cost this State above 120,000 l. though we never received more than
20, or at most, 30,000 l. real value for it.

Perhaps this whole transaction affords the most striking proof conceivable, of
the absurdity of all attempts to fix the value of money by a law, or any other
methods of compulsion.

In this instance we see the Continental money mortally wounded, an^ our State
money debilitated and depreciated down to a seventh part of its nominal value,
by the very ill-fated means which were designed to support both of them.

Thus fell, ended, and died, the Continental currency, aged 6 years; the most
powerful state engine, and the greatest prodigy of revenue, and of the most
mysterious, uncontrollable, and almost magical operation, ever known or heard
of in the political or commercial world; bubbles of a like ^ort which have
happened in other countries, such as the Mississippi scheme in France, the
South Sea in England, etc. lasted but a few months, and then burst into
nothing; but this held out much longer, and seemed to retain a vigorous
constitution to its last, for its circulation was never more brisk and quick
than when its exchange was 500 to 1; yet it expired without one groan or
struggle: and I believe, of all things which ever suffered dissolution since
life was first given to the creation, this mighty monster died the least
lamented.

Yet I hear that some folks are preparing to dig the skeleton of it out of the
grave where it has quietly rested 9 years, that we may have the pleasure of
wasting a million or two upon its obsequies.

If it saved the State; it has also polluted the equity of our laws; turned
them into engines of oppression and wrong; corrupted the justice of our public
administration; destroyed the fortunes of thousands who had most confidence in
it; enervated the trade, husbandry, and manufactures of our country; and went
far to destroy the morality of our people; after all this, I wish it might be
suffered to lie where it is, in a state of quiet oblivion, yea, perfectly
forgotten; for I think that every remembrance of it must be mixed with
bitterness.

I hope the reader will excuse this small digression; for when I came to the
spot where the poor old CONTINENTAL died, I could not help stopping to mark the
place with some little signal of notice.




1. The first fact alleged by the Council is, " that by the law of the State,
and their own oaths, they are required to publish the rate of exchange the
first week in every month." This proves, I conceive, that the Council are
required to publish the true exchange the first week in every month* but the
whole city knows, that 175 for 1 was not the true exchange on the 2d instant;
and the Council cannot be supposed to be ignorant of what is known to every
other person in the city, and which the laws suppose them to be acquainted
with, or it would be absurd to lodge the power of judgment with them.

So that their variation from the true exchange cannot be excused by any plea
of ignorance. Therefore, when they say, "that they have not the same
opportunity of knowing the current rate of exchange with accurate precision,"
as the merchants have, I think it follows, that they ought to have inquired of
the merchants, and gained the most accurate information possible, in a matter
of that consequence and delicacy, in which the laws of the State, their own
oaths, and the interests of the whole State, were concerned; but not that they
should adopt the lowest known rate, at which they could discover that any
commercial transactions had been adjusted.

The lowest rate is never the current or true rate of exchange, any more than
the highest. It essentially and most manifestly differs from the true, as far
as the extreme differs from the mean; a difference which the Council, on their
own principles, had no right to make, as it did not, in my opinion, ^omport
with, or satisfy, either the words or meaning of the law, under which they
acted. But while the obligations of the law, and their oaths, are urged, and
the integrity and consciences of the Council are deeply affected; would any one
suppose that the Council would publish what all the world knows to be false,
and that under the sanction of an oath? Could the Council, without violating
every principle of truth and veracity, declare the exchange to be 175, when
there was not one person in the city but must know the contrary; Indeed I think
it is bad enough when a Council, by any solemn act, violate their faith; but
when they are hardy enough to violate their oath and "veracity" too, the matter
must look very serious to all good men.

Further, while we are told so much about laws of the State and oaths of
office, I am led to inquire where these laws and oaths have been for several
months past, during which time the exchange was constantly and gradually
rising: and the Council, in the first week in each month as constantly
declaring and publishing the exchange to be 75 for 1, for three successive
months past, when there was not a single person in the city but must have known
the contrary? Consistency in the acts and declarations of public bodies, is of
great use, and much to be desired; their dignity stands mightily tarnished, and
nigh unto ridicule without it.

2. Another fact adduced by the Council, is, "that the rate of exchange has
been, by common consent and usage of trade, gradually rising for some time
past; so that no person, in his private dealing, pays or receives at the rate
of 75 for 1;" and the whole city may add, neither was it on the 2d inst. (the
date of their resolution) at 175 for 1; the current exchange was known to every
one to be at least 220 for 1, at that time.

The Council go on to argue, "that the people have raised it (the exchange) by
common consent, and Council have only followed them, by making a declaration of
what they have done." If this allegation is true, it will justify the Council's
conclusion; but if it is not, it may be deemed a provoking, insulting attempt
to impose a deception on "the unwary" public, and beneath the dignity of
Council to adduce it. I will examine it with confidence, because every merchant
in the city knows whether it is true or not.

The resolution of Council declares (if not expressly, at least in effect, and
all the effect that it could in reason be supposed to have) that the exchange
of old Continental to State money is 175 for 1. Now the people, by common
consent and usage of trade, have never done this; have not raised that exchange
to 175 for 1; it had never exceeded 75 at that time; therefore the resolution
annihilated the difference between 175 and 75, i. e. 4-7ths, i. e. somewhat
more than eleven shillings in the pound, of all the Continental money, which
every man was possessed of at that time. The truth of these facts and
observations are obvious to every merchant, and indeed to every market-woman;
and I leave them to stand on their own ground, having no disposition to indulge
a vein of sarcasm or ridicule on this serious subject.

I would only observe, that this fatal resolution has taken from thousands
their daily bread, and ruined the fortunes of many who had capital sums of that
money on hand; that all the Continental money in the treasury of the State, or
due in taxes, or any other way, is reduced more than half, to the great loss
and embarrassment of the public; and every man who has not paid his taxes, may
now pay them with less than half the real value which those paid, whose rates
were collected one week before. "And is this reasonable? Is this just?"

Further, the Council adduce this fact, viz. "that the rate of exchange has
been gradually rising for some time past:" and they might have added, that the
people have been gradually conforming themselves to that rise. But the case is
widely different, when they make such a shocking s^art at once, as from 75 to
175. A man may descend from the garret to the lower floor by a ^light of stairs
without any damage; but were he to descend at one leap, he would probably break
his neck. The feelings of too many make any further explanation of this matter
quite unnecessary.

3. But the third fact adduced by the Council, and which, I suppose, is
designed for a clincher, and which is to afford an argument of indispensable
necessity, is this, viz. "that the State of New Jersey had, on the 27th ult.
raised their exchange to 150 for 1; and that the people of that State were
pouring in their Continental money on us," etc.

I cannot but stop here, to observe how quick the old tone is changed. It has
been a long time urged by people of great judgment, that the only natural and
sure way to prevent our being deluged by an inundation of Continental money,
is, to keep the exchange of it somewhat higher here, than it was in the
neighboring States. Yet those very people who now, for this reason, force up
the exchange, have, for years past, been in the bitterest manner raising an
outcry against such as depreciated the currency.

It is true, indeed, that the Jersey people could bring their Continental money
over Delaware, and purchase State money at 75 for 1; and it is as true, that
our people could carry the Jersey money over the Delaware, and sell it at 1^0
for 1; and the advantage, on the whole, would be on our side; because all the
Continental money which was in the Jersies at the date of their resolution,
cost their people 75 for 1, and they get no more for it here. Whereas our
people, who carry their State money to them, purchased it for 75, and got 150
for it.

But after all, it could be but the bubble of a day; it might furnish
employment for stock-jobbers, schemers, and idle people a short time, but could
not continue long; it is not possible that advantage could be taken long of
different exchanges on the two sides of Delaware, whilst the communication is
so very great; and after all, the difference could be but trifling.

For neither the resolution of the Jersies, nor of our State, can make the
State money of either a whit more valuable, i. e. make it purchase any more
hard money or any other valuable goods, than before; but the violent shock must
depreciate both, as we find by experience, which is the surest evidence in
matters of this nature.

But, salus populi, suprema lex. What is now to be done? Is it best to repeal
the resolution? I think not. The mischief is done. A repeal will not remedy it.
The Continental money has received its mortal wound. I do not think it
advisable or possible to heal it. The State money follows fast after it. The
exchange for hard money on the 2d instant was 3 for 1; it is now said to be 4
for 1 at least.

I think we have now no choice left, but to adopt my old doctrine, viz. "To
recur to our solid substance, or real wealth, bidding a final farewell to all
bubbles, vain expedients, and shadows."

The present evil originates in the law, which the Council have undertaken to
execute. If a law is so absurdly made as to be incapable of execution, nothing
but absurdity and perplexity can arise out of it. It will lie with the Assembly
in their approaching session, to repeal the law or not.

On the whole, if the Council have not increased the esteem of the public by
their resolution, they are at least entitled to some compassion. They have
undertaken a task that is impossible; and I imagine their difficulties would
puzzle much abler heads than theirs. If a legislature should make a law that a
bar of iron should be cut asunder with an ax of wood, the officer entrusted
with the execution of it, might think it his duty to try; but he need not be
surprised, after all his labor and chopping, to find the iron bar entire, and
his ax sadly bruised.

The exchange, or operation of money, is a very nice, touchy, delicate subject;
and no man can, by right or prudence, intermeddle with it, who does not
understand its nature and principles. No dignity of station, or reverence of
character, can secure a man against ridicule and contempt, when he comes to be
knocked about by the magical effects of that all-powerful subject, when put
into operation under the direction of unskilful hands.

STRICTURES ON A Publication in the FREEMAN's JOURNAL of May 16, 1781, signed
TIMOLEON. TIMOLEON was an angry writer, who appeared in the Freeman's Journal
of May 16, 1781* in vindication of the resolve of Council on which the
foregoing Remarks (of the Citizen) were made.

I ever supposed the author to be President Reed; but as he chose to shroud
himself in darkness, and the printer would not give up his name, I did not
think myself under any obligation to address him in a style or manner due to
the first officer of the State; but, with the greatest freedom, treated the
performance according to the merit of it.

But whoever was the author, the arguments (such as they were) are considered
in these Strictures; but where the author was mean enough to leave the merits
of the matter, and descend to low scurrility and personal abuse, I passed over
it, as it was of no consequence to the public; and only remarked on one or two
scandalous personal imputations, which I never before heard of from any body
but himself.

In fine, the fatal importance of the faces, not any personal animosity, was at
that time my sole motive for making my Remarks and Strictures, and is now the
same for re-publishing them.



[First published in Philadelphia, May 23, 1781.]
IT is of no consequence to the public, whether TIMOLEON or myself have the
blackest heart, the foulest mouth, or the most spiteful pen. I yield to him the
palm in every article of personal abuse, sly innuendo, or gross scandal; I mean
to confine myself to such particulars as the public have an interest in.

In my Remarks on the Resolution for raising the Exchange, I observed that the
Council, in their defense, had urged that both the laws of the State, and their
oaths of office, required what they had done.

I replied, that the exchange which they had published for several successive
months, was not the true exchange; and therefore could not satisfy either the
law or their oaths of office. Mr. T. seems to deny this, but says, the virtuous
part of the community represented the exchange as various from 150 to 200 or
225. This I deny, and call on mr. T. to produce one virtuous person of the
community, of knowledge fit to be consulted, who ever told the Council the
exchange on the date of their resolution was 175; or one respectable merchant
(as he goes on to assert) who ever said or agreed that the exchange in March or
April last, was 75 for 1. The contrary of both is well known to every body in
this city. Plain fact is here notoriously against mr. T.; for which I appeal to
the whole city, who are the most competent judges.

What mr. T. asserts, and I deny, is this, viz. that the exchange of hard money
was here in February, March, and April last, at 75 for 1, and in May 2 d,
instant, at 175 for 1. I do not begrudge mr. T. the whole credit of his fetch,
viz. "that the act of Assembly does not require the Council to publish the most
current rate, but simply the rate of exchange;" but whatever credit this
precious subtilty may give to his ingenuity, it can afford no help to his
argument; because the exchange does mean the current or usual exchange, from
the force of the particle the, for which I refer to the most common English
Grammar of the schools. The words are not an exchange, or any exchange, but the
exchange, which cannot with any propriety mean any but that particular one
which was most current or usual at the time.

But mr. T. cannot possibly understand this mystery, how a buyer can be a loser
by the Council's declaring the exchange 175. I can easily explain this matter
of fact; before the date of that declaration, with 220 dollars the buyer could
purchase candles or fish to the value of one hard dollar; but after that
declaration, he must pay 500 of the same dollars for the same goods; his loss
therefore is the difference between 220 and 500, i. e. 280, or something more
than eleven shillings in the pound.

This is a computation grown very familiar in the city; and I cannot but wonder
it should remain so long a mystery to mr. T.; for this same reason, or to use
the numerical figures of the resolution (to make the matter plainer to mr. T.
who discovers much mystery, and some mystery of mysteries in the matter)
because that 175 dollars bring no more after the resolution, than 75 would
bring before, every possessor of Continental money, and of course the public
treasury, loses 4-7ths of all they have on hand, and all debts due and payable
in that currency.

This he confidently asserts to be a falsehood. I think he might be ashamed to
deny a truth of public notoriety; but if he is really so dull as not to be able
to see this, it is manifest the Council see it very plain, as is very evident
by their attempt (though a vain one) to obviate the mischiefs of it, in the
payment of taxes, fines, etc. By resolve of Council, May 4, 178^, collectors of
taxes, fines, etc. are directed to receive them in the following manner, viz.
when paid in old Continental money, they are to receive the same sum at which
each person stands charged in the duplicate (or tax-book;) but if paid in
specie, or State money, or new Continental ( i. e. 40 for 1 money) they should
receive it at the former exchange of 75 for 1, not according to the new rate of
175 for 1, published by Council, May 2d, i. e. two days before.
and which, he says, is the real and true cause of much of the clamor against
the Council's resolution.

But in this he is very much mistaken, because the remedy adopted by the
Council is void of effect, as it does not reach or remedy the mischief; for
though the tories and whigs too cannot pay their State money for taxes at more
than 75, yet they can and daily do change their State money for Continental,
and pay their taxes with much less than half the real value which those paid,
who paid their taxes before the resolution was published, and this is publicly
known to every body. Nor can I see any thing but personal honesty which
prevents all our collectors from changing all the State money which they
received before the resolution, for old Continental; and paying that into the
treasury. This is the blessed way in which (it is the peculiar felicity of mr.
T. to discover) our treasury has been enriched since the resolution.

If it still does not appear to mr. T. that the old Continental money, either
in his own desk or in the treasury, is reduced to less than half the value it
had before the resolution, the best way I know of to satisfy himself is, to
take some of it to buy any necessaries, and he will, I doubt not, have a
practical proof too strong to admit a doubt; and if in this or any other way he
should happen to be convinced, I shall expect that he will publicly acknowledge
it, for his own sake.

But to follow mr. T. a little further. I have said in my Remarks, that "the
resolution of Council declares (if not expressly, at least in effect, and all
the effect that it could in reason be supposed to have) that the exchange of
old Continental to State money, is 175 for 1." This mr. T. denies with great
triumph. I must beg the reader's attention here a moment; the words of the law
are, that the Council are required to publish "the then rate of exchange
between specie and Continental money, which exchange, so published, shall be
the exchange of the Continental money and the State money," etc. in which it is
manifest, that the most express design of publishing the exchange of specie,
was thereby to fix the exchange of the State money on a par with it; this was
the effect which the legislature intended, and the very effect which the
Council intended, as appears by their provision against the effects of it, in
the case of taxes, fines, etc.

Yet mr. T. with great assurance asks, "What has this to do with the Council's
publication, which has not State money in contemplation?" His law logic helps
him out but poorly here, viz. that the operation of the law on this
publication, and not this publication itself, produced the effect: he might as
well deny that a miller grinds wheat, because the millstones grind it; or that
a man travels a journey on horseback, because the horse only travels; for it is
very plain, that the law, without this publication, would no more have raised
the exchange of State money, than the mill would grind the wheat without the
miller to set it a^going, or the horse perform the journey without the rider on
his back. I therefore conclude, that every one will be convinced that my
proposition is true; and if it is true, mr. T. acknowledges that "my
observation will apply."

Mr. T. among other reasons why the Council did not raise the exchange last
month, gives this one, viz. the speculation at Boston and Rhode Island improved
the credit of the old Continental money here, and therefore was not to be
interrupted by any disadvantageous alteration of the exchange.

This speculation was, to purchase Continental here at 220 for 1, and sell it
at Boston for 75; but in the very next paragraph, he reprobates the same kind
of speculation to the Jersies very severely, I suppose, because it was not so
profitable. "Is this," says he, "a traffic which public counsels are to promote
and encourage?" I have no where said these speculations were good, I mentioned
them as bad things; and all I said, and all my argument required, was, that
they were but bubbles of a day, etc. and could not justify so dangerous and
ruinous a measure, as raising the exchange to prevent their mischief, because
this would make the remedy worse than the disease.

I did oppose the tender-act, which is the act in question (see my Strictures
on Tender-acts, p. 128) whilst it was under consideration, with all the power I
was able, and in the most public way; and therefore, in mr. T.'s opinion, my
indecency, This author is fond of finding fault with my manner of writing,
complains of indecency, etc. the writings which excite his uneasiness are now
before the reader, who will judge whether his censures are well or ill grounded.

I have only to observe for myself, that I ever meant, when writing on serious
and grave subjects, to deal in definite ideas and sentiments, and to use such
words to express them, as should convey my meaning with the greatest clearness
and ^ase to the reader; polish of expression, or grace of period, is neither my
talent nor object; and I suppose, the plainness of my style, especially when it
happened to excite his feelings strongly, appeared to him like indecency; but
if calling things by their right names, or, as the Dutch say, calling a spade,
a spade, is indecency, I must bear it as well as I can; and I hope, the
clearness of the sense will make amends for the want of polish in the
expression with such readers as are more delighted with the sentiments and
ideas of an author, than with the (...) or his periods, or the (...) of his
language; and ^his is the sort of readers I most wish to please.


as he calls it, may have some palliation. But I can see no indecency in
pointing out the evils or impracticabilities of a law, which the whole
community must suffer; if this is done in such a way as tends to a remedy. The
numberless instances of private distress, as well as the starving condition of
all the public departments, and especially the unprovided state of the army,
were my great inducements to write my Remarks, and thereby expose the errors
which at least aggravated our calamities. I have no ill will to the Council, I
have none to the Assembly; but I wish the wisdom of both may increase, and all
their errors may be mended.

I cannot forbear animadverting a little on the rancorous, malignant conclusion
of mr. T. in his invective against some of our citizens. I think a little
decency to the place which gives him bread, might have induced him to spare his
black epithets. It is a foul bird that besmears his own nest. But if he intends
(as perhaps he does) to apply any of his detestable characters to me
personally, I have only to aver, they are sheer abuse, without the least
foundation of truth.

I did, indeed, on repeated advices of the great distress of Boston, for flour
and iron, in 1777, load a vessel of my own with a cargo of both, and sailed for
Boston, but was (on April 6) unfortunately taken on the passage, by the
Orpheus, English frigate, and carried into Rhode Island, where, after a month's
imprisonment, I was released on exchange, having lost my whole vessel and
cargo, to the amount of about 2000 l. hard money; for which I never had, nor do
expect ever to have, the least compensation from them.

I also did remain in the city when the British troops captured it, having,
among other reasons, a child in the smallpox at the time, who could not be
removed; but it is not true that I enjoyed the least friendly or confidential
intercourse with them or their adherents.

I spent three months of the time in visiting the American prisoners in the
gaols here, and procuring and carrying to their relief, such food and clothing
as I could collect, at a time when their distresses were beyond all
description, and when it was deemed a crime to show compassion to them; and on
the 6th of February, 1778 (long before there was any probability of an
evacuation of the city) I was committed to gaol, and suffered not a collusive,
but a most severe, confinement of 132 days, without being able, by every
possible application, When the British troops under the command of general sir
William How took possession of Philadelphia, Sep. 26, 1777, my whole family
then in town was myself and two daughters, the one a little over, and the other
under, twenty years of age, and were under such terrors, that I could scarce
leave them an hour in the daytime.

On the 6th of Feb. 1778, I was taken out of bed at 11 o'clock at night, by
orders (as was said) of general How, and confined in the public gaol of the
city.

I was under great apprehensions that my daughters would go out of their
senses, with the fright and their unprotected condition.

I represented my distress in sundry letters to general How, to his
superintendant of police in the city, and to sundry other officers, with most
earnest request that I might be informed of the cause of my imprisonment, and
have an opportunity of a hearing before the general, or any court he might
appoint; but never could get any answer or knowledge of any crime or fault
charged to me, but was held in close confinement till the day preceding the
evacuation of the city, 17th June, 1778.

My property to a large amount was likewise seized and conveyed into the king's
stores; part of which I indeed recovered afterward, but I sustained a final
loss of about 500 l. value, which I could never recover or obtain any
compensation for.

And more than all this, my long and close confinement so injured my health,
and impaired my constitution, that I am not yet, nor ever expect to (...),
restored to the state of ^ound health which I enjoyed before that grievous
oppression.

From these circumstances (which were well known to President Reed, and the
whole city) we may judge with what rancor and malignancy of heart it could be
suggested by TIMOLEON, that my intercourse with the British troops was friendly
and confidential, or my confinement collusive, and of my own seeking, that I
might plead the merit of it with my countrymen after the British were gone.


to obtain any knowledge of the cause of my confinement; but the presumption
generally admitted was, that my constant and careful attendance on the American
prisoners was thought to imply too strong an attachment to Americans, to be
compatible with either the duty or protection of a British subject.

As to what mr. T. very malignantly suggests about reviling government, evading
resolutions of committees, and croaking discontent, I beg leave to observe,
that I never have opposed either projects of committees, or measures of
government, except such as have since, on the fullest experiment, and the
plainest demonstration of fact, been reprobated by our gravest counsels, and
condemned by the general consent of Americans as bad policy; such as
limitations of prices, forcing sales of private property, tender-acts, emitting
deluges of paper currency, fixing the value of paper currency by law, and other
absurdities which have involved America in greater calamities than the British
arms.

And I freely submit it to every sound American, whether I may not, with good
right, and without vanity, boast of it as an instance and proof of sound
judgment and most genuine patriotism, that I have early discovered and opposed
those ill-judged and pernicious expedients, which, by the general voice of
America, are now execrated as the undoubted sources and causes of our present
corrupted morality, enervated state of defense, ruin of public faith,
prostitution of national character, loss of the confidence of our friends,
contempt and disgrace abroad, and confusion at home.

I have, indeed, with great reluctance, opposed popular prejudices, when they
were incapable of being controlled. But I freely submit it to my
fellow-citizens, whether time and fact have not ever justified my conclusions,
with this only difference, that the consequences have been verified in fact in
a much stronger degree, and more aggravated mischief, than I have delineated.
If one material instance of my opposition to projects of committees, or
measures of government, different from this, can be produced, I am content to
stand corrected in the face of the public; and I am confident my
fellow-citizens will not suffer me to be oppressed, because I have told them
the truth before every one could see it.

I never once expressed or ^elt any dissatisfaction to the great cause of
American liberty, but every wished and promoted its success, as far as was in
my power. The truth of every part of this declaration I do aver on my honor,
and have the fullest proof of the facts, and doubt not my fellow-citizens will
consider me as a much-injured man, and give full credit to what I say.

I do at least call on mr. T. to produce the least spark of proof of the
contrary. However injurious I consider his malignity, I am yet less affected by
his publication, than I should have been by his secret whispers, which I could
have no opportunity to contradict.

I humbly beg leave to suggest further here, that out of these very facts, so
spitefully misrepresented by mr. T. when they are heartily considered, arises a
stronger proof of my attachment to the American cause, than most whigs are able
to exhibit, and a much stronger proof than any which I even heard mr. T. ever
has exhibited of his whiggism.

My writings on finance are open to every body, and have met the approbation of
many of the greatest men in America; and I believe mr. T. begins to feel the
force of them: for I find he begins to ' hope we shall have spirit enough to
enforce a hard money tax,' which has long made a part of my scheme of finance,
and which mr. T. has constantly reprobated, till now. But this does not flatter
my vanity much; for I believe he might as well 'jump out of the garret into the
street,' as write on the subject of finance at all.

I have only to beg the reader to keep his eye steadily on the facts, not on
the colorings, of mr. T. or myself, and from those facts to form his judgment.
Facts are hardy, stubborn things, which mr. T. or I may color indeed, but
neither of us can break or bend them; such as follow, viz.

1. Was the current exchange of specie in February, March, and April last, 75
for I; or was it 175 for I on the 2d instant, as declared by Council?

2. Was the exchange required by law to be published, an or any exchange, and
not the current exchange, as mr. T. quibbles?

3. Did the Council's declaring the exchange of specie at 175, produce the same
effect as declaring the exchange of State money at 175 would have done?

4. Did the Council's declaring the exchange of 75 in February, March, and
April, and 175 in May, which was not the then current rate of exchange, satisfy
either the words of the law, or their oaths of office?

5. Did any respectable merchants, on consultation, inform the Council that the
current exchange in February, March, and April last, was 75, or 175 on the 2d
instant?

6. Did the declaration of the Council on the 2d instant so operate on the old
Continental money, as to reduce the value of it to less than half, both in
private hands and in the public treasury?

7. Did the raising the exchange in the Jersies afford reasons by any means
sufficient to justify our following so fatal an example?

These are some of the principal facts contested between mr. T. and myself.
They are all matters of public notoriety. The public are not all beholden
either to mr. T. or myself, for the knowledge of any of them, except the 5th,
of which we must depend on mr. T. for the necessary proof.

If the above facts and reasonings are true, I think it will follow, that the
poison which mr. T. is so much concerned to find an antidote for, will prove to
be these poison truths, which he fears will have an operation to his
disadvantage. I am sorry, too, that they ever were truths. I am quite of
opinion they are a sort of poison truths, which have done, and I fear will do,
much hurt; and therefore I hope I may be excused for putting my mark of
disapprobation on them.

STRICTURES ON Two Publications in the FREEMAN's JOURNAL of May 30, 1781,
signed PHOCION, AND IMPARTIAL. PHOCION appeared in the Freeman's Journal of
May, 30, 1781, when, in answer to my challenge, he, with great triu^^^^,
produced Robert Morris, esquire. who, he says, advised publishing the exch. (...)
at 75 for 1, in April last; which, if true, would have been nothing to the
purpose.

But he appeared again in the Journal of June 6, with a recantation of what he
had published about mr. Morris. -- IMPARTIAL appeared in the same paper of May
30, and is, I suppose, the same person with TIMOLEON and PHOCION, or, which
comes to about the same thing, some heated par^^s^n of the (...)

He set out with blackening the CITIZEN and all the Republican party with ran^
or enough, and concludes with a labored panegyric of mr. Reed's government. Any
body who wishes to see any of these pieces, may find them in the Freeman's
Journal, as above quoted.



[First published in Philadelphia, May 23, 1781.]
THESE authors, together with TIMOLEON, are the sons of darkness. The printers
are not at liberty to give up their names. I take PHOCION and TIMOLEON to be
the same person. But as I suppose they are ashamed to be seen, I do not mean to
disoblige them by hauling them into light, but hope, whilst it is impossible
for me to know who they are, it will be deemed very absurd to suppose any thing
I write, designed for a personal application to either of them. PHOCION says,
that "the CITIZEN has insinuated that no merchant could have advised the
continuance of the exchange at 75 in April last." This is not true, PHOCION;
you do depart from the fact; and you know you do. Had you kept to the fact,
your sentence would have stood thus, Viz. The CITIZEN denies that any
respectable merchants ever informed the Council that the true or current
exchange of specie was 75 in April last.

On this I have challenged TIMOLEON, and now challenge PHOCION. It is mean for
you, PHOCION, to sneak out from the point in question, by such an artful but
pitiful evasion. A man of character would be ashamed of it; but it is easier to
blush in the dark than before company.

You go on to mention mr. Robert Morris, as having given his opinion and advice
to publish "the exchange in April at 75." I have reason to believe that this is
not true; that mr. Robert Morris never was consulted in April last, nor did
give any opinion or advice about publishing the exchange so late as April last;
and that his opinion at that time was decidedly for publishing the exchange as
high as the truth, if it was determined to publish it at all.

Mr. PHOCION has called up mr. Morris's name, which obliges me to do the same.
Mr. Morris is easily consulted, and will doubtless inform, if desired, what he
did say on the subject to which I refer.

At an earlier period, say the beginning of February or March, when the
exchange stood with little variation, and the subsequent rise of it was not
foreseen; when the effects of the tender law could not be known; many
merchants, and mr. Morris among them, might think it dangerous to shock the
then state of our trade and currency by any unnatural and sudden start of the
exchange, and might give it as their opinion and advice to publish it at 75.
But if this is admitted ever so true, it does not follow that any of them ever
meant to intimate thereby, that the true exchange even in February or March,
much less in April last; was 75.

Therefore, the whole matter does not contain any the least contradiction to
any thing which I have asserted, is therefore a manifest departure from the
fact in question, and of course is just so much foreign matter lugged in for
the mere purpose of artful shuffle and deception.

Mr. PHOCION, you must stick better to the point; it is shameful to start,
shuffle, and evade the true matter which labors at bar; you must keep to the
fact; if you do not do this for yourself, I will do it for you; for I can and
will hold you so close, that it shall not be in your power to squirm out of the
grasp which pinches you. Farewell.

Now mr. IMPARTIAL calls for my attention a moment. It would be hard to take no
notice of this man, who seems to be boiling over with gallish matter, and to
have taken great pains to scrape together a considerable number of very hard,
black words, suitable to express it. It is easy to see what sort of a blowing
genius this is, by only casting an eye over his "crude revilements, villainies,
hollow principles, pestilent spirit, jaundiced eyes, feculencies of wealth,
execrable characters, stream of discord, Sodom, false patriot, BECAUSE JEALOUS,
sneer of the States, disappointment and malice, which are IMMORTAL with the
wicked AFTER THEIR DEATH," to which may be added his poor old hackneyed word,
"junto," which he has honored with large employment in this service.

But I must beg to be excused from following him through such a foul thicket of
hard names, coarse scurrility, and low dirt. I can easily believe he is not
acquainted with President Reed, though I cannot so easily admit that he is
acquainted with his government, yet it is very clear he means to defend it; but
as he seems to be very scant of matter, and barren of argument, it may be
deemed a good-natured action to help him out a little. We generally judge of
our governors as we do of our carpenters, by the goodness of their work when it
is done.

I will therefore attempt to lay down some general rules, marks, or signs, by
which a good or bad government may be distinguished; by the help of which mr.
IMPARTIAL may, if he pleases, elucidate and embellish the government of his
hero, and support it with some kind of argument, which will probably have more
weight with the public, than any loud-sounding, hollow encomiums whatever.

1. When the laws protect the persons and property of the subject, the
government is good: but it must be weak or wicked, when the laws are so framed,
as in their operation to injure and oppress the subject in his person or estate.

2. When the laws are held in general reverence by the people, the government
is good: but it must be bad, when the laws are generally considered as
iniquitous, and execrated as such.

3. When the laws restrain wicked men, and support, protect, and encourage
honesty, upright dealings, and industry, the government is good: but when the
laws let all the rogues in the community loose on the honest and industrious
citizen, the government must be very weak or wicked.

4. When men of grave wisdom, proper abilities, and known integrity, are put
into office, the government is good: but when we see men of wild projection,
doubtful morals, and inadequate abilities, crowding themselves by address and
corruption into office, the confidence of the people in the government must be
lost, and the administration itself must be very weak.

5. When the laws are made a rule of duty, and bulwark of safety and protection
to the subject, the government is good: but when we see people imprisoned,
persecuted, and ruined, without trial, conviction, or a day in court, the
administration will be deemed bad. The worst man that ever lived has a right to
a day in court, to a cool hearing, and an opportunity to say, by himself or
counsel, all which he fairly can for himself.

6. When the laws are gravely administered by the proper officers, the
government is good: but when mobs, riots, and insurrections infest the
community, and disturb the public peace; when the force of the community is put
under any other direction than that of the law; the government becomes
dangerous, and all security is lost.

7. When the forces and resources of a State are so modelled, put into order,
and under such control, that both may be called into action and use, when, and
to such degree as the public safety requires, the government is good: but when
the public debts are unliquidated or unpaid, the army ill-supplied or ill-paid,
the force of the State dwindling away, and the means of preservation lost, the
administration must be amazingly bad, and the State in a condition of most
alarming danger.

8. When the trade, agriculture, and mechanic arts, those great sources of, not
the wealth only, but even morality, of a country, are properly encouraged, the
government is good: but when we see our merchants drove, by the oppression of
the laws, or absurdity of administration, out of the State, and the farmers and
tradesmen following them with their produce and fabrics, the government must be
bad indeed.

9. When the dignity of public boards, and the personal respectability of
public men, are well kept up in the minds of the people, the government is
good: but when the public boards are execrated as wanting common honesty or
prudence, and public men cursed, hated, and despised, as void of honor, truth,
skill, and uprightness, the government must be bad.

10. When we see the officers of government carefully attending to the forms,
decisions, and spirit of the laws, which secure the liberty of the subject, the
government is good: but when we see officers in the great departments eagerly
and impatiently grasping at enormous, dangerous, and arbitrary powers,
attempting to deprive the subject of the rights of a jury, the habeas corpus,
and other essential legal forms of process and trial, we have reason to
apprehend the government is bad. These are the very tyrannies of the British
court, and are ranked among the capital articles of complaint, on which we
ground our war against them, and separation from them.

11. A good government is willing to come to the light, and to explain the
public movements to the understandings of the subject: bad governments are more
impatient of examination, are apt to complain of the liberty of the press, and
when remarks are made on their measures with ever so much propriety, truth, and
modesty, they rarely attend with candor, but endeavor to divert the attention
of the public by artful evasions of the matter in question, and instead of
answers, entertain their fellow-citizens either with fulsome rapture of
panegyric, or declamations of personal abuse, or foul scurrility, neither of
which has the most distant relation to the grievances complained of, and which
require their explanation.

It may be objected that the above rules, as far as they relate to the laws,
will not apply, because it luckily happens that our constitution does not vest
the President with the power of legislation; it is equally true, that our
constitution does not empower the President to raise mobs, and appoint
committees, and therefore the objection may go to that part too. Upon this I
have only to observe, that the whole management of the public affairs, which is
supposed to be under the great influence of any prime mover, is commonly called
the administration or government of such a minister.

But as I am not going to make use of any of these rules for myself, but wrote
them solely for the benefit of mr. IMPARTIAL, he or any body else that reads
them, may leave out all which he thinks not for his purpose, and make use of,
and apply, such of them only as he thinks apropos.

On the whole I have to observe to TIMOLEON, PHOCION, IMPARTIAL, and every
other writer, that if any of them are disposed to object to the truth of any
fact or principle which I have advanced or may advance, and will state their
objections fairly and heartily, I shall have pleasure in giving them all the
information in my power; but if they are disposed to run off in a tangent,
through the endless wilds of abuse, personal reflection, and scurrility, in which
the public can have no concern, I must beg leave to inform them once for all,
that I think it inconsistent with the respect I owe the public, and the dignity
of character I mean to assume to myself, to follow them in such a dirty career.
I have neither talents nor taste for that kind of writing.

I mean to address the understanding of my readers, not their passions, their
biasses, much less their corrupt taste. I mean to write on very serious,
important subjects, and wish to convince and inform serious minds. I have no
more ambition to be thought a witling, a punster, or sharp dealer in squibs or
innuendoes, than I have to be reputed an able bruiser, a sly s^abber, or an
accomplished assassin.

Facts and principles are my only objects, and the public good the great end I
have in view, and it is painful to me to be diverted from my course by objects
of low wit, seurrility, or scandal, which can only raise a laugh, or a grin,
without the least advantage to the public.

SINCE writing the above, I find mr. PHOCION begins to acknowledge and mend his
errors. I doubt not he was compelled to this by force of very strong
conviction. It is human to err, it is honorable to own and correct an error, it
is diabolical to persist in an error after conviction. I am rejoiced to see so
honorable a motion in mr. PHOCION, and I hope he will go on in the good way,
till all his errors and mistakes are corrected. It may be worth notice here,
that the tender-act which was to be supported by the precious plan of
regulating the exchange month by month by the definitions and publications of
the Council, and the vain and ridiculous attempts of the Council to put the
same into execution (all which make the subject of these remarks and
publications) I say, the said tender-act and subsequent resolutions produced
such unexpected, wild, and perni^ious effects, as not only gave a mortal wound
to the Continental money, but proved also to be the last efforts, the dying
struggles of the whole system of tender-acts, of limitations of prices of
goods, of regulating the market, and defining the value of money by laws and
acts of force.

For we find that the Assembly of Pennsylvania, with the recommendation of
Congress, on June 2, 1781, repealed all the tender-acts then existing in that
State, and discharged all penalties and forfeitures annexed to them, and the
like was done about the same time in all the other States.

And so strongly is the injustice of that wild system impressed on the general
mind, that it is an article in most of the constitutions since published, that
all contracts shall be fulfilled according to the true and honest intention of
them.




A DISSERTATION ON THE POLITICAL UNION AND CONSTITUTION OF THE THIRTEEN UNITED
STATES OF NORTH AMERICA, Which is necessary to their Preservation and
Happiness; humbly offered to the Public. Forming a plan of confederation, or a
system of general government of the United States, engrossed the attention of
Congress from the declaration of independence, July 4. 1776, till the same was
completed by Congress, July 9, 1778, and recommended to the several States for
ratification, which finally took place, March 1, 1781; from which time the said
confederation was considered as the grand constitution of the general
government, and the whole administration was conformed to it.

And as it had stood the test of discussion (...) Congress for two years,
before they completed and adopted it, and in all the States for (...) more,
before it was finally ratified, one would have thought that it (...) have been
a very finished and perfect plan of government.

But on trial of it in practice, it was found to be extremely weak, defective,
totally inefficient, and altogether inadequate to its great ends and purposes.
For,

1. It blended the legislative and executive powers together in one body.

2. This body, viz. Congress, consisted of but one house, without any check
upon their resolutions.

3. The powers of Congress in very few instances were definitive and final; in
the most important articles of government they could do no more than recommend
to the several States; the consent of every one of which was necessary to give
legal sanction to any act so recommended.

4. They could ass^ss and levy no taxes.

5. They could institute and execute no punishments, except in the military
department.

6. They had no power of deciding or controlling the contentions and disputes
of different States with each other.

7. They could not regulate the general trade: or,

8. Even make laws to secure either public treaties with foreign States, or the
persons of public ambassadors, or to punish violations or injuries done to
either of them.

9. They could institute no general judiciary powers.

10. They could regulate no public roads, canals, or inland navigation, etc.
etc. etc.

And what caps all the rest was, that (whilst under such an inefficient
political constitution, the only chance we had of any tolerable administration
lay wholly in the prudence and wisdom of the men who happened to take the lead
in our public councils) it was fatally provided by the absurd doctrine of
rotation, that if any Member of Congress by three years' experience and
application, had qualified himself to manage our public affairs with
consistency and fitness, that he should be constitutionally and absolutely
rendered incapable of serving any longer, till by three years' discontinuance,
he had pretty well lost the cue or train of the public counsels, and forgot the
ideas and plans which made his services useful and important; and, in the mean
time, his place should be supplied by a fresh man, who had the whole matter to
learn, and when he had (...) it, was to give place to another fresh man; and so
on to the end of the chapter.

The sensible mind of the United State^, by long experience of the fatal
mischiefs of anarchy, or (which is about the same thing) of this ridiculous,
inefficient form of government, began to apprehend that there was something
wrong in our policy, which ought to be redressed and mended; but nobody
undertook to delineate the necessary amendments.

I was then pretty much at leisure, and was fully of opinion (though the
sentiment at that time would not very well bear) that it would be ten times
easier to form a new constitution than to mend the old one. I therefore sat
myself down to sketch out the leading principles of that political
constitution, which I thought necessary to the preservation and happiness of
the United States of America, which are comprised in this Dissertation.

I hope the reader will please to consider, that these are the original
thoughts of a private individual, dictated by the nature of the subject only,
long before the important theme became the great object of discussion, in the
most dignified and important assembly, which ever sat or decided in America.



[First published in Philadelphia, 1783.]
I. THE supreme authority of any State must have power enough to effect the
ends of its appointment, otherwise these ends cannot be answered, and
effectually secured; at best they are precarious. -- But at the same time,

II. The supreme authority ought to be so limited and checked, if possible, as
to prevent the abuse of power, or the exercise of powers that are not necessary
to the ends of its appointment, but hurtful and oppressive to the subject; --
but to limit a supreme authority so far as to diminish its dignity, or lessen
its power of doing good, would be to destroy or at least to corrupt it, and
render it ineffectual to its ends.

III. A number of sovereign States uniting into one Commonwealth, and
appointing a supreme power to manage the affairs of the union, do necessarily
and unavoidably part with and transfer over to such supreme power, so (...) of
their own sovereignty, as is necessary to render the ends of the union
effectual, otherwise their confederation will be an union without bands of
union, like a cask without hoops, that may and probably will fall to pieces, as
soon as it is put to any exercise which requires strength.

In like manner, every member of civil society parts with many of his natural
rights, that he may enjoy the rest in greater security under the protection of
society.

The UNION of the Thirteen States of America is of mighty consequence to the
security, sovereignty, and even liberty of each of them, and of all the
individuals who compose them; united under a natural, well adjusted, and
effectual constitution, they are a strong, rich, growing power, with great
resources and means of defense, which no foreign power will easily attempt to
invade or insult; they may easily command respect.

As their exports are mostly either raw materials or provisions, and their
imports mostly finished goods, their trade becomes a capital object with every
manufacturing nation of Europe, and all the southern colonies of America; their
friendship and trade will of course be courted, and each power in amity with
them will contribute to their security.

Their union is of great moment in another respect; they thereby form a
superintending power among themselves, that can moderate and terminate disputes
that may arise between different States, restrain intestine violence, and
prevent any recourse to the dreadful decision of the sword.

I do not mean here to go into a detail of all the advantages of our union;
they offer themselves on every view, and are important enough to engage every
honest, prudent mind, to secure and establish that union by every possible
method, that we may enjoy the full benefit of it, and be rendered happy and
safe under the protection it affords.

This union, however important, cannot be supported without a constitution
founded on principles of natural truth, fitness, and utility. If there is one
article wrong in such constitution, it will discover itself in practice, by its
baleful operation, and destroy or at least injure the union.

Many nations have been ruined by the errors of their political constitutions.
Such errors first introduce wrongs and injuries, which soon breed discontents,
which gradually work up into mortal hatred and resentments; hence inveterate
parties are formed, which of course make the whole community a house divided
against itself, which soon falls either a prey to some enemies without, who
watch to devour them, or else crumble into their original constituent parts,
and lose all respectability, strength, and security.

It is as physically impossible to secure to civil society, good cement of
union, duration, and security, without a constitution founded on principles of
natural fitness and right, as to raise timbers into a strong, compact building,
which have not been framed upon true geometric principles; for if you cut one
beam a foot too long or too short, not all the authority and all the force of
all the carpenters can ever get it into its place, and make it fit with proper
symmetry there.

As the fate then of all governments depends much on their political
constitutions, they become an object of mighty moment to the happiness and
well-being of society; and as the framing of such a constitution requires great
knowledge of the rights of men and societies, as well as of the interests,
circumstances, and even prejudices of the several parts of the community or
commonwealth, for which it is intended; it becomes a very complex subject, and
of course requires great steadiness and comprehension of thought, as well as
great knowledge of men and things, to do it properly. I shall, however, attempt
it with my best abilities, and hope from the candor of the public to escape
censure, if I cannot merit praise.

I BEGIN with my first and great principle, viz. That the constitution must
vest powers in every department sufficient to secure and make effectual the
ends of it. The supreme authority must have the power of making war and peace
-- of appointing armies and navies -- of appointing officers both civil and
military -- of making contracts -- of emitting, coining, and borrowing money --
of regulating trade -- of making treaties with foreign powers -- of
establishing post offices -- and in short of doing every thing which the
well-being of the Commonwealth may require, and which is not compatible to any
particular State, all of which require money, and cannot possibly be made
effectual without it.

They must therefore of necessity be vested with a power of taxation. I know
this is a most important and weighty trust, a dreadful engine of oppression,
tyranny, and injury, when ill used; yet, from the necessity of the case, it
must be admitted.

For to give a supreme authority a power of making contracts, without any power
of payment -- of appointing officers civil and military, without money to pay
them -- a power to build ships, without any money to do it with -- a power of
emitting money, without any power to redeem it -- or of borrowing money,
without any power to make payment, etc. etc. such solecisms in government, are
so nugatory and absurd, that I really think to offer further arguments on the
subject, would be to insult the understanding of my readers.

To make all these payments dependent on the votes of thirteen popular
assemblies, who will undertake to judge of the propriety of every contract and
every occasion of money, and grant or withhold supplies according to their
opinion, whilst at the same time, the operations of the whole may be stopped by
the vote of a single one of them, is absurd; for this renders all supplies so
precarious, and the public credit so extremely uncertain, as must in its nature
render all efforts in war, and all regular administration in peace, utterly
impracticable, as well as most pointedly ridiculous. Is there a man to be
found, who would lend money, or render personal services, or make contracts on
such precarious security? of this we have a proof of fact, the strongest of all
proofs, a fatal experience, the surest though severest of all demonstrations,
which renders all other proof or argument on this subject quite unnecessary.

The present broken state of our finances -- public debts and bankruptcies --
enormous and ridiculous depreciation of public securities -- with the total
annihilation of our public credit -- prove beyond all contradiction the vanity
of all recourse to the several Assemblies of the States. The recent instance of
the duty of 5 per cent. on imported goods, struck dead, and the bankruptcies
which ensued on the single vote of Rhode Island, affords another proof, of what
it is certain may be done again in like circumstances.

I have another reason why a power of taxation or of raising money, ought to be
vested in the supreme authority of our commonwealth, viz. the moneys necessary
for the public ought to be raised by a duty imposed on imported goods, not a
bare 5 per cent. or any other per cent. on all imported goods indiscriminately,
but a duty much heavier on all articles of luxury or mere ornament, and which
are consumed principally by the rich or prodigal part of the community, such as
silks of all sorts, muslins, cambricks, lawns, superfine cloths, spirits,
wines, etc. etc.

Such an impost would ease the husbandman, the mechanic, and the poor; would
have all the practical effects of a sumptuary law; would mend the economy, and
increase the industry, of the community; would be collected without the
shocking circumstances of collectors and their warrants; and make the quantity
of tax paid, always depend on the choice of the person who pays it.

This tax can be laid by the supreme authority much more conveniently than by
the particular Assemblies, and would in no case be subject to their repeals or
modifications; and of course the public credit would never be dependent on, or
liable to bankruptcy by the humors of any particular Assembly. -- In an Essay
on Finance, which I design soon to offer to the public, this subject will be
treated more fully. (See my Sixth Essay on Free Trade and Finance, p. 229.)

The delegates which are to form that august body, which are to hold and
exercise the supreme authority, ought to be appointed by the States in any
manner they please; in which they should not be limited by any restrictions;
their own dignity and the weight they will hold in the great public councils,
will always depend on the abilities of the persons they appoint to represent
them there; and if they are wise enough to choose men of sufficient abilities,
and respectable characters, men of sound sense, extensive knowledge, gravity,
and integrity, they will reap the honor and advantage of such wisdom.

But if they are fools enough to appoint men of trifling or vile characters, of
mean abilities, faulty morals, or despicable ignorance, they must reap the
fruits of such folly, and content themselves to have no weight, dignity, or
esteem in the public councils; and what is more to be lamented by the
Commonwealth, to do no good there.

I have no objection to the States electing and recalling their delegates as
often as they please, but think it hard and very injurious both to them and the
Commonwealth, that they should be obliged to discontinue them after three
years' service, if they find them on that trial to be men of sufficient
integrity and abilities; a man of that experience is certainly much more
qualified to serve in the place, than a new member of equal good character can
be; experience makes perfect in every kind of business -- old, experienced
statesmen, of tried and approved integrity and abilities, are a great blessing
to a State -- they acquire great authority and esteem as well as wisdom, and
very much contribute to keep the system of government in good and salutary
order; and this furnishes the strongest reason why they should be continued in
the service, on Plato's great maxim, that "the man best qualified to serve,
ought to be appointed".

I am sorry to see a contrary maxim adopted in our American counsels; to make
the highest reason that can be given for continuing a man in the public
administration, assigned as a constitutional and absolute reason for turning
him out, seems to me to be a solecism of a piece with many other reforms, by
which we set out to surprise the world with our wisdom.

If we should adopt this maxim in the common affairs of life, it would be found
inconvenient, e. g. if we should make it a part of our constitution, that a man
who has served a three years' apprenticeship to the trade of a tailor or
shoemaker, should be obliged to discontinue that business for the three
successive years, I am of opinion the country would soon be cleared of good
shoemakers and tailors. -- Men are no more born statesmen than shoemakers or
tailors -- Experience is equally necessary to perfection in both.

It seems to me that a man's inducements to qualify himself for a public
employment, and make himself master of it, must be much discouraged by this
consideration, that let him take whatever pains to qualify himself in the best
manner, he must be shortly turned out, and of course it would be of more
consequence to him, to turn his attention to some other business, which he
might adopt when his present appointment should expire; and by this means the
Commonwealth is in danger of losing the zeal, industry, and shining abilities,
as well as services, of their most accomplished and valuable men.

I hear that the state of Georgia has improved on this blessed principle, and
limited the continuance of their governors to one year; the consequence is,
they have already the ghosts of departed governors stalking about in every part
of their State, and growing more plenty every year; and as the price of every
thing is reduced by its plenty, I can suppose governors will soon be very low
there.

This doctrine of rotation was first proposed by some sprightly geniuses of
brilliant politics, with this cogent reason; that by introducing a rotation in
the public offices, we should have a great number of men trained up to public
service; but it appears to me that it will be more likely to produce many jacks
at all trades, but good at none.

I think that frequent elections are a sufficient security against the
continuance of men in public office whose conduct is not approved, and there
can be no reason for excluding those whose conduct is approved, and who are
allowed to be better qualified than any men who can be found to supply their
places.

Another great object of government, is the apportionment of burdens and
benefits; for if a greater quota of burden, or a less quota of benefit than is
just and right, be allotted to any State, this ill apportionment will be an
everlasting source of uneasiness and discontent. In the first case, the
over-burdened State will complain; in the last case, all the States, whose
quota of benefit is under-rated, will be uneasy; and this is a case of such
delicacy, that it cannot be safely trusted to the arbitrary opinion or judgment
of any body of men however august.

Some natural principle of confessed equity, and which can be reduced to a
certainty, ought, if possible, to be found and adopted; for it is of the
highest moment to the Commonwealth, to obviate, and, if possible, wholly to
take away, such a fruitful and common source of infinite disputes, as that of
apportionment of quotas has ever proved in all States of the earth.

The value of lands may be a good rule; but the ascertainment of that value is
impracticable; no assessment can be made which will not be liable to exception
and debate -- to adopt a good rule in any thing which is impracticable, is
absurd; for it is physically impossible that any thing should be good for
practice, which cannot be practiced at all; -- but if the value of lands was
capable of certain assessment, yet to adopt that value as a rule of
apportionment of quotas, and at the same time to except from valuation large
tracts of sundry States of immense value, which have all been defended by the
joint arms of the whole Empire, and for the defense of which no additional
quota of supply is to be demanded of those States, to whom such lands are
secured by such joint efforts of the States, is in its nature unreasonable, and
will open a door for great complaint.

It is plain without argument, that such States ought either to make grants to
the Commonwealth of such tracts of defended territory, or sell as much of them
as will pay their proper quota of defense, and pay such sums into the public
treasury; and this ought to be done, let what rule of quota soever be adopted
with respect to the cultivated part of the United States; for no proposition of
natural right and justice can be plainer than this, that every part of valuable
property which is defended, ought to contribute its quota of supply for that
defense.

If then the value of cultivated lands is found to be an impracticable rule of
apportionment of quotas, we have to seek for some other, equally just and less
exceptionable.

It appears to me, that the number of living souls or human persons of whatever
age, sex, or condition, will afford us a rule or measure of apportionment which
will for ever increase and decrease with the real wealth of the States, and
will of course be a perpetual rule, not capable of corruption by any
circumstances of future time; which is of vast consideration in forming a
constitution which is designed for perpetual duration, and which will in its
nature be as just as to the inhabited parts of each State, as that of the value
of lands, or any other that has or can be mentioned.

Land takes its value not merely from the goodness of its soil, but from
innumerable other relative advantages, among which the population of the
country may be considered as principal; as lands in a full-settled country will
always (caeteris paribus) bring more than lands in thin settlements -- On this
principle, when the inhabitants of Russia, Poland, etc. sell real estates, they
do not value them as we do, by the number of acres, but by the number of people
who live on them.

Where any piece of land has many advantages, many people will crowd there to
obtain them; which will create many competitors for the purchase of it; which
will of course raise the price. Where there are fewer advantages, there will be
fewer competitors, and of course a less price; and these two things will for
ever be proportionate to each other, and of course the one will always be a
sure index of the other.

The only considerable objection I have ever heard to this, is, that the
quality of inhabitants differs in the different States, and it is not
reasonable that the black slaves in the southern States should be estimated on
a par with the white freemen in the northern States. To discuss this question
fairly, I think it will be just to estimate the neat value of the labor of
both; and if it shall appear that the labor of the black person produces as
much neat wealth to the southern State, as the labor of the white person does
to the northern State, I think it will follow plainly, that they are equally
useful inhabitants in point of wealth; and therefore in the case before us,
should be estimated alike.

And if the amazing profits which the southern planters boast of receiving from
the labor of their slaves on their plantations, are real, the southern people
have greatly the advantage in this kind of estimation, and as this objection
comes principally from the southward, I should suppose that the gentlemen from
that part would blush to urge it any further.

That the supreme authority should be vested with powers to terminate and
finally decide controversies arising between different States, I take it, will
be universally admitted, but I humbly apprehend that an appeal from the first
instance of trial ought to be admitted in causes of great moment, on the same
reasons that such appeals are admitted in all the States of Europe. It is well
known to all men versed in courts, that the first hearing of a cause, rather
gives an opening to that evidence and reason which ought to decide it, than
such a full examination and thorough discussion, as should always precede a
final judgment, in causes of national consequence. -- A detail of reasons might
be added, which I deem it unnecessary to enlarge on here.

The supreme authority ought to have a power of peace and war, and forming
treaties and alliances with all foreign powers; which implies a necessity of
their also having sufficient powers to enforce the obedience of all subjects of
the United States to such treaties and alliances; with full powers to unite the
force of the States; and direct its operations in war; and to punish all
transgressors in all these respects; otherwise, by the imprudence of a few, the
whole Commonwealth may be embroiled with foreign powers, and the operations of
war may be rendered useless, or fail much of their due effect.

All these I conceive will be easily granted, especially the latter, as the
power of Congress to appoint and direct the army and navy in war, with all
departments thereto belonging, and punishing delinquents in them all, is
already admitted into practice in the course of the present unhappy war, in
which we have been long engaged.

II. But now the great and most difficult part of this weighty subject remains
to be considered, viz. how these supreme powers are to be constituted in such
manner that they may be able to exercise with full force and effect, the vast
authorities committed to them, for the good and well-being of the United
States, and yet be so checked and restrained from exercising them to the injury
and ruin of the States, that we may with safety trust them with a commission of
such vast magnitude; -- and may Almighty wisdom direct my pen in this arduous
discussion.

1. The men who compose this important council, must be delegated from all the
States; and, of course, the hope of approbation and continuance of honors, will
naturally stimulate them to act right, and to please* the dread of censure and
disgrace will naturally operate as a check to restrain them from improper
behavior: but however natural and forcible these motives may be, we find by
sad experience, they are not always strong enough to produce the effects we
expect and wish from them.

It is to be wished that none might be appointed that were not fit and adequate
to this weighty business; but a little knowledge of human nature, and a little
acquaintance with the political history of mankind, will soon teach us that
this is not to be expected.

The representatives appointed by popular elections are commonly not only the
legal, but real, substantial representatives of their electors, i. e. there
will commonly be about the same proportion of grave, sound, well-qualified men,
-- trifling, desultory men, -- wild or knavish schemers, -- and dull, ignorant
fools, in the delegated assembly, as in the body of electors.

I know of no way to help this; such delegates must be admitted, as the States
are pleased to send; and all that can be done, is, when they get together, to
make the best of them.

We will suppose then they are all met in Congress, clothed with that vast
authority which it is necessary to the well-being, and even existence, of the
union, that they should be vested with; how shall we empower them to do all
necessary and effectual good, and restrain them from doing hurt? To do this
properly, I think we must recur to those natural motives of action, those
feelings and apprehensions, which usually occur to the mind at the very time of
action; for distant consequences, however weighty, are often too much
disregarded.

Truth love^ light, and is vindicated by it. Wrong shrouds itself in darkness,
and is supported by delusion. An honest, well-qualified man loves light, can
bear close examination and critical inquiry, and is best pleased when he is
most thoroughly understood: a man of corrupt design, or a fool of no design,
hates close examination and critical inquiry; the knavery of the one, and the
ignorance of the other, are discovered by it, and they both usually grow
uneasy, before the investigation is half done. I do not believe there is a more
natural truth in the world, than that divine one of our SAVIOR, "he that does
truth, comes to the light." I would therefore recommend that mode of
deliberation, which will naturally bring on the most thorough and critical
discussion of the subject, previous to passing any act; and for that purpose
humbly propose,

2. That the Congress shall consist of two chambers, an upper and lower house,
or senate and commons, with the concurrence of both necessary to every act; and
that every State send one or more delegates to each house: this will subject
every act to two discussions before two distinct chambers of men equally
qualified for the debate, equally masters of the subject, and of equal
authority in the decision.

These two houses will be governed by the same natural motives and interests,
viz. the good of the Commonwealth, and the approbation of the people. Whilst,
at the same time, the emulation naturally arising between them, will induce a
very critical and sharp-sighted inspection into the motions of each other.
Their different opinions will bring on conferences between the two houses, in
which the whole subject will be exhausted in arguments pro and con, and shame
will be the portion of obstinate, convicted error.

Under these circumstances, a man of ignorance or evil design will be afraid to
impose on the credulity, inattention, or confidence of his house, by
introducing any corrupt or indigested proposition, which he knows he must be
called on to defend against the severe scrutiny and poignant objections of the
other house. I do not believe the many hurtful and foolish legislative acts
which first or last have injured all the States on earth, have originated so
much in corruption as indolence, ignorance, and a want of a full comprehension
of the subject, which a full, prying, and emulous discussion would tend in a
great measure to remove: this naturally rouses the lazy and idle, who hate the
pain of close thinking; animates the ambitious to excel in policy and argument;
and excites the whole to support the dignity of their house, and vindicate
their own propositions.

I am not of opinion that bodies of elective men, which usually compose
Parliaments, Diets, Assemblies, Congresses, etc. are commonly dishonest; but I
believe it rarely happens that there are not designing men among them; and I
think it would be much more difficult for them to unite their partisans in two
houses, and corrupt or deceive them both, than to carry on their designs where
there is but one unalarmed, unapprehensive house to be managed; and as there is
no hope of making these bad men good, the best policy is to embarrass them, and
make their work as difficult as possible.

In these assemblies are frequently to be found sanguine men, upright enough
indeed, but of strong, wild projection, whose brains are always teeming with
Utopian, chimerical plans, and political whims, very destructive to society. I
hardly know a greater evil than to have the supreme counsels of a Nation played
off on such men's wires; such baseless visions at best end in darkness, and the
dance, though easy and merry enough at first, rarely fails to plunge the
credulous, simple followers into sloughs and bogs at last.

Nothing can tend more effectually to obviate these evils, and to mortify and
cure such maggotty brains, than to see the absurdity of their projects exposed
by the several arguments and keen satire which a full, emulous, and spirited
discussion of the subject will naturally produce: we have had enough of these
geniuses in the short course of our politics, both in our national and
provincial councils, and have felt enough of their evil effects, to induce us
to wish for any good method to keep ourselves clear of them in future.

The consultations and decisions of national councils are so very important,
that the fate of millions depends on them; therefore no man ought to speak in
such assemblies, without considering that the fate of millions hangs on his
tongue, -- and of course a man can have no right in such august councils to
utter indigested sentiments, or indulge himself in sudden, unexamined flights
of thought; his most tried and improved abilities are due to the State, who
have trusted him with their most important interests.

A man must therefore be most inexcusable, who is either absent during such
debates, or sleeps, or whispers, or catches flies during the argument, and just
rouses when the vote is called, to give his yea or nay, to the weal or woe of a
nation. -- Therefore it is manifestly proper, that every natural motive that
can operate on his understanding, or his passions, to engage his attention and
utmost efforts, should be put in practice, and that his present feelings should
be raised by every motive of honor and shame, to stimulate him to every
practicable degree of diligence and exertion, to be as far as possible useful
in the great discussion.

I appeal to the feelings of every reader, if he would not (were he in either
house) be much more strongly and naturally induced to exert his utmost
abilities and attention to any question which was to pass through the ordeal of a
spirited discussion of another house, than he would do, if the absolute
decision depended on his own house, without any further inquiry or challenge on
the subject.

As Congress will ever be composed of men delegated by the several States, it
may well be supposed that they have the confidence of their several States, and
understand well the policy and present condition of them; it may also be
supposed that they come with strong local attachments, and habits of thinking
limited to the interests of their particular States: it may therefore be
supposed they will need much information, in order to their gaining that
enlargement of ideas, and great comprehension of thought, which will be
necessary to enable them to think properly on that large scale, which takes
into view the interests of all the States.

The greatest care and wisdom is therefore requisite to give them the best and
surest information, and of that kind that may be the most safely relied on, to
prevent their being deluded or prejudiced by partial representations, made by
interested men who have particular views.

This information may perhaps be best made by the great ministers of state, who
ought to be men of the greatest abilities and integrity; their business is
confined to their several departments, and their attention engaged strongly and
constantly to all the several parts of the same; the whole arrangement, method,
and order of which, are formed, superintended, and managed in their offices,
and all informations relative to their departments center there.

These ministers will of course have the best information, and most perfect
knowledge, of the state of the Nation, as far as it relates to their several
departments, and will of course be able to give the best information to
Congress, in what manner any bill proposed will affect the public interest in
their several departments, which will nearly comprehend the whole.

The Financier manages the whole subject of revenues and expenditures -- the
Secretary of State takes knowledge of the general policy and internal
government -- the minister of war presides in the whole business of war and
defense -- and the minister of foreign affairs regards the whole state of the
nation, as it stands related to, or connected with, all foreign powers.

I mention a Secretary of State, because all other nations have one, and I
suppose we shall need one as much as they, and the multiplicity of affairs
which naturally fall into his office will grow so fast, that I imagine we shall
soon be under necessity of appointing one.

To these I would add Judges of law, and chancery; but I fear they will not be
very soon appointed -- the one supposes the existence of law, and the other of
equity -- and when we shall be altogether convinced of the absolute necessity
of the real and effectual existence of both these, we shall probably appoint
proper heads to preside in those departments. -- I would therefore propose,

3. That when any bill shall pass the second reading in the house in which it
originates, and before it shall be finally enacted, copies of it shall be sent
to each of the said ministers of state, in being at the time, who shall give
said house in writing, the fullest information in their power, and their most
explicit sentiments of the operation of the said bill on the public interest,
as far as relates to their respective departments, which shall be received and
read in said house, and entered on their minutes, before they finally pass the
bill; and when they send the bill for concurrence to the other house, they
shall send therewith the said informations of the said ministers of state,
which shall likewise be read in that house before their concurrence is finally
passed.

I do not mean to give these great ministers of state a negative on Congress,
but I mean to oblige Congress to receive their advices before they pass their
bills, and that every act shall be void that is not passed with these forms;
and I further propose, that either house of Congress may, if they please, admit
the said ministers to be present and assist in the debates of the house, but
without any right of vote in the decision.

It appears to me, that if every act shall pass so many different corpse of
discussion before it is completed, where each of them stake their characters on
the advice or vote they give, there will be all the light thrown on the case,
which the nature and circumstances of it can admit, and any corrupt man will
find it extremely difficult to foist in any erroneous clause whatever; and
every ignorant or lazy man will find the strongest inducements to make himself
master of the subject, that he may appear with some tolerable degree of
character in it; and the whole will find themselves in a manner compelled,
diligently and sincerely to seek for the real state of the facts, and the
natural fitness and truth arising from them, i. e. the whole natural principles
on which the subject depends, and which alone can endure every test, to the end
that they may have not only the inward satisfaction of acting properly and
usefully for the States, but also the credit and character which is or ought
ever to be annexed to such a conduct.

This will give the great laws of Congress the highest probability,
presumption, and means of right, fitness, and truth, that any laws whatever can
have at their first enaction, and will of course afford the highest reason for
the confidence and acquiescence of the States, and all their subjects, in them;
and being grounded in truth and natural fitness, their operation will be easy,
salutary, and satisfactory.

If experience shall discover errors in any law (for practice will certainly
discover such errors, if there be any) the legislature will always be able to
correct them, by such repeals, amendments, or new laws as shall be found
necessary; but as it is much easier to prevent mischiefs than to remedy them,
all possible caution, prudence, and attention should be used, to make the laws
right at first.

4. There is another body of men among us, whose business of life, and whose
full and extensive intelligence, foreign and domestic, naturally make them more
perfectly acquainted with the sources of our wealth, and whose particular
interests are more intimately and necessarily connected with the general
prosperity of the country, than any other order of men in the States. -- I mean
the Merchants; and I could wish that Congress might have the benefit of that
extensive and important information, which this body of men are very capable of
laying before them.

TRADE is of such essential importance to our interests, and so intimately
connected with all our staples, great and small, that no sources of our wealth
can flourish, and operate to the general benefit of the community, without it.
Our husbandry, that grand staple of our country, can never exceed our home
consumption without this -- it is plain at first sight, that the farmer will
not toil and sweat through the year to raise great plenty of the produce of the
soil, if there is no market for his produce, when he has it ready for sale, i.
e. if there are no merchants to buy it.

In like manner, the manufacturer will not lay out his business on any large
scale, if there is no merchant to buy his fabrics when he has finished them; a
vent is of the most essential importance to every manufacturing country -- the
merchants, therefore, become the natural negotiators of the wealth of the
country, who take off the abundance, and supply the wants, of the inhabitants;
-- and as this negotiation is the business of their lives, and the source of
their own wealth, they of course become better acquainted with both our
abundance and wants, and are more interested in finding and improving the best
vent for the one, and supply of the other, than any other men among us, and
they have a natural interest in making both the purchase and supply as
convenient to their customers as possible, that they may secure their custom,
and thereby increase their own business.

It follows then, that the merchants are not only qualified to give the fullest
and most important information to our supreme legislature, concerning the state
of our trade -- the abundance and wants, -- the wealth and poverty, of our
people, i. e. their most important interests, but are also the most likely to
do it fairly and truly, and to forward with their influence, every measure
which will operate to the convenience and benefit of our commerce, and oppose
with their whole weight and superior knowledge of the subject, any wild
schemes, which an ignorant or arbitrary legislature may attempt to introduce,
to the hurt and embarrassment of our intercourse both with one another, and
with foreigners.

The States of Venice and Holland have ever been governed by merchants, or at
least their policy has ever been under the great influence of that sort of men.
No States have been better served, as appears by their great success, the ease
and happiness of their citizens, as well as the strength and riches of their
Commonwealths: the one is the oldest, and the other the richest, State in the
world of equal number of people -- the one has maintained sundry wars with the
Grand Turk -- and the other has withstood the power of Spain and France; and
the capitals of both have long been the principal marts of the several parts of
Europe in which they are situated; and the banks of both are the best
supported, and in the best credit, of any banks in Europe, though their countries
or territories are very small, and their inhabitants but a handful, when
compared with the great States in their neighborhood.

Merchants must, from the nature of their business, certainly understand the
interests and resources of their country, the best of any men in it; and I know
not of any one reason why they should be deemed less upright or patriotic, than
any other rank of citizens whatever.

I therefore humbly propose, if the merchants in the several States are
disposed to send delegates from their body, to meet and attend the sitting of
Congress, that they shall be permitted to form a chamber of commerce, and their
advice to Congress be demanded and admitted concerning all bills before
Congress, as far as the same may affect the trade of the States.

I have no idea that the continent is made for Congress: I take them to be no
more than the upper servants of the great political body, who are to find out
things by study and inquiry as other people do; and therefore I think it
necessary to place them under the best possible advantages for information, and
to require them to improve all those advantages, to qualify themselves in the
best manner possible, for the wise and useful discharge of the vast trust and
mighty authority reposed in them; and as I conceive the advice of the merchants
to be one of the greatest sources of mercantile information, which is any where
placed within their reach, it ought by no means to be neglected, but so
husbanded and improved, that the greatest possible advantages may be derived
from it.

Besides this, I have another reason why the merchants ought to be consulted; I
take it to be very plain that the husbandry and manufactures of the country
must be ruined, if the present weight of taxes is continued on them much
longer, and of course a very great part of our revenue must arise from imposts
on merchandise, which will fall directly within the merchants' sphere of
business, and of course their concurrence and advice will be of the utmost
consequence, not only to direct the properest mode of levying those duties, but
also to get them carried into quiet and peaceable execution

No men are more conversant with the citizens, or more intimately connected
with their interests, than the merchants, and therefore their weight and
influence will have a mighty effect on the minds of the people. I do not
recollect an instance, in which the Court of London ever rejected the
remonstrances and advices of the merchants, and did not suffer severely for
their pride. We have some striking instances of this in the disregarded advices
and remonstrances of very many English merchants against the American war, and
their fears and apprehensions we see verified, almost like prophecies, by the
event.

I know not why I should continue this argument any longer, or indeed why I
have urged it so long, in as much as I cannot conceive that Congress or any
body else will deem it below the dignity of the supreme power to consult so
important an order of men, in matters of the first consequence, which fall
immediately under their notice, and in which their experience, and of course
their knowledge and advice are preferable to those of any other order of men.

Besides the benefits which Congress may receive from this institution, a
chamber of commerce, composed of members from all trading towns in the States,
if properly instituted and conducted, will prod^^^ (...) many, I might almost
(...) utility to all the States -- it will give dignity, uniformity, and safety
to our trade -- establish the credit of the bank -- secure the confidence of
foreign merchants -- prove in very many instances a fruitful source of
improvement of our staples and mutual intercourse -- correct many abuses --
pacify discontents -- unite us in our interests, and thereby cement the general
union of the whole Commonwealth -- will relieve Congress from the pain and
trouble of deciding many intricate questions of trade which they do not
understand, by referring them over to this chamber, where they will be
discussed by an order of men, the most competent to the business of any that
can be found, and most likely to give a decision that shall be just, useful,
and satisfactory.

It may be objected to all this, that the less complex and the more simple
every constitution is, the nearer it comes to perfection: this argument would
be very good, and afford a very forcible conclusion, if the government of men
was like that of the Almighty, always founded on wisdom, knowledge, and truth;
but in the present imperfect state of human nature, where the best of men know
but in part, and must recur to advice and information for the rest, it
certainly becomes necessary to form a constitution on such principles, as will
secure that information and advice in the best and surest manner possible.

It may be further objected that the forms herein proposed will embarrass the
business of Congress, and make it at best slow and dilatory. As far as this
form will prevent the hurrying a bill through the house without due examination,
the objection itself becomes an advantage -- at most these checks on the
supreme authority can have no further effect than to delay or destroy a good
bill, but cannot pass a bad one; and I think it much better in the main, to
lose a good bill than to suffer a bad one to pass into a law. -- Besides it is
not to be supposed that clear, plain cases will meet with embarrassment, and it
is most safe that untried, doubtful, difficult matters should pass through the
gravest and fullest discussion, before the sanction of law is given to them.

But what is to be done if the two houses grow jealous and ill-natured, and
after all their information and advice, grow out of humor and insincere, and no
concurrence can be obtained? -- I answer, sit still and do nothing till they
get into better humor: I think this much better than to pass laws in such a
temper and spirit, as the objection supposes.

It is however an ill compliment to so many grave personages, to suppose them
capable of throwing aside their reason, and giving themselves up like children
to the control of their passions; or, if this should happen for a moment, that
it should continue any length of time, is hardly to be presumed of a body of
men placed in such high stations of dignity and importance, with the eyes of
all the world upon them -- but if they should, after all, be capable of this, I
think it madness to set them to making laws, during such fits -- it is best,
when they are in no condition to do good, to keep them from doing hurt, -- and
if they do not grow wiser in reasonable time, I know of nothing better, than to
be ashamed of our old appointments, and make new ones.

But what if the country is invaded, or some other exigency happens, so
pressing that the safety of the State requires an immediate resolution? -- I
answer, what would you do if such a case should happen, where there was but one
house, unchecked, but equally divided, so that a legal vote could not be
obtained. The matter is certainly equally difficult and embarrassed in both
cases: but in the case proposed, I know of no better way than that which the
Romans adopted on the like occasion, viz. that both houses meet in one chamber,
and choose a dictator, who should have and exercise the whole power of both
houses, till such time as they should be able to concur in displacing him, and
that the whole power of the two houses should be suspended in the mean time.

5. I further propose, that no grant of money whatever shall be made, without
an appropriation, and that rigid penalties (no matter how great, in my opinion
the halter would be mild enough) shall be inflicted on any person, however
august his station, who should give order, or vote for the payment, or actually
pay one shilling of such money to any other purpose than that of its
appropriation, and that no order whatever of any superior in office shall
justify such payment, but every order shall express what funds it is drawn
upon, and what appropriation it is to be charged to, or the order shall not be
paid.

This kind of embezzlement is of so fatal a nature, that no measures or bounds
are to be observed in curing it; when ministers will set forth the most
specious and necessary occasions for money, and induce the people to pay it in
full tale; and when they have gotten possession of it, to neglect the great
objects for which it was given, and pay it, sometimes squander it away, for
different purposes, oftentimes for useless, yea, hurtful ones, yea, often even
to bribe and corrupt the very officers of government, to betray their trust,
and contaminate the State, even in its public offices -- to force people to buy
their own destruction, and pay for it with their hard labor, the very sweat of
their brow, is a crime of so high a nature, that I know not any gibbet too
cruel for such offenders.

6. I would further propose, that the aforesaid great ministers of state shall
compose a Council of State, to whose number Congress may add three others, viz.
one from New England, one from the middle States, and one from the southern
States, one of which to be appointed President by Congress; to all of whom
shall be committed the supreme executive authority of the States (all and
singular of them ever accountable to Congress) who shall superintend all the
executive departments, and appoint all executive officers, who shall ever be
accountable to, and removable for just cause by, them or Congress, i. e. either
of them.

7. I propose further, that the powers of Congress, and all the other
departments acting under them, shall all be restricted to such matters only of
general necessity and utility to all the States, as cannot come within the
jurisdiction of any particular State, or to which the authority of any
particular State is not competent: so that each particular State shall enjoy
all sovereignty and supreme authority to all intents and purposes, excepting
only those high authorities and powers by them delegated to Congress, for the
purposes of the general union.

There remains one very important article still to be discussed, viz. what
methods the constitution shall point out, to enforce the acts and requisitions
of Congress through the several States; and how the States which refuse or delay
obedience to such acts or requisitions, shall be treated: this, I know, is a
particular of the greatest delicacy, as well as of the utmost importance; and
therefore, I think, ought to be decidedly settled by the constitution, in our
coolest hours, whilst no passions or prejudices exist, which may be excited by
the great interests or strong circumstances of any particular case which may
happen.

I know that supreme authorities are liable to err, as well as subordinate
ones. I know that courts may be in the wrong, as well as the people; such is
the imperfect state of human nature in all ranks and degrees of men; but we
must take human nature as it is; it cannot be mended; and we are compelled both
by wisdom and necessity, to adopt such methods as promise the greatest
attainable good, though perhaps not the greatest possible, and such as are liable
to the fewest inconveniences, though not altogether free of them.

This is a question of such magnitude, that I think it necessary to premise the
great natural principles on which its decision ought to depend -- In the
present state of human nature, all human life is a life of chances; it is
impossible to make any interest so certain, but there will be a chance against
it; and we are in all cases obliged to adopt a chance against us, in order to
bring ourselves within the benefit of a greater chance in our favor; and that
calculation of chances which is grounded on the great natural principles of
truth and fitness, is of all others the most likely to come out right.

1. No laws of any State whatever, which do not carry in them a force which
extends to their effectual and final execution, can afford a certain or
sufficient security to the subject: this is too plain to need any proof.

2. Laws or ordinances of any kind (especially of august bodies of high dignity
and consequence) which ^ail of execution, are much worse than (...); they
weaken the government; expose it to contempt; destroy the confidence of all
men, natives and foreigners, in it; and expose both aggregate bodies and
individuals, who have placed confidence in it, to many ruinous disappointments,
which they would have escaped, had no law or ordinance been made: therefore,

3. To appoint a Congress with powers to do all acts necessary for the support
and uses of the union; and at the same time to leave all the States at liberty
to obey them or not with impunity, is, in every view, the grossest absurdity,
worse than a state of nature without any supreme authority at all, and at best
a ridiculous effort of childish nonsense: and of course,

4. Every State in the Union is under the highest obligations to obey the
supreme authority of the whole, and in the highest degree amenable to it, and
subject to the highest censure for disobedience -- Yet all this
notwithstanding, I think the soul that sins should die, i. e. the censure of
the great supreme power, ought to be so directed, if possible, as to light on
those persons, who have betrayed their country, and exposed it to dissolution,
by opposing and rejecting that supreme authority, which is the band of our
union, and from whence proceeds the principal strength and energy of our
government.

I therefore propose, that every person whatever, whether in public or private
character, who shall, by public vote or other overt act, disobey the supreme
authority, (...) be amenable to Congress, shall be summoned and compelled to
appear before Congress, and, on due conviction, suffer such fine, imprisonment,
or other punishment, as the supreme authority shall judge requisite.

It may be objected here, that this will make a Member of Assembly accountable
to Congress for his vote in Assembly; I answer, it does so in this only case,
viz. when that vote is to disobey the supreme authority: no Member of Assembly
can have right to give such a vote, and therefore ought to be punished for so
doing -- When the supreme authority is disobeyed, the government must lose its
energy and effect, and of course the Empire must be shaken to its very
foundation.

A government which is but half executed, or whose operations may all be
stopped by a single vote, is the most dangerous of all institutions. -- See the
present Poland, and ancient Greece buried in ruins, in consequence of this
fatal error in their policy. A government which has not energy and effect, can
never afford protection or security to its subjects, i. e. must ever be
ineffectual to its own ends.

I cannot therefore admit, that the great ends of our Union should lie at the
mercy of a single State, or that the energy of our government should be checked
by a single disobedience, or that such disobedience should ever be sheltered
from censure and punishment; the consequence is too capital, too fatal to be
admitted. Even though I know very well that a supreme authority, with all its
dignity and importance, is subject to passions like other lesser powers, that
they may be and often are heated, violent, oppressive, and very tyrannical; yet
I know also, that perfection is not to be hoped for in this life, and we must
take all institutions with their natural defects, or reject them altogether: I
will guard against these abuses of power as far as possible, but I cannot give
up all government, or destroy its necessary energy, for fear of these abuses.

But to fence them out as far as possible, and to give the States as great a
check on the supreme authority, as can consist with its necessary energy and
effect,

I propose that any State may petition Congress to repeal any law or decision
which they have made, and if more than half the States do this, the law or
decision shall be repealed, let its nature or importance be however great,
excepting only such acts as create funds for the public credit, which shall
never be repealed till their end is effected, or other funds equally effectual
are substituted in their places; but Congress shall not be obliged to repeal
any of these acts, so petitioned against, till they have time to lay the
reasons of such acts before such petitioning States, and to receive their
answer; because such petitions may arise from sudden heats, popular prejudices,
or the publication of matters false in fact, and may require time and means of
cool reflection and the fullest information, before the final decision is made:
but if after all, more than half the States persist in their demand of a
repeal, it shall take place.

The reason is, the uneasiness of a majority of States affords a strong
presumption that the act is wrong, for uneasiness arises much more frequently
from wrong than right; but if the act was good and right, it would still be
better to repeal and lose it, than to force the execution of it against the
opinion of a major part of the States; and lastly, if every act of Congress is
subject to this repeal, Congress itself will have stronger inducement not only
to examine well the several acts under their consideration, but also to
communicate the reasons of them to the States, than they would have, if their
simple vote gave the final stamp of irrevocable authority to their acts.

Further I propose, that if the execution of any act or order of the supreme
authority shall be opposed by force in any of the States (which God forbid!) it
shall be lawful for Congress to send into such State a sufficient force to
suppress it.

On the whole, I take it that the very existence and use of our union
essentially depends on the full energy and final effect of the laws made to
support it; and therefore I sacrifice all other considerations to this energy
and effect, and if our UNION is not worth this purchase, we must give it up --
the nature of the thing does not admit any other alternative.

I do contend that our UNION is worth this purchase -- with it, every
individual rests secure under its protection against foreign or domestic insult
and oppression -- without it, we can have no security against the oppression,
insult, and invasion of foreign powers; for no single State is of importance
enough to be an object of treaty with them, nor, if it was, could it bear the
expense of such treaties, or support any character or respect in a dissevered
state, but must lose all respectability among the nations abroad.

We have a very extensive trade, which cannot be carried on with security and
advantage, without treaties of commerce and alliance with foreign nations.

We have an extensive western territory which cannot otherwise be defended
against the invasion of foreign nations, bordering on our frontiers, who will
cover it with their own inhabitants, and we shall lose it for ever, and our
extent of empire be thereby restrained; and what is worse, their numerous
posterity will in future time drive ours into the sea, as the Goths and Vandals
formerly conquered the Romans in like circumstances, unless we have the force
of the Union to repel such invasions. We have, without the union, no security
against the inroads and wars of one State upon another, by which our wealth and
strength, as well as ease and comfort, will be devoured by enemies growing out
of our own bowels.

I conclude then, that our UNION is not only of the most essential consequence
to the well-being of the States in general, but to that of every individual
citizen of them, and of course ought to be supported, and made as useful and
safe as possible, by a constitution which admits that full energy and final
effect of government which alone can secure its great ends and uses.

In a dissertation of this sort, I would not wish to descend to minutiae, yet
there are some small matters which have important consequences, and therefore
ought to be noticed. It is necessary that Congress should have all usual and
necessary powers of self-preservation and order, e. g. to imprison for
contempt, insult, or interruption, etc. and to expel their own members for due
causes, among which I would rank that of non-attendance on the house, or
partial attendance without such excuse as shall satisfy the house.

Where there is such a vast authority and trust devolved on Congress, and the
grand and most important interests of the Empire rest on their decisions, it
appears to me highly unreasonable that we should suffer their august
consultations to be suspended, or their dignity, authority, and influence
lessened by the idleness, neglect, and non-attendance of its members; for we
know that the acts of a thin house do not usually carry with them the same
degree of weight and respect as those of a full house.

Besides I think, when a man is deputed a delegate in Congress, and has
undertaken the business, the whole Empire becomes of course possessed of a
right to his best and constant services, which if any member refuses or
neglects, the Empire is injured and ought to resent the injury, at least so far
as to expel and send him home, that so his place may be better supplied.

I have one argument in favor of my whole plan, viz. it is so formed that no
men of dull intellects, or small knowledge, or of habits too idle for constant
attendance, or close and steady attention, can do the business with any
tolerable degree of respectability, nor can they find either honor, profit, or
satisfaction in being there, and of course, I could wish that the choice of the
electors might never fall on such a man, or if it should, that he might have
sense enough (of pain at least, if not of shame) to decline his acceptance.

For after all that can be done, I do not think that a good administration
depends wholly on a good constitution and good laws, for insufficient or bad
men will always make bad work, and a bad administration, let the constitution
and laws be ever so good; the management of able, faithful, and upright men
alone can cause an administration to brighten, and the dignity and wisdom of an
Empire to rise into respect; make truth the line and measure of public
decision; give weight and authority to the government, and security and peace
to the subject.

We now hope that we are on the close of a war of mighty effort and great
distress, against the greatest power on earth, whetted into the most keen
resentment and savage fierceness, which can be excited by wounded pride, and
which usually rises higher between brother and brother offended, than between
strangers in contest. Twelve of the Thirteen United States have felt the actual
and cruel invasions of the enemy, and eleven of our capitals have been under
their power, first or last, during the dreadful conflict; but a good
Providence, our own virtue and firmness, and the help of our friends, have
enabled us to rise superior to all the power of our adversaries, and made them
seek to be at peace with us.

During the extreme pressures of the war, indeed, many errors in our
administration have been committed, when we could not have experience and time
for reflection, to make us wise; but these will easily be excused, forgiven,
and forgotten, if we can now, while at leisure, find virtue, wisdom, and
foresight enough to correct them, and form such establishments, as shall secure
the great ends of our union, and give dignity, force, utility, and permanency
to our Empire.

It is a pity we should lose the honor and blessings which have cost us so
dear, for want of wisdom and firmness in measures, which are essential to our
preservation. It is now at our option, either to fall back into our original
atoms, or form such an union, as shall command the respect of the world, and
give honor and security to all our people.

This vast subject lies with mighty weight on my mind, and I have bestowed on
it my utmost attention, and here offer the public the best thoughts and
sentiments I am master of. At the time when this Dissertation was written (
Feb. 16, 1783) the defects and insufficiency of the old Federal Constitution
were universally (...) and acknowledged* it was manifest, not only that the
internal police, justice, security, and peace of the States could never be
preserved under it, but the finances and public credit would necessarily become
so embarrassed, precarious, and void of support, that no public movement, which
depended on the revenue, could be managed with any effectual certainty: but
though the public mind was under ^^ll conviction of all these mischiefs, and was
contemplating a remedy, yet the public ideas were not at all concentrated, much
less arranged into any new system or form of government, which would obviate
these evils. Under these circumstances I o^^ered this Dissertation to the
public* how far the principles of it were adopted or rejected in the New
Constitution, which was four years afterward ( Sep. 17, 1787) formed by the
General Convention, and since ratified by all the States, is obvious to every
one.

I wish here to remark the great particulars of my plan which were rejected by
the Convention.

1. My plan was to keep the legislative and executive departments entirely
(...) the (...) to con^^^l of the two houses of Congress, the other to rest
entirely in the Grand Council of State.

2. I proposed to introduce a Chamber of Commerce, to consist of merchants,
(...) by the legislature in all matters of trade and revenue, and (...) have
the (...) the revenue committed to them.

The first of these the Convention qualified; the second they say nothing of,
i. e. take no notice of it.

3. I proposed that the great officers of state should have the perusal of all
bills, before they were (...) into laws, and should be required to give their
opinion of them, as far as they (...) the public interest in their several
departments; which report of them Congress should cause to be read in their
respective houses, and entered on their minutes. This is passed ^ver without
notice.

4. I proposed that all public officers appointed by the executive authority,
should be amenable both to th^^ and to the legislative power, and removable for
just ^ause by either of them. This is qualified by the Convention.

And in as much as my sentiments in these respects were either qualified or
totally neglected by the Convention, I suppose they were wrong; however, the
whole matter is submitted to the politicians of the present age, and to our
posterity in future.

In sundry other things, the Convention have gone into minutiae, e. g.
respecting elections of President, Senators, and Representatives in Congress,
etc. which I proposed to leave at large to the wisdom and discretion of
Congress, and of the several States.

Great reasons may doubtless be assigned for their decision, and perhaps some
little ones for mine. TIME, the great arbiter of all human plans, may, after a
while, give his decision; but neither the Convention nor myself will probably
live to feel either the exultation or mortification of his approbation or
disapprobation of either of our plans.

But if any of these questions should in future time become objects of
discussion, neither the vast dignity of the Convention, nor the low, unnoticed
state of myself, will be at all considered in the debates; the merits of the
matter, and the interests connected with or arising (...) it, will alone
dictate the decision.


I have confined myself in this dissertation entirely to the nature, reason,
and truth of my subject, without once adverting to the reception it might meet
with from men of different prejudices or interests. To find the truth, not to
carry a point, has been my object.

I have not the vanity to imagine that my sentiments may be adopted; I shall
have all the reward I wish or expect, if my dissertation shall throw any light
on the great subject, shall excite an emulation of inquiry, and animate some
abler genius to form a plan of greater perfection, less objectionable, and more
useful.

A SIXTH ESSAY ON FREE TRADE and FINANCE. Particularly showing what Supplies of
Public Revenue may be drawn from MERCHANDISE, without injuring our Trade, or
burdening our People. Humbly offered to the Public.
[First published in Philadelphia, March 24, 1783.]
HAVING lately published 'A Dissertation on that Political Union and
Constitution, which is necessary for the Preservation and Happiness of the
Thirteen United States of North America,' I now go on to consider some of the
great departments of business, which must fall under the management of the
great Council of the Union, and their officers.

The first thing which naturally offers itself to consideration, is the expense
of government; this is a ^ine qua non of the whole, and all its parts. No kind
of administration can be carried on without expense, and the scale or degree of
plan and execution must ever be limited by it. Two grand considerations offer
themselves here. 1. The estimate of the expenses which government requires:
and, 2. Such ways and means of raising sufficient money to defray them, as will
be most easy, and least hurtful and oppressive, to the subject.

The first is not my present principal object: I shall therefore only observe
upon it, that the wants of government, like the wants of nature, are few and
easily supplied; it is luxury which incurs the most expense, and drinks up the
largest fountains of supply, and what is most to be lamented, the same luxury
which drinks up the greatest supplies, does at the same time corrupt the body,
enervate its strength, and waste those powers which are designed for use,
ornament, or delight. The ways and means of supply are the object of my
principal attention at present. I will premise a few propositions which appear
to me to deserve great consideration here.

I. When a sum of money is wanted, one way of raising it may be much easier
than another. This is equally true in States as in individuals. A man must
always depend for supply on those articles which he can best spare, or which he
can furnish with least inconvenience: he should first sell such articles as he
has purposely provided for market: if these are not enough, then such articles
of his estate as he can best spare, always sacrificing luxuries first, and
necessaries last of all.

II. Any interest or thing whatever, on which the burden of tax is laid, is
diminished either in quantity or neat value, e. g. if money is taxed, part of
the sum goes to pay the tax; if lands, part of the produce or price goes to pay
it; if goods, part of the price which the goods will sell for, goes to pay it,
etc.

III. The consumption of any thing, on which the burden of tax is laid, will
always be thereby lessened, because such tax will raise the price of the
article taxed, and fewer people will be able or willing to pay such advance of
price, than would purchase, if the price was not raised: and consequently,

IV. The burden of tax ought to lie heaviest on such articles, the use and
consumption of which are least necessary to the community; and lightest on
those articles, the use and consumption of which are most necessary to the
community. I think this so plain, that it cannot need any thing said on it
either by way of illustration or proof.

V. The staples of any country are both the source and measure of its wealth,
and therefore ought to be encouraged and increased as far as possible. No
country can enjoy or consume more than they can raise, make, or purchase. No
country can purchase more than they can pay for; and no country can make
payment beyond the amount of the surplus which remains of their staples, after
their consumption is subtracted. If they go beyond this, they must run in debt,
i. e. eat the calf in the cow's belly, or consume this year the proceeds of the
next, which is a direct step to ruin, and must (if continued) end in
destruction.

VI. The great staples of the Thirteen United States, are our HUSBANDRY,
FISHERIES, AND MANUFACTURES. Trade comes in as the handmaid of them all -- the
servant that tends upon them -- the nurse that takes away their redundancies,
and supplies their wants. These we may consider as the great sources of our
wealth; and our trade, as the great conduit through which it flows. All these we
ought in ^ound policy to guard, encourage, and increase as far as possible, and
to load them with burdens and embarrassments as little as possible.

VII. When any country finds that any articles are growing into use, and their
consumption increasing so far as to become hurtful to the prosperity of the
people, or to corrupt their morals or economy, it is the interest and good
policy of such country to check and diminish the use and consumption of such
articles, down to such degree as shall consist with the greatest happiness and
purity of their people.

VIII. This is done the most effectually and unexceptionably, by taxing such
articles, and thereby raising the price of them so high, as shall be necessary
to reduce their consumption, as far as is needful for the general good. The
force of this observation has been ^elt by all nations; and sumptuary laws have
been tried in all shapes, to prevent or reduce such hurtful consumptions; but
none ever did or can do it so effectually as raising the price of them: this
touches the feelings of every purchaser, and connects the use of such articles
with the pain of the purchaser, who cannot afford them, so closely and
constantly, as cannot fail to operate by way of diminution or disuse of such
consumption; and as to such rich or prodigal people, as can or will go to the
price of such articles, they are the very persons who, I think, are the most
able and suitable to pay taxes to the State.

I think it would not be difficult to enumerate a great number of such articles
of luxury, pride, or mere ornament, which are growing into such excessive use
among us, as to become dangerous to the wealth, economy, morals, and health of
our people, viz. distilled spirits of all sorts, especially whisky and country
rum, all imported wines, silks of all sorts, cambrics, lawns, laces, etc. etc.
superfine cloths and velvets, jewels of all kinds, etc. to which might be added
a very large catalogue of articles, though not so capitally dangerous as these,
yet such as would admit a check in their consumption, without any damage to the
States, such as sugar, tea, coffee, (...), fine linens, all cloths and stuffs
generally used by ^he richer kind of people, etc. all which may be judiciously
taxed at ten, twenty, fifty, or one hundred per cent. on their first
importation; and to these might be added, a small duty of perhaps five per
cent. on all other imported goods whatever.

Two things are here to be considered and proved. 1. That this mode of taxation
would be more beneficial to the community than any other: and, 2. that this
mode is practicable. If these two things are fairly and clearly proved, I think
there can be no room left for doubt, whether this kind of taxation ought to be
immediately adopted, and put in practice.

I will offer my reasons in favor of these propositions as fully, clearly, and
truly as I can, and hope they may be judged worthy of a candid attention. I
will endeavor in the first place, to point out the benefits arising from this
mode of taxation.

I. This mode of taxation may safely be raised to such a degree, as to produce
all the money we need for the public service, or sufficiently near it; perhaps
a small tax in the ordinary way would be more beneficial to the States than
none, because this tax keeps the customary avenues from the wealth of
individuals to the public treasury always open, which may be used on
emergencies, and the habit and practice being settled, would avoid the
difficulties naturally arising from novelty or innovations.

But to return to my argument. It is greatly in favor of this kind of tax, that
it will bring money enough for the public service; it is matter of great
animation in the pursuit of any object, to know that, when accomplished, it
will be adequate to its purposes. People all want to see the end of things, and
to know when they are to have done: this will naturally produce much stronger
efforts, vigor, and cheerfulness, than if the thing, when accomplished, would
be but half adequate to its purposes.

II. This mode of taxation applies for money where it is to be had in greatest
plenty, and can be paid with most ease and least pain. If we apply to the
farmer, tradesman, or laborer for cash, they have mighty little of it, and it
is hard for them to raise the necessary sum; but it is matter of common course
with the merchant, through whose hands the great current of circulating cash
passes; he will consider the tax as part of the first cost of his goods, and
set his price and sell accordingly: it matters little to him, whether he pays
half the cost of his goods abroad, and the other half at home, or whether he
pays it all abroad; his object is to get the whole out of his sales, with as
much profit to himself as he can.

III. This mode lays the burden of tax on that kind of consumption which is
excessive and hurtful, and lessens that consumption, and of course mends the
economy, and increases the industry and health, of the people. For it is plain,
that no more money will be paid for the goods taxed, than would have been paid
for the same kind of goods, had they not been taxed: the difference is, the
same money paid for the taxed goods will not buy so many of them as before the
tax, because the tax will raise the price of them.

And when the consumption or use of such goods is excessive and hurtful, this
lessening of it is a benefit, though the same money is paid for them as before,
for the same reason that it is better for a man that happens to be at a tavern
with excessive drinkers, to pay his whole share of the reckoning, but drink
less than his share of the liquors, and go home sober, than to pay the same
reckoning, drink his full share of the liquors, and go home drunk. It is always
better for a man to buy poison and not use it, than to buy the same poison and
use it; in the one case he loses nothing but his money, in the other case he
loses his money and health too. For the same reason it is better for a reaper
to drink half a pint of rum in a day, than to reap for the same wages, and
drink a quart of rum. This reasoning will hold in its proper degree, with
respect to every kind of consumption which is excessive and hurtful.

IV. This mode of taxation saves the whole sum of the tax to the States, while
at the same time it mends the habits and health of the people: for it is plain,
that if the consumption of such imported goods is lessened by the tax, a less
quantity will be imported, and of course a less sum of money need be sent
abroad to pay the first cost of these goods; and this excess of money, which is
thus saved from going abroad (from whence it would never return) is paid by the
tax into the public treasury, from whence it issues on the public service, and
is directly thrown into circulation again through the States, and of course
becomes a clear saving, or balance of increase of the circulating medium, and
consequently of realized wealth in the country; whilst at the same time, the
people are better served and accommodated by the reduced consumption, than they
could have been by the excessive one.

V. It appears from what has been just now observed, that this mode of taxation
naturally increases the circulating cash of the States, and every one knows
what a spring, what vigor this gives to every kind of business in the country,
whether of husbandry, mechanic arts, or trade. There is no comparison between
the advantages of carrying on any sort of business in a country where cash
circulates freely, and in a country where cash is scarce. In the one case,
every kind of business will flourish, and industry has every sort of
encouragement and motive for exertion; in the other all business must be sadly
embarrassed, and of course make but a feeble and ^low progress.

We can scarce form a conception, what a different face these two circumstances
will give a country in a short time; in the one case, buildings rise, husbandry
improves, arts and manufactures flourish, the country is alive, and every part
of it abounding with industry, profits, and delight; the other can produce
little more than languishment, decay, dullness, and fruitless anxiety,
disappointment, and wretchedness.

VI. The tax I propose, will operate in a way of general equality, justice, and
due proportion. A tax on general consumptions cannot fail to bring the burden
in due proportion on individuals, because every one will pay in proportion to
his consumption; and the presumption is, that the man who spends most, is best
able to spend.

If this proposition admits of exceptions, they are generally in favor of the
economist, the careful, penurious man, and against the prodigal who dissipates
his estate, and will operate as a check upon him, if he is not past all
considerations of interest. If this is the case with him, the sooner his estate
is run through the better it is, both for himself and the public, for when this
happens, he must either die or work for his living, and of course do some good
in the world, or at least cease doing hurt; he will then no longer be able to
set an example of idleness, extravagance, and dissoluteness, and draw other gay
spirits into his pernicious practices; and if his constitution shall happen to
out-last his estate, he may by temperance enjoy some good degree of health, and
his adversities may perhaps bring on serious reflections, sincere repentance,
and amendment of life, and if his fortune is desperate in this world, he may at
least find strong inducements to prepare for the next; so that he is in no
sense injured by the tax, but may by prudence derive great benefits from it.

Besides, I am of opinion that government ought to leave every man master of
his own estate, and permit him to judge for himself how fast and in what way he
will spend it; he knows well what tax he pays on every expenditure, and every
part of it is subject to his own free choice, and if his career of dissipation
cannot be restrained, it is as well for him, and much better for the public,
that he should give part of his wealth to the public treasury, than waste the
whole of it in his luxury and pleasures; so that I do not see that he has in
this case the least ground of complaint of injury or oppression.

Besides, I think there is a kind of justice in framing the public instiiutions
in such a manner, that a man cannot spend a dollar in luxury and dissipation,
which is hurtful to the public, but he must at the same time pay another dollar
into the public treasury, to make thereby some compensation for the injury
which the public receives from his luxury.

And as to the niggard, the penurious man, who does not spend his money in
proportion to his wealth, and of course does not pay his share of tax; it is
observable that even his very penury inures to the benefit of the community,
for what he does not spend, he saves, and thereby enriches himself, and of
course adds to the wealth of the community, for the wealth of the community is
always the aggregate of the wealth of every individual who composes it; this
ought therefore to be a favored case, as the community eventually gains more by
a shilling saved, than it could by a shilling consumed and lost, though the
consumer should pay sixpence into the public treasury.

In fine, the tax on this principle is carved out of the expenditures of the
nation, not indeed all expenditures indiscriminately, but is so calculated as
to fall heaviest on those expenditures which are the most general indices of
wealth, and are usually made by the rich who are the best able to bear them;
and the few exceptions which may be supposed to take place, will generally
operate in favor of virtue and economy, and against vice and dissipation; and
where it falls heaviest, and becomes most burdensome, it is designed, and does
actually tend, to correct that very vicious taste and corrupt habit, which is
the true cause of the burden, and which it is always in the power of the
sufferer to ease himself of, whenever he pleases.

Point out any other mode of taxing, if you can, that finds its way so surely
to the wealth of individuals, and apportions itself thereto so equitably, that
no subject can be burdened beyond his due proportion, without having a full
remedy always in his own power; yea, a sure, easy, and excellent remedy,
because a man may always avail himself of it, without the expense and trouble
of a lawsuit, or being subjected to any body's decisions, opinions, or
caprices, but his own.

VII. This mode of taxing will make the quantity and time of the tax depend on
the free choice of the man who pays it. If a man has a mind to drink a bowl of
punch or bottle of wine with his friend, or buy a silk gown for his daughter,
he knows very well how much tax is incorporated with the purchase, and adopts
and pays it with cheerfulness and good-humor; a humor very different from the
irritated sensibility of a man, who sees an awful collector enter upon him with
his warrant of plenary powers to distrain his goods, or arrest his person, for
a tax which perhaps he abhors, either from religious scruples, or an opinion
that he is rated beyond his due proportion, or because he is not at that time
in condition to pay it.

The good-humor of the subject is of great consequence in any government. When
people have their own way and choice in a matter, they will bear great burdens
with little complaint; but when matters are forced on them contrary to their
humor, they will make great complaints on small occasions, and the public peace
is often destroyed, much more by the manner of doing, than by the thing done.

VIII. This mode of taxing will give our treasury some compensation for the
moneys which our people pay toward the tax of other countries which they
travel through, or reside in, when abroad. An American cannot travel through any
country of Europe, and drink a bowl of punch or eat a dinner, but he
contributes to the tax of the country; and if our taxes, like theirs, were laid
on such luxurious consumptions as travelers usually indulge themselves in,
their people who travel through our country, or reside in it, would contribute
toward our taxes, in like manner as our people who travel or reside in their
countries, contribute to theirs.

And as we expect that the intercourse between us and all the countries of
Europe will be very great, it is highly reasonable that our treasury should
receive the same benefit from their travelers among us, that their treasuries
receive from our people who travel or reside among them, and a little attention
to the subject will be sufficient to convince any man that this article is more
than a trifle.

IX. This mode of taxing, which brings the burden of the tax principally on
articles of luxury, or at most on articles of not the first necessity, gives
easement and relief to our husbandry and manufactures, which are in danger of
ruin from the present weight of taxes which lies on them. If we tax land, we
lessen its value, and of course diminish the whole farming interest. If we tax
polls, we in effect tax labor, which discourages it, and of consequence we cast
a damp and deadening languor on the very first springs, the original principle
and source of our national wealth, and wound the great staples of the country
in their embryo.

Now I think that any mode of taxing, which gives remedy and relief against so
great, so fatal an evil, would deserve consideration, even though it had not
these advantages in its favor, which I have before enumerated. I have heard a
stupid and cruel argument urged, that taxing labor has this advantage, that it
promotes industry, because it increases necessity. This argument proves in a
very cogent manner, that it is best to make every body poor, because it will
make them work the harder.

But I should think it would be more humane and liberal in a government to
manage the public administration so, that industry might have all possible
encouragement, that it might be rather animated by an increase of happiness and
hope of reward, than goaded on by dire necessity and the dreadful spurs of
pinching want.

I freely give it as my clear and decided opinion, that it is the interest,
duty, and best policy of every government, to give all possible ^ase,
exoneration, and encouragement to that industry, those occupations, and kinds
of business, which most enrich, strengthen, and happi^y a nation, and to lay
the burdens of government as far as possible on those fashions, habits, and
practices, which tend to weaken, impoverish, and corrupt the people; and
therefore that any mode of taxing which tends to encourage the first of these,
and discourage the last, is worthy of the most serious attention.

But perhaps the advantage of this kind of taxation will appear in a more
striking light, by considering its practical and general effects on a nation
which adopts it; in which view of the matter I think it will be very manifest,

I. That any man of business, whether he be merchant, farmer, or tradesman, may
live easier and better, i. e. be happier through the year, and richer at the end
of it, in a country where this tax is paid, than he could live in the same
country, if the tax was not paid; for as the tax is laid on useless
consumptions, it would of course diminish those consumptions, and of course
save the first cost of the part diminished, and all the additional expense
which the use of that part would require.

If a man lives in a country abounding in luxury, he must go in some degree
into it, or appear singular and mean, and that part which he would be in a
manner compelled to adopt, would probably cost him more than his tax.

But it is here to be considered, that the first cost of an article of luxury
is not near all the cost of it. One article often makes another necessary, and
that a third, and so on almost ad infinitum; if you buy a silk cloak, there
must also be trimmings, and that will not do without a hat or bonnet, and these
require a suitable accommodation in every other part of the dress, in order to
keep up any sort of decency and uniformity of appearance; and there also must
be spent a great deal of time to put these fine things on, and to wear them, to
show them, to receive and pay visits in them, etc.

And when this kind of luxury prevails in a country beyond the degree which its
wealth can bear, the consequence is pride, poverty, debt, duns, lawsuits, etc.
etc. The farmer finds the proceeds of the year vanished into trifles; the
merchant and tradesman may sell their goods indeed, but cannot get payment for
them. Every family finds its expense greatly increased, and the time of the
family much consumed in attending to that very expense. Many families soon
become embarrassed, and put to very mortifying shifts to keep up that
appearance, which such a corrupt taste almost compels them to support.

But were these families, with the same income, to live in a country of more
economy and less luxury, they would easily pay the taxes on the luxuries they
did use, keep on a good footing with their neighbors, appear with as much
distinction, live happy and unembarrassed through the year, and have money in
their pockets at the end of it. In such a country, payments would be punctual,
and industry steady, and of course all business both of merchandise, husbandry,
and mechanic arts, might be carried on with ^ase and success.

These are no high colorings, but an appeal to plain facts, and to the sense of
every prudent man on these facts; and I here with confidence ask every wise
man, if he would not choose to live in a country where articles of hurtful
luxury and needless consumption were, by taxes or any other cause, raised so
high in their price, as to prevent the excessive use of them, rather than in a
country where such articles were of easy acquirement, and the use of them so
excessive among the inhabitants, as to consume their wealth, destroy their
industry, and corrupt the morals and health of the people.

II. I think it is very plain, that articles of hurtful, or at best of
needless, consumption are making such rapid progress among us, and growing into
such excessive use, as to throw the economy, industry, simplicity, and even
health of our people into danger; and of consequence, raising the price of such
articles so high as will be necessary to produce a proper check to the
excessive use of them, will require a tax so great, as, when added to a small
and very moderate impost on articles of general and necessary consumption, will
bring money enough into the public treasury, for all the purposes of the public
service. We will suppose then that all this is done, and when this is done, we
will stop a moment, and look round us, and view the advantages resulting from
this measure, over and above the capital one of checking and restraining that
excessive luxury that threatens, if not an absolute destruction, yet at least a
tarnishment of every principle out of which our prosperity, wealth, and
happiness must necessarily and for ever flow. I say, we will stop a minute and
view the advantageous effects of this measure.

The first grand effect which presents itself to my view is, that our army will
be paid; and that our brethren, our fellow-citizens, who, by their valor, their
patience, their perseverance in the field, have secured to us our vast,
extensive country, and all its blessings, will be enabled to return to their
friends and connexions, not only crowned with the laurels of the field, but
rewarded by the justice and gratitude of their country, and be thereby enabled
to support their dignity of character, or at least be put on a footing with
their fellow-citizens (whom they have saved) in the procurement of the means of
living.

The next advantage of this measure which occurs to me is, the easement and
exoneration of the laborers of the community, the husbandman and tradesman, out
of whose labor all our wealth and supplies are derived; by them we are fed, by
them we are clothed, by the various modifications of their labor our staples
are produced, our commerce receives its principle, and our utmost abundance is
supplied; we are therefore bound by every principle of justice, gratitude, and
good policy, to give them encouragement and uninterrupted security in their
peaceful occupations, and not, by an unnatural and ill-fated arrangement of our
finances, compel them to leave their labors, which are the grand object of
their attention and our supplies, to go and hunt up money to satisfy a
collector of taxes.

But justice and gratitude operate only on minds which these virtues can reach.
There may be some few among us, of no little weight, who are content, if they
can obtain the services, to let the servant shift for himself, and who, when
they are sure of the benefit, remember no longer the benefactor, and, as in
this great argument of universal concern, I wish to find the way to every man's
sense, and address myself not only to those who have virtue, but even to those
who have none, I will therefore mention another advantage of this measure,
which I think will (virtue or no virtue) reach the feelings of every man who
retains the least sense of interest, viz.

That in this way all our public creditors would be paid and satisfied, either
by a total discharge of their principal, or an undoubted, well-funded security
of it, with a sure and punctual payment of their interest, which would be the
best of the two; because a total discharge of the principal at once, if
sufficient money could be obtained, would make such a sudden, so vast an
addition to our circulating cash, as would depreciate it, and reduce the value
of the debt paid, much below its worth at the time of contract, and introduce a
fluctuation of our markets, and other fatal evils of a depreciated currency,
which have been known by experience and severely felt, enough to make them
dreaded.

It would therefore be much better for the creditor to receive a certain,
well-funded security of his debt than full payment: for in that case, if he
needed the cash for his debt, he might sell his security at little or no
discount, which is the constant practice of the public creditors in England,
where every kind of public security has its rate of exchange settled every day,
and may be negotiated in a very short time. Supposing this should be the case,
stop and see what an amazing effect this would have on every kind of business
in the country.

The public bankruptcies have been so amazingly great, that vast numbers of our
people have been reduced by them to the condition of men who have sold their
effects to broken merchants, who cannot pay them, their business is lessened,
or perhaps reduced to nothing for want of their stock so detained from them.
Supposing then that their stock was restored to them all, they would instantly
all push into business, and the proceeds of their business would flow through the
country in every direction of industry, and every species of supply.

In fine, the whole country would be alive, and as it is obvious to every one,
that it is much better living in a country of brisk business than in one of
stagnated business, every individual would reap benefits from this general
animation of industry, beyond account more than enough to compensate the tax
which he has paid to produce it.

All these advantages hitherto enumerated will put the labor and industry of
our people of all occupations on such a footing of profit and security, as
would soon give a new face to the country, and open such extensive prospects of
plenty, peace, and establishment, throw into action so many sources of wealth,
give such stability to public credit, and make the burdens of government so
easy and almost imperceptible to the people, as would make our country not only
a most advantageous place to live in, but even make it abound with the richest
enjoyments and heartfelt delights.

These are objects of great magnitude and desirableness; they animate and
dilate the heart of every American. What can do the heart more good than to see
our country a scene of justice, plenty, and happiness? Are these rich blessings
within our reach? Can we believe they are so absolutely within our power, that
they require no more than very practicable efforts to bring us into the full
possession of them? These blessings are doubtless attainable, if we will go to
the price of them; and that you may judge whether they are worth the purchase,
whether they are too dear or not, I will give you the price-current of them
all, the price which, if honestly paid, will certainly purchase them.

In order to have them, then, we must pay about a dollar and a half a gallon
for rum, brandy, and other distilled spirits; a dollar a gallon above the
ordinary price for wines; a dollar for bo^ea tea, and about that sum above the
ordinary price for hyson tea; a double price on silks of all sorts, ^aces of
all sorts, thin linens and cottons of all sorts, such as muslins, lawns, and
cambrics, and on jewelry of all sorts, etc. about a dollar and a third a yard
above the ordinary price for superfine cloths of all sorts, etc. etc. a third
of a dollar a bushel for salt (for I do not mean to lay quite all the tax on
the rich, and wholly excuse the poor) about a dollar a hundred for sugar, one
tenth of a dollar a pound on coffee, and the same on cocoa, above the ordinary
prices, etc. etc. with an addition of five per cent. on all articles of
importation not enumerated, except cotton, dying woods, and other raw materials
for our own manufactures; for whilst importations are discouraged, our own
manufactures will naturally be increased, and ought to be encouraged, or at
least to be disburdened.

On this state of the matter I beg leave to observe, that the war itself for
seven years past has laid a tax on us nearly equal to the highest of these, and
on some articles of necessary consumption, from two hundred to a thousand per
cent. higher, such as salt, pepper, allspice, alum, powder, lead, etc. etc.
and yet I never heard any body complain of being ruined by the war, because rum
was twenty shillings per gallon, tea twelve shillings per pound, or mantuas
three dollars a yard, or pepper ten shillings a pound, or superfine cloths
eight dollars a yard, etc. Nor does it appear to me, that the country has paid
a shilling more for rum, silks, superfine cloths, etc. for the last seven
years, than was paid for the same articles the seven preceding years, i. e. the
whole tax was paid by lessening the consumption of these articles.

Nor do I think that the health, habits, or happiness of the country have
suffered in the least on the whole, from its being obliged to use less of these
articles than was before usual; but be this as it may, it is very certain that
the country has suffered but little from the increased price of these articles
which I propose to tax, except at some particular times when those prices were
raised much higher than the point to which I propose to raise them, i. e. at
particular times rum has been as high as three dollars a gallon; tea, three
dollars a pound; sugars, three shillings and sixpence, and coffee, three
shillings and sixpence a pound; mantuas four dollars a yard, etc.

But it is observable, that the principal increased prices which have really
hurt and distressed the country during the war, have been of other articles
which I propose to tax very lightly, or not at all; such as salt, which has at
times been six dollars a bushel, and perhaps three or four dollars on an
average, coarse cloths and coarse linens, o^^abrigs, cutlery, and crockery
wares, etc. which have often rose to five or six prices, and stood for years
together at three or four, and yet the burden of these excessive prices of even
necessary articles of unavoidable consumption, has not been so great, if you
except the article of salt, as to be so much as mentioned very often among the
ruinous effects and distresses of the war.

The use I mean to make of these observations is, to prove from plain,
acknowledged fact, that the increased price of the articles which I wish to
tax, up to the utmost point to which I propose to raise them, will be but a
light inconvenience (if any at all) on the people, and the diminished
consumption of those articles, and the increase of circulating cash (both which
will naturally and unavoidably result from the tax) will be benefits which will
at least compensate for the burden of the tax, and I think it is very plain,
will leave a balance of advantage in favor of the tax.

But if you should think I conclude too strongly, and you should not be able to
go quite my lengths in this argument, so much, I think, does at least appear
incontestably plain, that if there is a real disadvantage arising from my mode
of taxing, it is so small, that it holds no comparison with the burden of tax
hitherto in use on polls and estates, which discourages industry, oppresses the
laborer, lessens the value of our lands, ruins our husbandry and manufactures,
and with all these dreary evils, cannot possibly be collected to half the
amount which the public service requires.

But to save further argument on this head, I will with great assurance appeal
to the sense, the feelings of our farmers, who make the great bulk of our
inhabitants, if they would not prefer living in a country where they must pay
the aforementioned increased prices on the goods I propose to tax, rather than
where they must part with the same number of cows, oxen, sheep, bushels of
wheat, or pounds of pork or beef, etc. which are now, in the present mode of
taxing, annually demanded of them to satisfy the tax.

I dare make the same appeal to all our tradesmen, and even to our merchants,
who, in my opinion, would have clear and decided advantages from my mode of
taxing, as well as the farmers. I do not see how the merchant or any body else
can be hurt by the tax; but will all be clearly benefited by it, if the
following particulars are observed:

I. That the tax be laid with such judgment and prudence, and different weight
on different articles, that the consumption of no article shall be diminished
by it, beyond what the good and true interest of the nation requires; for it is
certainly better for the merchant to deal with his customers in such articles
as are useful to them, and in such way that they shall derive, real benefit
from their trade with him, than to supply them with articles that are useless
or hurtful to them, and which of course impoverish them.

In the first case, he will make his customers rich and able to continue
trading with him, and to make him good and punctual payments: in the other
case, he makes his customers poor, and of course subjects himself to the danger
of dilatory payments, or perhaps of a final loss of his debts.

II. That the tax be universal and alike on every part of the country, for if
one State is taxed, and its neighbor is not, the State taxed will lose its
trade. This proves in the most intuitive manner, that every tax of impost on
imported goods must be laid by the general government, and not by any
particular State, whose laws cannot be extended beyond its own jurisdiction.
And,

III. That the tax be universally collected. Smuggling hurts the fair trader;
favor and connivance of collectors to particular importers, through bribery,
friendship, or indolence, has the same effect; the person who avoids the tax
can undersell him who pays it; therefore it is the great interest of the
merchant, when the duty is laid, to make it a decided point, that every
importer shall pay the duty.

And I am of opinion, that when the body of merchants make it a decided matter
to carry any point of this nature, they are very able to accomplish it; they
certainly know better than all the custom-house officers and tide-waiters on
earth, how to prevent or detect smuggling, and to discover and punish the
indulgence or connivance of collectors, who may be induced to favor particular
importers, and they have the highest interest in doing this, of any set of
people in the nation; and therefore I think it good policy to trust this matter
to their prudence, with proper powers to execute it in the most effectual way.

From a pretty extensive acquaintance, I am convinced there is a professional
honor in merchants which may be safely trusted; and I apprehend it is a policy
both needless and cruel, to subject the persons and fortunes of merchants, the
great negotiators of the nation's wealth, and a body of men at least as
respectable as any among us, to the insults of custom-house officers and
tide-waiters, the rabble of whom, in Europe (I hope ours may be better) are
generally allowed to be as corrupt, unprincipled, intolerable, and low-lived a
set of villains as can be scraped out of the dregs of any nation; and to set
such fellows to watch and guard the integrity and honesty of a most respectable
order of men, and subject honorable and useful citizens to such mortifying
inspection, appears to me to be such an insult on common sense, -- such an
outrage on every natural principle of humanity and decency, -- such a gross
corruption of every degree of polished manners, that I should imagine it must
require ages to give it that degree of practice and establishment which has
long taken place in Great Britain.

The quickest way to to make men knaves, is to treat them as such. It is a
common observation, when a woman's character is gone, her chastity soon
follows. Few men think themselves much obliged to exhibit instances of
integrity to men, who will return them neither credit nor confidence for their
uprightness. Let every man have the credit of his own virtues, and be presumed
to be virtuous till the (...) appears. Honesty is as essential and delicate a
part of a merchant's character, as piety is of a clergyman's, or chastity, of a
woman's, and you wound them all alike sensibly, when you show, by your conduct
toward them, that you even suspect that they are wanting in these
characteristic virtues.

I conceive nothing more is necessary to make the collection of this tax easy,
than to convince the merchants, and indeed the whole community, that the tax is
necessary for the public service, -- for the essential purposes of government;
and that every one who pays it, receives a full compensation in the benefits he
derives from the union; and that the management of the affair be committed to
the merchants, to which, from the nature of their profession and business, they
are more adequate and qualified, than any other men; and as it falls directly
within the sphere of their business, it seems to be an honor, a mark of
confidence, to which they are entitled.

Indeed, let the community at large be convinced that the money proceeding from
this tax, is necessary for the public service, and that it can be assessed with
less burden on the people in this way, than in the mode hitherto practiced, and
the collection will be easy and natural.

The tax will cease to be considered, like the taxes formerly imposed on us by
the British Parliament, unconstitutional in their assessment, and useless in
their expenditure, for they plagued us with taxes only to satisfy their harpies
(little or none of the money ever reached the British treasury) but this tax is
imposed by our own people, -- by our own representatives, and for our own
benefit.

It must be imposed by Congress indeed, as the authority of any particular
Assembly cannot be adequate to it; for it must operate alike in all the States,
be alike universal in its effects, and uniform in its mode of assessment and
collection; and must therefore proceed from the general authority which
presides over the whole Union, i. e. from the Congress; but it is a Congress of
our own appointment: for the members of Congress are as much our
representatives, and chosen by our people, as the members of the several
State-Assemblies; and the end and use of the tax is our own public service, to
secure the benefits of our union, without which it is impossible we should
obtain respectability abroad, an uniform administration of civil police at
home, an established public credit, or full protection against domestic or
foreign insult.

I never knew any measure of government opposed in its execution by the people,
when a general conviction took place that the measure was properly planned, and
was necessary to the public good. We have had full proof through the war, what
great burdens our people will, very cheerfully and even without complaint,
bear, when they are convinced that the exigencies of the State, and the public
safety, made them necessary.

This exhibits the tax in an advantageous light, rather eligible than shocking,
connects the ideas of burden and benefit together, and naturally brings the
evils removed by the tax, and the advantages resulting from it, into one view,
and may strike the minds of the people so strongly, as to make the burden of it
appear light, when compared with its benefits.

This brings me to the consideration of the practicability of my mode of
taxation which I proposed, and which I do conceive is a matter of capital
weight in this discussion, for which I do rely on these two grand propositions:

1. That whatever is the real, great interest of the people, they may, by
proper measures, be made to believe and adopt: and,

2. That whatever is admitted to be a matter of common and important interest,
in the general opinion of the people, may be easily put in practice by wisdom,
prudence, and due management of the affair.

I do contend, that when this tax is fairly proposed to the public, with a
proper elucidation of the evils it avoids, and the advantages which result from
it, it will not be looked on as a burden of oppression, an imposition of power,
but as the purchase of our most precious blessings, as a measure absolutely
necessary to our most essential and important ^^terests.

Therefore any attempt to avoid this tax, by smuggling or any other way, will
be deemed by general consent an act of ^^eannes^; an avoidance of a due share
of the public burden; frustrating the necessary plans of public safety, and
rendering ineffectual the public measures adopted by general consent, for the
public security, tranquillity, and happiness.

Such an action implies in it great meanness of character in the agent, and a
high crime against the State, and the detection of it will be considered as a
very material service to the Commonwealth. Where any actions are deemed crimes,
scandals, and nuisances by the general voice of the people, detections and
informations against them are reputable; they cease to be infamous -- the
infamy of an informer does not take place in such instances.

The reasons of governmental measures ought always to attend their publication,
so far as to afford good means of conviction to the people at large, that their
object and tendency is the public good. This greatly facilitates their
execution and success. It is hard governing people against their interests,
their persuasions, and even against their prejudices. It is better to court
their understandings first with reason, candor, and sincerity, and we may be
almost sure all their passions will follow soon.

I abhor a mysterious government. I think an administration, like a private
man, which affects to have a great many secrets that must not be explained, has
generally a great many faults which will not bear telling, or a great deal of
corruption which will not bear examining. Government, like private persons, may
indeed have secrets, which ought to be kept so; but in that case, caution
should be used against any intimations or hints getting abroad, even that there
are such secrets, or any secrets: for this would produce an anxious inquiry and
solicitous inspection, which might make the keeping the secret more difficult,
and besides bring on many other inconveniences arising from numberless
apprehensions, which such a circumstance would give birth to.

An ostentatious giving out that there are mighty secrets in the cabinet, or
many mysteries in the State, that must not be pried too closely into, is the
very contrary of all this, and generally is a sign of a weak administration,
and not seldom of a corrupt one; but of all public measures which require
explanations to the people, that of taxes, which touches their money (which is
always a very sensible part) may stand as chief; and to make these go down any
thing well, it is always necessary to spread an universal conviction,

1. That the money required in taxes is necessary for the public good: and,

2. That it will certainly be actually expended only on the objects for which
it is asked and given.

And if these two things are really true, there will rarely be much difficulty
in making them to be believed through the most sensible part of the Commonwealth;
but if these two things either a^^ not really true or not really and generally
believed, I do not know that a standing army would be sufficient to collect the
taxes.

I am of opinion their force, authority, and influence, like the conquests of
the British army, would last no longer in any place than they staid to support
it. Whenever they shall go away, I imagine they will find that they have left
behind them infinitely more abhorrence than obedience among the people.

Though I am clearly of opinion that there must exist an ultimate force or power
of compulsion in every effective and good government, yet it is plain to me,
that such force is never to be put in action against the general conviction or
opinion of the people; nor indeed do I believe it ever can be so exercised with
success and final effect, for every attempt of this kind tends to convulsions
and death.

Such an ultimate force indeed ought to fall upon and correct those who sin
against the peace, interest, and security of the public. But this can be done
with safety and advantage only in cases where the crime punished is against the
opinions, the sentiments, and moral or political principles, which generally
prevail in the people; for if the most violent declaimer and mover of sedition
in a government, should happen to be received by the people as a patriot, and
his harangues should be eagerly adopted as the doctrines of their liberties and
rights, any attempt to punish him would be vain or useless.

For either the people would interpose and rescue him, or, if he was pu^^^hed,
they would consider him as the martyr of their cause, and thereby the public
uneasiness, tumult, and uproar would be augmented: but when single persons or
parties counteract the laws, and disturb that peace and order of government
which is established by general consent, and in which there is a general
persuasion that the security of every individual is concerned, there will be no
difficulty in making such examples of punishment, as shall be sufficient to
curb those turbulent and factious spirits, more or less of which may be found
in every community, and which would become intolerable, if not kept under a
rigorous restraint.

In all cases of this ^ort, the righteous severities of government will be
approved, supported, and even applauded by the general voice.

Yea, if we were to suppose that the general opinion was wrong in any
particular matter of importance, yet it is plain, that vicious opinion could
not be controlled by force; it must continue till the ill effects of it shall
produce a general conviction of its error, or till the people can be convinced
by reason and argument of the danger of such opinion, before the ill
consequences of it are actually felt; in both which cases the people will turn
about fast enough of their own accord, and the error will be corrected most
effectually, and with ease, and without any danger of disturbing the public
tranquillity.

Opinions indeed of a dangerous, hurtful nature may spread among the people,
and, when they become general, are to be considered as great public calamities,
which admit of no remedy but that which they carry with them, and which will
prove effectual in the end, viz. their own evil tendency, and therefore must be
let alone, like inundations, which, however calamitous, whatever waste and
destruction they make, cannot be controlled; any attempt to stop their force,
increases their violence and mischief; they do least hurt when they are
unmolested, and are suffered to drain themselves off in their own natural
channels.

In short, there is no forcing every body, and therefore I reject with
abhorrence every idea of governing a country by a standing army, or any other
engines of force. I consider every plan of this kind as a departure from the
true principles of government, as destructive in its consequences, as absurd
and ineffectual to its own ends; for such a government, whenever it has been
tried, instead of promoting the peace, security, and happiness of the State,
has generally been found to have operated by way of tyranny and oppression.

It appears from all this, that the true art of government lies in good and
full information of the facts to which its ordinances are to be accommodated,
and in wisdom in adopting such institutions, laws, and plans of operation, as
shall best suit the state and true interests of the people; and acting openly,
fairly, and heartily with them. You may as well attempt, by finesses, to cheat
people into holiness and heaven, as into their real political interests.

There are people scattered over the whole nation, who understand the great
interests of the community and the wisdom of public measures, and are as firmly
attached to them as those who sit in the seat of government, and who are always
dissatisfied, and their confidence in the public counsels is lessened, when
they observe public measures are adopted, which they do not see the use of, and
the ends for which they are calculated; and of course little mystery and few
secrets are necessary in government. Let the administration be such as will
bear examining, and the more it is examined, the better it will appear.

In such a mode of administration as this, if burdens that are really heavy are
necessary for the public safety, they will be cheerfully taken up, and
patiently borne, by the people without endangering the public tranquillity.

Another objection against my mode of taxing (which, in my opinion, is the
greatest by far that can be fairly urged) remains yet to be considered. I once
almost concluded not to mention it here, because its hurtful operation is
distant, we are in no present danger of its effects, and its evils may be
prevented or remedied in future time by necessary measures, without requiring
our present attention. But I will subjoin it, because I think it best to
communicate every quality, effect, and tendency of this subject, which my
utmost investigation of it has been able to discover, that the public may take
it up or reject it on the fullest reason that I can lay before them. The
objection is,

That this tax is insensible, and will produce more money than the people are
apprized of, and in future time, when our trade and consumptions shall
increase, may produce more than the public service will require, and of course
will tend to public dissipation and corruption. For frugality in a court ever
springs from necessity, and a rich treasury naturally makes a prodigal
administration, and too often a corrupt one.

It may be answered, that it will always be easy to lessen or take the tax off,
whenever it shall become too productive. This may be easy, but will always be
dangerous. The imposing it at the close of the war will prevent the fall of the
goods taxed, and keep them up partly to the war pri^e, and of course save the
merchants who have goods by them, from very great loss, and is a good reason
for imposing it now; but when it shall be taken off, it will reduce the price
of the goods taxed, in so sudden a manner, as will be very hurtful to those who
have stock on hand, and may ruin very many families.

There is another, and perhaps better, way of guarding against the evils of the
objection. It will be easy to transmit to each State an account of the annual
proceeds of the tax, and when the amount shall exceed the annual expenditures,
an account of the surplus, together with an estimate of the proportion of each
State (according to the established quota of burdens and benefits) may be
returned with it, and the said proportion of the surplus may be made subject to
the orders of each State respectively; and if they judge that they can more
safely trust their own economy, than that of the supreme administration, each
State may draw its quota out of the general treasury into its own, and there
keep it as a deposited fund of public wealth, or dispose of it as they please.
Perhaps a fund to defray the internal expenses of each State might be as easily
raised in this way as any other; but I leave a further discussion of the
objection and its remedies to the wisdom of future times.

But if this my mode of taxing, or any other that may be adopted, should not be
sufficient for the public service, I could wish the deficiency might somehow be
made up at home, without recurring to the ruinous mode of supplies by public
loans abroad. I think that every light in which this subject can be viewed,
will afford an argument against it. I have known this cogent argument used in
favor of foreign loans, viz. we give but five per cent. interest abroad, and
our people can make ten per cent. advantage of the money at home, therefore
they gain five per cent. by the loan.

This stupid argument, if it proves any thing, just proves that it is every
man's interest to borrow money, for it is certainly profitable to buy any thing
for five pounds which will bring ten; but the natural fact is the very reverse
of this, for if you bring money into a kingdom or family, which is not the
proceeds of industry, it will naturally lessen the industry and increase the
expenses of it. It has been often observed, that when a person gains any sudden
acquisition of wealth by treasure-trove, captures at sea, drawing a high prize
in a lottery, or any other way not connected with industry, he is rarely known
to keep it long, but soon dissipates it. The sensible value of money is lost,
when the idea of it becomes disconnected with the labor and pain of earning it,
and expenses will naturally increase where there is plenty of wealth to support
them. The effect is the same on a nation.

Is Spain a whit richer for all the mines of South-America? The industry of
Holland has proved a much surer source of durable wealth. We already find a
dangerous excess of luxury growing out of our borrowed money, and our industry
(especially in procuring supplies of our own) wants great animation.

Besides, the aforesaid argument is not grounded on fact; it is true, I
suppose, that we pay but five per cent. interest on our foreign loans, but they
cost us from fifteen to twenty per cent. more to get them home, for that is at
least the discount which has been made on the sale of our bills for several
years past, and if we bring it over in cash, there is freight and insurance to
be paid, which increases the loss.

From this it appears, that for every eighty pounds of supply which we obtain
in this way, we must pay at least an hundred pounds, even if we were to pay the
principal at the end of the year, and the consuming worm of five per cent.
interest every year after, if the payment is delayed: to all this loss is to be
added, all the expense of negotiating the loans abroad, brokerage on sale of
the bills, etc. etc.

To escape the ruinous effects of this mode of supply, I think every exertion
should be made to obtain our supplies at home; it is certainly very plain our
country i^ not exhausted, it is full of every kind of supply which we need, and
nothing further can be necessary, than to find those avenues from the sources
of wealth in the hands of individuals, which lead into the public treasury,
those ways and proportions that are most just, most equal, and most easy to the
people. This is the first great art of finance; that of economy in expenditures
is the next.

Any body may receive money and pay it out; borrow money and draw bills; but to
raise and manage the internal revenue, so as to make the wealth of the country
balance the public expenditures, is not so easy a task, but yet I think not so
hard as to be impracticable; unless this can be done, the greatest conceivable
abilities must labor in vain, for it is naturally impossible that any estate,
which cannot pay its expenditures, should continue long without embarrassment
and diminution; the load of debt must continually increase, and the interest
will make a continual addition to that debt, and render the estate more and
more unable every year to clear itself; but if the estate can pay its
expenditures, it is the height of madness not to do it.

If revenues can be spared sufficient to discharge the interest of the debt, so
as to stop its increase, the estate may be saved, and a future increase of
revenue may in time wipe off the principal; but no hope is left, if interest
upon interest must continue to accumulate.

And as the interest of every individual is inseparably connected with the
public credit or state of the finances, it follows that this affair becomes a
matter of the utmost concern and very important moment to every person in the
community, and therefore ought to be attended to as a matter of the highest
national concern; and no burden ought to be accounted too heavy, which is
sufficient to remedy so great a mischief.

It may be objected to all this, that the duties I propose are so extremely
high, that, 1. they will hurt our trade: and, 2. can have no chance of
obtaining a general consent.

To the first I answer -- as far as this tax tends to lessen the importation of
hurtful luxuries and useless consumptions, it is the very object I have in
view; and it is so very light on all other articles, that the burden will be
almost insensible.

But as to the second objection -- it is in vain to trifle with a matter of
such weight and importance, or weary our people with small plans and remedies,
utterly inadequate to the purpose. In weighty matters, weak, half-assured
attempts will appear to every one to be labor lost, and a ridiculous
disproportion of the mean^ to the end: it is better in itself, as well as more
likely to succeed with the people, to take strong hold, and, with a bold, firm
assurance, propose something, which, when done, will be an adequate and
effectual remedy.

Our national debt, including the supplies for the present year, I am told, by
the Financier's estimate delivered to Congress, amounts to about 35,000,000 of
dollars, the annual interest of which will be somewhat above 2,000,000 of
dollars, which, I think, may be raised by the tax I propose (though it is
impossible to tell with much precision, what the proceeds of a tax will be,
which has not been tried:) it is very plain that the proceeds will be large,
and so calculated as to be almost wholly a clear saving, not to say a benefit,
to the country; and if there should be deficiencies, a small additional tax may
be laid in the usual way to supply them.

Our annual expenditures, on the peace establishment, may, I think, be reduced
to a quarter or third of a million of dollars, and perhaps, if our national
debt was liquidated as it ought to be, a great saving might be made both of
principal and interest; but the detail of these matters is in every one's
power, who has leisure and proper documents to make the calculations.

Without descending to minutiae, I only mean to examine the great principles of
resource and mode of supply which are within our power, and give my reasons as
clear as I can for adopting a practical trial. Such a practice would doubtless
discover many things which no foresight can reach, and experience only can
elucidate; it is an untrodden path which I recommend, and though it cannot be
perfectly known, yet it seems to me to have such an appearance of advantage as
deserves a trial.

The expense and difficulty of collection will be no greater on the high tax I
propose, than it would be on a trifling one, which would produce less than a
tenth part of the supply which this would furnish.

Therefore, if it should be judged prudent to make the trial, I think it most
advisable to take it up on such a large scale, as will make it sufficiently
productive to become an object worthy of strong effort and persevering
diligence, in order to give it a full effect.

In fine, we have not children or dunces to deal with, but a people who have as
quick a ^ight of their interest, and as much courage, readiness, and
cheerfulness to support it as any people on earth. We can have, therefore,
nothing more to do, than to make such propositions to them as are really for
their interest, to convince their minds that the thing proposed is necessary
and beneficial; and this is to be done, not by refinement of argument, but by
devising and explaining such measures as will, from their nature and operation,
produce beneficial effects.

We must, with candor and fairness, in a manner open and undisguised, tell them
what we want money for, and how much, and by a wise and upright management of
their interests deserve and gain their confidence, that their money, when
obtained, shall, to the last shilling, be paid for such necessary purposes; the
tax will then cease to be odious. It will become an object of acknowledged
interest, and every person who smuggles or otherwise avoids the tax, will be
considered as shrinking from a burden which the public good makes necessary.

Every attempt of this sort will become disreputable and infamous, and when you
can connect the tax and character together, there will be little difficulty in
collecting it.

This will effectually obviate the great objection, viz. that it will be
impracticable to collect a heavy tax on goods of great value, but little bulk,
such as silks, laces, and the like, because they may be easily smuggled, etc.
Whenever they are to be sold, they must be exposed to view, and let the burden
of proof ever lie on the possessor, that the tax has been bona fide paid.

I should think it advisable to commit the management of this matter to the
merchants; they are most hurt by smuggling, and of course have the highest
interest in preventing it. It will be ten times more difficult to cheat and
impose on them, than any others, because the matter falls wholly within their
own sphere of business. Two of a trade cannot cheat one another as easy as
either of them might cheat a stranger. If the merchants would take the matter
up, and make it a kind of professional honor to prevent smuggling, and see that
the duty is effectually paid, there is little doubt but they could effect it.

All this reasoning depends on this one principle, viz. that our public
measures must carry in them wisdom, natural fitness, justice, and propriety:
then they will gain character, reputation, and confidence among the people at
large, and mutual interest will soon make the government easy and effective;
every individual will soon find his interest connected with that of the public,
and he will have every inducement both of honor and profit to stand well with
the government, and effectually support it.

And in this way, even the great doctrine of taxation itself, that common and
almost universal source of complaint, may become an object of acknowledged
necessity, of confessed right, and the payment made like that of any other
debt, with conviction of right and full satisfaction.

I will conclude this Essay with one argument more in favor of my principle of
taxation, which appears to me of such mighty weight and vast importance, as
must reach the feelings, and govern the heart, of every upright American, viz.
that our public union, with all its blessings, depends on it, and is supported
by it, and must, without it, dissolve and waste away into its original atoms.

To refuse any plan its necessary support, and to murder and destroy it, is the
same thing; the union cannot be supported without so much money as is necessary
to that support, and that money may be raised in the way I propose, and cannot
in any other. We have a most plain and undeniable proof of fact, that the usual
mode of taxation of polls and estates, is in its principle unjust and unequal,
because it does not operate on our people in any due proportion to their
wealth: this mischief was less felt, when our taxes were very small, and
therefore, though unjust, were not ruinous; but the case is greatly altered, now
the taxes are grown up into the burden which the present exigencies of the
nation require.

The said tax hitherto in use is further ruinous, because it carves what money
it does produce, out of the very first resources, the original principle of our
national wealth, which, like tender ^ion^, should be nursed and guarded with
all care, till they arrive to strength and maturity; -- then we may pluck the
fruit without hurting the tree: -- to cramp and diminish any of these, is like
making bread of our seed wheat, or feeding our mowing grounds, every quantity
we take lessens the next crop ten; but what gives decision to the point is,
that we have the clear proof of experience, that the utmost efforts in this way
have not been sufficient to produce one quarter of the sum necessary for the
public service; nor is there any probability of an increased production.

The mode of supply by foreign loans need not be further reprobated; it is
plain to every body, that if they can be continued (which is doubtful) they
will soon involve us in a foreign debt, vastly beyond all possibility of
payment: our bankruptcy must ensue; and with our bankruptcy will go all our
national character of wisdom, integrity, energy of government, and every kind
of respectability. We shall become objects of obloquy, butts of insult, and
by-words of disgrace abroad; an American in Europe will be ashamed to tell
where he came from. Every stranger takes some share in the character, in the
honors or disgrace, not only of the family, but nation to which he belongs.

The scheme of issuing any more Continental money, I take for granted, nobody
will think of; and therefore I conclude, that all the ways and means which have
hitherto been tried, have proved utterly insufficie^^ ^or the purpose: and I
further conceive, that it will (...), that the mode I propose, if put into
practice, (...) sufficient. I further contend, that no other mod^ (...) reach
is or can be equally easy to the people, (...) productive of sufficient money
for the various (...) our union; this is then the only practicable way (...)
can be supported, and of course the union depends o^ (...) and, without it,
must inevitably fall to pieces.

To say all this, may be thought very great presumption in an individual; be it
so; still I am safe, for no man can contradict me, who is not able to find and
explain some other way of supply, equally easy to the people, and equally
productive of all the money which the support of the union requires: but in as
much as the eagerness of inquiry for several years past has not been able to
discover any such other mode, I conclude there is no such, and of course, the
one I have proposed is the only one that can be adopted, to save our union from
dissolution.

And under the impression of this full persuasion, may I be permitted to
address our public administration, not only in Congress, but in all the States,
in the strong language of Lord Chatham -- Set me down as an idiot, if you do
not adopt it, or rue your neglect; and it is no^ certain that our posterity in
the next age, and all our neighbors in the present, will not set you down for
idiots, if you do not adopt it soon, before the mischiefs it is designed to
obviate, shall grow up to such degree of magnitude and strength, as to become
incapable of remedy; for what can they think, when they shall see that you
suffer our union, which is committed to your care, to fall to pieces under your
hands, because you will not attempt to give it that support, which, to say the
least of it, is in its nature practicable, and the due practice of which would
produce the great remedy required.

But you will say perhaps, we admit your principle to be just and good, but we
cannot raise our ideas up to your height of scale or degree of impost; your tax
is too high; it grasps too much, and is thereby in danger of losing all; it
will scare our people out of their wits. I do not think much of this; if the
wits which the people now have, are not sufficient for their salvation, it
matters little how soon they are scared out of them; but it is not certain that
their wits are so volatile; there is at least a possibility, a chance, that
they may have wit enough to adopt the remedy that will prevent those
calamities, which (if not prevented) will soon drive them out of their security
-- their property -- their national honor -- their country and wits too; at
least I think it needless for you to lose your wits, for fear the people will
lose theirs.

But I would ask you seriously, do you think that a less scale of tax than that
which I propose, would be sufficiently productive for the public service, or
the support of the Union? I think you must probably say no, on the bare
presumption (for the produce of an untried tax cannot be reduced to a
certainty:) to what purpose then, I further ask, would it be to set on foot so
expensive and troublesome an operation, which, when completed, would be utterly
inadequate to its purposes? or what funds have you, out of which you expect to
draw the deficiency?

If there is any wisdom or effort in our counsels and plans, they must reach
through; they must connect the means with the end, and make the one adequate to
the other. Would you not laugh at a sailor, who should moor a ship with an inch
rope, and so lose the ship, for fear his owners should find fault with him for
wetting a cable? Where means are inadequate to their end, they become
ridiculous, especially when adopted in matters of consequence; people lose all
confidence in their effects, and therefore lose all courage and inducement to
use strong efforts to make them operate.

I am clearly of opinion, if our people have lost their confidence in our
public counsels, and are backward in pushing them into practice, the reason is,
not because they stupid and blind to their interests, or wanting in zeal to
promote them, but because their courage is all worn out, and their patience
exhausted, by a seven years' course of visionary, ineffectual, ill-contrived,
and half-digested plans, which promised little in theory, but constantly in
practice, proved the baseless fabrics of a vision, and vanished at last, not
only without use, but with consequences very detrimental to our national
character of integrity and wisdom, as well as to the interests and morals of
our people; not the least discouraging of all which was this constant effect
which they all had, viz. that those States or individuals, which promoted them
with most ^^al, ardor, and effort, always lost most by them.

I am of opinion it is quite time to quit this childish miniature of counsels,
and adopt something up to the full life, and propose some system to our people,
that will, when executed, be effective and sufficient for it^ purpose. I
imagine such a proposal would find our people full enough of sense to discuss
it, candor to approve of it, and zeal to promote it.

But if you will continue to believe that my high scale of tax will stupify our
people with terror on first ^ight of the dreadful, dreary object, I will
seriously ask you if you are acquainted with one individual, who, you think,
would be likely to hand himself, or run distracted, or give up the American
Union or Independence, on being told, that he must, for the rest of his life,
pay a dollar a gallon tax on distilled spirits and win^; a duty equal to the
first cost on silks, cambrics, lawns, muslins, laces, jewelry, and so on
through all the grades of the tax I propose.

Or how does the dreadful spectre affect your own constitution? Does it make
your own blood run cold and stiffen in your veins? As you are mostly men of
fashion and fortune, I conceive you will be as deeply interested i^ the tax as
the most of your constituents, and you may pretty well judge of their feelings
by your own. I do not apprehend that your anxiety is excited at all for
yourselves, but for your people; but cannot you suppose that your constituents
have sense to discern the necessity and utility of a public measure, judgment
and patriotism to approve it, and firmness to bear the burden of it, as well as
you?

Some objects, when seen through a mist, or at a distance, appear frightful and
clothed with terrors, which all vanish on a nearer view, and more close
inspection. Some disagreeable things, when they come home to our feelings, are
found to have less pain than dis^ant expectation painted out.

Let us suppose and realize to ourselves then, that my scale of tax was adopted
and become habitual to the people; can you imagine that the country would be
thereby rendered a whit the worse, or more inconvenient to live in, than if the
tax was not paid? or if you cannot come quite up to this, do you conceive the
inconvenience of the tax paid in this way, by any comparison so heavy and
burdensome, as the present tax on polls and estates, or any other of equal
product, that has ever been practiced or proposed, would be to the people at
large.

I do not know how far our people at large are impressed with a sense of the
importance of our union; it is, in my opinion, an object of the utmost weight;
I conceive that the very existence of our respectability abroad, the interest
which we are to derive from our connexions with foreign nations, and our
security against foreign and domestic insults and invasions, all depend on it,
and even our independence itself cannot be supported without it; and as I know
well that the attachment of our people to their independence is almost
universal, I should suppose that our union, which is so closely and inseparably
connected with it, would likewise be an equal object of their attachment and
concern.

If this is the case, I cannot be persuaded that our people will revolt against
any reasonable and necessary means of supporting both the one and the other,
and as the tax I propose appears to me the only possible and practicable means,
any how within our power, which can be adequate to this great purpose, I cannot
say that I shudder to propose such a tax; but I think we may safely presume on
the good sense of our people, their patience, and discernment of their
interests, enough to expect their concurrence in the measure, and even
cheerfulness and zeal in supporting it.

But if this cannot be obtained, I can add no more; I have no conception that
the Americans either can or ought to be governed against their consent, or that
the collection of taxes, of any kind, or in any mode, can be made with success,
whilst an opinion becomes general among the people, that the taxes are
unnecessary, unjust, or improperly applied.

I think it would not be very difficult to make out the detail of particulars
necessary to form the plan or system, both of the tax and its collection, on
the principles herein urged; but the whole is humbly submitted to the
consideration of the public, who, I hope, are enough impressed with the
importance of the subject, and the necessity of adopting some decisions
relating to it, without delay, to induce every one to give it that attention
that its nature and weight requires, and which our present critical
circumstances make indispensable to our political salvation. It may be of use
to the reader, to advert to some particulars of the state and condition of the
country and its revenues, at the time when this Essay was first published.

1. The Continental money had been entirely out of circulation near two years,
and all kinds of estimates, payments, and accounts were made in hard money.

2. That the Bank of North America was instituted by Congress, and pretty well
established at Philadelphia: the charter of it bears date Dec. 31, 1781.

3. Very strong exertions had been made to obtain money from the States, by a
tax levied on polls and estates in the old and usual way, and such conviction
of the necessity of public supplies generally took place through the States, that
considerable sums were obtained in this way, and remitted in bank bills to the
Financier General, mr. Morris.

But these taxes were levied by the States neither in any due proportion of
quotas, nor with any equality of either quantity or punctuality in the
payments, and as no power of compulsion was vested in Congress at that time,
the supplies ^ell vastly short of the public exigencies; large loans indeed
were negotiated abroad, and many wild and vain schemes for raising money were
proposed at home; but all was languor and deficiency.

4. A strong and laborious effort was made by Congress for an impos^ of only
five per cent. on imported goods, which, with great difficulty and delay, was
at last ratified by all the States except Rhode Island, which, by its final
negative, frustrated the plan, rendered it wholly void, and it died without any
effect.

5. A very considerable foreign debt was contracted, and every department at
home was deeply involved, and no payments could be made either at home or
abroad; it was with the utmost difficulty that money could be procured for
daily supplies, which were absolutely indispensable.

6. Very great (...) were due to the army, and had there not been more (...)
(...) the army, and greater (...) (...) their General and other officers, than
scarce ever existed before, it would have been impossible to have kept them
together, or to have governed them with any proper discipline.

7. We were just upon the close of the war; the peace was expected soon; the
preliminary articles of it were indeed settled and signed, Jan. 20, 1783, but
the advice of them had not reached America at that time: but,

8. Peace, though the most desirable of all things at that time, yet was clothed
with terrors, and the near approach of it excited the most anxious
apprehensions.

The murmurs of the army for their pay ran high; there was no money to pay
them, yet they were to be disbanded; and whether they would suffer themselves
to be dismissed, and sent to their several homes, without their pay, was a
question of great importance.

These difficulties were afterward obviated by the prudence of General
Washington, but in a way that harrowed up all his feelings; he ordered small
divisions of the army to be marched off to diverse distant places, and then
directed them to be dismissed, without any pay indeed, but with a profusion of
promises and assurances that speedy provision should be made for the settlement
and payment of their accounts.

Commissioners were indeed appointed to settle all unliquidated public
accounts, both of the army and other creditors, but no payments were made but
in certificates of the debts due, with promise to pay them with interest to the
creditor or bearer.

These were worth about 2s. 6d. in the pound, and the circulation of them soon
became very great at that exchange: but to return to the time of writing this
Essay --

9. Though the public treasury was so very poor and distressed, yet the States
were really overrun with an abundance of cash: the French and English armies,
our foreign loans, Havanna trade, etc. had filled the country with money, and
bills on Europe were currently sold at 20 to 40 per cent. below par.

10. This induced the merchants to buy these bills, and remit them to Europe,
(...) in return to import great quantities of European goods, which arrived
under the great expense of a war freight and insurance; yet their scarcity, the
great plenty of cash, and the luxury and pride of the people were such, that
they ^old rapidly and to great profit; all which made the tax of impost I
proposed, very peculiarly necessary at that time for many reasons; not only,

1. To supply the treasury; but,

2. To restrain and check the luxurious consumptions which were growing fast
into fashion.

3. To keep up the price of goods, and thereby save the merchants from ruin, or
at least, from very great loss, by the reduction of the price of their goods on
hand, which would be the natural consequence of the peace.

4. To prevent a (...) of imported goods flowing in upon us, which soon drained
the country of its cash, and ^illed the States with luxury; but the tax would
have either prevented the evil, or would have brought (...) immense sum into
the public treasury, which would have ^ased our public embarrassments.

Perhaps both might have been produced by the tax to such a degree, as (...)
have afforded very great and desirable advantages; but the measure was not
adopted, though I believe every one regrets at this day that it was not then
pursued.

The principles of it have since been adopted by the now Congress, and though on
a much l^ss s^ale than I proposed, yet we find the tax richly productive, and
very little burdensome to our people.




I do not set myself up to propose systems of political union and plans of
revenue because I think myself the fittest and most capable man to do it; but
because I am convinced that every system of this ^ort must be the work of one
mind, carefully and deeply comprehending the whole subject, and fitting all the
parts to each other, so that every part may form a coincidence with the rest.
It is scarcely possible for twenty or thirty men of the best abilities
collected in a room together, to do this; either of them might do it alone, but
all of them together cannot.

The twenty together may examine the system of plan, when made and proposed,
and note its faults, but even then they cannot mend them, without danger of
destroying its uniformity; they m^^t do as you do with your clothes which do
not fit, send for the tailor who made them, point out the faults, and direct
him to take them home, and make the alterations.

Any man of a clear head may comprehend his own thoughts, but cannot so well
enter into those of another. You might as well set twenty watchmakers to make a
watch, and assign to each his wheel; though each wheel should be exquisitely
finished, it would be next to a miracle if the teeth and diameters fitted each
other, so as to move with proper uniformity together; if this great work is
done, (...) ^^^body must do it, somebody must begin. A moderate genius may hit
on, and propose, a thought, which a richer mind may improve to the greatest
advantage. If I can attain this honor I shall have my reward, and please myself
with the hope, that I may be in some degree useful to the country I love, which
gave me birth, and in which I expect to leave my posterity.

A SEVENTH ESSAY ON FREE TRADE and FINANCE; In which the Expediency of Funding
the Public Securities, Striking further Sums of Paper Money, and other
important Matters, are considered. The funding act of Pennsylvania was printed
for public consideration some months before it was enacted into a law ( March
16, 1785) during which time this Essay was published: the said act directed,
among other things*

1. That one year's interest should be paid (...) this State on all Continental
certificates, which originally issued to any citizen or citizens of this State*
etc. with a proviso, that that species of certificates, commonly called final
settlements, which should be entitled to interest, should not have been
alienated or transferred, but shall remain the property of the original holder,
his heirs, etc. (which proviso, in ^^y opinion, ought to have extended to all
the other kinds of certificates, as well as to the final settlements:) by this
proviso, every possessor of a final settlement, except he was the original
holder of it, was excluded from receiving interest.

But I take it, that the true spirit, design, and reason of this proviso was,
in a considerable degree, eluded in the subsequent practice; for the statute,
among other proofs that the man who claimed interest, was really the original
holder, prescribed this one, viz. that such claimant should make oath before a
prothonatory, that he was truly the original holder of the certificate, and had
not alienated it; and this certificate of the prothonatory of such oath being
made, being annexed to the certificate on which interest was demanded, by
construction of the statute, entitled the possessor of it to draw interest,
though he was not the original holder; by which means very many certificates were
^old with such affidavits annexed, and the possessor, though an alien^^, drew the
interest on them as well as if he had been the original holder.

2. A tax was instituted for raising an annual sum of 76,945 l. 17 s. 6 d. and,

3. An emission of 150,000 l. in paper money, 50,000 l. of which was reserved
for a loan-office, and the other 100,000 l. together with the aforesaid (...) 6
d. were appropriated to the payment of said year's interest, and (...) The year
(...) interest at 6 per cent. paid under this act, amounted to 267,694 dollars,
the capital of which, of course was 4,461,570 dollars, nearly.

This high tax proved a heavy burden upon such of our people as happened to
have no certificates on which they could receive interest and little benefit
even to the most of those who had them; for the certificates were monopolized
into few hands, and not many of our people drew more interest than would pay
their taxes.

And as these heavy sums were mostly paid to such holders of certificates, as
had never rendered any services to the State, or contributed any supplies, or
had any kind of merit or earnings, on which they could, with any pretense,
found their claim to so great a contribution from the public, much uneasiness
was generated, and our people found that their labor was vain, in as much as
the profits of it were drained from them, for purposes of no use or advantage
to them.

For it is to be noted here, that although interest was granted by this act for
but one year, yet it was expected to be continued, and really was so, for
several years afterward, by a subsequent act ( March 1, 1786) though under a
somewhat different form, yet with the same burden as before.

The paper bills emitted by this act never passed as a general currency, but
were negotiated in market, like other commodities, at the exchange which they
happened to gain, but always in a depreciated state, i. e. at a discount from
10 to 30 per cent.

In fine, this unhappy measure has cost this State already more than 500,000 l.
and still we are not clear of it.

And, I believe, no man can count up 500 d. benefit which the State ever
received from it.

I clearly foresaw the mischiefs of this fatal measure, and to obviate and
prevent them was the design of this Essay, and though I did not succeed, Yet I
have real satisfaction in reflecting that I exerted my utmost abilities, and
faithfully performed my duty in the attempt, though it proved not successful, to
avert the calamities of the State of which I am a citizen.



[First published in Philadelphia, Jan. 10, 1785.]
PUBLIC securities are notes or promises of payment, made in writing, to the
public creditors, who had demands on the public for moneys lent, supplies
furnished, services rendered, etc. etc. Of these there are a great variety, and
distinguished by diverse appellations, such as loan-office certificates,
depreciation certificates, final settlements, etc. etc.

As the public was in no condition to pay these securities when they became
due, they suffered a great depreciation: the owners sold them for what they
could get, and they have long been an article of traffic in the hands of the
brokers and speculators; and the price-current, or estimated value of them, as
they pass from hand to hand, is become as much fixed and as well known in the
brokers' offices, as that of any other goods or merchandises.

And this price-current, made in market by the general consent of buyers and
sellers, determines the value of all articles of traffic, whether goods, bills
of exchange, public securities, stocks of every kind, or even money itself: and
this rule of estimation is so fixed and natural, that no external force or
height of authority can alter it, as has been clearly proved by experiment (the
strongest proof in nature) in the instances of tender-laws and regulation of
prices, which have often been attempted in vain, though pushed as far as law,
authority, violence, and force could go.

Therefore it follows, that the public securities, when they become articles of
exchange or traffic, are really worth what they will bring in market, and no
more; i. e. let their nominal value be what it will, their real value is so
much as, and no more than, they will bring in market: this is plain, natural
law, which it is in vain for the greatest force or highest authority to oppose;
it will prove too strong for the most mighty opposition; it is therefore most
wise to submit to it, and obey its sovereign dictates, without reluctance.

The price-current of public securities has been different at different times,
and the different kinds of them are estimated at different prices; very many
have been purchased at 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, or 8 for 1; others at 6 s. or 7
s. in the pound, or about 3 for 1. A few instances may be produced of sales at
higher and lower prices; but in general, I believe, the above prices may be
estimated as the extremes: very great numbers of final settlements have been
bought at 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, or 8 for 1.

It is very certain, and undoubtedly confessed on all sides that our soldiers,
when their services were over, and their accounts were fairly adjusted, were
entitled to the liquidated balances in their favor, in genuine money^ this was
in justice due to them for their services, and if they were paid, no more than
justice was done them; but if, instead of this, they were paid nominally twenty
shillings in a certificate, note of public promise, or any other article of
negotiation or traffic, which was worth, by general consent of buyer and
seller, in the public exchange, no more than 2s. 6d. and would bring no more,
it is plain they were paid but 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, and the remaining 17s.
6d. is still due to them.

We will suppose, that instead of a certificate of 20 s. which would bring but
2 s. 6 d. they had been paid in brass, at 20s. per lb. which was worth in
market, and would bring no more than, 2s. 6d. per lb. it is plain their
condition would have been exactly the same, i. e. the soldier that received the
pound of brass, which he could sell for 2 s. 6 d. and no more, would be just as
well off, and as well paid, as the soldier who received the certificate of 20s.
which he could sell for 2 s. 6 d. and no more; it is a very plain case that
neither of them are paid more than 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, and that the
remaining 17 s. 6 d. remains unpaid, and consequently due to them.

And if any justice of honor to the public faith is designed or attempted, if
must be effected by paying to them what still remains due to them. But can the
human mind conceive, that any sort of justice or honor to the public faith
would be done, not by pitying the poor soldiers, and paying the balance due to
them, but instead of this, by raising a large sum of money, by taxing the
community, to buy in all the brass, and giving 20 s. per lb. for it to the
speculators who had bought it of the soldiers for 2 s. 6 d. per lb. (even
whilst the current market price was but 2 s. 6 d.) and giving interest till the
cash was paid? which would be giving those speculators eight times as much
money as the capital they advanced, and 48 per cent. per ann. interest for it,
till the cash was paid.

The brokers' interest of 4 per cent. per month, is a fool to this; for this
not only recovers 4 per cent. per month interest, but secures the payment of
eight-fold the capital, when the interest ceases. Besides, the brokers run some
risk of opprobrium and loss of their debt; but this plan gives honor and
security to the whole transaction, by giving it the sacred sanction of the
supreme power of the State.

It makes no difference to the argument, whether the article to traffic paid to
the soldiers, and purchased in again by the State, be brass or certificates;
because both, by the supposition, are of equal price in the market, and make a
payment of equal value to the soldiers.

The whole argument holds good and in equal force, with regard to all original
holders of public securities, as to the soldiers, all of whom are supposed to
have furnished to the public, cash, goods, or services, to the amount of the
certificates they received.

The argument also has the same force, with respect to speculators, who have
purchased public securities at a higher exchange than 8 for 1: with respect to
these, the conclusion is the same in nature, but differs only in degree.

This plan of paying the vast sums of public moneys to speculators, which were
originally due to the soldiers and other original holders of the public
securities, and the payment being withheld from them to whom it ought to have
been made, still remains due: I say, the plan of paying these moneys to the
speculators, who at present hold the securities, i. e. paying to these
speculators eight times the capital they advanced for the purchase of them,
with 48 per cent. per ann. interest, till actual payment is made to them, and
taxing the State to raise these moneys, and of course taxing the poor soldiers
(who, in their penury and distress, sold their certificates at 2 s. 6 d.) in
the pound, for the money necessary to pay them at 20s. in the pound, with
interest, to the speculators who purchased them: I say, this plan is adopted by
some folks with great seriousness and gravity; and their ideas are supported
with very specious arguments, the detail of which I wave considering just now,
that I may mention one proposition, which I think necessary to introduce here,
viz.

No ingenuity of argument can ever support an absurd conclusion; the absurdity
of the conclusion for ever destroys the argument, however specious and
ingenious the premises may be found: this is called by logicians reductio ad
absurdum, has been taught in the schools a thousand years, and has always been
allowed to be good reasoning.

All the arguments that can be adduced, can never convince any body that this
plan is right; there is not a boy in a compting-house, or maid in a kitchen,
who would not exclaim against the injustice of it, the moment they heard and
understood it; the common sense which resides in every human breast, revolts
against it; for this I appeal to the sentiments and feelings of every body who
has any.

Do not you think, my fellow-citizens, that a speculator in public securities
must be pretty well brazed, yea, bra^^ed over, who can express his joy without
blushing, in the face of the world, and tell us that he is enlivened with hopes
of obtaining a public act, entitling him to eight times the capital of his
speculations, with 48 per cent. per ann. interest, till he receives the
principal in good, solid, hard cash; all which he knows to be the earnings of
the poor, distressed soldier, who, with his family, languishes for want of the
payment, which is withheld from him by means of the failure of the public faith?

This plan, however cruel, shocking, and execrable it may appear, is defended
by some folks by this argument, viz. the public securities, like bonds, bills
of exchange, promissory notes, etc. are assignable or transferable over, by
which the assignee becomes possessed of all the right and interest, which the
original holder had therein; that the whole property passes by the assignment,
and the sum paid by the assignee to the original holder, whether little or
much, is of no consideration in the case.

I suppose this holds true generally with respect to bonds, bills of exchange,
promissory notes, etc. but I do not think it holds true universally: the rule
has its exceptions, and I think the case in point is manifestly one of the
strongest instances of them. The Continental money is a most notorious one; the
public faith was plighted for the redemption of that money, as sacredly as
force of words, height of authority, and appeals to Heaven could do it. Yet
every man acknowledges, that if that money, though all made payable to the
bearer, was to be redeemed at a hard dollar for every Continental one, the most
absurd injustice would be done.

The old State money of this State affords another instance of the same kind.
The loan-office certificates afford a third instance, the value of which is
estimated by Congress, by a public scale of depreciation, grounded on the real
value of the certificates, at the several dates at which they were issued.
Nobody pretends to object to this measure^ or the principle on which it was
founded.

Another instance may be adduced from a clear, decided rule of the law of the
land, viz. if an executor buys up the bonds of his testator at a discount, i.
e. by paying less than the nominal value for them, when he comes to make up the
accounts of his executorship, he shall not be allowed the nominal value of
those bonds, but so much only as he actually paid for them.

To all this I will venture to add here a proposed case, with my opinion on it,
viz. suppose a merchant stops payment, who has thousands of bonds, notes, etc.
against him, and upon the best survey of his affairs, it becomes the general
opinion that he will pay 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, and his bonds and ^otes are
generally passed from hand to to hand, at that exchange. Every broker and
banker has them, and passes them for years together at that rate; but, after a
series of time, the debtor becomes able and willing to pay his whole debt, and
is cited into a most sovereign court of chancery, where mere right and justice
is the rule of the court; where it is confessed that the 2 s. 6 d. is either
paid or now due to the assignee of the note for 20 s. and the sole question
before the court is, who shall have the other 17s. 6d. whether the original
creditor, to whom the debt was due, for full consideration paid, or to the
assignee who had never paid any thing for it?

We will suppose the court is under no bias, but honestly mean to make such a
decree as will be most just, do the most honor to their court, and be best
approved in Heaven. I make no difficulty in giving my opinion, that the court
will award in favor of the original creditor, who has paid the full
consideration of the debt, in preference to the assignee, who has never paid
any thing for it.

Find fault with and disprove this opinion, whoever of you can; I expose it
with confidence, to the censure of you all. Where two persons are in equal
possession of an estate, it shall be given to him that has right. Original
right is such a sacred thing, that it can and will go great lengths in favor of
its proprietor, is ever reverenced by the law, and ever claims the principal
attention of the court.

I take it, that the facts out of which the reasons grow, that govern
assignments of bonds, bills of exchange, and negotiable notes, are so toto
c^elo different from those in the case now under discussion, that it is
impossible to argue from the one to the other without the most manifest
absurdity.

One instance of this difference, of full notoriety, and striking enough, is
this, viz. that in the case of transfer of bills of exchange, negotiable notes,
etc. a valuable consideration is always presumed to be given; but in the case
in point no such thing, but the very contrary, appears in full blaze of
evidence; 2 s. 6 d. in the pound has not the least pretension of being a
valuable consideration for eight times the principal advanced, and 48 per cent.
interest for the same, till the whole shall be paid, together with 48 per cent.
for several years' interest due on the certificate, before the purchaser ever
saw it, or even paid his 2s. 6d. for it.

This fact stands glaring in the face of the world, and strikes conviction of
its own injustice and absurdity into every beholder; it gives concern to the
most avaricious speculator, and brings a blush even into the anvil countenances
of the sanguine promoters of the blessed scheme of making provision for the
enormous payment.

They endeavor to palliate it, or shuffle it out of sight, by suggesting that
the instances of this sort are but few and inconsiderable, and so blended with
the right and justice due to the distressed widows, orphans, soldiers, and
other worthy citizens, who are public creditors, that they cannot be separated,
and are therefore not worthy to be noticed; but here again the fact is
notoriously against them. I should think a man had need of a front as hard as
an andiron, to affirm, in the face of the public, that these instances are but
few and inconsiderable.

It is a matter of public notoriety and general belief, that almost the whole
of the widows, orphans, soldiers, and other distressed public creditors, have
sold their certificates, which are now in the hands of the speculators, who are
known to be very numerous, and many of whom have a vast amount of them.

But let these instances be few or many, it is a vain pretense to say they are
so blended with the other public creditors, that they cannot be separated. A
method of justice and due discrimination is easily investigated; the public
creditors are easily found; their names are all on the public books, with the
balances which were due to them when their accounts were settled.

I propose then, that they shall be debited with the certificates they
received, at the price, exchange, or value at which they passed or could be
sold, when they received them, and have the residue of their balance paid to
them honestly, with interest.

It will take no more money to pay them than to pay the speculators; and as to
the certificates, except such as are in the hands of the original holders, let
them be paid to whoever brings them in, at a scale of value founded on their
original value when they were issued, or the mean exchange at which they have
passed for two or three years back.

This will repay to the speculators all the cash they have advanced, which, I
think, is all the justice or tenderness to which they are entitled from the
public; for, to say the best of them, I esteem them a sort of men barely
tolerable, but by no means worthy of encouragement.

Some people say they have merit, and support the public faith, by giving
something for certificates, when others would not buy them at all; but I think
we are not much beholden to them, for vilifying and decrying the public faith,
till they have persuaded the poor soldiers to sell their certificates for 2 s.
6 d. in the pound, rather than trust the public any longer.

As my proposal leaves no ground of complaint on the part of the speculators,
so I think it will do manifest justice to the widows, orphans, soldiers, and
other distressed public creditors, who, in my opinion, most justly deserve all
the groans of compassion which are so liberally bestowed on them by our
honorable Assembly, and the committee of public creditors.

I should be sorry to see the zeal of these patriots for the public faith
abate, and the^ concern for the distressed creditors cool away, if the
speculators should happen to lose their point, and, of course, should lower
their cry for justice and compassion, when they find they are not like to
finger the money. -- Hinc istae lacrymae.

What now remains for me is, to show that the case above proposed is (mutatis
mutandis) in fact the case in point. The public is the merchant who stopped
payment (no body will dispute this) the thousands of bonds and notes against
him, are the public securities or certificates of all kinds; the general
consent which determined that he would pay 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, is the
exchange settled by general consent, at which the public securities, especially
the final settlements, have been bought and sold for a long succession of time.

And the high court of chancery, with sovereign power, totally unbiassed by any
considerations but those of mere right and justice, and who mean to make such
decisions as shall do the highest honor to the State, deserve the highest
esteem and approbation of their fellow-citizens and the world, and merit the
best approbation of Heaven; I say, this high court of chancery is our General
Assembly.

And the parties who appear before this august court of chancery, i. e. our
General Assembly, are the soldiers, who served us with fatigue and blood through
a seven years' war, and other virtuous citizens, who furnished the public, in
the greatest public exigence and distress, with cash and other supplies, and
who altogether saved the liberties of the country, and procured for our
Assembly itself, the very privilege of sitting, uninterrupted, within the walls
which they now occupy, and of debating whether they will pay them or not; I
say, these soldiers and other creditors are the original creditors, and the
assignees are the stock-jobbers and speculators in the public funds and
securities, who have in their hands the certificates, which, during the reputed
bankruptcy of the State, they purchased at 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, or 8 for 1,
without any allowance for interest at all.

I say, these two parties are the original creditors and the assignees of the
bonds who appear before this court, and the grand question now before the court
is, whether they will pay these public moneys to the soldiers and other
virtuous ^^^izens, who are the original creditors; or whether they will pay
these same moneys to a parcel of stock-jobbers and speculators in the public
funds and securities, at the rate of 8 for 1 of the principal they have
advanced, and 48 per cent. per ann. interest, till the principal is paid,
together with 48 per cent. interest from the date of the certificate, to the
time of the purchase of it by the speculator, which, in some cases, is several
years, and raises the interest due on the certificates at the time of purchase,
to a much greater sum than was paid for the whole certificate?

We will then, if you please, suppose our venerable high court of chancery,
viz. our Assembly, to be sitting, with the public moneys all on the table
before them; and the two parties appear and make their claim to the money; it
is confessed that the public have had a valuable consideration for it, and
therefore justly owe it to somebody, and the only question before the court is,
who shall have it?

The speculators bring in their certificates signed over to them, and claim to
be admitted in the place of the original creditors, and paid as such, on the
equity and common reason of assignments.

The widows, orphans, soldiers, and other original creditors, come in and say,
-- we claim this money, because we have earned it, and have paid the full,
valuable consideration for it. We have not yet been paid. We received these
certificates when they were not so good as money, and have sold them mostly at
2 s. 6 d. in the pound, which was all that they were worth, and would bring in
market, when we received them, and which we are willing to allow should be
debited to us. So far we have been paid, but no further the remainder of the
debt due from the public to us at the time of settlement, is still due to us
and unpaid, and we now claim it. The speculators have no such plea of a
valuable consideration given; they have purchased at such vast discount, that
they have no pretensions to a valuable consideration given; what they have paid
we are content they should receive back with interest; the rest is our dear
earnings, which the public have had the full benefit of, and which we now claim
as our due, and demand payment.

This is stating the matter, I conceive, clearly and fairly, and I beg leave to
give my opinion decidedly in favor of the original creditors. It does appear to
me, that the quid pro quo, or valuable consideration, goes so into the nature,
and makes such a part of, the very essence of commutative justice, that it is
impossible that an equitable debt should be generated without it, by any
contract whatever.

It is a matter of the most public notoriety, that the quid pro quo, or
valuable consideration paid by the speculators, is no more than the exchange at
which they purchased the certificates, which is such a mere trifle, that it
^^^onts the common feelings of the human mind, to pretend that such a trifle
(say, one sixth or eighth part) is a valuable consideration for the whole; it
is a valuable consideration for no more than was paid, and of consequence can
generate a debt of no more; the rest still stands connected with the original
consideration paid, i. e. sticks to the original creditor, and there will
adhere, till it is discharged by an adequate payment.

For no man is born with, or can acquire, a right to the earnings or fortune of
another, without giving a valuable consideration for it, and that consideration
must be of adequate value; for a penny can no more be a valuable consideration
for a pound, than nothing at all can be for a penny: for it strikes the human
understanding as plainly, and with as much force, that a pound is worth more
than a penny, as that a penny is worth more than nothing at all.

Therefore I do conclude, and contend strongly for the conclusion, that the
speculators are entitled to no more than they have paid a valuable
consideration for, and the rest remains due to the original creditors, as their
dear earnings for which they have not yet been paid.

I know very well that the speculators have many ingenious arguments, spun as
fine as silk, to prove their right to the whole debt specified in their
certificates; but the soldier has a much better one, strong as iron, yea, made
of iron, I mean his earnings with sword and musket, through a seven years' war,
which yet remain unsatisfied. Do you think that the finest silken arguments of
the speculator can stand any the least chance with this iron one of the soldier?

There is something in original right, which strikes the human mind w^^^
irresistible force: this original right will for ever attach itself to original
earnings; there it will stick, and cannot be torn away by any force, nor be
decoyed by any fraud, till it is satisfied by adequate payment. A just debt
will for ever remain a debt due, till it is paid.

It therefore follows, that if we pay the speculators the immense sums which
they demand, the public debt of the whole sum will still remain due to the
original creditors, who have, by their cash, supplies, and earnings, advanced
the full, valuable consideration, out of which the debt first grew, and who
have never been paid.

Public justice and the honor of the public faith require, not only that we pay
as much money as we owe, but that we pay it to the persons to whom it is due;
for paying it to any body else can be no satisfaction of that justice and faith
which we owe to our real creditors, but is an additional injury to them.

The human mind can no otherwise know right and wrong, than by the force and
manner in which they strike the mind, and raise an approbation or
disapprobation in it; and I appeal to the feelings of all my readers, whether
my propositions do not strike their minds strongly, and force their approbation
of my conclusion. I challenge the hardiest speculator to believe it right, if
he can, or rather not to believe it wrong, to lay the burden of a tax on the
community, and among the rest on the public creditors themselves, to raise
money to pay the public debt, and when it is collected, to pay it away, not to
the real creditors, who, by their earnings and advances, have paid the full
consideration for the debts due to them, but to others who never earned any
thing for us, nor paid any valuable consideration to us, and, of consequence,
can have nothing due to them from us.

There is another very serious consequence, which I apprehend from our paying
such an enormous sum to the speculators, as they demand, if we now had the
whole money in the treasury, viz. it would be such a drain of our public money,
as would put it wholly out of our power to pay our real creditors in any
tolerable season, and would, in a great measure, reduce them to despair, of
ever receiving their debts due, and of course would greatly lessen all
confidence in the public faith.

But if the money is not in the public treasury (which I take to be the fact)
our issuing another deluge of public promises, by way of funding such an
enormous sum, I fear would hurt the credit of the State still more; for public
promises, like all other promises that are broken, become of less and less
value, the oftener they are repeated, and the more they are multiplied; and
though I profess to believe fully, that these new and multiplied public bills
would be good enough to pay the speculators with, yet I should be sorry that
our real creditors (who have paid a full consideration for their debts due from
the public) should partake of the inconveniences of them.

I therefore humbly propose, that the first thing we do, should be to set about
raising the money; for this will be more acceptable when it comes, whoever is
to have it, than any promises we can make.

And in the next place I would propose, that the real creditors should be paid
first, and the speculators last of all, if it is judged necessary that they
should ever be paid. I have several very ^rgent reasons for this proposition,
both moral and political.

1. The real creditors have lain out of their money longer than the
speculators, and it seems to me very reasonable and just, that the oldest debts
should be first paid.

2. The speculators who expect eight-fold their principal, and 48 per cent.
interest, can better afford to lie awhile out of their money, than the real
creditors, who have no pretensions to any more than barely their principal, and
6 per cent. interest.

3. The general esteem of the people, and public conviction of the justice of
the demand, is much greater with respect to the real creditors, than to the
speculators; and therefore, when the citizens of the State are told, when the
money is to be collected, that it is designed for the payment of the real
creditors, the tax will probably be paid more cheerfully, and with less
uneasiness and disturbance, than may be expected if it was publicly known that
it was to go to the speculators.

4. The real creditors are poor, and would be greatly relieved by the payment
made to them, and be enabled to go into business for their own and the public
advantage. But when the speculators are paid, they will all at once become so
amazingly rich, that they will probably set up their carriages, and run into
other courses of idleness and pleasures, luxury and dissipation, which are ever
hurtful to the public; and I think it good policy to pay that money first which
is like to do the most good, and to pay that which is like to do the most hurt,
last of all, if it must be paid at all; for I shall ever think it ^ound wisdom,
if evils and mischiefs cannot be wholly avoided, to keep them at as great a
distance as possible.

On the whole, whether any or all my propositions can be admitted or not, it
does at least appear that the real, original creditors, and speculators, are
characters of such different predicament and merit, and their demands on the
public, founded on such different original considerations, reasons, and real
earnings, that the least consequence that can be drawn from the whole matter,
is a most manifest necessity that there should be a discrimination between
them; that they can, with no propriety, or appearance of justice, be considered
on an equal footing with each other, or in any manner entitled to the same
consideration and treatment from the public.

But I must stop here a moment, to consider a capital argument advanced very
seriously, "that if all the certificates are not indiscriminately paid up to
the holders of them, the public credit will receive such a wound that we shall
never be able to persuade any body in future to loan money, or furnish supplies
or services on the public faith, let our necessities be ever so great." I
believe it will be readily admitted, that I have stated this argument in the
same light in which it is urged by those who make use of it; but I think there
is a delusion in this statement of the argument, which I will endeavor to
correct in the following manner, viz.

If, by any mismanagement or neglect, if, by any deficiency or misapplication
of the public moneys, it shall so fall out, that the real, worthy, public
creditors cannot be paid; if matters are worked about by any shifts, arts,
combinations, contrivances, or deceits, so that the man who has loaned money,
furnished supplies, or rendered services to the public in its necessities,
cannot be paid: no pretty, plausible excuse, no fine-spun arguments, no force
of words, which really mean nothing, no pathetic addresses upon perverted
facts, can help us out; but the public credit must suffer; and if the very men
who make these mistakes, or even some wiser men, were to rule the roast in any
future time of public distress, there is the highest probability that they
would find people backward to lend their money, furnish supplies, or render
services, on the credit of the public.

On the other hand, if we consent to pay the speculators the bare principal,
which they have paid, with the interest of it, but shall refuse to secure by
the public sanction, the profits of 8 or 900 per cent. which they demand, the
amount of which, in moderate computation, cannot be less than 2 or 3,000,000 of
dollars, which they never earned or paid for, nor we ever received any benefit
or valuable consideration for; I say, if we refuse to pay to the speculators
these enormous profits, it will so discourage them, that it may make them
backward in venturing again, and so we may be obliged to do without them in
future times, let us want them ever so much.

Both these alternatives are doubtless very dreadful, and I think there can be
no doubt, but we are under an unavoidable necessity of incurring one of them;
but I am in no condition to give my opinion, which would be the most terrible
of the two. So having clearly and fairly stated the facts, I leave the rest to
the reader.

But it may be further objected, -- if all this is to be admitted, will it not
put it out of the power of the holder of any public security, to sell it?
Experience will perhaps furnish the best answer to this question. The
depreciation of Continental money never stopped the circulation of it. As long
as it retained any value at all, it passed quick enough; and would purchase
hard money or any thing else, as readily as ever, when the exchange was 200 for
1, and when every hope, or even idea, of its being redeemed at nominal value,
had entirely vanished.

I am told, the price of stocks or public securities in England is now at 55
per cent. i. e. reduced by depreciation to near half their nominal value; and
not a man in England has the most distant idea that they will ever be redeemed
at their nominal value, yet they pass quick enough at their exchange, and any
person who is disposed to sell out, has no difficulty in finding a purchaser.

It may be further objected, that if the speculators could have known
beforehand, that they should come off so, they would not have been concerned
in such speculations at all; but would have laid out their money in trade,
husbandry, manufactures, or some other way. However lamentable this may be, I
must leave it unanswered.

It may be further objected, that this doctrine will overset and throw into
confusion the common rules and laws, which regulate assignments of bonds, bills
of exchange, negotiable notes, etc. which have had the sanction of long usage
and practice, and have ever been found by experience to be both just and
necessary.

I answer, it will not, for this plain reason, which would demonstrably govern
the case, if nothing else could be said upon it, viz. every law or rule of
right, whether commercial, political, moral, or divine, holds right and just,
only in its mean; the moment it is pushed out of its mean, into its extremes,
it loses the reasons on which it is founded, and becomes wrong and unjust.

We have a law which forbids to make graven images; but this prohibits not
statues in gardens or heads on ships. We have another forbidding to do any work
on the Sabbath; but this does not make it unlawful to put out the fire of a
house that is burning, or laboring hard to save a drowning man, or to pull an
^x out of the mire. We have a law that says, "thou shall not kill;" but this
prohibits not the execution of a malefactor, or fighting a battle. We have
another that says, "thou shall not steal;" yet a man may lawfully steal to
satisfy his hunger.

The only question, I conceive, which the subject admits in this place is,
whether the demand of the speculator is an extreme case, which comes not within
the reasons, and of course cannot be justified or supported by the rule, of
common assignments? I contend for the affirmative of this question, and for
reason say the demand is morally wrong, because it would take an immense sum of
money from the community, which must be a large proportion of their earnings,
and give the same to the speculators, without any adequate valuable
consideration, either paid by the speculators, or received from them by the
citizens, contrary to the most fundamental law of commutative justice, which
requires that a quid pro quo, or a valuable consideration, shall always be
given in lieu of the property transferred. This is the most essential part of
the moral law, which regards property.

Further, this is not only morally wrong, but politically so too.

1. Because it taken an immense property from those who had earned it, and
would, of course, probably make the best use of it, and places it in the hands
of people who have not earned it, and who would, of course, probably make the
worst use of it. And it is certainly high policy to keep the wealth of the
State as far as possible in the hands of those people who will make the best
use of it.

2. Because this would impoverish the great body of the people, who are ever
the strength of every nation, in order to throw immense wealth into the hands
of individuals, which would not only weaken the State, but destroy that
equality of the citizens which is necessary to the continuance of our
republican form of government.

3. Because this plan will retard the increase of our trade and our population,
and lessen the value of our lands. We all know that burdens on trade lessen it;
heavy taxes on the country will discourage people from coming to settle on our
lands, and, of course, the increase of our population will be retarded, which
will reduce the number of purchasers of lands, and, of course, lessen their
value.

Our neighbors, especially New York, have a vast extent of unsettled lands;
they court settlers with this powerful motive, that they have means to pay
their debts without any burdensome recourse to taxes on their lands, labor, or
cattle.

The funding plan in question, I am told, will require about 300,000 dollars
per ann. to defray the interest only; besides which, we have sundry immense
demands against the State. The principal debt, the funding of which is now
under consideration, is about 5,000,000 of dollars, near half of which I take
to be designed for clear profit to the speculators; to be due to them, or from
us, it cannot be said, for they never paid us any thing for it; it must then be
excessive generosity to them.

It may do for people to be generous, when their incomes are affluent, and
cash, plenty; but when they are oppressed with debt to such an amount as to
bring their credit, and even their capital, into danger, in this critical
circumstance, the strictest economy, yea, even close parsimony, become very
important duties. But in such a crisis of distress and danger, to assume an
immense, needless, additional debt, even if a due consideration was paid for
it, would be extreme ill policy; but to do it without any consideration at all,
would be the height of absurdity and madness.

At all times we ought to be just, before we are generous. But at such a
crisis, a lavishment that will put it out of our power to be just, must be
reprobated as downright wickedness. And as the criminality of all crimes is
estimated by the damage they do, that conduct in a ruler, which destroys the
credit of a State, and even puts it out of the power of it to be just, and of
course destroys the rights of thousands of its most meritorious citizens, ought
to be branded, as the most censurable of any crime which can affect human
property, character, and honor.

4. This plan is impolitic, because it will convey the money collected from the
people to a great distance from the places where it was collected, and of
course the people who paid it, will have little or no benefit from its future
circulation. If the same moneys were to be paid (as they ought to be) to the
real creditors, i. e. the soldiers and others, who furnished moneys, supplies,
etc. who are scattered over the whole State, and are to be found in every part
of it; I say, if the moneys collected from the people were to be paid to those,
it would be diffused over the whole State, and every person who paid the tax to
raise these moneys, would have a chance of taking benefit of its circulation.

But the case will be widely different, when it shall be paid to the
speculators; most of them live in the city, and the few who reside in the
country, when they come to receive their immense fortunes, will immediately
come to the city, with all their money; the country will be no proper place to
parade in; they will find nobody there ^it to rank with; and that is not all;
but when they clatter along in their carriages, they may chance to hear
somebody say, there goes a speculator or stock-jobber, who revels in the spoils
of his country.

In short, this will not do at all; they must move into the city, where they
can find people of their own class to associate with.

And this is not the worst of it; the speculators, I suppose, must nominally
belong to this State, but doubt not but they are in company, and share profits
with many who live out of it, and consequently convey their wealth out of the
State.

And this is not the worst of it, but I conceive that many of them, though they
reside in this State, are not natives of it; the domus animae, domus optima, i.
e. home i^ home, though never so homely, is a strong affection in most men; and
on the inducements of it, foreigners, when they travel abroad and acquire
fortunes, have an inclination to return to their native country, to spend and
enjoy them; and I think our speculators of foreign birth will have a motive
additional to this natural one, to set off to their native country, viz. the
powerful one of getting out of hearing of the curses of the people among whom
they live.

It is here to be noted in a manner which I think deserves great attention,
that however dirty, ragged, poor, and despicable an injured people may appear,
they always have one species of revenge left to them, which they rarely fail to
make the most of, viz. the power and privilege of cursing their oppressors;
they curse them in the streets, they propagate their curses by their fire-sides
to their children, who are not commonly apt to have much defect of memory, and
they mix their execrations with their prayers to Heaven.

It is said that the curse causeless will not come; but I believe few States or
individuals have reason to make themselves very easy under those curses which
are not causeless. There is most certainly a Providence which governs the
world, which pays the utmost attention to right and wrong, without the least
respect imaginable to the lace or rags of the suitors.

Many more arguments might be adduced, but I deem the above fully sufficient,
to prove that the plan in question is in its nature immoral and dishonest; and,
in a political view, extremely injurious to the State, and I might almost add,
fatally ruinous; and therefore is demonstrated to be an extreme case, not at
all within the reasons of, and of course not justifiable by, the common law or
rule of assignments which, by long use, has been found to be both morally and
politically good and useful.

The Committee of Public Creditors, in their last petition to the Assembly,
have introduced one proposition, which pleases me very much, viz. Nothing that
is morally WRONG can ever be politically RIGHT. I could wish this was written
in letters of gold in the frontispiece of all our chambers of public council;
and, what is more, might be engraved on the hearts of all our public men, as a
practical principle too sacred to yield to any views of interest, however
gaudily dressed, or finely colored: and, by way of giving it my little mite of
improvement and support, I beg leave to add, that nothing which is both morally
and politically wrong, can ever be right in any sense whatsoever.

I have one argument against satisfying the demands of the speculators, which I
have not marked under either moral or political arguments, because it appears
to me strongly to partake of both, and therefore ought to be mentioned by
itself. It is this, viz. it gives public sanction, support, and even a kind of
dignity, to a sort of speculation, which, if not wicked in itself, is of a
nature very ruinous to the public, as it affords enormous profits without any
earnings, viz. eight-fold the principal, and 48 per cent. interest, which (were
they to be freed from disgrace and danger, and to be made reputable and safe by
the sanction and support of the Legislature) would be enough to induce bad men
of all professions to withdraw their stock in business, from their usual
occupations, and vest it in such speculations of high profit and honor.

In my opinion, nothing scarcely can be worse than public laws or institutions,
which tend to draw people from the honest and painful method of earning
fortunes, and to encourage them to pursue chimerical ways and means of
obtaining wealth by sleight of hand, without any earnings at all.

But were these speculators to gamble on each other's purses only, I should
think less of it; but it becomes publicly ruinous, when the public are to pay
the losings.

The fatal experience of Europe might, methinks, be a warning to us. Ever since
the blessed scheme of funding was first invented there, every nation has had a
race of stock-jobbers and speculators in the public securities, who never fail
to appear in plenty whenever a State gets into distress, and the public said
faulters a little: they appear, to be sure, with a mighty pretty grace, in aid
of the public credit, not indeed to keep it sound and whole, but to evince that
it is not quite dead; and for a practical proof of this, they will offer to
give at least something for it.

In the last days of Lewis XIV. (that noted ^r^ of distress in France) this
sort of people had the modesty to accept public securities of 32,000,000, for
the loan of 8,000,000, which is 4 for 1. But our speculators go far beyond
this; they give 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, which is 8 for 1. But it is no wonder
that our speculators should exceed those of the most ingenious nation in
Europe, since the American genius sets up to outdo all the world in every thing.

A crisis of public distress is the proper time for this kind of vermin to
swarm, like flies about a sore, or crows round a carcass, not with any design
to heal the sore, or restore life, but to feed themselves. This I admit to be a
principle natural enough; but however excusable it may be in itself for these,
like all other noxious animals, to pursue the means of their own preservation,
yet I cannot think they are entitled to the gratitude, or support, or rewards,
of the public.

I beg the reader to note here very particularly, that I do not mean by any
thing I write, to oppose any practicable and wise plan of funding or paying the
real public debts; all I object to is, funding or paying the profits of the
speculators.

But however our public counsels may settle this question, and whatever is to
be done with our public moneys, when we get them, I here beg my readers'
attention a little, to the ways and means of raising them.

1. In the first place, I do object as strongly as I am able, to laying any
considerable tax on polls and estates. This is taxing the labor, cattle, and
lands of our people, which are the embryo, the first principles, the very seed,
the raw materials of our wealth; and of course ought to be most carefully and
tenderly nursed, cultivated, and encouraged; but by no means to be burdened and
discouraged.

We have imported luxuries enough, which are hurtful to the public; the
necessary restraints of which require a tax sufficiently large for the public
use. It would be better for our people to pay a tax of a dollar per gallon on
rum and wines, 50 per cent. on silks, etc. etc. than to suffer their labor and
lands to be taxed. But if this, with our usual taxes on trade, etc. is not
sufficient, I would rather tax our exported goods than our labor and lands;
because I think it manifestly better to tax our finished goods, than our raw
materials.

Besides, our past experience has sufficiently taught us, that the collection
of any considerable tax on polls and estates is impracticable; the vast arrears
of most of our counties are a full proof of this; and to make our treasury
depend on revenues of uncertain product, is a sure way to subject our finance
to constant disappointment, and of course to keep our public credit in a
perpetual state of depression, and scandalous, as well as ruinous, deficiency.
But I will not dwell longer here on this subject, having treated it more
largely in my Sixth Essay on Free Trade and Finance, to which I refer the
reader, if he desires to hear any more about it. [See p. 230.]

2. I object most seriously to issuing paper money, in our present
circumstances, for the following reasons:

1. We have already a full sufficiency of circulating cash. The labor of our
people, and all the great staple commodities of our country, produced by it,
will and do bring not only immediate cash, but a high price; and it is not
possible that money should be too scarce in any country, where the labor and
produce of it have quick sale, good price, and command immediate cash; whilst
this is the case, every natural and necessary and and use of cash is fully
answered and satisfied; and, of course, if any body in such case wants money,
the want must arise, not from any scarcity of cash, but from a want of
something that will purchase it, i. e. from poverty; which the introduction of
an additional quantity of circulating cash will by no means remove, but must
increase, because it will directly tend to lessen industry, and introduce
luxury.

It is no objection to this, that European and West Indies goods will not bring
ready cash; it is well known that the market is greatly glutted with those
articles; and when a market is overstocked with any articles, they will not
bring quick sale and ready cash, let money be ever so plenty.

2. Our cash for a year past has been not only fully sufficient for the
purposes of our trade, but has been in a very settled, steady state, with very
little fluctuation or variation in its value. This appears from the settled
prices which our staple commodities have born through the last year. The same
thing appears from the negotiations of the Bank; from which it is manifest,
that the state and quantity of hard cash is nearly the same with us now as it
was a year ago; this proves that the quantity of circulating cash is
sufficient; for were it not so, it would undulate and vary; for cash, like
water, will always flow from the higher to the lower surface, and will never
become fixed and steady till the true equilibrium is obtained.

3. It is admitted by every body, that cash was plenty enough before the war;
but it is plain we have now much more of it than we had then; because the price
of labor and the produce of the country are much higher now than they were
then. On an average, about 40 or 50 per cent. more can now be obtained for
labor and country produce, than their current price was in 1774.

It is no objection to this, that it is more difficult to borrow money on
interest now than it was then; it is a want of public and private faith, and
distrust of all security, and not a scarcity of cash, which makes the
difficulty. Besides this, another cause may be assigned, viz. our monied men
who used to dispose of their money in that way, have, at least many of them,
lost their money, loaned on either public or private securities, by the defect
of those securities, and of course the lenders of money are in this way reduced
to a fewer number, whilst at the same time, the same cause adds to the number
of those who have occasion to borrow; each of which naturally increases the
difficulty of borrowing.

Striking paper money will lessen none of these difficulties, but will increase
them all; as it is evident that it will much lessen all confidence in any
securities of long continuance, and, in every view, diminish the number of
lenders of money.

4. Making large and sudden additions (of either paper or hard money) to our
circulating cash, will not increase our wealth: its effect will be an increase
of the price of all articles of traffic, i. e. it will destroy the steady value
of our money, by lessening its worth in an inverse ratio of the increase of its
quantity, and so, without any benefit, will introduce the ruinous mischiefs of
a fluctuating currency, from which, good Lord, deliver us!

5. I do not apprehend that we have the least chance of supporting the credit
of paper money, if it should be issued; and to expose our public credit to
further disgrace and insult, and to waste the public wealth in further stupid,
absurd, and iniquitous appreciations of depreciated paper, appears to me the
height of political frenzy. The pressure of a vast public debt, the low state
of the public credit, the universal diffidence in that sort of money which
prevails among the people of all ranks, and the dreadful apprehensions of its
consequences, which are expressed by the Bank, and by all our merchants (who
are certainly the best judges of the matter) I say, all these put together
appear to me to destroy every degree of probability of supporting the credit of
any additional paper currency.

And I cannot suppose any body distracted enough to think it proper to issue
it, if every idea of the probability of supporting its credit must be given up.
But I am apt to conjecture, that if our speculators fail in their scheme of
getting their immense profits funded, the demand for that money will be greatly
lessened, and so, perhaps, the zeal for striking paper may cool away, and, of
course, any further arguments against it, may not be necessary. But if nothing
can hinder the attempt, I am of opinion it must die in the birth. -- For,

6. I do not believe it possible to usher paper money into general currency,
either with or without a tender-act. Making it a tender is indeed too shocking
to be admitted by any sober man that I have heard of; and without it, it must,
I think, have the same effect, and share the same fate, as the other paper
which has recently gone before it.

But after all, if it should gain a general currency, and a credit but little
inferior to hard money, the effect, I think, must plainly and evidently be,
that it will soon drive all the hard money out of the country, or at least out
of circulation, as it will certainly be either hoarded or purchased up for
exportation; and then we shall have nothing before us, but to increase the
quantity of our paper, and supply the deficiency of its value by additions to
its quantity, and make the most of it, Continental like, as long as we can make
it pass at all.

7. With respect to the plan of opening a Loan-Office, and striking a sum of
paper money to put into it, to be loaned out on private security to such
persons as may want to borrow, I have to observe,

1. That all the objections which lie against striking paper money at all, lie
with equal weight against striking any for this particular purpose.

2. This will bring the borrowers into difficulty, instead of helping them; for
if they give a good security for the money, and find, when they have got it,
that it is not equal to good money, but must be passed at a discount or
depreciated value, their purposes will not be answered, nor their necessities
be relieved by it. And,

3. This inconvenience will fall heaviest on the most distressed part of the
community, for no others will give good security for bad money. And,

4. If the money should, by any strange turn, prove equal to hard money, the
sum proposed, viz. 50,000 l. is by no means equal to this demand, and, of
course, will be immediately snapped up by favorites, or such who happen to
stand nearest, and of course it will by no means operate by way of public
benefit, or general relief of the distress of our people, but will be engrossed
by a few sharp-sighted folks, with, perhaps, not the best title to public
favors, or most likely to make the best use of them. I think that any scheme of
this sort had better be put off, till we are in a condition to make it operate
in a way of effectual, impartial, and general utility.

Upon the whole matter, the great principle I go upon with respect to public
securities, is this, viz. that all bills issued on the public credit, of every
sort, under whatever denomination they may appear, whether of certificates,
paper money, annuities, etc. etc. take their value, not from the sums specified
in the face of them, but from the price or exchange at which they generally
pass in market, and, of course, when they are redeemed by the public, it ought
to be either at their original value, or at that price or exchange at which
they generally pass at the time of redemption, EXCEPTING ONLY such securities
as are in the hands of the original holder, and have never been alienated. Such
securities are evidences of full consideration paid, and, of course, of a full
debt due to such holder: but securities in the hands of a purchaser cannot be
such evidence.

When public securities gain a currency, or become objects of traffic, and
depreciate in the hands of the possessor, he doubtless sustains loss, and is
really injured; and when the depreciation is great, say 8 for 1, or 200 for 1
(bo^^ which we have seen) the mischief becomes very heavy, and in its nature
lies in the loss which the possessor of the securities sustained, by their
depreciation whilst they were in his hands:

Hence it appears clearly enough where the mischief lies, and, of course, it is
easy to see what must be the nature of the remedy it requires, viz. such a
remedy as will make up the losses which every one has sustained by the
depreciation of the public securities whilst in their hands. This is manifestly
impracticable, and perhaps the utmost power of human invention cannot hit on
any plan which will do this; what then ought the public to do? I answer, the
same which any private man must do, who knows that he has had a valuable
consideration for money, and honestly owes it, but knows not to whom it is due,
or cannot find his creditor.

From this view of the matter it appears very plain, that appreciating the
securities, and redeeming them at full value, gives not the least remedy to the
sufferers by the depreciation, but is an additional injury to them; because the
securities, at the time of redemption, will not be in the same hands in which
they depreciated, and, of course, the sufferers will find themselves taxed to
make up the money, which they lost by the depreciation, that it may be paid to
the present holders of the securities, who never lost any thing. But if any one
wishes to see this subject further discussed, I refer him to my Fifth Essay on
Free Trade and Finance, where this matter is fully considered, with respect to
Continental money. [ See p. 97.]

I will conclude here by observing, that not one argument can be adduced for
redeeming the public securities at full value, which will not apply to the
Continental and old State money, and prove that both ought to be redeemed at
full nominal value.

I take it that the public accounts are nearly all adjusted, and the public
creditors have received certificates or public securities for their respective
balances. But as those securities are mostly Continental, it will lie with
Congress, and not with any particular State, to prescribe the time, mode, and
value of their redemption.

In the mean time, I think we may do much for the present relief of our own
distressed citizens, who suffer greatly by the delays of Continental payment;
and I esteem the attempts of our Assembly very laudable in their principle.
What I complain of is an error in the application. It is certainly very good in
them to strain every nerve to raise money for the relief of our widows,
orphans, soldiers, and other worthy and distressed public creditors; but I
think it a mistake to plan the matter so, that when the money is raised, it
shall not be applied to the relief of those worthy, distressed citizens, but
shall go, at least a very considerable part of it, to a parcel of speculators,
who neither ever earned it, nor are in any distress for want of it; for they
are generally rich, and can command plenty of cash.

With the good leave of the public, I will sum up the matter, and humbly offer
some propositions, which appear to me worthy of consideration.

I. I propose to set about raising all the money we can, not by a tax on polls
and estates, which will be very burdensome to our people, hurtful to the
capital interest of the State, and of very uncertain product; but by continuing
our present duties on trade, with such further additional duties on LUXURIES,
as will be necessary to restrain the excessive use of them: and this, I
conceive, will require duties so high, as will be sufficient for the exigencies
of the State, and will be of certain product.

II. I propose to pay all the interest which is now due to the inhabitants of
this State, on all such public securities as are in the hands of the original
holders, and have not been alienated (to be ascertained by affidavit or any
other sufficient proof) and also to stop payment of all interest on any
certificates which are not in the hands of the original holders; for I do not
know that among citizens of equal merit, we can with justice make fish of one,
and flesh of another.

III. I propose that commissioners be appointed to purchase up such public
securities as were originally given to the citizens of this State, but have
been alienated by the original holders, and are now in currency as objects of
traffic or exchange: to purchase such securities, I say, at the current
exchange, or as low as they can be bought. It is certainly as right for the
State to buy up these securities, which are become a common object of traffic,
as it is for any individual. Two great advantages will result from this:

1. The present holders will have the value of them paid in money: and,

2. The State will have them to produce to Congress, whenever our quota shall
be demanded for the redemption of them; for the securities themselves will
doubtless be accepted as good payment of our quota, both of principal and
interest; and it will then be indifferent to us at what exchange, or in what
manner or time, Congress may direct their redemption.

IV. I propose that all those original holders of public securities, who have
alienated them, shall be debited on the public books, with the certificates
they received, at the value (and no more) at which they could be sold at the
time they received them, or the time of their date, and that the residue of
their balance may be paid, together with the principal of the certificates,
which are now in the hands of the original holders, and have not been
alienated. I say, that both these be paid as soon as money sufficient can be
raised by the State.

It will require, I know, a heavy sum of money to do this, but we shall have
this satisfaction to animate our exertions, that we are doing an act of justice
in favor of those to whom the money is justly due, and shall have the advantage
of paying it to people who are scattered through the State, and will immediately
circulate the money among our citizens, in every part of the State, which, if
the justice was equal, will be much preferable to paying the same money to
people who would carry it all away to distant parts, from whence it would have
little chance of returning into circulation, to the places where it was
collected.

V. As the pressures of the State are very heavy, I think we ought to make all
the savings we can; I therefore propose to lessen the House of Assembly, by
taking away two-thirds of the members, and limiting the sessions of the Council
to the Assembly's sessions, unless the President should, on emergent occasions,
summon them. I think one-third of our Assembly would do the business much
better than all of them; and the President, with a good Secretary, would be
sufficient for the common and usual business of the Council. I know of no
advantage arising from over-numerous Legislatures, or Councils that ^it too
long. The extremes of democratical government tend to anarchy, or despotism, or
ruin.

An idle, useless, or corrupt member is less noticed and easier lost in the
crowd, in a large Assembly, than in a small one. Virtue and merit are, for the
same reason, less conspicuous in a large than small Assembly; cabals,
party-schemes, and interested plans, are easier formed in a large than in a
small house, and the guilt or folly of an individual is more easily sheltered
or concealed in great than in small numbers.

For when Assemblies are large, the business is most commonly done by a few,
under the umbrage of the whole; the major part are not commonly in the secret.
The American Congress rarely consists of more than thirty members present, yet
no complaint has been made that their number is too small. The British House of
Commons consists of more than five hundred members, not very famous for
gravity, wisdom, or order. Their proceedings are commonly directed by the
Premier, and a few leading members; yet if you ask Lord North, why he pushed
the American war, he will tell you with great composure, that it was (...) his
war, but the war of the Parliament.

When more people are employed about any business than are necessary to do it,
the consequence has ever been found to be, that the business is not done so
well, is clogged with more delays, is less consistent in its several parts, and
not so well methodized. The people who are interested in the business, and have
occasion to attend upon it, are not so well-served, and a greater expense is
incurred, than would happen, if people just enough for the business, and no
more, had been employed.

This, one would think, was grounded on natural fitness; for we find it holds
true in all human affairs, from a house too full of servants, a field with too
many reapers, a town-meeting of too many people, a kitchen with too many cooks,
a committee of too many members, a church with too many deacons or too large a
vestry, a court with too many judges, and so on, up to an assembly of the first
dignity, with too many representatives.

Now to admit any principle or circumstance into our gravest and most important
councils, which has ever been found hurtful in all cases where it has been
adopted, is highly imprudent and dangerous, and tends to ruin. The fatal
experience of many great nations proves this in a manner very forcible and
convincing.

Rome and Greece lost their liberties by over-numerous Senates, etc. and Poland
is now in desolation from the same cause; their Pospolite, which was instituted
for the great defense of their nation, and their liberum veto, which they
hugged with enthusiasm, as the standard of their liberty, together with their
over-numerous Diets, have completely ruined them. But whether these
observations are proper or not, we shall, by this proposition, at least save a
vast expense, at a time when the utmost economy is necessary.

VI. At all times, but especially i^ times of public pressure, the peace and
quiet of the State should be consulted, and the general confidence of the
people in the government should be as far as possible secured, it order to its
firm establishment, and the great principles of our civil policy should be
strictly regarded. I therefore humbly propose the repeal of the test-act; for
we can no how expect the internal peace and quiet of our people, and their
confidence in our government, so long as we exclude one-third our citizens from
any share in it.

Nor can we any how call our civil policy a government of the people, or reap
the advantage of such a government, as long as so large a proportion of our
citizens (if reckoned by numbers, influence, wisdom, or estate) are shut out
and disfranchised. We need the counsels as well as the wealth of all our
people, and our constitution gives equal right, as well as prescribes equal
duty, to them all.

That the major must rule the minor, is undoubtedly a maxim essential to a
democratical or republican government; but it is equally manifest, that the
extremes of this maxim will destroy the very nature, as well as uses, of such
governments. For if two-thirds can disfranchise the minor third, a majority of
the remaining two-thirds may disfranchise the minority of them, and so on
toties quoties, till there will be but two left undisfranchised, to govern the
whole; which, I suppose, every body will allow to be somewhat worse than to
have but one sovereign despot; for the two might quarrel, and each form his
party, and so the State might be involved in a civil war, which could not
happen, if there was but one despot, and nobody else left capable of forming a
party.

It is doubtless necessary to adopt good maxims of government, but it is
equally necessary to exercise some prudence and discretion in the use of them;
for we may be ruined by the extremes of those very maxims, which, in their
mean, are very salutary and useful.

It has been suggested by some ill-minded people (but for the honor of
Pennsylvania, I must think, without the least reason) that some Members of our
General Assembly are deeply interested in stock-^obbing and speculations in
certificates, and are possessed of, o^ concerned in, public securities to a
large amount, which they are not the original holders of, but obtained by
purchase at 6 or 8 for 1, and are now using all their endeavors, power, and
influence, in the Assembly, under the sanction of their sacred public
character, to procure a vote of the Assembly, for funding their certificates,
and, of course, to vote the money of their constituents by thousands into their
own pockets.

I think it necessary that the honorable Assembly should take proper measures
to vindicate themselves from such scandalous aspersions; and if there are any
such members, to take the necessary care that one scabby sheep shall not spoil
the whole flock. There can certainly be no more reason or fitness, that a
Member of Assembly, under the sacred sanction of his public character, should
vote the money of the State into his own pocket, than that a judge or juryman
should sit in judgment in a cause, in the event of which he is personally
interested.

We are told by some folks of delicate feelings, that the public credit or
honor is like the chastity of a woman; and we all know that the wife of Caesar
ought not to be suspected; it will therefore follow, by consent of every body,
that every cause of suspicion of the integrity and disinterestedness of our
honorable Assembly should be removed as far as possible; and this is the more
necessary, as our Assembly is a single Legislature, whose acts are not subject
to a revision, or require the concurrence of another house; and of course, if
they err, the subject is without remedy.

On these considerations there can be no doubt but our Assembly, and every body
else, will be thoroughly penetrated with the necessity of having every member
of that august body most effectually acquitted from all suspicion of
interestedness, when they come to decide a question, which demands 3 or
4,000,000 of dollars from the State.

I therefore propose, with all m^esty, that when the great question shall be
put finally in that supreme house, 'Whether the public securities shall ^e
fundeth' that there shall be some sort of voyer dire oath ^^test imposed on
every member, to this purpose, viz. tha^ ^he is not directly or indirectly
possessed, interested, or concer^ed, otherwise than as an original holder, in
any public secu^ities, proposed to be funded, by the vote of Assembly now
depending.

The principle of this proposition wi^^ doubtless be admitted by every body;
and I conceive the Assembly will have no objection to the mode, as they are in
their sentiments very favorable to test-acts. This metho^, I conceive, would
set the character of the Assembly in t^^ most unexceptionable point of light,
and would give great dignity and weight to their decisions; and though they might
happen by this method to lose a vote or two, yet the^r is not doubt but they
would have upright souls enough (...), to make an ample majority in favor of
any vote, which he real interest or honor of the State might make necessary.

It has ever been my fortune to write in the muns of popular prejudices; and in
justice to my subject, and to my own judgment, I have often been oblige^ to mix
some kind of censure on public measures, which were adopted by the leaders of
the times, when I thoug^t they were founded on principles of mistake and error,
and tended to the ruin of the cause they were designed to support, and would,
in their nature, operate in a manner very hurtful to my country. I accordingly
met with little thanks: my rewards were such as any body may expect, who
opposes the current tide of popular opinion, and the favorite plans of warm,
zealous men.

I have sometimes met with that warmth and malignancy of censure, which can
hardly be supposed to arise from an opposition to error of mere judgment,
without some degree of corruption of heart. Yet time has evinced my most
censured propositions to be necessary, and they have been adopted by our
gravest and most dignified councils, and are now become very orthodox, and are
justified by the sanction of general opinion. I therefore think I have some
right to claim the attention^^ my fellow-citizens, at least I flatter myself I
am inti^^ed to their candor, while they read my propositions.

Nothing but my ^pinion of the vast importance of the subject of this Essa^
could have induced me to write it. I had long determined to write no more on
political matters; but when I (...) to see the State in danger of having some
millions of be public money (in this our pressure of public debt) diverte^ from
the objects who have every claim of justice to it, and ^ished on people who
never earned it; I am told, that in (...) public debates on this subject which
have since taken place, my plan of (...) the original creditors in preference
to the speculators, was admitted (...) and desirable, but it was objected to
and rejected because it was thought (...) to make the discrimination: and this
supposed impracticability (...) strongly urged and greatly insisted on: on
which I beg leave to obser^^^.

1. That the nam^s (...) the original creditors are on the public books, with
the balances due to (...), and are easily found: to which a reference must be
made equally or (...) plans: for it a certificate is offered for payment, which
is not entered (...) it will be rejected as counterfeit.

2. The proof (...) on the man who demands payment, that he is an original
creditor: if he cannot make this appear, he will ^a^l of payment, as all
persons must, who (...) suits which they cannot support with proof.

3. If there are some, or even many, original creditors who cannot prove their
demand, (...) so must los^ it, it does not follow that such as can prove their
claim, should be rejected: this would be a mad conclusion.

4. If the original, rightful creditor cannot be ^ound, he cannot be paid; but
it does not ^ollow, that the money due to him must be paid to any body else,
who has (...) claim of either original or derivative right; it is certainly
very plain, that, in such case, the money ought not to be paid at all to any
body, as mu^^ be the case with every private man who owes money, but cannot
find (...) creditor, or with the publ^^, to whom all estates or property
escheat, if he owners cannot be ^ound, as in case of treasure-trove, wreck of
sea, lands, when the owner dies without will or heirs, etc.

5. The whole objection, though true, when urged against paying the original
creditors, and in favor of paying the speculators, is nugatory and trifling;
for such original creditors as cannot be found, or cannot prove their demands,
are le^^ equally without remedy under both plans; for payment to the
speculators makes no more provision for such cases, than payment to the
original creditors.

6. If such cases exist (as probably many) of them many) no one pretends that
they bear any proportion to the vast number (that can be found) of creditors
possessed of full proof; and it is very plain, that the defect of proof in the
one cannot injure or diminish the right of the other, whose claim is capable of
full proof.

Indeed I think that nothing can be plainer than this, viz. that we ought to
pay all the real creditors, whose wealth or services we have had the benefit
of, and who are possessed of full proof of the debts due to them therefore, but
by no means to pay the whole money to speculators, who have certainly no right
at all, because some may probably have right which they cannot make appear.

The State of Pennsylvania, in their funding act (1785) made the discrimination
I propose, with respect to one species of certificates (final settlements) but
I never heard any difficulty was found in the practice or execution of the
statute, on that account.

Some people are wild enough to propose to pay the public money to the
speculators, for fear the real original creditors should perjure themselves in
proving (...) accounts. This is too foolish to require an answer: for,

1. If we are to reject oaths in proof of accounts, for fear of perjuries, the
rule ought doubtless to be made general and extend to all accounts of all
descriptions of persons; for certainly one man has as good a right to take
benefit of his own perjuries, as another. But,

2. If such perjuries should happen it surely cannot follow from thence, that
the speculators ought to have all the money paid to them, which is due to the
real, original creditors.

In fine, I think it really disgraceful to human nature, to suppose such
arguments and such objections require answers, and I have to beg my reader's
pardon for offering them.


and also to see a deluge of paper money rolling in upon the State, when I had
not the least reason to suppose either that our public credit, in its present
state of pressure and weakness, could support it, or that the quantity of our
circulating cash (which is demonstrably quite sufficient) could bear such vast
and sudden additions, without the most ruinous consequences. I say, when I
viewed those matters, I really thought it a duty I owed to the State in which I
live, to explain my sentiments, and, as far as in me lay, endeavor to avert
these mischiefs.

I doubt not but the public will judge favorably of my intentions, and allow my
arguments their due weight. The facts alleged are all of public notoriety; the
reasonings are open to every man; and I have only to wish, that the reader may
peruse this Essay with the same love of justice and truth, and the same zeal
for the good, honor, and prosperity of this State, as occupied my whole breast
when I wrote it.

A PLEA FOR THE Poor Soldiers: OR, AN ESSAY To demonstrate that the SOLDIERS
and other PUBLIC CREDITORS, who really and actually supported the Burden of the
late War, HAVE NOT BEEN PAID, OUGHT TO BE PAID, CAN BE PAID, and MUST BE PAID.
[First published in Philadelphia, Jan. 2, 1790.]
WHEN the funding bill of Pennsylvania was published for consideration, five
years ago, I wrote my Seventh Essay on Free Trade and Finance, in which I
advanced sundry principles and arguments, which, perhaps, may apply as well to
the finance of the Union in general, as to that of Pennsylvania in particular;
and, of course, it may be necessary here, to repeat and revise many of the
principles and arguments therein advanced and fully discussed; but a reference
to that Essay will make a full enlargement on them unnecessary in this place.

In an Essay of this sort, it will probably be expected, I. That the moneys
necessary for the public exigence, should be stated: II. The resources out of
which these moneys are to be raised, should be considered: and, III, The mode
of assessments and collections should be attended to.

I am informed, that these will be the first great objects of attention in
Congress, on the opening of the ensuing session.

My present design is, to state and advocate the rights and claims of a great
and very respectable class of our citizens, whose distinguished merit entitles
them to the justice, and, indeed, to the gratitude also, of their country, but
who are, I fear, at least many of them, in danger of being neglected and losing
the reward due to them, for the supplies and services which they rendered their
country in the greatest public distress.

And the very money which is granted and paid by the country, for the just
recompense of these worthy and deserving patriots, is, by a strange fatality of
events, absurdity of reasoning, and perversion of counsel and right, I say,
this money is proposed by some to be diverted from, and never paid to, them;
but to be given to another class of citizens and foreigners, who do not pretend
to any merit of their own, or to have earned any of the money, but whose claim
and demand is founded wholly on the merit and earnings of these worthy
citizens, who are, by the very plan, to lose it all, and get none of it.

The worthy patriots I allude to, are those who, during the war, when our
country was overwhelmed with infinite distress and danger, rendered their
services, supplies, and money in its defense, but who, on the adjustment of
their accounts, could not be paid, by reason of the deficiency of the public
finances of the States, and, therefore, were obliged to accept certificates of
the balances due to them, with promises of interest and payment in future time.

These certificates were made payable to the bearer, and of course were
negotiable, and were worth about 2 s. or 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, their value
being estimated by the current or common price, at which they were generally
bought and sold in the public market; for the value of certificates, as well as
of every thing else that becomes an object of general exchange or transfer,
must, and ever will, be estimated by the current or common price it will bring
in market.

That the common price at which such certificates were generally bought and
sold at the close of the war, was in fact about 2 s. or 2 s. 6 d. may easily be
made appear in a most incontrovertible manner, by the testimony of thousands
and thousands, who bought and sold them the first year or two after the close
of the war, when the great bulk of them were issued, and when the greatest
sales of them were made by the original holders.

Since this period they have been hawked and jockied about by the speculators
and brokers, like an ignis fat^us, at a great variety of desultory risings and
fallings of price, according to the opinion, or whim, or caprice, or deception
which happened to prevail in the minds of men at the time; the tracing or even
considering of which, I conceive of no manner of consequence at present.

It follows from the foregoing observations, that the value of the public
certificates, at the time of their being issued, may be easily ascertained; and
so much the public creditors who received them, were paid, and no more, say 2
s. 6 d. in the pound; and the remainder, say 17 s. 6 d. in the pound, and the
interest of it from that time, is still due to them.

That this reminder or balance ought to be paid to them, with the money which
is, or may be, granted and paid by the public, for the express purpose of
satisfying and rewarding these worthy citizens, for their dear and painful
earnings in their country's cause, and that the said money ought not to be
diverted from this most just and valuable purpose, on any reason or pretense
whatever; I say, that the balance which they have not received, and which, of
course, is still due, ought to be paid to them, is a most capital object to be
proved, ^^^ed, and enforced in the present Essay.

I shall attempt, and cannot doubt I shall be able, to prove to the
satisfaction of every judicious reader, That they are not yet paid; That they
ought to be paid; That they can be paid;


And, to satisfy the grateful wishes of all our citizens, and to establish our
national character of honor and humanity, both at home and abroad, That they
must be paid.

For this purpose, I beg the candid attention of my reader to the following
propositions:

I. No public creditor who receives a certificate, is thereby paid any more
than the value of the certificate at the time of delivery, i. e. it is not the
nominal value but the real value only, i. e. the current price of it, which is
to be regarded in estimating the quantity of payment made by it.

When any body proposes to pay a debt in bills of exchange, bills of paper
money, certificates, or any bills of public or private credit (if the creditor
agrees to accept such payment) the first question that invariably occurs is,
what is the exchange? i. e. no regard at all is paid to the nominal value, but
reference is constantly had to the exchange or current price in market, in
order to determine what amount of such bills shall be given to satisfy the
debt. This practice is so universal among all men, and grounded on such
manifest principles of right, that I cannot conceive that any man can be found,
who will dispute either the reality or propriety of it.

The practice of Congress, the supreme council of the Union, affords a
precedent of this same principle, adopted by them, respecting their loan-office
certificates.

They published by their authority a scale of depreciation, by which the value
of those certificates was estimated at the real exchange they had at the time
of their dates, and the rate of their final redemption was fixed on the same
principle.

All the States adopted the same principle, either by making use of the scale
of Congress, or establishing scales of their own, by which the value of
Continental money was estimated through all the stages of its depreciation.

This practice of Congress and of all the States was founded not only on
absolute necessity, but on the plainest principles of right; and if they made
any deviation from justice, in the adjustment of any of their scales, this was
no error in the principle, but merely a fault in the practice or use of it. And
surely there can be no reason why the same rule (if a good one) of estimating
the real value of certificates issued in 1777 and the subsequent years, should
not be applied to the certificates which were issued at the close of the war.

But there is certainly great reason why our most virtuous citizens, who, by
their patriotic efforts, services, and supplies, supported the war, and saved
our country, should not be subjected to the loss of seven-eighths of their just
dues, for want of such a rule, or some other means of saving them from such
ruinous and shameful injustice.

Farther, let us appeal to plain, common sense on this subject. When the public
accounts were settled at the clos^ of the war, the public creditors were
entitled to their several balances due to them from the States, in good hard
money. Now can any possible reason be given, why a certificate worth but 2 s. 6
d. should be good payment to them, of 20 s. at that time, any more than now at
this time? I believe it will be readily admitted, that if any body (personal or
aggregate) should, at this time, seriously propose to pay a debt of 20 s. with
a certificate or any thing else, which was worth but 2 s. 6 d. the offer would
be rejected with every degree of contempt, as a most villainous and rascally
insult.

Is there one Member of Congress, who would not think himself abused by the
offer of a certificate worth 3-5 ths of a dollar, in full satisfaction of six
dollars, which he expects for one day's attendance in the house? but how
aggravated and keen, would be his feelings and chagrin, if he should neglect
his family and private concerns, and attend Congress seven years, and, at the
end of the term, should be paid off in certificates of the same depreciated
value!

Or, do you think his vexation would be softened any, by being told, that though
his certificates were really worth at present but 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, yet
the sum expressed on the face of them was 20 s. in the pound, and therefore he
must be satisfied with them as good and full payment, and if he would have
patience to keep them long enough, they might perhaps bring him the full, real
value expressed in them?

I believe every Member of Congress will readily allow, that I have hit on what
would be the true feelings of any of his brethren, and even of himself, in such
a supposed case. If so, gentlemen, please to do as you would be done by; this
rule of conduct is enjoined upon you by an authority much superior, and far
paramount, to any you can lay the least claim to, in your utmost dignity, and
fullest possession of sovereign power.

From all this it appears evident, that the public creditors, who have received
certificates in payment, were paid no more than the current value or exchange
of the certificates, at the time they received them. So much is paid and no
more, and so much and no more they ought to be debited, and the residue of the
debt, not having been paid, is still due to them.

It farther appears, that the certificates which were delivered to the soldiers
and other public creditors, on the final settlement of their accounts, after
the close of the war, were worth not more than 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, which
ought to be debited to them, and the remaining 17 s. 6 d. in the pound, being
unpaid, still remains due to them.

II. These balances which remain unpaid to the public creditors, ought to be
paid as soon as possible. The sums due to them are their dear, their painful
earnings; these claimants are the soldiers who fought, and the citizens who
supplied them, when the salvation of our country was the great prize contended
for; it is owing to their virtuous and strong exertions, that we have any thing
left, either for our own enjoyment, or the payment of them.

We have no instance in history, of an army who discovered and practiced more
spirit, firmness, patience, discipline, fortitude, and zeal, either under the
instant pressure of the greatest hardships and sufferings, or in the solemn and
awful march to the most dangerous enterprises, or in the arduous moments of
battle, than were found in our troops.

Nor did they hesitate or faulter in the least, till they had completed their
great work, raised their own, their general's, and their country's honor and
character to the utmost height, and reached the arduous goal which they had
constantly in view, through every stage of their fatigue and danger; this
glorious goal was the complete liberation of one of the greatest empires of the
earth, which empire we are, who ^it clothed in all the majesty of empire,
wealth, and power, solemnly deliberating, whether we shall pay these our
deliverers, or not.

That "the laborer is worthy of his hire," is the great doctrine of COMMUTATIVE
JUSTICE, that divine law of nature, and nature's God, which, in the utmost
majesty of command, connects the quid pro quo, that august principle on which
alone all thrones and governments can acquire and fix a permanent
establishment; this sacred principle, I say, requires that these worthy
claimants should be paid the money due to them, because they have dearly,
nobly, and faithfully earned it.

There is in every human heart, a principle of right, a principle planted by
the great Creator, ever approving the things which are most excellent; how far
soever this sacred principle may become generally practical, emanate and spread
in society, and govern and direct the general mind; yet the dispensation of
public justice and right, lies in the power, and becomes the peculiar duty, of
a few men, the chosen and dignified few, to whom the administration of the
great affairs and interests of the nation are committed.

These dignified personages are sometimes called gods; they certainly sit in
the place of God, and whether given to the people in wrath or mercy, are
certainly appointed by him, and the sacred charge and duty of imitating his
government lies on them; judgment and justice are the habitation of his throne;
and these sacred virtues ought always to be found in our supreme council, not
as transient persons who may be called in on favorite occasions, where their
presence may be pretty well admitted, and their inspection may be tolerable,
but as constant residents, who take up their dwelling there, as the place of
their uniform habitation.

With a heart melted in sympathy with the sufferings of my country's
deliverers, with a sublimated sense of the importance, as well as sacred
nature, of the justice and judgment of our nation, I most devoutly implore (and
doubt not the concurrence of every honest American) that these sovereign and
sacred virtues may dwell, not only in our supreme councils, but in the heart of
every member who shall give his vote in the decision of this most capital and
interesting cause which I am pleading.

Another thing which ought to induce us to pay these worthy citizens is, their
brilliant success, and the most important benefits we derive from their
exertions. I do not say that success simply is a virtue, but it is a very great
proof of it, in as much as success generally follows prudent, spirited, and
persevering conduct; nor do I say that rewards ought to be proportioned to the
benefits received; for by this rule we can never pay enough to our deliverers;
but where the benefits accruing from virtuous exertions are very great, they at
least become entitled to a full compensation, and perhaps liberal minds will
think a generous one might with great propriety be allowed.

We call general Washington, the father and savior of his country, and with
great propriety; the virtues of a father he might have possessed alone, but the
savior of his country he could not have been without his army. He indeed
designed with discernment, commanded with prudence, and led on his troops with
fortitude; but although these virtues were carried by him beyond the power of
imitation, the success must have failed, had not his army co-operated with his
designs effectually, obeyed his orders cheerfully, and followed him with
firmness; without these, neither his laurels could have been obtained, nor our
deliverance have been completed.

They were his faithful companions in distresses, in dangers, in battles, in
victories; they shared his fortunes, they shared his merits, and they
persevered with him, till they also shared his final successes, which put a
period to their long and patient labors, and our country's calamities.

How would all the ^ine feelings of the human mind have glowed in the breast of
that exalted general, if, in that period of triumphant and final success, he
could have called these his dear and worthy fellow-laborers and
fellow sufferers together, met their brightened countenances with the warmest
mutual congratulations, thanked them for their services, and dismissed them
with such rewards, as would have enabled them to return to their families with
some degree of advantage, as well as honor.

But I will draw a veil over the rest, and only say, the hard necessity of the
times prevented this; the general knew it, the soldiers knew it, and submitted
with patience to accept their discharge, and find their way home as they could,
with empty hands and dry lips.

Is it possible that the great councils of America shall suffer such
persevering fortitude, discipline, and patience to go without their reward?
Generous allowances are not demanded; liberal appointments are not solicited;
no more is required than the simple pay which was promised them by Congress;
all they ask for, is the fulfillment of that sacred contract, which is grounded
on the public faith and honor of an empire.

Indeed, I think that the patient and quiet behavior of the real public
creditors, both at the close of the war and since, entitles them to the highest
esteem and respect of all our citizens, and should excite a very strong zeal,
to make the most powerful efforts to do them right; it is certainly mean, base,
and shameful, it is below the dignity of a nation, to deny or delay that
justice to virtuous, quiet, and well-behaved citizens, which would be granted
to tumult, uproar, and insurrection.

Will any man presume to say they are quiet, because it is not in their power
to make disturbance? This is very ill-natured; but were it really the case, it
would bring them into the rank of helpless persons, like the widows and
fatherless, who have rights which they are not able to assert and support;
these are entitled to the most peculiar and tender protections of the
government; the wrongs and oppressions of such as these, are always ranked
among the most horrid and cruel acts of injustice.

But I do not conceive this to be the real fact; all States have found that
there may be as great force and strength in the still, small voice, as in the
explosions that break the cedars of Lebanon; it is not commonly a fretfulness
of temper in the people, but the cause of complaint, which breeds disturbances
in a State; it is rare that people can be worked up into general insurrection,
without some great and general cause.

Wrongs and oppressions diffused over a State will always sow the seeds of
discontent; these ^it easy on nobody; but always operate by way of fret and
resentment, and are generally the causes of serious insurrections, and
sometimes of most capital revolutions, in government; I know of but one sure
way to keep the people quiet and easy in any government, and that is, to cause
'justice and judgment to run down its streets, and righteousness to cover it.'

But it ought to be noted here, that though the proper way to keep the subjects
of any State in quietness, is to do them justice, yet it does not follow, that
no men will be quiet under wrongs; many virtuous and good citizens will put up
with injuries, and bear them with patience, rather than engage in pursuits for
redress, which may make the remedy worse than the disease; few men would be
willing to foment public disturbances, and make the land of their nativity a
scene of desolation and horror, to gain redress of personal wrongs, or to
gratify a spirit of revenge.

Many good men would patiently suffer injuries, rather than even give
uneasiness to their oppressors, especially where the wrong happens to proceed
from some near connection, a brother, a father, or perhaps the fathers of their
country; but this virtuous patience under injury I deem highly meritorious, and
deserving the utmost attention to their rights, and the redress of their wrongs.

But when the very people from whom redress is expected, begin to take
advantage of the peaceable disposition of such a citizen, to think him void of
spirit, and proceed to insult his wrongs, trifle with his demands, ridicule his
pretensions, and plead absurd arguments in avoidance of his claims, arguments
which are a burlesque of common sense, and which cannot meet the approbation of
that discerning power, which the all-wise Creator has planted in every human
mind, as the great index of right and wrong; I say, when insults of this sort
are added to injuries, there is a point, a bound, beyond which human patience
will not endure, and, of course, such injuries never will be offered to any
person who is supposed to be in condition to assert and vindicate his own
rights, or to resent properly the insults offered to him.

For example, let us suppose that the Continental army, officers and men, with
those who, by their contributions, fed and clothed them, were all met together,
with their august general at the head of them, When I wrote this I had no doubt
but that, if such an assembly of fellow-laborers and fellow-(...) had appeared,
their general would have cheerfully put himself at their head, and have
supported their suit with all his power and influence.

It is also very manifest, that both they and their rights are all, at this
time, in real existence and full life, though not all met together in condition
to assert and demand the justice which is due to them.

It is further certain, that the known rights of an absent man ought not to be
neglected, because he is not pr^^^^t to assert them, or in condition to
vindicate his demand; infants, and all other helpless persons, have rights
which are ever recognized by the law of right, and ought ever to be supported
by the government, to which the administration of that law of right is
committed.


and, in this respectable state, should present their humble petition to
Congress for their pay; do you think, gentlemen, that there is a man in all the
States, either in or out of Congress, who would venture to tell them they were
paid already, and had no right to expect any thing farther from their country?

If a speech of this sort is supposable, it may be proper to consider it a
little more particularly. I conceive that any speech directed to an army, the
great subject of which is, to persuade them, after seven years' hard service,
to go off quietly without their pay, must necessarily carry in it materials
somewhat rough, harsh, and not much suited to the taste of the hearers; it will
therefore, doubtless, be necessary to soften and sweeten it as much as may be,
in order to insure its proper effect.

I will go on then to suppose, if you please, that some grave person of known
wisdom, candor, and polished manners, should rise up to make an address to this
great and respectable body of citizens, which, I think we may presume, might be
pretty nearly in the following manner, viz.

Gentlemen -- I address you as most respectable citizens; your conduct has been
noble; your merits are known to all the world, and acknowledged by all the
States. Your arduous, persevering efforts have saved your country. What a pity
is it then, that after so much worthy action, and so much triumphant virtue,
you should be inadvertently betrayed into such an improper conduct, as to
petition for your pay; inadvertently betrayed, I say, for I do not attribute
your present application to any evil design; (...) to your having somehow
imbibed very improper sentiments. I must be so free, gentlemen, as to tell you,
you have been paid, fully paid already.

Here the soldiers interrupt the orator. -- Paid already! fully paid! with
certificates worth but 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, and hard work to get so much.

The orator resumes -- Have patience, my friends; do not interrupt me; I am
delivering the sense of your country.

SOLDIERS. Is it the sense of our country, that a debt of 20 s. can be paid,
fully paid, with a certificate, or any thing else, which is worth, and will
sell for, but 2 s. 6 d.?


ORATOR. I again beg your patience a little, my dear friends; it is true, your
certificates, when you received them, were indeed somewhat dull and low; they
would not fetch more than 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, and hardly that; 2 s. 6 d.
was the extent of the general current price of them; but surely you ought to
consider this was no fault of the certificates; they were wrote on as good
paper, and with as good ink, as need be, and 20 s. was wrote on them as plain
as could be wished; and not only so, but the public faith of the States, the
sacred honor of your country, was annexed to that 20 s. and solemnly pledged to
make it good, and what could you wish more? Certainly, gentlemen, you cannot
have the assurance to suggest, or even to think, that the public faith, the
sacred honor of your country, was worth but 2 s. 6 d. in the Pound! that their
State-bills of 20 s. were worth but half a crown.


SOLDIERS. We do not wish to enter into any conversation about public faith and
honor; it seems to us, that this subject is not very proper to talk much of, at
this time; for the least said is soonest forgot; but one thing we know and
feel, that we could get no more than 2 s. 6 d. in the pound for our
certificates; and our necessities obliged us to part with them for what we
could get.

You will please to consider, sir, it is no small thing for people in our
condition, to be deprived of seven years' hard earnings, carved out of the
prime of life, and to be left with nothing to begin the world with, or even to
keep ourselves and families from starving.


ORATOR. I do not blame you in this distress for selling your certificates; but
you ought to have considered, that, when you sold them, you made over and
transferred all your right to payment, for all your services and advances to
your country, and, therefore, ought not to have sold them so cheap; you really
hurt yourselves, and debased the honor and credit of the States, by that
imprudent step; had you been wise enough to have sold them at 20 s. in the
pound, your necessities had been better relieved, and all this trouble and
perplexity which you give yourselves and us, would have been prevented.


SOLDIERS. You might as well blame us for not turning our certificates into
joes and guineas; you know as well as we, that it was absolutely impossible to
get more for them, or do better with them, than we did; we received the
certificates made payable to the bearer, and of course, negotiable, and
calculated to be bought and sold, i. e. to circulate like cash through any and
every hand; but we had no idea when we sold them, that we sold any more than we
received; or that our selling them destroyed our demand on the States, for that
part of our earnings which we had not received, and which was not paid to us;
nor can we conceive, how our sale of negotiable certificates can operate on our
real earnings like an enchanter's wand, so as to annihilate them, or turn them
into a mist.


ORATOR. I observe, gentlemen, you grow somewhat warm; I wish to avoid all
ill-humor and hard language; you have deserved nobly; you have gained great
honor; you have saved your country; and I hope, after all this merit, you will
neither tarnish your own honors, nor disturb your country's peace, by your
uneasiness and discontent.

What is done is passed and cannot be recalled; I earnestly recommend to you,
my dear and honored fellow-citizens, to return home peaceably and quietly like
virtuous and good christians, and go to work double tides, to raise money to
pay the present holders of your certificates; for however foolishly you parted
with them under value, yet the public faith is annexed to them, and must be
supported.


I appeal to every man in the Union, whether this address, or rather dialogue,
does not state every fact and every argument, truly and fairly; and whether
such a statement of facts and arguments would be likely to send the hearers
home contented and quiet, without their pay; I trow not. If the above statement
is not right, I challenge any body that can, to mend it; for my part, I freely
own my opinion, that the whole harangue, though ever so well-dressed and
polished, is, and must be, from the nature of the facts, an insult not only on
these worthy citizens, who rendered their supplies and services to their
country during the war, but on common sense itself, and must wound the natural
feelings of the humane mind, and which no man of honesty and candor could ever
make in the absence of the parties, and which no man, who had any regard to
personal safety, would dare to make in the presence of them.

The Orator's plan is, to consider the certificates delivered to the public
creditors, on the settlement of their demands, for supplies and services
rendered during the war, to consider these certificates, I say, as full payment
of the sum due to them, and to redeem the certificates at full nominal value,
by payments made to the bearers of them.

It is farther a most plain fact, that the certificates were not worth more
than 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, at the time they were delivered to the real public
creditors, on the final settlement of their accounts, after the close of the
war.

And it is a farther plain fact, that by far the greatest part of these
certificates have been sold by the original holders, in their necessities and
distresses, to persons who are now possessed of them, at 2 s. 6 d. in the
pound, or at most for some trifle which bears but small proportion to the
nominal value.

Now this plan, dress it, and cook it, and season it, and color it in any and
every way you possibly can, if carried into execution, will most necessarily
and unavoidably draw after it these two consequences:

1. That a sum of many millions of money must be levied and collected from the
labor and painful earnings of the citizens of the States, not to be paid to the
worthy citizens, who, by their supplies and services, during their country's
distress, have merited and earned it, but to be paid to numbers of rich
speculators, who have no pretense of having merited or earned any of it, and
who will, upon the earnings of those others, make a profit immense, not less in
thousands of instances than 1000 per cent. Whilst,

2. The great bulk of the worthy citizens, who, by their supplies and services,
really and dearly merited and earned the money, but who have sold their
certificates (which is the case of by far the greatest part of them) must and
will absolutely and finally lose 7-8 ths, and very many even eleven parts out
of twelve, of their real merits and painful earnings, from which shameful
injustice, Good Lord, deliver us.

I beg leave here to ask the gentlemen who compose our supreme administration,
legislative, executive, and official,

1. Whether they can possibly reconcile their own minds to any plan which
involves such gross injustice?

2. Whether any of them could be prevailed on, at any time of their lives, on
any consideration, to pay a private debt of their own of 20 s. with a
certificate, or any other depreciated paper, worth but 2 s. 6 d.?

3. Whether in heaven or earth (and farther we need not go) I say, whether in
heaven or earth, there can be found a reason which can justify a minister of
State, or any public man, employed in the dispensation of the justice and
judgment of a nation, in devising or doing any thing, which, in his personal
capacity, would wound his honor and conscience, and damn him to eternal infamy
and contempt.

It is known to every body, that at the close of the war, our nation was
bankrupt; at least they stopped payment, could not, and did not, do justice to
those to whom they were justly indebted; and if we could not pay them when we
ought, the only way to heal and remedy the matter, is to pay them when we can;
and it is mighty plain^ if we honestly mean to pay our debts, we must not only
pay the whole money we owe, but must pay it to those to whom we owe it; for
paying it to any body else can be no satisfaction of the debt.

Nothing can be more absurd than to apply the common rule of assignments of
negotiable notes, bills of exchange, etc. to the public certificates; the
exchange of the one rarely rises or falls more than 4 or 5 per cent.; the
depreciation of the other is 15 or 20 times as much, and is so enormous, that
the principal value is absorbed by it, and not more than 1-8 th or 1-10 th part
of the nominal value in reality remains; here is an extreme case indeed, and it
is well known that every law, right, or rule of morality is limited to its mean
or reasonable application; the moment it diverges therefrom, and flies into
its extreme, it loses its rectitude and equity, and becomes injurious and
wrong; and the sure and infallible criterion of such extreme, is when such
application operates by way of injustice and destruction of right.

And in the case in point before us, the application of the common rule of
assignments, to the certificates, has a necessary operation, most cruel,
injurious, and hurtful in two respects:

1. It takes an immense sum of money from virtuous citizens, who dearly merited
and earned it, and subjects them to a total and ruinous loss; whilst,

2. It conveys the same immense sum to other men, who never merited or earned
it all, and gives them an enormous profit of 1000 per cent. on the merits and
earnings of the losers.

This whole doctrine is so perfectly known and familiar to all doctors in law
and morality, that they have adopted it for a proverb or maxim, summum jus,
summa injuria, i. e. right in extreme becomes extreme wrong; and nobody ever
pretended to dispute this maxim, who was not either most poignantly pressed
with argument (in which case the schoolmen will make any shifts) or hurried and
impelled by some favorite scheme or interest, out of all their philosophy,
decency, and common sense.

There is another plan or method of doing this business, which appears to me
much more just and equitable, and quite as easy as the one I have been
exploding, viz. Let every certificate be estimated by a scale of value,
grounded on the current price or exchange of it at its date, and at this value
let it be debited to every public creditor who received it, and at the same
value, I apprehend that certificates should never be redeemed at a higher rate
than their value or current exchange was at the time of issuing them; for the
public never received a valuable consideration for any more than was paid; and
to demand their redemption at a higher value would be charging the public with
usurious interest, which would be as wrong between public, as between private,
contractors.

It may be objected, perhaps, that the public do not literally receive 2 s. 6
d. and give their bond or certificate for 20 s.: but I answer, they really do
this; for it is very plain, that the certificate, when issued, was worth no
more than its current exchange at that time, say 2 s. 6 d.: the public creditor
received no more, and ought to be debited with no more; but the certificate is
made payable to the bearer, who is a stranger, at 20 s.

(...) if I pay 2 s. 6 d. and, in consideration thereof, take a bond to a third
person, who is a stranger, for 20 s. it is plain that the bond is usurious and
void, and if it passes by assignment through a thousand ^a^ds, the usury will
always stick to it, and, of course, it will ever carry with it its legal
defect, or principle of avoidance.

For it is plain, that if a private man should receive 2 s. 6 d. and give his
bond for 20 s. the bond would be usurious, and of course void.

My proposition is plainly just, and acknowledged by Congress and every body
else, and has the sanction of general practice with respect to loan-office
certificates, Continental money, etc. and I challenge any man to give a shadow
of reason, why all subsequent certificates, or paper of public credit, should
not be estimated, and in every respect be governed, by the same rule.

But if the certificate depreciates below its original value, the aggregate
public sustains the loss. This is manifestly the case with respect to all paper
money, certificates, and other public securities of every kind, which gain a
general currency, or become objects of common exchange and negotiation through
the community, and happen to depreciate during such currency.

The loss by depreciation becomes divided into innumerable parts, every single
one of which consists of the loss each individual severally sustained by the
depreciation of the paper, whilst it was in his bands, and the aggregate sum of
all these parts or losses, makes up the whole sum of the depreciation, or the
difference between the current value of the paper at the time, and the original
value of it when it first issued.

By this it appears, that the aggregate public has sustained the whole loss,
not in a way of perfect equality indeed (and perhaps no public assessment ever
did or can do this) but by way of general tax, of which innumerable individuals
(though not strictly every one) has sustained or paid his share, and, of course,
it would be very unjust to tax the same public over again for such sum, not to
pay it to the persons who have suffered by the depreciation, but to other
people, who have lost nothing, nor have any claim of merit to it.


or at the current value (as the case may require) let it be redeemed, with
interest from its date to the time of its redemption, and let the remainder of
the balances due to the public creditors, who have received certificates, be
paid them in money with interest, as soon as that can be done.

I know no reason why the real or current value of the certificates in question
should not be fixed by a scale, as well as the loan-office certificates, and
other depreciated public paper, during the war; this principle, as I before
observed, was adopted not only by Congress, but by all the States, as a matter
of both justice and necessity, and the tender-acts and other infringements of
this plan, were found totally wrongful, and, of course, were repealed.

No human plan of dispensing commutative justice to a nation, can ever be
perfect and wholly free from error; all that human wisdom and human virtue can
do, is to adopt that plan, which, in its operation, shall produce the most
justice and right, and the least injury and wrong, of any that can be devised,
and carry the plan into effect by the most equitable administration which can
be practiced.

If this then is a good rule or criterion of a good plan (which certainly no
man can seriously deny) let us try the two plans by this infallible touchstone,
viz. which of them, in its operation, will produce the most justice and
utility, and avoid the greatest injury and wrong.

1. The justice and utility of the one is reduced by its operation to almost
nothing, whilst the injuries and wrongs it produces are enormous, detestable,
and almost infinite; no less than depriving numberless citizens of 9-10 ths of
the reward due to their great merits and services, and subjecting them to a
final and total loss of the same, whilst it heaps the immense wealth (which is
their due, and which they lose) on another class of men, who have no pretense
to any merit at all.

2. The other plan gives to those meritorious citizens all the rewards to which
they are entitled, and if any injustice has been done them by the long delay,
it is in some measure made up to them by the interest it proposes to give them,
whilst it gives to the purchasers of alienated certificates, the same price for
them which they were worth when first issued, with interest from that time till
their redemption; and I think this is all they have a right to expect, and we
may very well say to each of them, Take what is thine own with usury, and more
we will not give thee.

If this class of men sustain any loss, it must arise from their having
purchased certificates at a higher exchange or price than they bore when they
were first issued, and this is a loss to which speculations of that sort are
always exposed; if any of our rich and enterprising citizens are disposed to
deal in stocks, gamble in the funds, or to be concerned in any negotiations of
hazard whatever, they all expect to be liable to a run of ill luck, as well as
to good fortune; and I do not know that the public have much occasion to
trouble themselves about either their profit or loss.

But if the losses of these men should be thought pitiable, they certainly, in
either magnitude or distress, bear not the least proportion to the heavy,
ruinous losses, which our most virtuous and meritorious citizens must sustain
on the other plan; much less can they justify the adoption of a plan in their
favor, which will deprive our most respectable citizens of the immense sums due
to their painful merit and services, in order to lavish the same away on these
adventurous speculators, and thereby accumulate the fortunes of the one, and
the distresses of the other, to a degree almost infinite.

But after all, if the losses of these speculating gentry must be thought to
require compensation, I beg it may be made by the public, but by no means let
it be carved out of the dear merits and earnings of the noblest patriots of our
country.

But the sacred duty of paying these worthy citizens, who have done and
suffered so much for our country, and from whose noble exertions we actually
derive and enjoy most inestimable benefits, is not only enforced on us by every
principle of justice, honor, and gratitude; but it is farther recommended by
many advantages and great inducements of interest, which are either involved in
it, connected with it, or consequential from it. It may be proper here to
mention some of these.

The reverence and respect which we owe to general Washington, ought to induce
us to pay with punctilious honor and justice, these his faithful followers and
fellow-laborers; it is known only to God, and the humane heart of that august
commander, what anguish of mind, what poignant sensibility of regret and
compassion occupied his breast, at the close of the war, when the exhausted
finances of the country reduced him to the dreadful necessity of dismissing his
faithful followers without their pay, and leaving them to find their way home
as they could, without a shilling, either to relieve the distresses of their
families on their return, or even to buy a cup of good liquor to recruit their
exhausted spirits, or make their meeting cheerful.

It is known only to God, and to the humane heart of that august commander, how
animated, how alive would be every fine sensibility of that great man, how
dilated his whole heart, could he be informed that the justice and gratitude of
his country would furnish the reward due to the virtues and merits of these his
worthy followers and supporters.

With what a suffusion of pleasure would he hasten to find out these noble
spirits in their retreats of obscurity and distress, extend to them the welcome
relief, and sympathize in their joy and gladness; is it possible we should
hesitate to indulge a man we reverence and esteem so highly, with this
gratification, in which every good heart in our nation would sympathize, and
which every feeling of honor and compassion strongly requires of us?

On the other hand, do you think he could bear a disappointment in his, with
his usual equanimity? He can bear hardships and dangers, he can bear a retreat
before his enemies, he can bear the horrors of war, and the dreadful collisions
of a battle, he can bear the joys and triumphs of victory, he can bear final
and decided successes, and he can bear the universal applause, gratitude, and
melting hearts of his fellow-citizens; I say, he can bear all these with that
heroic strength of mind, which, indeed, feels every incident, but can control
every passion into calmness and decency.

But were he to see the immense sum of money due to his companions and
supporters, twice earned, first by their toils and supplies, and then again by
the citizens at large, out of whose labor the money was carved and collected,
were he to see, I say, this immense sum all swept away into the coffers of
those who never earned any of it, whilst his dear companions were left to
lament, in remediless despair, the savage injuries of their country, the
disappointment of all their last expectations, and the hopeless ruin of their
fortunes and families; this, I think, would be too much for his mighty
fortitude to sustain, would shake that FIRMNESS OF MIND, that great POWER OF
SELF-COMMAND, which perhaps forms the most inimitable part of his character;
and what has he done, that you should subject him to this insupportable
mortification, this agony of sympathizing woe? When this Essay was written, I
had not the least idea that any possible consideration could have induced
general Washington to sign any act, which, in its operation, would cut his
soldiers out of their pay, and leave those without compensation, who, by their
advance of money and supplies, had fed and furnished his army; nor do I
apprehend, that when he signed the funding bill, he conceived these effects
would follow its operation: but I see two ways only, in which these effects can
be avoided:

One is by paying both original creditors and speculators; which, I suppose,
will be considered either extremely difficult or desperate, for want of cash.

The other is by a repeal of the funding act, or, which amounts to the same
thing, by an explanatory declaration that by public creditors, in the act, is
meant the real, original creditors, and not the speculators.

But ^e this as it will. I conceived it impossible for the general to sign such
an act, and, of course, thought it would be great cruelty, and even insult, to
offer such an one to him.




I do not mean by all this, to suggest that the simple humor or caprice of any
individual, however dignified, ought to be the basis of any public measure, in
which national interests are concerned; but where any man exists in a nation,
whose long practice and example have demonstrated that all his powers are
directed by wisdom, all his passions are controlled and governed by discretion,
and every action excited and animated by virtue and patriotism, I say, to form
public acts agreeable to the wishes of such a citizen, is paying court to
virtue itself.

Whilst, at the same time, the government makes a very high compliment to the
great body of the people, in supposing that their minds are all under the
influence of a similar virtue and patriotism, and, of course, that it is highly
proper to propose such an act to their approbation, on full presumption that a
public act, dictated by the wishes of such an illustrious citizen, would
certainly meet with a co-incidence of sentiment in the people at large, and, of
course, must be equally grateful to their wishes also.

I do not offer this as an airy compliment to the citizens of the States; but I
do most seriously believe, that the wishes of our august general, in the case
before us, and those of the great body of our people, are the same, or at
least, similar; the operations of the war being under the direction of the
general, and the more important parts, both of action and events, happening
under the inspection of his own eye, will doubtless excite in his mind more
lively sentiments of many things and circumstances, than the people at large
can have; yet I think the conduct of those worthy patriots who supported the
war by their supplies and services, meets the approbation of the people in so
universal a manner, that very few can be found, who would not sincerely join
their august general, in wishes that they may be paid. This leads me to observe,

III. That the patriots who supported the war by their supplies and services,
not only ought to be, but in fact can be, paid. Let their merits be ever so
great, and our obligations to do them justice be ever so sacred, yet if our
case was such that we could not pay them, no more need be said on the subject;
but if we can pay them, and do not, one would think that heaven and earth would
rise in their favor, and revenge their wrongs.

To prove that they can be paid, the following facts may, and doubtless will,
be admitted to be true and convincing evidence.

1. That the country is rich enough to pay them: 2. That the people are
generally convinced, that the debt demanded is justly due to their merits and
earnings; 3. That they are willing to pay them: and, 4. That our government, or
supreme council, is also willing to pay them, and vigorously to set on foot and
pursue the ways and means proper to effect it.

1. That the country is rich enough to pay their deliverers, is too manifest to
admit a doubt, or need any proof. It is easily demonstrated, that an additional
impost on imported luxuries (such as spirits, wines, silks, jewelry, etc.
etc.) but barely high enough to reduce the consumption down to that moderate
degree, which is really necessary to the health, wealth, and morality of the
inhabitants, would make our finances amply sufficient to pay every shilling we
owe to these worthy citizens, and not this only, but also to discharge every
other debt which either honor, justice, or gratitude demands of us.

2. That our people are generally convinced that the money demanded by these
worthy citizens is justly due to them, is abundantly manifest from many
considerations: 1st. They have discernment enough to know that a debt justly
due will always be due until it is paid. That long delay of payment is no
extinguishment of a debt. 2d. I believe their genius rises high enough to
comprehend, that a debt of 20 s. cannot be paid and satisfied by a payment of 2
s. 6 d. or, which amounts to the same thing, that the whole is greater than a
part, or that 20 of any thing cannot be balanced or equalized by an eighth part
of the same thing.

3. That our people at large are universally willing to pay these worthy
citizens, is also very manifest.

1st. The habits of morality are strongly impressed on our people in general.
The country is not old enough to establish vice, oppression, and injury, or to
obliterate the natural index of right and wrong, in the human mind: in the old
countries, the luxury of an individual may consume the labor of thousands; a
nation may be taxed and oppressed to support the lust, pride, and haughty
grandeur of a few; a court of inquisition may be instituted to force the mind,
and infringe the rights of conscience, and the people will bear it; but with us
it is otherwise.

In America, oppressors have not lost their shame, nor the oppressed their
resentment, nor the people their natural sense of good and evil; when these
worthy citizens exhibit their merits and services, show their wounds, and plead
their constitutions and fortunes broken in the cause of their country, and cry
for their pay, the general mind is instantly affected, a sense of both justice
and compassion is strongly excited, and the universal wish and murmur is, 'let
right be done,' and, 'why has it been so long neglected and delayed?'

2d. For the truth of the fact, I appeal to every man in the States, whether,
within the circle of his acquaintance, there does not prevail a general pity
for the soldiers and other liberal supporters of the war; a decided opinion and
high sense that they have been injured and ill used; and a strong and sincere
wish that they may be paid: as far as my acquaintance with my countrymen
extends, this wish is almost universal, and if any exception can be found, I
conceive it must be among two classes of people. 1. The present holders of
alienated certificates, some of whom, I suppose, wish to grab and secure to
themselves, the rewards due to the merits and services of these worthy
patriots. 2. The other class are those who always abhorred both the war and
Revolution, and are therefore well enough pleased to see all those who were
concerned in promoting both the one and the other, most effectually mortified
and disappointed. This leads us to consider,

4. The happy facility and ease with which our supreme council can adopt the
measure of paying these worthy, injured citizens, and put into most effectual
operation the ways and means necessary to accomplish it; nobody doubts that
this is the ardent wish of their hearts, or that they will speedily adopt the
favorite measure, and vigorously support and push it to its final effect, and
thereby demonstrate to the world, how strongly they are animated and gratified
with the pleasing task of repairing the wrongs of our injured citizens, and
restoring the justice, honor, and dignity of our country.

By large and repeated trials of the temper of our people, we find that they
will bear great pressures and burdens, and will freely devote their services
and fortunes for what they deem to be the good of their country, for objects
which fall in with their wishes, and meet their approbation; this temper will
enable government to institute any proper modes of supply, for the payment of
our worthy patriots, when that very payment is the favorite wish of the people
who are to pay the tax which is collected for that purpose.

Two different bodies of claimants now present their demands on government;
these worthy patriots are one of them; and the present holders of alienated
certificates are the other; it will require equal sums of money to pay either
of them; the only question is, which of them shall have it? but I conceive,
that the difficulty of raising the money for the payment of each of these, will
not be by any means equal, but extremely different.

This brings into view another consideration, which, in the present state of
our finances, appears to me of great moment; our revenue system is young and
tender, and it is of great importance to introduce the practice of it, and get
it formed into a sort of habit in the States as soon as possible; and this may
require delicate management; if taxes are called for in ways, and for purposes,
which are generally approved, the collection may be made with little difficulty
and few murmurs; but if immense sums of money are demanded in ways that are
disgusting, and for purposes not generally approved, and perhaps abhorred, the
difficulties of collection will be great, and the murmurs, infinite; this may
bring embarrassments on the revenue, which we may long feel very sad effects
of. To apply this to the case before us --

A large impost laid purposely for the payment of the real supporters of the
war, will meet the approbation, and coincide with the wishes, of the great body
of our people, and, of course, the collection will be made with ease and good
humor; but let our people be told that this immense sum, which is levied for
that favorite purpose, when carried into the treasury, is not to be given to
those favorite patriots, but is to be grabbed up by another class of men who
have no pretense to either service or merit, but claim only what is due to the
merits and the services of the others, I conceive, in this case, that all good
humor will take its flight in an instant, and murmurs plenty and sour enough
will ensue.

What effect such general murmurs, complaints, and discontents may have on the
revenue, may be easily foreseen, and I should be glad to know, that these
mischiefs would end with the revenue, without extending farther to disturb and
derange the general police of the nation; the least mischief which can be
expected from this general dissatisfaction may be, that it will furnish a
plausible excuse or plea for smugglers and those who wish to defraud the
revenue, viz. that there cannot be much harm in eluding a tax which is levied
for the very purpose of satisfying claims, which are, in their nature,
wrongful, and not grounded on any such valuable considerations, as the laws of
commutative justice make essentially necessary to the existence of any rightful
transfer of property.

I imagine it would be pretty much in vain for government to attempt to compose
all this confusion, and pacify the general ill humor, by holding out an old law
of (...) or mercantile rule (good enough, indeed, within, its (...) limits) but
which is racked and tortured far beyond (...) reach and influence of that
reason, on which alone (...) fitness and propriety ever did, and ever must,
(...) which is stretched to such a degree of extravagance (...) nation under
heaven ever thought of adopting into practice; and which no man of common sense
can ever reconcile to that natural sense of right, which exists in his own
mind; I mean the old law or usage of assignments.

I do not recollect more than two instances which ever happened in Europe, of
stock, bills, or certificates (for they are all different names for the same
thing) of such magnitude as to affect national credit, the variations of
exchange of which ever were so great as from par to 8 for 1; these two
instances were, the Mississippi scheme in France, in 1719; and South Sea scheme
in England, in 1721. In the original publication of this Essay, the following
short account, of the South Sea scheme in England was inserted by way of
preface, viz.

THE South Sea scheme in England affords us the only instance I ever heard of
in that country, of any national stocks or funds, whose fluctuation or exchange
ever varied, i. e. rose or fell, so much as from par to 8 for 1, or vice versa,
form 8 for 1 to par.

National stocks or funds I call them, not because those stocks were properly
public money, but because they were of such magnitude and extent as to affect
the trade and credit of the nation, and were managed under the sanction and
protection of national authority, and controlled by the inspection of
Parliament.

The South Sea Company was incorporated by act of Parliament, in 1711 i. e. a
great number of proprietors of navy bills, debentures, and other public
securities, were incorporated into a Company, to which was given a great
variety of duties on wines, tobacco, India goods, etc. to pay the annual
interest due to them, amounting to above half a million sterling; and also,
with this grant was joined a grant of a monopoly of the trade to Spanish
South-America, grounded on the Ass^^nto treaty, etc.

This Company soon grew amazingly rich, had the King and most other capital
personage for stock-holders, and in 1718, his Majesty himself was chosen their
Governor; at which time, the Company was become the great favorite of the court
and nation, and, in 1720, were in such good condition, that 100 l. share of
their stock was worth 130 l. i. e. 30 per cent. above par.

At this time, i. e. in 1720, the scheme of reducing all the public funds into
one, for discharging the national debt (which, by the by, at that time was
alarming enough) was set on foot.

The South Sea Company and Bank of England were competitors, and bid on one
another for the privilege of taking in the national debts, and thereby
increasing their capital stock and yearly fund. The offer of the Company to
Parliament for this privilege, was above 7,000,000 l. sterling, etc. which was
more than the Bank would give, and, of course, was accepted and ratified by an
act of Parliament.

Having thus carried their point, the next thing was to go to work, and make
the most of their privilege, which was generally thought so great, that their
stocks rose from 130 to 300 l. for a share of 100 l. by the time their contract
with Parliament was completed.

The first thing they had to do, was to purchase in the public securities,
which they were able to do on pretty favorable terms; for the Revolution, and
the wars of King William and Queen Anne, had raised the national debt to about
40,000,000 l. sterling (if I remember right) which was in those days thought a
very alarming sum (though the nation have learned better since) of course, the
credit of the public debts was somewhat doubtful; and as the stock of the
South Sea Bank or Company was in the first credit, the proprietors of the
public securities thought themselves happy to carry in and sell their public
securities, on such terms as they and the Company could agree on. Above
26,000,000 l. sterling was subscribed into the South Sea stock, in this manner.

In short, the Company opened their books and sold out stock to an immense
amount, and to a profit from 300 to 1000 per cent. Their first subscription was
for 1,000,000 at 300 l. April 12, 1720; and the stock rose so fast, that on the
24th of August following, the books were opened for a subscription of 1,000,000
capital stock, at 1000 l. for every 100 l. capital stock, which was filled in
three hours; such was the rage for that sort of speculating, at that time. And,
what is more amazing, after the books were closed, in the afternoon of the same
day, this same subscription was sold in Change-Alley at 30 or 40 per cent.
advance.

The cash and credits of the Company were vastly accumulated by this time; and
as they lent millions on interest, and sold most of their stocks for about
1-5th cash in hand, the rest on credit at several future payments, the debts
due to them were immense.

When the bubble burst, as it did in less than six months after, and the stock
the subscribers had purchased at 1000 per cent, was reduced down to about 150,
and, of course, the loss of ever such subscriber was 850 l. out of every 1000
l. subscribed; I say, when this happened, legal suits (of which very many were
commenced) for these debts due to the Company, would have reduced most of the
monied men in the kingdom to a state of remediless bankruptcy, and the Company
must have lost most of their money in the bargain. The public creditors had
lost most of their public securities, which they had subscribed into that fund.
And infinite other mischiefs of a like nature must have accrued, of a kind most
ruinous and wrong, and of an amount so great as to affect national interest,
honor, and credit, and of such an extreme and extraordinary nature, that no
ordinary rules of law could be applied in any such manner as to afford the
least remedy, but would rather increase the evil, and give the wrong a kind of
sanction of law.

In this extreme case, the Parliament found themselves under an absolute
necessity of assuming the powers of sovereign equity, and, as supreme
chancellors of the kingdom, to supersede the ordinary rules of the law, control
its force, soften its rigor, and adopt such equitable principles, as would
afford some remedy of an evil, an injury, a wrong, of such magnitude, as
brought the justice, credit, and safety of the nation into danger.

On this principle they suspended lawsuits; annulled special bails; discharged
numberless debtors who owed for stock, on paying 10 per cent. of their debts;
compelled compensations in favor of the sufferers; forced dividends and
appropriations of the stock of the Company; and even punished many for
mismanagement, who seemed to have conformed themselves to the letter of the
law, etc. etc.

Vide Tindal's Continuation of Rapin, in the pages referred to in the index,
under the words, South Sea Trade and Company.




These were both established and authenticated by acts of the supreme
legislature; acted under the inspection and control of it; were the channels
through which the public moneys were circulated; and the final accounts of both
were settled and adjusted under the direction and authority of the same supreme
power of the respective nations. These schemes were so extensive as to affect
national interest; most of the monied men in both nations were deeply concerned
in them, and when the enormous and ruinous effects of that great variation of
exchange, which these stocks suffered, came to be he generally felt,
applications without number were made to government for relief.

Very strong remonstrances were made against the interference of the
legislature, and that the matter should be left to the course of common law, i.
e. to be decided according to the common rule of assignments of all negotiable
notes, bonds, etc. But on a close inspection of the matter, it was soon clearly
seen, that the variation of exchange of these stocks (or their depreciation, as
we call it) was so enormous and extreme, that any application of the ordinary
rules of law and practice to them, would produce the most ruinous injustice and
wrongs, and, of course, every idea of that mode of settlement and adjustment
was instantly given up.

Their great principle was, that justice and right was the grand end of law,
and paramount to any particular rules or established practice, and, of course,
ought to control them in all cases of so extreme and extraordinary a kind, as
could not fall within the reason on which those rules were founded, but so
circumstanced, as that an application of these common rules would unavoidably
produce such injury and wrong, as was totally destructive of all that right
which was the essential principle and end of all law.

Upon full consideration of all this, by an act of sovevereignty they adopted
the most equitable principles, which they could devise in those great
confusions, which would apply to the particular cases that lay before them, and
which would, in their operation, produce the most right and avoid all wrong, in
the best manner they could think of.

The English House of Commons went so far as to suspend all judgments and
executions recovered upon any contract, for sale or purchase of any stock or
subscription, and also ordered that all persons, who had become indebted to the
Company for South Sea stock, etc. should, on payment of 10 per cent. be
discharged from any farther demands. They made many other resolutions (which
were afterward made acts of parliament) totally repugnant to the common rules
of law and practice, but absolutely necessary to be adopted in those extreme
cases, to which these common rules could not be applied without the most
manifest and ruinous wrongs and injustice; wrongs of such magnitude as to
affect the trade and credit of the nation, as well as to bring remediless ruin
on thousands of individuals, and, at the same time, heap immense fortunes on
others who had never deserved them.

I know very well that great pains were taken in France, to throw much odium
and blame on mr. Law, and to make him chargeable with the great and ruinous
mischiefs of the Mississippi scheme; and the same industry was used in England,
to cast blame on the directors of the South Sea Company, and to father the
pernicious consequences of that scheme on their corruption and mismanagement.

But though it may be probable enough, that in schemes of that vast magnitude and
national interest, faults in the management might be found, which are always
made to rest on the prime movers and directors of them, yet the most capital
and destructive mischiefs sprung from the nature of the schemes themselves, and
would necessarily happen (though, perhaps, not in every possible excess and
aggravation) if the same plans were to be set on foot a thousand times over.

But as these schemes were established under the sanction of the Legislature,
in the fullest manner that could be devised, it was not quite decent to admit
in the national assemblies, that their mischiefs flowed from their nature, but
the blame must be thrown on somebody, as some stupid committees, in the late
times, attributed the depreciation of the Continental money to the merchants.

This, to be sure, in England, was natural enough, where they adopt this
principle, that when popular discontents rise very high, one man must die for
the people, i. e. one or more victims must be sacrificed, like scape-goats, to
appease the people, and thereby parry the resentment due to the minister, or
prince, or Parliament, or other principal, from whose folly or misconduct the
mischief originally proceeded; witness, admiral Byng, and many others.

But let the mischief originate wherever it might, the grand object of
attention was a remedy, and this, doubtless, engrossed and occupied the whole
wisdom of the legislatures and the respective nations, at the time; for whilst
their great interest, both national and individual, were rapidly melting down
under the fatal influence of these destructive schemes, even supreme councils
were willing to hearken to advice; and, therefore, we may well presume that we
have an example of the most consummate national wisdom that could be collected,
in the modes of remedy which they adopted.

Nor does any body suppose that one man in England expects that their national
debt will ever be paid at par, though the present discount or depreciation is but
about 25 per cent.; or that more interest will be paid than the real value of
these stocks or certificates require; the present interest paid on them being 3
or 3 per cent. whilst the common interest of that country is 5 per cent.

I do not pretend to refer to any thing, which might be done in the old days of
barbarity and ignorance; but I do not recollect having ever heard of one modern
prince or State in Europe, who ever attempted to pay his soldiers or other
public creditors, in certificates, or stocks, or negotiable securities of any
sort; except when such payment made a part of the original contract, as the
contracts for navy supplies are payable in navy bills, etc. All that I know,
which is at all like it, is paying armies, etc. with base coin, which some
princes have done; but this was a State-cheat universally detested; nor could
all the authority of such prince ever give such base coin a currency beyond its
real value; nor did I ever hear of much it being called in and redeemed at full
nominal value.

This I take to be the practice of the nations of Europe, in cases similar to
the one I am pleading; and, I think, a very little discretion on our part might
induce us to imitate their prudence and virtue, profit by their example, and
avoid their errors.

But it may, perhaps, be more important to our internal quiet, to advert to
what has been the practice of our own States in similar cases; for any
innovations, or departure from known usage, and customs among ourselves, may
give more dissatisfaction to our people, than any deviation from European
practices, which, though perhaps equally ^ise, yet are less known and considered
among us, than our own.

The loan-office certificates issued by our own supreme council during the war,
are all estimated by a scale, the principle of which is the value of them at
the time of their dates; the value of our Continental and States money has been
estimated by either the general scale of Congress, or that of particular
States; this method was indeed neglected too long, but was at last fully
adopted, upon the plainest reason and most urgent necessity; and when our
Continental and State money depreciated down to nothing, it all died where it
was; nobody ever thought of appreciating it again, by a redemption at its
original value.

The Old Tenor and other bills which had a currency in many of the States long
before the Revolution, were redeemed at their current exchange, without the
least regard to their nominal value.

And can any possible reason be given, why we should adopt an innovation
(proposed and urged by many) respecting the certificates in question, which is
a total departure from the constant practice of all the States before, at, and
since the Revolution, in all cases of similar reason; an innovation, which, by
its natural and necessary operation, must and will not only produce immense and
ruinous wrong to numberless individuals of most deserving citizens, but will
also disgrace and disparage our public credit, honor, and dignity, and
discourage the confidence of our own citizens and foreigners in our national
justice and morality?

Indeed, the ordinary rules of law would do infinite mischief and injustice,
were not the rigor of them to be softened and corrected by chancery; the powers
of chancery ought always to control the common law, whenever, in any case, the
application of the ordinary rules of law will manifestly destroy right and
justice, or work a wrong; for law is certainly perverted and needs correction,
whenever it destroys right, or does wrong.

The supreme power of every State is the supreme chancery of it, and always
has, and must have, sovereign authority to repeal, to limit, or control every
rule of law; and ^ay, and ought to, do it, whenever that rule operates by way
of destruction or defalcation of right, or producing of wrong, for justice and
security of right can never be perfect, or even tolerable, in any State.
without the existence of this power, and the prudent exercise of it.

When all the foregoing reasons, the practice of all our own particular States,
and also, that of our own supreme council, as well as that of all the States of
Europe, in similar cases, as far as their practice is known to us; I say, when
all these things are duly considered, I think my great conclusion will be
admitted very readily, viz.

That our most deserving and patriotic citizens (whose cause I have been
advocating) must be paid; that the wishes of our own citizens require it; that
our character of honor and justice, both at home and abroad, requires it; and
that we shall be deemed by the nations of Europe, the veriest novices in policy
and finance, as well as knaves in practice, if we do not do it.

I will subjoin one short observation here, because I think it of great
importance, viz. it is the great interest, duty, and honor of every government,
not only to pay their contracts honestly and in good season, but also to grant
proper compensations to all their citizens, who, by patriotic exertions,
deserve the notice and rewards of their country; this will enable government at
all times to command every possible exertion of their people, either in the way
of services or supplies, and will induce them to hasten with cheerfulness and
pride, to offer to government any thing they have or can produce, which the
public service stands in need of.

Whereas, if these noble spirits find themselves neglected and forgotten, and
that in their country's service they have labored in vain, and spent their
strength for, naught, their zeal for the public service will become very
languid, and not only so, but the example of their disappointment will operate
by way of great discouragement of their neighbors. Nothing animates and keeps
up the spirit and good-humor of a nation so effectually, as a full confidence
in the justice and gratitude of its government; and this is the deepest and
firmest foundation on which the wealth, the peace, the honor, and the
establishment of a nation can be built.

For this great purpose, excessive and extravagant allowances are by no means
necessary, but are even criminal, when the finances are low and straitened, for
we ought, at least, to be just before we are generous; the honor of the service
and the acceptance of government, are the grand inducements to noble, patriotic
actions; and moderate compensations, adequate to the services and merits, will
be perfectly satisfactory; more than enough need not be given to any one, for
that will make it necessary to give less than enough to some other.

On the whole, raising the great sums of money necessary to satisfy all the
real public creditors, will, under proper management, be no great burden to the
States; the levying them as fast as the honor and justice of the States
require, will not impoverish them. Large sums collected from the body of the
nation, if they are paid out again and distributed over the same nation,
especially if the collection is principally made from the richer sort, and the
payments made to the poorer sort (which will be the case, on the plan I
propose) this tax, I say, will rather prove a benefit than a burden.

It will increase the circulation of cash; it will stimulate industry; it will
enable thousands to pay their debts, who otherwise could not do it; and, of
course, it will enable thousands to receive the debts due to them, who must
otherwise lose them; it will enable very many poor to support themselves, who
otherwise would be a burden on the public or private charity; it would tend to
equalize the wealth of the community, by giving every one his due portion of
it; and thereby prevent the riches of the country from accumulating in few
hands, etc. etc. It is here very worthy of notice, that these salutary effects
will naturally and surely flow from MY plan of paying the public moneys to the
real, original creditors, who are scattered over all the States; and payment to
them will, of course, not only afford such relief as will be highly convenient
to them and their neighbors, but will also produce such a brisk circulation of
the money so paid, as will be greatly beneficial to the whole nation.

Not so, but in a manner widely different, will be the operation of the scheme
of paying these moneys to the speculators; about one-third of whom, I am told,
are foreigners, who will carry their share of the money out of the country,
never to return again; and the other two-thirds, if paid to the speculators
here, will not probably produce any general increase of circulation of money,
or other benefit to the public.

For money obtained by sudden acquirement, without industry, merit, or
earnings, seldom proves any benefit either to the possessors or to the public,
but generally produces luxury, vanity, pride, and hurtful example of
prodigality and waste, till the whole is expended, and then the poor objects
and their families are lost much more forlorn and distressed than they would
probably have been had the money never have come into their hands.

I think any body may observe the very different effects and operations of
these two plans, and it appears to me, that little penetration will be
necessary to discern that the gain lies on the side of godliness; and, of
course, if we reject the right, with so many benefits annexed, and adopt the
wrong, with such a train of mischiefs at the heels of it, however our integrity
may be unim peached, our wisdom will be doubted, and will appear to many people
altogether inadequate to the management of the finances of a nation.




These are no small advantages resulting from taxation; and, I think, their
effects on the nation at large will compensate the burden of it, and probably
yield a balance of advantage; especially if the tax should be levied by an
impost on imported luxuries, and thereby lessen the consumption of useless and
hurtful articles; which would operate to the benefit of the community, even if
the money produced by the tax was all thrown into the sea.

This mode of taxation may easily be made adequate to all the exigencies of the
State, and leave no occasion of reverting to either an excise or direct
taxation, both of which will be much more difficult in their assessment, more
expensive in the collection, more disgusting in the mode of demand, more
burdensome to the subject, less equable in pressure, and much more uncertain in
the product.

I now, with the utmost confidence, submit it to the heart, to the feelings,
and to the conscience, of every citizen of the States, that I have exhibited
proofs, not barely sufficient for full conviction, but so plain, that any
person must put violence on himself, who will not be convinced,

I. That the real public creditors, whose cause I am pleading, have not yet
been paid; this is as plain as that 20 s. is more than 2 s. 6 d.

II. That they ought to be paid, with the first moneys we can get; this is as
plain as that "the laborer is worthy of his hire," or, that contracts made on
valuable consideration given, ought to be fulfilled.

III. That I have exhibited such a statement of our finances or resources of
supply, as demonstrates that they can be paid; that the payment of them would
not be a burden or distress on the country, but rather a benefit, a manifest
advantage, to our people at large: and,

IV. That from most essential considerations of public justice and honor, of
national character, both abroad and at home, and of the internal peace and
establishment of our nation, it follows most clearly, that they must be paid.

I do not know any thing farther necessary or that can be done, but to give
this Essay some inscription, which may direct it to some particular attention;
for that which is offered to the public at large, is generally considered as
every body's business, and so is apt to be in fact nobody's and, of course,
becomes neglected.

As I mean, in this Essay, to plead the cause of national justice, I wish to
address it to Congress, and beg the patronage of that august body;

Not merely because they are the fountain of national justice, and their
decisions alone can administer the remedy which I solicit; but also,

Because many very respectable personages, who now compose that supreme
council, were, during the war, either concerned in the most capital public
transactions in the cabinet, or were officers of most distinguished rank in the
army; and therefore, by near inspection, were enabled to judge in the best
manner, not only of the importance of the merits and services herein urged; but
also of the spirit, fidelity, and patriotism, with which they were rendered to
the public; and also,

Because I wish to set up the claim of these worthy, deserving patriots, along
side of that of the present holders of certificates, who (I am told) have
presented their petition to Congress, in which they count very largely on the
merits, services, and sufferings of these worthy citizens, of which they
exhibit pathetic and very moving descriptions, but after all, very modestly
request, that the money due to these very meritorious citizens, may be paid to
themselves.

I think, I can introduce my friends at least under the advantage of old
acquaintances; whereas the others, I conceive, are mostly new faces.

I have great confidence, that my plea for citizens of such merit and
respectability, will meet at least the attention, if not the approbation and
patronage, of Congress.

But after all, if it should be the final determination (which I cannot
suppose) that the certificates shall be considered as full payment to those who
received them, and that nothing is now due to any but to the possessors of
those certificates, I have one more motion to make, viz. that the original
holders of these certificates should be preferred and first paid, as claiming
payment of debts of an higher nature, and grounded on greater merit, than the
others can pretend to. Congress, in their last session, after long debate,
rejected the whole plan of discrimination between the original creditors or
holders of certificates, and the speculators or the holders of alienated
certificates, and, without any distinction, admitted alike the claims of all
the present possessors, and, by their funding act of August 4, 1790, funded all
the certificates at full value, or 20 s. in the pound, with interest payable
quarterly on two-thirds of their amount, from the first day of January, 1791;
and the other third, with interest to commence the first of the year 1801, or
ten years from said January 1.

The certificates for interest, called indents, are excepted, out of this
provision, and are funded at an interest of 3 per cent. only.

By this act, an enormous sum of the public money is appropriated for the
payment of speculators, who never earned it, nor pretend to hold out any sort
of right to it, which is founded on their merits, or earnings, or valuable
consideration paid, but claim it entirely in right of others, to whose merits
and earnings, the money was righteously due, and which they make title to
merely by force of the common rule of assignments, which, it appears to me,
cannot admit any reasonable application to this case.

Whether it is the design of Congress, by this statute, to cut the real,
original creditors off from their pay of that part of the balances which they
have never yet received (and which, I suppose, is yet justly due to them) I
know not; but I take it, that this is the light in which it is generally
understood.

If this is really the case (which I cannot yet believe) I have only to lament
that all the arguments I have published, which appear to me to be very strong,
clear, and conclusive, and all the concern I have felt for this great subject,
are vain and fruitless, and I suppose I ought to set myself down as an idiot,
stupid as a post, because I cannot perceive an iota of reason or justice in a
measure, which appeared to Congress so clear and just, as to induce them to
adopt it in a solemn, public act: or may I rather be indulged in the thought
that a Prince, a Diet, a Parliament, a Congress, an Assembly, however high in
dignity, and however important to mankind their decisions are, may err, and,
what is more, may, on revision, be convinced of their error, and -- correct it?

-- Facilis descensus Averni:
Noctes at que dies patet atri j^nu^ Ditis;
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad (...),
Hoc opus! hic labor est! --
VIRGIL.


I know that Congress, like all other similar bodies of supreme authority, must
necessarily have a great variety of important, different, and sometimes,
contending interests, referred to their decision; and, of course, the several
parties will use all possible arts, address, and influence in their power, to
bend the mind of that august body to their several wishes.

It is very difficult for any body of men, thus beset and surrounded (if they
have any passions or prejudices at all) to pursue a course perfectly direct,
and free from error; yet so very important and consequential is every decision
they make, and every measure they adopt, that the fate of millions hangs on
their lips, and the fortune of millions is balanced by the motion of their
hands.

Therefore, under a due impression and sense of both the difficulty and
importance of their stations, councils, and actions, all good men ought to be
candid in their opinions, moderate in their censures, and very zealous and
sincere in their prayers that Almighty God would, in all their difficult
consultations, give them that wisdom which may direct and lead them to such
decisions as may be conformable to natural right and justice, conduce to his
glory, and establish the peace, happiness, security, and best good of our
country.

A REVIEW OF THE PRINCIPLES AND ARGUMENTS Of the two foregoing ESSAYS, viz. The
Seventh Essay on Finance, and The Plea for the Poor Soldiers; WITH SOME
OBSERVATIONS ON THE FINANCES of the UNION.
I. THE finances or management of the stock or revenue of every State or
individual, from the greatest Empire down to the least Republic, from the
highest company to the lowest partnership, from the richest landholder or
merchant to the poorest peasant or pedlar, determines their fortune or fate, is
the great principle out of which their peace and plenty, or their embarrassment
and straits, must grow, and from which must proceed their final honors and
success, or their disgrace and ruin.

This subject, of course, becomes an object of most capital concern, and ought
to be an object of first consideration, both of every community and also of
every individual.

Therefore, when any plan, either of political maneuver in a nation, or
business in lesser communities or individuals, is in contemplation, to count
the cost becomes an indispensable part of the deliberations.

And when the cost is properly computed or counted, the next thing is, to look
out for and find revenues or incomes sufficient to pay it.

An error in either of these, i. e. a wild calculation of the expense of any
proposed plan, or a wild and deficient estimate of the income or revenue
sufficient to pay it, is the common and usual cause of bankruptcy, breach of
faith, and loss of credit, in both the one and the other, and of all the
disgraces, embarrassments, and other ruinous consequences which must flow
therefrom.

II. The capital stock of a nation or individual is the wealth each possesses,
and the resources which are with certainty within their power; but the more
proper and safe way of computing the stock is rather by the yearly income or
revenue, than by the capital; because if the annual expenditures exceed the
annual incomes, the capital stock must be left in debt at the end of the year,
which, if continued, must soon produce embarrassments and straits, and even
bankruptcy in the end.

It often happens that much valuable property is so conditioned, that it will
not produce any yearly income, or, at most, not any that is adequate to the
interest of its value; therefore, it would be very imprudent for a nation or
individual to make calculations of yearly expenditures, grounded on such
estates, for they will fail of supply otherwise than by way of mortgage, which
ought to be avoided as a last, because it is a fatal, resort.

III. But let the stock or finance of a nation or individual be ever so good
and affluent, yet every advantage of it must and ever will arise from, and be
limited by, the justice, honesty, and truth, with which it is negotiated or
administered. Honest payment of just debts, and fulfillment of contracts, are
most essentially necessary to give either a nation or individual the command
and control of all the supplies and services, which can be furnished within the
circle of their influence.

For all persons will hasten with eagerness to render all supplies and services
in their power to an honest, grateful paymaster, and will avoid, with a
proportionate reluctance, furnishing either the one or the other to a
dishonest, dilatory, or trickish paymaster.

And, of course, all supplies and services, in the one case, will be obtained
in the easiest, quickest manner, and will be executed and rendered in the
highest perfection (as there will be choice of materials, stores, and workmen)
and in the cheapest way, and at the lowest rates.

But, in the other case, both the supplies and services will be embarrassed in
their acquirement, will be executed and rendered in deficient manner, and at
very high prices; for every one is loath to deal with a bad paymaster, nor will
suffer himself to be engaged or employed by him, unless he is impelled by some
urgent necessity, or induced by the offer of very high price, or great
emoluments.

IV. Economy and prudence in expenditures is absolutely necessary to the
obtainment of the great advantages and benefits of the revenue or national
stock; without this, that justice and honesty in the management of the revenue
can never be practiced, which is essentially necessary to its ends and uses:
for if the revenue or stock is wasted by needless expenses, those which are
necessary must be unprovided for; if large, fictitious, and groundless demands
are accepted and paid, debts which are by honor, contract, and real merits,
justly due, must lie unpaid.

This operates not only to the great injury of the real creditors, but also to
the embarrassment of the whole community; for every branch of business in the
nation stands connected with the public finance, as the public debts are great
and extensive objects of dependence and exchange, and, of course, any
disappointment in these will generate innumerable disappointments in the course
of currency through which they ought to pass, and, of course, will either
directly or remotely affect every branch of business.

We have had late and large proof of this kind of vexation, in the numberless
instances of persons who could not carry on their business, or pay their debts,
because they were disappointed of receiving moneys due to them by the public:
such a mode of financiering as this will ruin any nation in the world.

The foregoing propositions and remarks I consider as maxims or first
principles, which force the assent of the mind at first sight, by a kind of
intuitive proof or instant perception, and which nobody will ever think of
disputing, much less of denying; I therefore premise them like axioms, on which
I may safely proceed to build any doctrines or plans which really rest on these
foundations, or come within their essential principles and reasons. -- I go on
now with my Review of the Principles and Arguments of the two foregoing Essays.

The great principles of the two foregoing Essays are comprised in the
following propositions:

I. That all certificates delivered to the public creditors, ought to be placed
to the debit of their account, at the value or exchange of them at the time
they received them, and the remainder or residue of the debt due to them, ought
to be paid to them with interest: and that all certificates, when brought into
the treasury, ought to be paid to the bearer, whether an original holder or
alienee, at the value or exchange, which each of them bore at the time of its
date, or at the current exchange at the time of redemption, as the case may
require. If this cannot be admitted, my second proposition is,

II. To pay all certificates brought in by the original holders, at full
nominal value, with interest; and to pay all the alienated certificates at the
value or exchange they bore at their dates, or at the time of redemption, as
the case may require. If this cannot be admitted, I propose,

III. That the original holders be first paid, and the speculators, last of
all, if they must be paid at all.

The great principle or substance of my argument is, that the public money
ought to be paid to the real, original creditors, who, by rendering supplies
and services to the country, (...) really, meritoriously, and painfully earned
it: for,

1. Their demand is founded on the most solemn contract of Congress, who had
good right to make such contract, which binds the honor, the morality, and
justice of the country, and nothing but payment can discharge the country from
the guilt of injustice, and violation of faith and truth most solemnly plighted
to them.

2. They fulfilled the whole of said solemn contract virtuously, honestly, and
very painfully on their parts, and therefore, on every principle of merit and
earning, are entitled to their pay.

3. The infinite benefits we derive from that contract and their faithful
fulfillment of it, afford another argument why we should pay them: we cannot
honestly enjoy the benefit of any man's labor, without paying him his hire; it
is to the supplies and services of these men, that we are indebted for our
country, our lives, our estates, our liberty, and our independence, and all the
blessings of a free government, uncontrolled and unbiassed by any foreign power
or influence; and it ought not to be thought possible, that such an American
government, which derives its existence from the exertions, the travails, and
persevering virtue of these patriots, should, by a public act, deny them their
pay, their hire, their reward, for merits which have been so beneficial to us,
and painful to them; or should suffer any how the public money, carved out of
the wealth and earnings of our citizens for the very purpose of paying these
worthy patriots, to be diverted from this desirable object, or to be applied to
any other purpose whatever.

4. The heart-moving and unparallelled distresses of very many thousands of
these worthy patriots for want of their pay, is another cogent reason why they
should be paid: I do not say, that the benefits we receive from their merits,
or the distresses they suffer from our breach of faith and promise in denying
them their pay, increase or alter the stipulations of their contract; but both
have a strong effect on the gratitude, the benevolence, and compassion of the
human mind, which are virtues of such precious and primary consideration in
society, that, I think, no government ought to be callous to their influence,
or hardened into an insensibility of their force. We all think it worse to
refuse a laborer his hire, when he and his family must starve and perish for
want of it, than to deny payment of an equal sum to a rich man, who had an
equally just demand, but whose fortune would enable him to bear the loss
without pain.

5. These original creditors have not yet been paid, but in small part, and
therefore the remaining balance is still due to them, and ought to be paid.
Nobody pretends they have ever received any payment but negotiable certificates
made payable to the bearer, and worth on average, when they received them,
about 2 s. 6 d. in the pound; these certificates, I say, ought to be debited to
them at their value or current exchange when they received them; so much they
have received, and no more; and the residue of balance due to them ought to be
paid to them.

I have attended to all the debates on this great subject, both public and
private, which have fell in my way, but I do not recollect one person who ever
seriously insisted, that the certificates delivered to the public creditors
were full payment of the debt due to them; but this notwithstanding, I have
heard many objections, silly and nugatory enough, strongly urged against making
any further payment to those who had sold their certificates.

1. One was, that if they had not sold their debt, they had sold the evidence
of it, and so could have no further demand; this is not true; the evidence of
the debt is the public books, where their accounts are adjusted, and the
balance due to them is entered; and nothing can justly be objected to this but
some evidence that the debt has been paid; which evidence, the certificate, if
produced, could not supply. Further, the certificate, if produced, could not be
so good evidence as the public books, for the one might be counterfeit, the
other could not be: suppose a man brings suit on a record, of which he has some
time or other taken a copy, and produces the record in court; can it be
objected to his recovery, that he has not produced the copy? Or, if a man
brings suit on a contract, and has three witnesses to it, two of which he
produces, who fully verify the fact; shall he lose his cause, because he did
not call in the third witness?

The public creditor who demands his pay, must doubtless bring evidence
sufficient to support his suit, i. e. the proof will lie upon him, and if he
can, in any way, verify the facts, and support his right, he doubtless ought to
be paid.

2. Another objection has been made, viz. that all the original creditors who
sold their certificates, were not driven by necessity to do this; and what if
they were not? can there be any crime or disqualification in selling a
negotiable certificate, made payable to the bearer, and purposely calculated,
like bills of money, for negotiation and currency through any and every hand?

3. It has been objected, that some original creditors sold their certificates
through diffidence of the public faith. And what if they did? Do you think they
were singular in their diffidence? Suppose any man wants confidence in his
debtor, and fears or doubts that he shall lose his debt; Can that affect the
justice of his demand, or his right to payment?

4. Another objects to any further payment, because some of the creditors who
sold their certificates for 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, had managed their 2 s. 6 d.
so well by a seven years' negotiation, as to make 20 s. out of it.

5. Another objects, that many of the public creditors were of such a
dissipating turn, that if they were paid the whole 20 s. due to them, they
would soon spend it, and, of course, would be no better but rather worse off,
than if they had never been paid.

Now, gentlemen-readers, suppose any private debtor should be summoned into
court, at the suit of his creditor, for a debt of 20 s. and he should show
(...) he had, seven years ago, paid his creditor 2 s. 6 d. of the debt of 20 s.
and plead any or all the foregoing objections against any further payment of
the 17 s. 6 d. which remained due; can you imagine that the court would allow
such plea to be good in law or equity, and sufficient to discharge the debtor
from any further payment? And if these pleas and objections should appear
trifling and ridiculous in a private concern, can you bring yourselves to
believe they would receive any additional weight or dignity from being
introduced by any most dignified personage, and urged in the most august
assembly on earth, against paying public creditors circumstanced in the same
manner.

But the great objection still remains, the clincher that is to support the
whole plan, and so connect the parts together, as to make the whole consistent
with law, reason, right, and justice; for certainly no plan can be justified,
which has not all these qualities. This capital objection to paying the
original creditors, who have sold their certificates, the balance of the debt,
which has never been paid to them, is this, viz.

They have sold their certificates, and thereby conveyed to the purchaser all
their right to their demand or debt due to them. As much stress is laid on this
objection, it requires a particular consideration.

1. If the public promise or faith is supposed to be given in the certificate,
it was broken the instant it was made; it was violated in the very birth of it;
it was verbal only, not real; the words expressed the nominal value, but the
reality or meaning sunk down instantly to the current value, by the very
construction which Congress itself fixed, by their scale, on like words in the
loan-office certificates, and under this construction they passed, by universal
consent of buyer and seller, from hand to hand.

The wrong was instantly done to the original creditor, and he instantly
sustained the injury and damage, and, consequently, if any thing is to be done
in future time to compensate or repair that damage, it ought so to be done,
that he who suffered the injury and damage, may receive the benefit of it;
making this compensation to a stranger, who suffered nothing, is no repair of
the wrong done, is no sort of restoration of injured right, and is, of course,
nugatory and ridiculous.

2. But, in real truth, if the public faith was designed to be really plighted
at all, it was annexed to the debt, not to the certificate; the debt was
founded on the merits or valuable considerations out of which it grew, and to
these it adheres, and carries with it the promise or public faith which is
annexed to it.

The certificates and these merits are very widely different things; the one
depreciated to 2 s. 6 d. in the pound; the other kept their value without the
least diminution; the one was transferred; the other was not. The speculators
can produce the certificates, but they cannot produce the merits, of the
original creditors: these they never bought or paid for, and, therefore, can
have no right or claim to them, or the rewards of them, i. e. to the debt
annexed to them; for it is impossible that one man should have a right to the
labor or hire of another, without paying a valuable consideration for it; if it
was even agreed to be transferred without this, the transfer would be void as a
nudum pactum, not only by the laws of the land, but by the immutable laws of
commutative justice.

3. The certificate was never either delivered to, or received by, the original
creditor, as full payment of the debt due to him, and therefore never comprised
or carried in it that debt; nor is it pretended or pleaded by any body as any
thing more than the evidence of that debt; and, of course, if the debt can be
sufficiently proved by the public books, or any other evidence, the want or
absence of the certificate can be no objection to the claim of the original
creditor.

4. The certificate, when first delivered to the public creditor, being made
payable to the bearer, and expressly fitted and calculated for circulation or
exchange, like other bills of public credit, comprised and carried in it some
value as long as it could be sold, but, like all other articles of negotiation
or exchange, that value was liable to variation according to the rise or fall
of the market.

From the two last propositions it clearly follows, that when the certificate
was sold, all the value which it comprised or carried in it was sold and
transferred with it, and no more; and of course, the purchaser, by the sale,
became entitled to that value, and no more: the rest of the debt staid behind,
and stuck fast to the original merits out of which it originally grew, and in
the place where it always belonged, i. e. the original creditor, by the sale of
his certificate, sold and granted all that he received, and no more; and that
part which he had not received, he retained, and has a right to call for and
receive, whenever he pleases.

5. A reference to the real design of Congress in issuing the certificates,
especially at the close of the war, may cast some light on this affair. We are
not to suppose that congress issued negotiable certificates for 40,000,000 of
dollars, worth but 2 s. 6 d. or some such trifle, in the pound, with real,
serious design to load the nation with the immense burden of redeeming them at
20 s. in the pound, wholly for the benefit of the bearers; by far the greatest
part of whom, they had every reason to suppose, would be strangers not only to
the merits, out of which the debt certified originally grew, but to any such
services, or even kind wishes, for our country, as could deserve the public
notice; and many of them strangers to the country itself.

We never ought to impute bad intentions, especially to public bodies of
dignity, where their actions will equally well bear a favorable construction. I
think, we are rather bound in charity to suppose, that, as Congress found the
public treasury so exhausted that it was impracticable to make even a small,
partial payment to the public creditors, they might think that negotiable
certificates would sell for something, which, though little, might be better than
nothing, and afford some relief, till the country could recover a little from
the ruins of the war, and arrange the finances into some productive state,
which would supply funds sufficient for full payment; and that, in the mean
time, they might safely trust to the wisdom of a future Congress, to adopt
modes of redemption of such certificates, either similar to their own scales
then in established practice, or some other which might do justice to all, or
at least something near it, and bring ruin on nobody, nor even disappoinment;
for such a limited redemption was expected by every body at that time.

They had been long accustomed to issue public paper with the public faith
plighted in words expressive and solemn enough, which yet, by their own scales
and by general acceptance, were reduced, in construction or meaning, down to
the current value or exchange which their paper obtained; and when they issued
the certificates in question, I have no doubt but they considered themselves
merely pursuing their long usage or practice, and conceived that the public
paper they then issued, with all the rest that preceded it, would, in time,
find and meet some reasonable mode of liquidation and final redemption,
tolerable to all, and ruinous to none.

In this view of the matter, though the means they adopted may not be deemed
altogether proper (and perhaps, under the public pressures and necessities
which then existed, no means could be hit on wholly free from exception) yet
their intentions may be admitted to be just, salutary, and benevolent, and
agreeable to the general expectation.

Whereas, on the other hand, to suppose them deliberately loading the States
with a debt of 40,000,000 of dollars, for only 5,000,000 which they received
and had the benefit of, is monstrous, which becomes still more hideous, if this
horrible plan was designedly so formed that, by its natural operation, it
would, in the end, cut all such of the original creditors who took benefit of
it, off from 7-8 ths of their pay or the debt certified to be due to them. But,

6. To suppose that the whole debt due to the original creditors is comprised
in their certificates, and transferred by the sale of them to the purchasers,
by the common rule of assignments, I say, this supposition will demonstrably
prove either that the common rule of assignments is wrong and bad in itself, or
wrongly applied to this case: but wrong in itself it is not; for it is plainly
enough very good and useful in its place, i. e. within its due mean and reason;
therefore, in the case in question, the application is wrongful, i. e. the rule
will not admit a reasonable application to the facts, on which its operation is
demanded.

For every law divine and human, every practicable rule of morality or sound
policy, is and must most necessarily be founded on justice and right, and, in
its application, must produce justice and right, and avoid injury and wrong;
therefore, whenever any law or rule, however sacred in itself, is applied to
any facts or case to which it so ill suits, that its necessary and unavoidable
operation will be to destroy right and justice, and to produce wrong and
injury, the application is certainly wrongful: in such case, the true use and
meaning of the rule is mistaken or perverted.

All laws of every country are so capable of application to cases which are out
of their reason, that a Court of Chancery makes a part of every judiciary
system; the authority and duty of which is to control and soften the extreme
rigor of the law; and when any statute or other rule is of so high authority
that the powers of the court, do not extend far enough to give relief,
application is and ought always to be made to the supreme authority, which is
ever the supreme chancery of the State, to repeal such law, or explain and
limit its true meaning, and correct the errors and wrongs of it.

Now to apply the foregoing position (which certainly no man will controvert)
to the case before us -- The opinion in dispute, 'that the sale of a
certificate transfers the whole debt certified, to the purchaser, by the common
rule of assignments,' cannot be true, because this would necessarily involve
and imply great wrong and injustice, viz. it would take away the rewards due to
the merits and earnings of our most meritorious citizens, and give the moneys
due to them to another class of people, who are not entitled to any of it by
any kind of valuable considerations, merits, or earnings whatever, i. e. it
would cut the original public creditors, who, by their merits and services,
supported the war and saved their country, off from the rewards, the pay, the
hire due to them, and give the same to the speculators, who never served or
saved the country, and to whom we owe nothing.

This takes the public money to an immense amount, from a vast number of most
deserving citizens, scattered through every part of the Empire, who have dearly
and most virtuously earned it, and have never been paid, and many of whom, with
their families, for want of their pay, are now suffering the pangs of ruin and
extreme distress, and all suffer great inconvenience and disappointment; I say,
from these worthy, unhappy objects it takes the public money due to their
earnings, and gives it to speculators, who have never earned any of it.

These effects are unavoidable. Turn, and twist, and cook the matter into all
shapes possible, and these effects will be found. 'They must and will exist, if
that plan is carried into effect; the great injustice of which strikes every
one with a force which the mind cannot resist. No man ever adopted that plan,
but he found the gross, but unavoidable, final injustice of it a great
difficulty, hard to be got over; and this final injustice proves as plainly
that the plan which involves it, is wrong, as that any effect indicates the
nature of its cause, or that that which does or works wrong, is wrong: of
course, there is an error in the matter so very gross and important as to be
fatal in society. Society cannot exist, if the laws of it will not secure to
the laborer his hire, or to the virtuous the rewards of his virtue, or to the
industrious the fruits of his industry.

In fine, the facts under that plan stand glaring thus: the original creditors
claim their pay by solemn, public contract, by dear earnings, and most virtuous
merits; they have not been paid; the money due to them is carved out of the
labors of the nation, in order to pay them; they can get none of it, are
finally cut off from it, and the speculators are to get it all, without the
least claim of merit, services, or valuable consideration paid for it.

These facts must be either disproved or avoided (which cannot be; they are of
the most public notoriety) or the absurdities and injuries resulting from them
must be swallowed and digested (Good Heaven! what throats and stomachs men must
have to do this!) or the plan must be given up.

Many people puzzle themselves to find where the error or wrong lies: some say,
in the breach of the public faith; some say, in the original issuing the
negotiable certificates; others say, in the folly of the seller, etc. etc. but
I should think it very easy to see that the error lies in supposing that
property can be transferred by implication, without any intention of the
seller, and without any valuable consideration paid for it.

But it matters little where the error or wrong lies; it is quite enough to
know that it really exists, and will produce its baneful effects, and is of
such magnitude as to affect the essential interests of the nation, and will do
so for ages to come; and, therefore, as soon as the error is discovered, it
ought immediately to be corrected or remedied: the national safety, peace, and
prosperity require this.

If we sow all over the nation errors and wrongs, they may be unnoticed at
first, but will soon spring up and grow into a forest of chagrin and
discontent, of wretchedness and ruin. Nothing can give peace and establishment
to a nation, equal to 'judgment and justice running down its streets, and
righteousness overflowing it.'

It is not uncommon for men of lively genius and eager reasonings, and perhaps
honesty too, to pursue their fine-spun arguments into conclusions that meet
obstinate facts, which, like an impregnable wall, must and will stop their
progress; but if their obstinacy happens to be equal to that of the wall, they
will not be willing to turn about, or even stop, but will go on and beat and
bruise their heads till their skulls are broken, and some crevice is opened,
through which their chimerical ideas can fly out; then, indeed, they will soften
into calmness and moderation, and grow willing to hearken to some plan that is
admissible by the hard facts which stand round them.

I heard once of a doctor who was called to a sick patient; he felt his pulse,
soon thought he found his disorder, and prescribed a dose which killed him.
When the doctor was told his patient was dead; he answered with some emotion,
that he had no business to die; for he could demonstrate by the most approved
rules of physic and medicine, that he ought not only to have lived, but to have
got well by this time.

Now, if you please, we will seriously compare this plan in question with mine,
which is comprised in my first proposition, viz. to debit the original
creditors with the certificates they received, at the value or exchange they
bore at the time of their dates, and to pay the residue of the balance due to
them with interest, and to pay the certificates at the same value or their
current exchange (as the case may require) to the bearers of them, whether
original holders or alien^^^; and let us judge of the two plans by this most
sure and unexceptionable criterion, viz. which of them will naturally operate
by way of most justice and right, and least injury and wrong? for no
practicable plan that can be adopted, every one will allow, will operate by way
of perfect right and no wrong at all; no public plan that ever was adopted ever
came or can come up to this degree of perfection, and all that is or can be in
the power of human wisdom and weakness is to adopt that plan, which, in its
operation, naturally produces most right and least wrong. By this criterion
then we will judge of the two plans before us, which criterion is (all
subtilties of reasoning aside) the only safe one which is practicable within
the extent of human power.

1. The plan I oppose pays the immense sum of public money given by the nation
purposely to reward the saviors of their country, pays this money, I say, to
the speculators, who never earned any of it, who do not pretend to found their
claim to it on any merits, or services, or valuable consideration, which they
ever rendered to the nation or any body else, but demand the compensations and
rewards due to the original creditors, without pretending to have paid any
valuable consideration therefore to them; and at the same time, the plan denies
those immense rewards to those worthy citizens, who found their claim thereto
on the most sacred contract of Congress to them, under sanction of the public
faith, which binds the country "by the laws of GOD and man;" on the most
punctual fulfillment of said contract, on their part; and on their great virtue
and merit, in saving their country in its most dreadful danger and distress: if
any body thinks there is any honor, justice, or right in this plan, let him
look for it, and I believe he will easily find all that is there.

2. The plan I propose is, to debit the original creditors with all the
certificates they received, at their current value at the time of their dates,
and pay the remaining balance due to them with interest; and to redeem the
certificates by payment to the bearer, let him be either original holder or
alienee, at the same rate, or at their current exchange at the time of
redemption, as the case may require.

This plan pays the immense public moneys to the people who earned them, i. e.
to those who, by solemn, public contract, and by their real supplies and
services rendered as the conditions of that contract on their part, are most
justly and substantially entitled to them; and, at the same time, pays to the
speculators the proper value of the certificates which they have purchased.

This plan, I think, will do the most general justice to the citizens at large,
which can be done by imperfect human wisdom, in the present circumstances of
the matter. This will place the public moneys where they belong, will give
every one his due, and no more than his due. This will bring, on one side,
wrong and ruinous distress on nobody; nor will it, on the other, heap
unmerited, unearned fortunes on any body. This will, in the end, do manifest
justice and right to every one. This ought ever to be our goal, whatever
confusion, doubt, and darkness may arise from the chaos of subtle arguments,
dexterity of management, and artful disguising and twisting of facts, through
which we may be forced to make our way in our passage on to this realm of
justice, truth, and light: for whatever dark and gloomy passages we may have
occasion to pass through, in the deliberation and adjustment of human concerns
and disputes, final justice and right ought ever to be the star that directs
our steps, and which will certainly guide us to the rightful issue at last.

I cannot see that this plan will bear hard on more than two sorts or
descriptions of men, viz.

1. Such public creditors who have real merits and just right to a claim, but,
by some means, may not be able to prove their right; and probably, among the
infinite number of real public creditors, there may be some of this sort, and
perhaps many, who must suffer without remedy; for what cannot be proved, cannot
be admitted in any court in the world; but then it is to be noted, that the
plan I oppose leaves these sufferers as much unprovided for, and as much
desperate and without remedy, as the plan I propose, and, of course, this
objection lies with equal weight against both plans, if it is of any weight
against either of them.

2. The second sort of men who may think my plan imposes hardship on them, are
such speculators as have purchased their certificates at a higher exchange than
that at which I propose to redeem them; but this loss or hardship (if it is
any) is and always must be incident to such speculations, which, at best, are
but games at hazard, altogether useless, barely tolerable, and often very
hurtful to the public: I do not, therefore, conceive their loss or gain
deserves any consideration in the public deliberations or decisions of this
great question, viz. what rate or scale of redemption of certificates,
Continental money, or any other public paper, does the general justice, and
national honor, and safety of our country, require? But if we were to allow
that the losses and hardships of these men were real and pitiful, they bear not
the least proportion to the infinite hardship and ruinous distresses, to which
the plan I oppose subjects countless thousands of our most deserving citizens;
even if the calculation is made on either the numbers, amount of loss, or the
merits, of the sufferers.

If this alternative cannot be avoided, it can admit no doubt but the lesser
must yield to the greater; for it is certainly a less evil to incur the loss of
a penny than a pound, or even to do injustice to one man than to a thousand;
and of two evils we ought to choose the least.

But the morality of the two plans, i. e. the degree of justice and right, or
of injury and wrong, which their operation will naturally produce, is not the
only thing which ought to govern our choice of them; there is a most important
difference both of facility of collection and utility of payment, under them.
For,

I. Under the plan I propose, the public money paid will be scattered over the
whole nation, through every part where the real public creditors will be found;
and the money so paid will,

1. Do an act of justice long due to the receiver:

2. Will increase the business of the country; as most of the creditors will be
thereby enabled to go into or increase their business, who are now restrained
and held back, through want of their stock withheld from them by the public.

3. This money will immediately spread through every part of the nation, and
cause a great increase of circulation, which will give spirit and facility to
the general industry and wealth of our people at large; and as the taxes are
all ultimately paid by the consumers, who are spread over every part of the
country,

4. The facility of collection of the second tax will grow out of the operation
of the first, as the payments will be made more easy and satisfactory thereby;
for the people will naturally grow contented under a tax, when they perceive
advantages arising out of the increased circulation of cash produced by it,
enough to compensate the burden of the tax.

II. But under the plan I oppose, the case will be greatly otherwise; for,

1. One third of the speculators are supposed to be foreigners, and, of course,
their third of the money paid (say, 7 or 8,000,000 of dollars) will be sent
directly out of the country, never to return again; this drain of cash by
annual interest (for nobody thinks of paying the principal) when added to that
of the foreign debt, is enough (if we had no other drains) to keep the country
poor, distressed, and behind hand for ages to come.

2. The other two-thirds paid to the speculators here, will not be scattered
over the country, and increase the general circulation, but will be accumulated
in few hands, most of which, according to the common course of human passions,
will be applied to make and support nurseries of vice, luxury, pride, vanity,
dissipation, and bad example: for fortunes obtained by sudden acquirement,
without any merits or earnings, are usually spent in this way; and if a few of
them should happen to employ their money prudently, it will so far contribute
to accumulating the national wealth into few hands, which is one of the worst
things that can happen to a nation.

III. Another difference of the operation of the two plans will have great
effect on the revenue. When the public money is paid for purposes of
acknowledged justice, utility, and general advantage, the payment of taxes will
be made without murmur, and the collection, of course, will be easy and without
disturbance. Paying to the original creditors the hire of their labors, the
debt due to them for exertions that saved their country, is a method of
employing the public money of most acknowledged propriety through the nation; but
the payment of speculators is not so popular; it is hard for people to see the
fruits of their labor taken from them, and given to speculators who never
earned any of it.

This will naturally make the taxes odious; and, of course, the burden of the
old taxes, the instituting of new ones, and the collection of both, will soon
become objects of general uneasiness, murmur, and ill-humor; which, when
general, will be easily blowed up into tumults, insurrections, and a general
derangement of the peace and political order of society; smuggling and other
avoidances of the taxes may not be the most alarming of these national frets.

In a nation thus tempered, a few m^n of spirit, and enterprise, who may happen
to be disgusted, soured with malevolence, and fired with thirst of revenge, may
do infinite mischief.

Without the aid of any such incendiaries, I am persuaded beyond a doubt, that
any tax to pay the speculators will sit very uneasy on the most quiet and
peaceable citizens that can be found among us.

I was lately in conversation with a gentleman of great fortune, and noted for
a very generous and peaceful temper, who told me he had just been paying an
impost of about 30 dollars for wines he imported for his own use, and added,
had it been to pay our soldiers and other supporters of the war, I should not
have begrudged it, had it been three times as much; but the thought that it
must go to the idle speculators, makes my blood boil in my veins: -- and I
conceive, every honest American that earns his own money, feels just so.

Taxes are ever ranked among the most te^hy articles of civil police, and
require very delicate management; and our revenue-system is very young, tender,
and not ripened enough into firm, general habit; and, though in its infancy, it
is pressed with a much heavier load than the country ever felt before; I
therefore conclude, that any plan that tends to embroil the finances, and
furnish objections and murmurs against the revenue, ought to be reprobated as
the most dangerous and fatal measure that can be devised.

IV. There is another objection to the plan I oppose, which I consider very
great, and which, I think, is obviated by the one I propose, viz. it encourages
and supports idle and hurtful arts and contrivances to procure fortunes by
dexterity and sleight of hand, rather than by the old, painful methods of
industry, economy, and care. These speculators all have for their object, the
acquirement of wealth without earning it, i. e. of getting the hire and rewards
due to the labor and merits of another, into their own possession and
enjoyment, without any retribution: this therefore is, in its nature and
principle, wrongful; and people of this cast commonly spend their stock and
time in these pursuits, which, otherwise, they would employ in useful
occupations of husbandry, manufactures, or trade; and, of course, so much good
stock and time is lost to the public.

I think, this sort of speculations ought not to be considered as merely
useless, but hurtful also, and, therefore, ought by no means to be encouraged
and supported by any measures of government; especially when their excess has
been carried to such an enormous pitch, as to draw after it the ruinous
consequences described above, and obvious to every discerning eye.

V. My next objection to the plan I oppose, arises from the general state of
the finances of the nation, which I beg leave to introduce, with some previous
observations by way of preface.

1. I am not alarmed at a heavy national debt; much less do I apprehend any
destruction or ruin from it, if not too enormous; nor,

2. Am I under any doubt or diffidence of either the strength or patience of
our people to bear it, if the following limitations and qualities of it are
attended to:

1st. If the debt contracted, or the public moneys to be paid, are for
necessary public purposes, i. e. to support and maintain the real justice,
honor, safety, convenience, and well-being of the nation, e. g. to pay the
civil list and just debts, for defense against enemies or pirates, for public
roads, inland navigation, encouragement of gen^^s, useful arts, etc. etc. etc.

2d. That the debt or annual demand for money does not exceed the product of an
impost on imported luxuries, no higher than is necessary to reduce useless,
luxurious, and hurtful consumptions down to that moderation that is necessasary
for the health, morality, and wealth of our people; and,

3d. That the money collected by the tax shall be so paid out, that it may
revert in its circulation to, and diffuse itself over, the same States and
places out of which the money so collected was originally drawn, i. e. that the
expenditures or payments of the money raised by the tax, shall be so made, that
it shall revert to and circulate through the same countries and places that paid
it.

Under these limitations and restrictions, strictly and uniformly adhered to,
no national debt can hurt, much less ruin, a nation; it would, in my opinion,
operate like a sumptuary law, and would be rather an advantage and benefit on
the whole, than a detriment. But this notwithstanding, I should choose to have
the calculations made so, that the annual incomes might a little exceed the
expenditures, that there might be a small surplus left to support accidents, or
contingencies, or, as the country proverb is, that something might be laid up
for a rainy day; but I would not wish to have such surplus very great, for if
it was so, I should expect that most administrations would find plenty of
contingencies, enough to consume it all -- I will now go on to consider the
present state of the public debt, as it is exhibited in estimates calculated up
to the last of the year 1790.

The certificates of all sorts, now in circulation and to be provided for,
amount, by the public estimates, principal, to 27,000,000 dollars: interest due
last of the year 1790, to 13,000,000; whole amount, 40,000,000 dollars.

By a moderate estimate, and much below what is generally supposed to be the
real fact, three-fourths of these, i. e. 30,000,000 dollars, are in the hands
of the speculators; the original value of which, when issued by Congress, at an
average of 2 s. 6 d. in the pound, amounts to 3,750,000 dollars; this sum, of
course, was paid by the speculators to the real creditors, at the first
purchase of them, and, therefore, ought to be placed to the debit of their
account; the remainder of the 30,000,000 dollars, viz. 26,250,000 is the clear
gain of the speculators, which they never paid any thing for, either to the
nation, to the original creditors, or to any body else; therefore, that sum,
having never been paid by any body, still remains due to the original
creditors, and ought to be provided for, and, of course, ought to be added to
the estimate of the national debt, viz. 26,250,000 dollars.

The national debt then, in round numbers (for my calculation does not require
accuracy enough to make it necessary to insert the broken or fractional
quantities) the national debt, I say, as calculated up to the end of the year
1790, will then stand, in round numbers, nearly as follows, viz.

Foreign debt, including interest, about (somewhat less) 12,000,000 doll.
Domestic debt, funded, about (somewhat more) 40,000,000 do. Domestic debt,
unfunded, computed at 2,000,000 do. State debts to be assumed, computed at
25,000,000 do. Balance due to the original creditors, as computed above
26,000,000 do. Provision for particular applications, where the justice of the
demand and hardship of the claimants require relief (incomputable) but say
4,000,000 do. Total of the national debt 109,000,000 do. Annual interest of
foreign debt by public estimate 542,600 doll. Annual interest of domestic debt,
viz. 97,000,000 dollars, at 6 per cent. 5,820,000 doll. Civil list, computed at
600,000 do. All these added together, make the amount of the yearly
expenditure, computed for full payment 6,962,600 do. The whole annual revenue
now in existence is estimated at about 2,600,000 do. Which subtracted from the
annual expenditures, leaves a deficiency to be provided for, of 4,362,600 do.

From this statement it appears, that the whole present revenue is less than
two-fifths of the yearly expenditures; a little more than two-fifths of it are
absorbed by the civil list and interest of the foreign debt, and about
two-thirds of the remainder are appropriated to pay the clear profits or gains
of the speculators, and the debts due to the original creditors come in for the
other third, but by such an unequal distribution, that far the greatest part of
them get nothing at all, and those who do come in for something, get but
two-thirds of the debt confessed by every body to be due to them.

For the truth of this statement I appeal to the public books, estimates,
calculations, and records, except my estimate of the exchange or value of
certificates, which is a matter of public notoriety, and I leave any body to
correct it, who can.

Out of this statement, I think, arises a very strong objection against the
plan I oppose. I think it is manifestly wrong, especially in the distressing
straits and deficiency of the revenue, to bestow 26,000,000 of the living funds
which the revenue can supply, on the speculators, who never paid any thing for
it, either to the nation, or to the original creditors, whilst there remains
due to said creditors a debt of above 50,000,000, which is not only unpaid, but
totally unprovided for; and especially when it is considered, that this
neglected debt is originally founded on the most solemn, public contract, and
the most faithful and painful fulfillment of it on the part of the creditors.

I do not at present advert to any but the following questions, that can arise
on this statement of the public debt and the existing revenue.

The first question to be considered is, -- whether this statement is wild and
ideal only, or really true and grounded on such facts as will support it? For
my part, I have not any particular knowledge of the facts on which it is
grounded, and, of course, do not object to any of it, except that part which
adopts the clear gains of the speculators into the public debt, and loads the
nation with the burden of 26,000,000 dollars to pay them, and of 800,000 more,
to raise the old Continental money out of the grave where it has quietly slept
more than seven years.

The second question which offers itself is, -- whether any part of the public
debt, included in the above statement, can be reduced, docked off, or thrown
out? There are but two items which, I conceive, can admit a doubt in this
question:

The first is, -- the 26,000,000 dollars appropriated to the payment of the
clear gains of the speculators. This, I think, ought to be rejected for all the
reasons assigned above.

The second is, -- the balance of the, same sum due to the original creditors.
I think (whatever may be decided as to paying or rejecting the clear gains of
the speculators) this item of the statement ought to be admitted and paid, for
all the reasons above urged, and this additional one, viz. the character of the
nation abroad for justice and honor, requires this.

For let us suppose that one of our ambassadors at a foreign court should, in
some grand circle, happen to harangue a little on the justice, honor, political
constitution, strength, riches, and blessings of his country, and some grave
man, with much meaning in his countenance, should reply to him -- Sir, all you
say of the blessings of your country, may be true for any thing I know; but it
seems to me, the justice and honor of it are not quite so clear, for I think I
have heard that your Congress refused to pay to th^se noble and patriotic
citizens, who, with their blood and travail, purchased for you all these
blessings you beast of, the rewards, the simple hire due to them by the most
sacred, public contract that could be made, and faithfully fulfilled on their
part, by exertions and services, the most noble, arduous, painful, and
persevering, of which we have any example in history.

I suppose, in such a case, you would not wish to see our ambassador dashed out
of countenance, pocket the affront, and slink into a corner: but if you think
some reply necessary to bring him off, and as he may not have one ready cut and
dried at hand, I wish any of you who oppose this payment, would make a suitable
one for him, that he may be properly armed at all points to defend the honor of
this country, whenever it may be insulted or attacked.

Third question. As the present revenue amounts to less than two-fifths of the
yearly expenditures, according to the above statement, the next question is, --
can the revenues be increased up to the amount of the necessary annual
expenditures? i. e. can the duties or taxes be raised up to three-fifths higher
than they now are? I conceive this will be difficult in the assessment, and
more so in the collection; indeed, it appears to me totally impracticable, as
things stand at present; and the idea of deferring payment, and loading the
nation with an instalment to be paid ten years hence, brings to my mind a young
rake, who bought a horse, and agreed to pay for it "at the next election," but
surreptitiously drew the note payable "at the resurrection;" the creditor
applied for payment; the rake plead that the time was not come; on which the
creditor applied to his father, who was a grave, serious man; he called his
son, and asked why he did not pay the debt; the son replied, that it was not
yet due, as he would see by the note; the father replied, Ah! young man, pay
the debt instantly; I fear, at the rate you go on, you will have enough to
answer for at the resurrection, without this note against you.

Fourth question. If the revenue is not adequate to full payment, ought not the
actual payments to be made by dividends, payable to every creditor in equal
proportions of the debt due? In such case, to pay part of the creditors half or
two-thirds of their demand, and nothing to the rest, is contrary to the most
received rule of distributive justice, in all cases of private bankruptcies or
stoppages of payment, and I can see no reason why the same rule should not
extend to the deficiencies of the public revenue.

Fifth question. If the public revenues are deficient, ought any creditor at
all to be paid any thing, till the whole debt is liquidated and reduced to a
certainty, without which it is impossible to make the requisite dividends? A
negative answer to this question seems to be so clearly just and proper, that I
cannot conceive that it will be disputed.

But after all, if the first proposition of my plan above urged cannot be
admitted, and the final decision must be, that the original creditors who have
sold their certificates, have, by the sale, extinguished their demand for any
further payment; that no evidence of the debt can be admitted, but
certificates; and no payment of the debt certified in them, can be allowed and
made to any body but the holders of them (all which appears to me to be strange
doctrine) I beg leave, if this must be the case, to introduce my second
proposition, viz.

That all original holders of certificates be paid the full nominal value of
their certificates, principal and interest; and that all alienated certificates
be paid to the bearer at the rate, value or current exchange they had at their
dates, or at the time of redemption, as the case may require, i. e. so that no
certificate shall be redeemed at a higher value or exchange than it bore at the
time of its date, or (if, after its date, it depreciated) at no higher exchange
than shall be its current value at the time of redemption; for the public never
received any valuable consideration for it, more than its value at the time of
its date, and therefore never ought to pay any more to redeem it; but if it has
depreciated through the course of its currency or circulation, the public has
paid that depreciation once already, for it operates by way of tax on the
innumerable hands in which it depreciated, i. e. on the public, through which it
circulated; and there can be no reason why the public should pay the same loss
over again; and if they should do this, it would be no reparation to the
sufferer; for, at the time of doing this, the certificate would not be in the
same hands which suffered by the depreciation? but this argument is more fully
discussed in the preceding Essays, where the doctrine of appreciation and
depreciation is often called up and considered.

The certificates are evidence of the debt certified, in the hands of the
original holder, and my proposition is, to pay it to him: but in the hands of
the alienee it carries not any such evidence, for it is plain enough, both in
fact and reason, that, by the sale of the certificate, nothing more was either
transferred by the seller, or expected or paid for by the purchaser, than the
chance or right of receiving such sum or value for it, as the Congress should
set or fix as the price or exchange at which it should be finally redeemed: and
this rate or scale of redemption ought to be set or estimated without the least
regard to the loss or gain of the speculators; but on principles of general
justice and right only, i. e. in such manner as will do most right and least
wrong, i. e. in such manner, that no description of citizens should be more
benefited or hurt, or made richer or poorer, by it, than another; for all
national distributions of justice, all public institutions and decisions
whatever, ought always to be so made, that both the burdens and benefits of
them may fall equably on all, and not lie more heavily or more beneficially on
one than another, i. e. so that every one shall participate his clear and
proportionable share both of the burden and benefit of them.

The rate or scale of redemption, thus estimated and fixed, will manifestly pay
to the speculator all that he has right to receive, i. e. all that he ever
bought or paid for; and if the overplus may not be paid to the original
creditor, let it be retained in the treasury, and be paid to nobody; for I
cannot see the use of paying it at all, where it is not due.

This proposition (which I advanced five years ago in my Seventh Essay on
Finance) gave rise to the great question of discrimination between original
holders and purchasers of certificates, and has been so fully discussed, that
little need be added in this Review of the Arguments.

Perhaps it may be enough to observe, that most of the opposers of the
proposition acknowledge the justice of it, but object to it at impracticable.
But I can see very little weight in the objection; every one who claims as an
original holder, must discriminate himself, i. e. the proof will lie on him
that he is such. I should suppose, that his name inserted in the certificate,
and his affidavit that he has never alienated it, would be sufficient. If the
certificate was taken out for his benefit in the name of another (as perhaps
has been often done) the balance due on the public books, and, the certificate
debited to him, with his own affidavit, would make the matter clear enough;
besides, the negotiator of such a matter would be a good witness.

There is no more danger of perjuries in this case, than there is in oaths to
original entries on books of accounts, to signatures, etc. etc. After all,
there can be but very few cases, if any, where the plan I oppose can give any
more or better remedy to creditors who have lost their proofs, than the one I
propose affords.

My last proposition is, -- if neither of the abovementioned two can be
admitted, that the original holder shall be first paid, and the speculator last
of all, if he must be paid at all. The reason is, because the debt of the
original holder is founded on greater merits and real earnings than the other,
and, therefore, ought to be considered as of a higher and more worthy nature,
and, of course, ought to be preferred in payment.

Upon the whole matter, I have no conception that the present arrangement of
the public finances, i. e. of receipts and payments, is by any means adequate
to the exigencies of the nation. I cannot form any idea, that our revenue
either is or can be made sufficient to support the immense load of debt which
lies upon it: nor can I conceive how any nation can exist without the utmost
deficiencies, disgra^^ and even bankruptcy, where the drafts on the revenue so
greatly exceed the annual incomes of it; can exist, I say, without running over
head and ears into the horrible gulf, the unbounded chaos of derangement, which
will draw into it every conceivable embarrassment, not only of the public
revenue, i. e. of the justice and honor of the nation, but which will also, by
its necessary consequence, involve every branch of business through the whole
nation in disappointment and distress.

Deferring payments to future time is but putting far away the evil day, and
avoiding the pain of present pressures, at the expense of future embarrassment.
The unavoidable consequence of an over-loaded revenue will be a deficiency of
the public payments, i. e. a failure of the public credit, and of the justice
and honor of the nation.

But in our own case, this is not all our calamity; for, under all this
pressure of taxes, we can derive little improvement of our country, or even
safety and security, from them: this immense gulf of debt swallows up all our
revenues, and is by no means satisfied with them all; it leaves us not a
shilling for public roads, inland navigation, encouragement of agriculture,
manufactures, or genius of any sort, or even for defense against enemies or
pirates, in case of a war; all the navy of the nation is not sufficient to
suppress a pilot-boat, if it should be armed and manned by pirates to insult
and infest our coasts.

But this is not all; our people have not the benefit of that increased
circulation of cash, which would arise from the heavy taxes they do pay, if the
payments were made to creditors scattered over the nation, who would instantly
circulate the money they received, among the same people from whom it had been
collected; but our money goes to strangers, or to such accumulations, that it
is carried off far beyond our reach for ever, after we have paid it in taxes.

In fine, it is not possible that our nation should continue even to exist in
honor, ease, and peace, under these burdens; a penny can never pay a shilling,
and a shilling due will ever be a debt, and a fretting one too, till it is
paid. The nature of our calamity admits but two alternatives, viz.

Either to reduce the debt by docking off some part of it, or to increase the
revenue up to an amount sufficient to pay it: the latter I take to be utterly
impracticable and desperate, as the matter now stands; the other, I think,
might be done. The only part of the estimate of the national debt that is not
for the nation's benefit, is the 26,000,000 dollars appropriated to pay the
clear profits of the speculators. This, I think, might be spared out of the
estimate, but as it is funded, I think it cannot be well docked off without a
REPEAL of the funding act, which I humbly wish may take place. I know there
would be great difficulties in doing this, but I conceive there will be much
greater difficulties in not doing it. I am confident, the act, when it begins
to operate, will be found, in its nature, wrong and impracticable, and
necessity will compel the rescinding it sooner or later, and it is much easier
to correct a new error than an old one; it is more honorable to correct an
error with readiness of mind on first conviction, than to wait for the severe
compulsions of necessity.

But if the repeal of the act should be thought improper, perhaps a supplement
fixing a reasonable rate or scale of exchange at which the certificates and
Continental money shall be received into the new loan, might prove a very
salutary amendment of it: and if I could believe that any thing less than the
nation's well-being made this repeal or amendment necessary, I should be silent
about it.

Any attempt to pay this vast sum twice over, would draw consequences the most
destructive and ruinous that can be conceived; and if both cannot be paid, and
we cannot avoid the alternative, I would prefer sacrificing a demand which
never originated in real merit or earnings, but receives its whole force from
an extravagant implication of a meaning in words, which, by construction of
speaker or hearer at the time of utterance, was never comprised or conveyed in
them; I say, I would prefer this to any violation of the solemn contract; the
sacred public vows, sealed and plighted to the orinal creditors, in the time of
our country's utmost danger and deep distress, and to whose faithful and
painful fulfillment of that contract on their parts, we are indebted under GOD
for our deliverance.

If the first part of this alternative can be adopted, our desperation may
cease, the great difficulty will diminish, partly because a large and the most
exceptionable part of the burden will be taken off, and partly because what is
left will be a debt of such acknowledged and uncontroverted right, justice, and
honor, as will give courage and force to our councils to assess, and our people
to bear, such burdens of tax as will be necessary to support it, and gradually
to wipe it off.

It is human to err, but it is the decided mark of strong intellects and a
generous temper, to acknowledge and correct an error on conviction; yet such is
the common weakness of the human mind, that error is often connected with
obstinacy; those who are weak enough to make mistakes, are rarely wise enough
to correct them; and the hard necessity which compels an amendment of an error,
will not always produce an acknowledgment of it. The stability of public
measures and decisions ought to rest on their rectitude and natural fitness,
not on an obstinacy that is blind to their faults. Every body acknowledges that
it is honorable and noble to own and correct an error, and that it is mean and
base to persist in one; yet most men feel a sort of degrading shame, when they
are called upon to correct their own mistakes. I hope our public councils are
not affected with any of these little feelings: but, be it so or not, it is
commonly true, that errors adopted on long deliberation are not easily given up
and corrected. I do not wish to insinuate here, that any attention will be
wanting to my arguments, drawn from religion and the fear of God (for his name
has been called in to give force to the vows of the nation to their real
creditors) or to arguments drawn from morality, national justice and honor,
from gratitude and compassion, etc. these are arguments to be answered to God,
to the nation, and to conscience. -- But to wave all these for this time, I beg
to conclude with the following questions, directed to every body:

First question. Whether paying the clear profits of the speculators, viz.
26,250,000 dollars, will not load and exhaust the revenue so much, as to put it
out of our power to pay our real debts of the first honor, justice, covenants,
and truth of the nation?

Second question. Whether this payment will not be matter of general
disapprobation and disgust, especially when kept alive and fresh in memory, by
the annual demand of above 1,000,000 dollars to pay the interest of it?

Third question. Whether denying payment to such of our citizens, who, by their
virtue and efforts, saved our country, will not be matter of great
dissatisfaction to our people, and discourage their future zeal and readiness
to serve their country, when their services may be necessary?

It is the right as well as duty of every citizen, to use his best endeavors
to avert his country's dangers and impending distresses, whenever they appear
threatening. Our country has a right to the wisdom as well as to the wealth of
all its inhabitants, when the public exigence makes either or both necessary,
and the right of the nation implies the duty of its citizens.

In discharge of this duty, I here offer my mite of wisdom, such as it is, to
my country. If any one sentence of these Dissertations does not carry
conviction, let it be rejected; but if my principles and arguments reach the
heart, and compel the mind of the reader to yield to their rectitude and force,
they will produce the effects I wish.

But whether I am gratified or disappointed, whether my country be saved or
not, I have that consciousness of upright intentions and faithful endeavors
for the salvation of the Union, which inspires me with the most satisfactory
expectation, that I shall be glorious in the eyes of the LORD and of posterity.

A CITIZEN OF PHILADELPHIA.
Philadelphia, Dec. 20, 1790.
AN ESSAY ON THE SEAT OF THE Federal Government, AND THE EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION
OF CONGRESS OVER A Ten Miles District; WITH OBSERVATIONS On the Economy and
delicate Morals necessary to be observed in infant States.
[First published in Philadelphia, Sep. 21, 1789. The seat of Congress was at
New York at that time.
]
AS the fixing the Seat of the Federal Government is a subject, which has of
late engrossed the attention of many people both in and out of Congress,
perhaps a few observations on the nature and consequences of that measure may
be useful, and, of course, acceptable at this time. I offer my best thoughts
with freedom, without meaning to offend. Though the United States of America
contain about 640,000,000 acres of land, which have every advantage of soil and
situation that any country can boast, and though their territory is equal to
Great Britain, Germany, France, and Spain, taken together, yet their population
and civil establishments are both young, and, as yet, in the tender state and
small beginnings; and, of course, the greatest attention is necessary to that
poli^^ and economy, which must strengthen, increase, and connect the whole. I
therefore hope, that the humble attempts of the author to point out and
patronize some leading principles of both these great objects, which are really
of most essential consideration, will meet the candor and favorable attention
of Congress and the Public.


It appears to (...), that deciding, or even pressing, the question of the
permanent residence of Congress is very improper at this time, because,

I. Congress have it in their power, without moving this question, to obtain
every accommodation for themselves which can be necessary for years to come,
and in a situation as nearly in the center of the present population of the
States, and as convenient for the whole Union, as any that can be obtained by
any fixture of place that can be made, and all this without any expense of the
States.

It is certain, that Philadelphia can and readily would furnish any and all
public buildings, which Congress can need for their two Houses; and it is
likewise certain, that all the public officers have such liberal appointments,
that they can very well afford to pay any small rent which would be necessary
for their offices.

It is farther certain, that Philadelphia is neare^ to the center and general
convenience of the States, in their present state of population, than any spot
either on the Potowmac or Susquehannah, or any other place proposed for the
permanent residence of Congress, and will probably continue so for many years.

II. Fixing the seat of government will be altogether useless, till a sum of
money can be advanced, sufficient to purchase the soil, and ^rect the necessary
buildings; which will require (according to the estimate of the Lower House of
Congress) 100,000 dollars. But it is certain, that, in the present state of our
finances, and the numerous and pressing demands on the treasury, we are in no
condition to advance any such sum; we have large debts called for in the most
pressing manner, by creditors both foreign and domestic, whose demands we are
bound to satisfy with the first ^^nies we can raise, either from our own
resources or our credit; these demands, I say, we are bound to satisfy, on
every principle of justice, public faith, national honor, and common honesty,
nay, by every inducement of gratitude, and even compassion.

It follows then, that to delay these payments, in order to squander away
100,000 dollars on buildings of no immediate use or necessity, is an act of
very high injustice, and even wickedness; it is prostituting the justice,
honor, and even morality of the nation, to very little more than vain show and
pageantry.

It may, indeed, be doubtful what sort of justice or gratitude is due to the
purchasers of alienated certificates; but there can certainly be no doubt of
the justice and gratitude too, which is due to the original holders of
certificates, who actually rendered their services, supplies, and cash to the
States, in the time of their highest dangers and distresses.

These men did in fact pay the purchase of our independence; and can it be
supposed, that Americans can enjoy all the rich blessings of their
independence, and, at the same time, refuse payment to the first purchasers of
it, who come like beggars to solicit payment, to relieve them from the penury
and distress which they suffer for want of it? -- Must all this scandal,
meanness, and wrong be incurred, in order to lavish immense sums on a parcel of
large edifices, to be reared up in the woods, and which are no more necessary
to the present honor, safety, or even convenience of the States, than a fifth
wheel to a coach? Common sense forbids it.

It is manifestly as wicked, shameful, inhuman, and ridiculous for a State to
do this, as for an individual to purchase a large estate, enjoy the rich
produce of it, and refuse to pay the original purchase of it, because the
creditor happens to be a poor creature, who cannot compel him to payment. Can
such a man, with any reason, expect either the blessings of Heaven, esteem of
mankind, or any kind of prosperity in possession of such iniquitous affluence
and inglorious grandeur? whilst the original purchase-money is wrongfully
withheld from the creditor; and the money due to him is laid out in sumptuous
buildings and gaudy parade.

I should think, that gentlemen who can propose such a plan, have forgot the
great principles of justice, public faith, and economy, on which alone the
honor, establishment, and safety of a nation can be founded, and, instead of
these, have adopted the sentiments of young beaus and girls, who think the
highest distinction consists in the finery of their dress, and set that mi^^
down as undoubtedly the most respectable, whose clothes and jewels are the
richest and most brilliant.

When there is an estate much involved, it commonly happens that some debts, on
account of greater original merit, better earnings, or other causes, are deemed
to be of a higher nature than others, and are therefore entitled to a
precedence or priority of payment; the original holders of the public
securities have undoubtedly this claim, and are therefore entitled to
precedence of payment, and the States are undoubtedly furnished with sufficient
resources to pay them, or, at least, their annual or half-yearly interest; and
these resources ought not to be diverted from so necessary and honorable an
object, to the vain purposes of ridiculous parade or extravagant appointments,
or other Utopian expenses.

But it may be objected to this by honest men, who will say, 'we approve the
justice and reason of this proposition; it coincides with the very sentiments
of the heart, and meets both the honest and grateful feelings of our souls;
but, alas! it is impracticable, because the original holders of the public
securities cannot be ascertained and discriminated from others who are not
such; many who are really original holders, will not be able to prove that they
are such.' In answer to this, I readily admit that any man who presents himself
as an original holder, and claims the benefit of precedence of payment, must
prove himself to be such, i. e. the proof will lie on him, and which almost the
whole of them will be able to produce with the utmost certainty, because their
names are recorded in the public offices, in which their accounts were settled,
and out of which their certificates issued, and though some few will not be able
to make this proof, and so must lose the benefit for want of proof, yet this
affords no reason why those who can make proof, should lose the benefit of it;
we might as well deny that authenticated deeds should be admitted as good
evidence of titles of lands to the possessor, because many people have
purchased estates, but have either neglected to procure the proper deeds, or,
by some misfortune, have lost them, and, of course, must lose their estates,
for want of the proper evidence of that right which is really in them.

III. In the late public debates of Congress on the subject of fixing the
permanent seat of government, gentlemen differed so extremely in their
estimates of the distance of stations, convenience of passage both by land and
water, salubrity or unhealthiness of places, state of population, and many
other circumstances necessary to be taken into account, that it appears very
plain, that the internal geography and many other local qualities of the United
States are not sufficiently defined and understood, to enable us to fix even
the centrality of the States, and ascertain many other things absolutely
necessary to be known and considered, in determining the permanent seat of
government. Therefore, it is prudent to put off that determination, till the
data on which it manifestly ought to depend, can be more fully known and
ascertained.

IV. It is expected that four or five States will soon be added to the present
Union; North Carolina and Rhode Island had not, at the time this Essay was
published, acceded to the Union under the New Constitution: the accession of
some new States was expected, viz. Vermont, Kentucky, etc.
the accession of two of them we hope to be very near, and it is unreasonable
to push the decision of a question (which is thought by many to be of the
utmost consequence to the whole Union) by only a part of the whole, when, by a
little delay, in no manner prejudicial to us, a decision may be obtained, in
which every part may have its due weight and influence.

But there is another reason against an immediate decision of the question (and
perhaps of more consequence than this) which is drawn from the present state of
Congress, viz.

V. In the late discussions of this subject in Congress, different gentlemen
adopted different spots or places for the seat of government, and became
divided into two parties nearly equal; each contending for his favorite spot
with all force of argument and energy of zeal; and both parties adhered to
their several favorite positions with such pointed and inflexible obstinacy,
and worked themselves up to such an acrimony of debate, that it became
impossible to force the decision, without giving a sort of triumph to one
party, and subjecting the other to very sensible mortification; and as the
majority must be very small, if the question is pushed on to a decision (for
the parties are nearly equal) it is much to be feared that the affair will
produce much dissatisfaction, and perhaps destroy mutual confidence and
good-humor, which may in future weaken our counsels, and lessen our unanimity
in matters that have no connection with the seat of government; for it is well
known, that irritated parties rarely adopt much accommodating temper or
benevolent condescension one toward another.

England and France, Holland and Italy, give us, in their histories, dreadful
lessons of the tragical effects of state-parties, and I pray God, we may have
prudence enough to put an early stop to them, if we find them in small
beginnings growing amongst us.

For these reasons I wish the said decision may be postponed; I would wish
this, if it was only to give gentlemen time to cool, and, when cool, to revise
their opinions and arguments. -- Time softens the acrimony of the mind, takes
off the edge of the passions, makes room for charity and benevolence, and may
perhaps produce such a spirit of accommodation, as, together with new
information and new lights that may be thrown on the subject, may produce in a
future time a decision which will strengthen our union, without any danger of
weakening or destroying it.

Perhaps it may appear in future time, that neither of the spots contended for
are on the whole eligible, and, of course, both parties may yield their
favorite positions, without giving any cause of triumph to their opponents. --
But there are still other reasons for a postponement of this decision not yet
mentioned, viz.

VI. Centrality will undoubtedly be (c^^teris paribus) the principle on which
the seat of government ought to be placed, because every part of the Union has
equal right to accommodation; but this must be a centrality of population, not
of territory; it cannot matter much whether the seat of government is at little
or great distance from those parts of the territory, which consist of
uninhabited woods and lakes.

But this center is, in its nature, a moving point, and must and will continue
so, till the population of every part of the territory is complete, and becomes
invariable, which, in the common course of human events, can never happen. And
no kind of establishment which we can give to the seat of government, will keep
it fixed and unmoved, when future reasons and future counsels shall operate
against it.

Therefore, it is altogether vain and highly imprudent to endeavor to fix our
seat of government by laying out any more money than is of immediate use and
absolute necessity, in furnishing the accommodations of it, and especially at a
time when out finances are extremely low and deranged, our people greatly
burdened, and the honor and justice of the States every where suffering in a
scandalous manner, by our breaches of faith and failure of public credit.

But though centrality is the principle (caeteris paribus) on which the seat of
government ought to be placed, yet (caeteris non paribus) it may become
otherwise; many other things may occur, to make a removal from centrality
absolutely necessary.

VII. The seat of government ought to be in a place where the court and
officers of government, and all the vast numbers of people, both citizens and
foreigners, who have occasion to resort there, may be accommodated in the best
and most convenient manner; but it is certain, that neither the one nor the
other have any chance for such accommodations on the desert banks of the
Potowmac or Susquehannah for many, many years to come; therefore, I think it
best to defer moving to either of the places for the present.

VIII. The seat of government ought to be in a place of the greatest attainable
intelligence, that the rulers may take benefit of the most extensive
correspondences of men of all professions, of foreigners resorting from every
part of the earth, of the most complete libraries, maps, and c. and c.

Congress may have concerns with all the world. Not a citizen in the States can
have a connection in any part of the earth, but, on some occasion or other,
Congress may have the matter before them. They must preside over all
improvements of the country, in which the experience and information of
foreigners may be of essential use. We may be interested in the customs of
foreign nations, which nobody can explain so well as their own people residing
among us, etc. etc. etc.

It is not supposable that the Members of Congress will come from home,
furnished with competent knowledge of all the subjects they will have occasion
to consider and decide; and if they have not this knowledge, they must obtain
it by information, as other folks do, and, of course, must be furnished with
the means of information; but I think we might as well immure them in the
bottom of a well, or shut them up in a cave, where they would be effectually
cut off from all intelligence of the world, as place them within the desert,
dreary fogs, and disheartening agues of either the Potowmac or Susquehannah,
where there is nothing grand and majestic to be seen, but the ice and floods,
and nothing lively to be heard or felt, but musk^toes. I am of opinion, the
defects of nature must be corrected by art, before either of these places can
become the best center of intelligence in America; and therefore, I think
Congress need not be in much hurry to move to either of them.

IX. It is necessary the seat of government should be placed where the
manufactures, agriculture, trade, and wealth of the country can receive the
best protection and encouragement, and be most easily and properly directed and
regulated by the government. The great first principles of our wealth are our
great staples of manufactures and agriculture; these both receive their
invigorating principle from our trade, for nobody would labor much to raise the
produce of the earth, or make fabrics, if there was no trade to make a (...)
for them, or no market where they could be sold.

This, of course, brings the whole into action on the various seats of
navigation, and, of course, it is absolutely necessary that the seat of
government should be near such seat of navigation, that government may have the
best opportunities to cherish and protect these most important interests, which
not only comprise the grand wealth and resources of the subject, but out of
which must be derived the great and most capital supplies of the government.

Farther, if it is necessary that the seat of government should be near any of
these seats of navigation and trade, it is evid^^^^y most necessary, that it
should be placed near to the greatest seat and center of them.

But neither the banks of Potowmac nor Susquehannah are near any such center,
nor have either of them any chance of ever possessing such advantage;
therefore, I think it best to put off at least for the present an emigration to
either of them.

X. It is necessary that the seat of government should be placed in that
position, which is most convenient for the defense and protection of the Union.
Our State is yet young; we are yet ignorant how far, and in what light, we may
be considered in the political systems of the European or African nations, or
what designs they are or may be meditating concerning us; I suppose, our
derangements and pressures since the peace have set us in a somewhat
disadvantageous light among them; but nature will soon give us consequence, as,
in the ordinary course of events, another century will (...) us as numerous,
and perhaps as powerful and rich, as the greatest of them, and, of course, we
shall be as respectable, if we have wisdom enough to improve our advantages.

The two colonies of the European powers, to which we are contiguous, are so
thinly inhabited and weak, that I conceive we are in little danger from them;
the Indians we can easily manage; our connexions with all the other nations of
the world must depend on navigation, for we can neither pass to them, nor they
to us, otherwise than across the sea.

I suppose nobody does now, or perhaps ever will, wish for any other than
commercial connections with any of them; but even our commerce may require
protection, and as the caprices of mankind are sometimes very vicious, and may
lead to actions very provoking, it is not impossible we may be insulted on our
own coasts, or even in our harbors, if we are wholly void of force to protect
them.

All this brings into view the very great importance of our navigation, which
is the great means of our commerce, and, of course, of our wealth, which will
doubtless require very extensive and numerous shipping; and these will make a
naval force, greater or less, at least in some degree, necessary; and as this
is an object on which not only the wealth, but even the character and safety,
of the States will capitally depend, it instantly rises into view as an
interest, an accommodation, of such vast magnitude, as to require a sort of
precedence of consideration, of most capital and decided attention; and, of
course, will at least require the seat of government to be so near to the seat
of it, as may be necessary to give it all the inspection, support, and
protection, that a matter of such capital consequence must require from
government.

The banks of Potowmac and Susquehannah are too remote from any practicable
seat of a navy, to admit any probability that it will ever be properly attended
to by a court at such distance. We have no instance of any nation, which pays a
proper attention to their navigation, whose seat of government is at a great
distance from their principal harbors.

France and Spain have good harbors, and every inducement and advantage for
building and furnishing a complete navy, but their capitals are far removed
from the sight of ships, and, of course, they are neglected.

On the contrary, the courts of England, Holland, Venice, and Genoa, have their
harbors near them, and their shipping is rarely neglected or out of order.

In as much, then, as capital considerations ought ever to control capital
decisions, I have no doubt but a seat of the federal government will be looked
for and found, not on the banks of Potowmac or Susquehannah, but near to some
navigable water, proper for the capital station of a navy; and to recede from
this principle will indicate not error of judgment, not corruption of heart
alone, but absolute, total madness; and for the justice of this remark, I
appeal to the sentiments of all the citizens of America, and of all their
friends in the world.

Time has fully justified Peter the Great, Czar of Muscovy; who, on the force
of this very principle, removed the seat of his Empire from its ancient
position, near 500 miles farther from the center of his dominions, and into a
climate and soil much less desirable, merely to gain a situation contiguous to
a harbor for his ships; in consequence of which his Empire is amazingly
enriched by trade, and become very respectable for its naval force.

But I suppose it will be strongly objected to any delay of fixing the seat of
government, that, till that is done, Congress cannot come into possession of
their exclusive jurisdiction over ten miles square of territory, which is to
surround their seat when fixed, and not before; and, of course, till then they
cannot enjoy the advantages of it.

This is a measure that has been adopted and approved by so many votes of
Convention, Congress, and particular States, that I suppose myself very stupid,
whilst I cannot see any kind of fitness or propriety in the measure, or any
advantages that will naturally result from it. But as stupidity is no crime,
and nobody can be rightfully blamed for not understanding what is totally out
of the reach of his mental powers, or for not seeing what does not appear
visible to him, I will venture to give my thoughts on this subject, in full
expectation, not of blame and censure, but of being deemed most uncommonly
stupid and dull, in not being able to comprehend what is so very clear and
plain to other folks.

I. In the first place, I can easily conceive that Congress ought to have and
enjoy all powers, authorities, and jurisdictions, that are or can be necessary
to preserve their own dignity, respectability, and state; sufficient fully to
secure them, to all intents and purposes, against all contempts, violences,
intrusions, or embarrassments, and to regulate and adjust their own order,
economy, and even ceremony, in the most proper and decent manner, which they
can devise; and that they shall be fully empowered to try and punish all
violations and trespasses in any of these respects, either by acts of their
corporate or aggregate body, or by such judges or officers as they shall
appoint; and that all these powers shall be superior to, and uncontrollable by,
any other power or authority whatever.

All these powers of self-preservation ought undoubtedly to exist in the
fullest manner in that august body, and their prudence in the exercise of them
may safely, and must necessarily, be relied on by the citizens of the States,
without instituting any superior authority to control them. -- But, in the
second place, it appears to me,

II. That these powers, authorities, and jurisdictions must not be fastened or
limited to any particular place; but must be inherent in that august body, and
must go and come with them when and wheresoever they move.

If, by the invasions of an enemy, a conflagration of their edifices, the
infections of a plague, or any other cause, they should find it convenient to
remove their court or the seat of their residence to some distant place, they
must carry all these jurisdictions and powers with them; it will not do well to
leave them behind; their use will be as great and necessary in the place to
which they move, as it was in the place they have left, and it would be hard
upon that august body, to add to their calamities of removal, the additional
mortification of being lessened and deflowered by it.

III. I have no idea that the citizens of any one district should be any more
subject to the authority and control of Congress, or should be entitled to
their benefits or notice in any way whatever, more than all the rest. Every
citizen has equal right to all the benefits of, and owes equal duty to, that
supreme body. Any distinctions of this sort lay a foundation for partialities,
expectations, or at least jealousies, which are very pernicious in society; and
although the citizens of the ten miles district may be few at first, yet we shall
probably find (whatever objections Congress have to a residence in cities) that
buildings and inhabitants will multiply round their court very soon into a
large city; in which numerous occasions will probably arise to operate on the
abovementioned sources of discontent and chagrin.

IV. Congress will have to make a whole code of laws for the ten miles
district, to appoint every judiciary and executive officer, and to superintend
the administration of the whole; and if they are as ^low about that, as they
are in organizing the federal government (and the case is quite as novel, and
the ground equally untrodden) this work may probably take up their time many
months; and as the States pay them about 1000 dollars a day, during their
session, the administration of the district will soon cost the States 100,000
dollars; which is much more than either we can spare, or the district can be
worth to us.

V. The whole police of the district will be a solecism in the federal
government; their laws will be made and imposed by people that are not of their
election, but by strangers, not by even their own fellow-citizens. It is
altogether at the option of Congress, whether they may appoint one officer of
their police, either judiciary or executive; they have no voice in taxation or
giving their own money; they do not belong to the Thirteen States, for they are
no part of either of them, and, of course, not parties to the confederation,
nor are they a State of themselves; the process of none of the confederated
States can run there, so that, for any thing they can do, their district will
be a refuge for debtors, thieves, and even murderers.

They must submit, right or wrong, to the decisions of their rulers, for they
have no appeal, no refuge from injury or tyranny; and this is no very
comfortable circumstance, if we consider a little how common it is for courts
to oppress the cities in which they reside. And if, under these circumstances,
the district should think themselves oppressed, and should happen to rebel or
raise an insurrection, the force of the Union must be called in to quell them;
and this will occasion another expense to the States, both of blood and
treasure, which I strongly object to.

VI. Besides all this, I know not what they will do, or what will become of
them, if Congress should happen to remove from them finally, and not return;
here must be another new road cut to their final destination, I know not how
nor where.

After all this trouble and expense, I cannot see one single benefit or
advantage which can accrue to the Congress, or the States, or the district,
from the whole of it; the powers and jurisdictions above described appear to me
to contain every thing, every authority which Congress can possibly need. I
take it they are all comprised in the constitution, though not particularly
enumerated there; but if it should be judged that these powers are not given
explicitly enough in the constitution, they can easily be added by way of
amendment, and I dare believe every State will readily ratify them.

But I am tired of gazing at this ten miles district, this unnatural object,
this sport of police; for I can really make nothing of it; and so I quit it,
being willing to refer it over to Congress to make something of it, if they can.

I now return from this long and wearisome discussion of this great objection
against any delay in fixing the seat of government, and return to my principal
subject, which I mean briefly to revise, and reduce the matter to very few
words, as follows:

We have every necessary building for the use of Congress ready made, and have
no need of new ones; and if we did need them, we have no money to spare to
build them, so long as our debts (of most poignant pressure and distress) are
unpaid; -- the geography and other circumstances of the States are not
sufficiantly known, to enable us to ascertain the most central place for a seat
of government; -- the present violent heats in Congress about this subject
render a decision of it dangerous at this time; -- we expect an accession of
new States, who ought to have their weight in the decision, but they must be
excluded, if the decision is pushed before their accession; -- that any attempt
to establish a permanent seat of government of long duration, is impracticable
and vain, as the just and central point for such a seat will, in its nature, be
always moving, and future reasons and counsels will alter any establishments we
can now make; -- that the seat of government ought doubtless to be situated in
the place of the greatest intelligence, -- in the center of commerce and
navigation, -- and as near as may be to the most capital and convenient station
or harbor of the navy, -- and in that place which is most convenient for the
general protection and defense of all the States.

Upon the whole matter, the great internal sources of our wealth, which are
derived from the labor of our people, either in the way of husbandry or
manufactures, all tend to a center in the line of navigation, which runs near
the seacoast, from one end of the States to the other; the external wealth
derived from our trade with foreign countries, tends to and centres in the same
line; here both meet and receive their invigorating principle, viz. their
market.

The market or sale is the principle which gives life and vigor to both these:
this principle is put in action on this great line of navigation; here the
sales of both are made; the one is purchased and shipped for exportation, the
other is purchased and sent off for consumption, into the various parts of the
country.

On this line, then, is the great seat and center of negotiation, both of our
home produce, and our imported wealth; here are to be found the great exchanges
of the nation, and, of course, the greatest plenty of cash, and here are found
the great banks, the richest repositories of money, and the grand conduits of
its circulation.

On this same line runs the greatest course of intelligence and advice from one
end of the States to the other; and next to this are the communications which
are conveyed by sea, from the remotest countries on one side, and by the great
roads leading from the extremities of the interior country on the other; but
both center and unite on this grand line of communication: for the truth of
this I appeal to every post office in the Union, and to every man whose
business has any connection with the general communication of the country.

It is farther obvious, and so intuitively plain that it cannot need a proof,
that a court, whose business lies with all men and all places, ought to be
seated in the greatest center of that communication which connects them all.

It follows then, by the most intuitive evidence, that the seat of the federal
government ought to be placed on the great line of navigation, and as near the
geographical center of it, as the great center of wealth and communication can
be found, and as near as may be to the grand station of the navigation, both of
commerce and force, which must insure the wealth, honor, and safety of the
whole.

Another obvious and very interesting reason why the seat of government ought
to be placed in the grand center of trade and communication, is this, viz. very
many people will have business of importance with the federal court or some of
its public offices, which may be well enough done without their personal
attendance, and they will have many more opportunities of sending their
business by some person of confidence who is going to the court, than they
could find, if the court was held in some out-of-the-way place, far from such
center of general resort.

It is easily observed, that a person in Boston has more opportunities to send
to New York, which lies on the great road of general communication, than to
Albany, which lies across the country: a person at Pittsburg has more
opportunities to send to Philadelphia, than to any place of half the distance,
which lies either north or south of it; any person in the country may send to
their capital easier than to a neighboring town, which lies in any direction
which crosses the road to their capital at right angles.

Besides, many people will frequently have business with the court, and private
business of trade, at the same time; and it is a great advantage to be able to
do both with but one expense of journey and time; to people who live at great
distance, these advantages will be very considerable, and the instances very
numerous though perhaps the mentioning the matter here may seem trifling.

These statements of facts, observations, and reasonings appear to me proper,
important, and convincing; and for the truth, justice, and fitness of them, I
appeal to the heart of every American, to that approving power which is to be
found in every human breast, and which no man can control, when the matter
proposed strikes the mind with a force of evidence, which, however disagreeable
the subject, will compel the assent.

I farther make the same appeal to the conscience of every man, who makes truth
the sole object of his pursuit, and who has honesty and firmness enough to
control the little sordid passions, which local attachments, sinister
interests, or party zeal may call up and stimulate to corrupt his judgment, or
to prostitute it; but perhaps, in the present corrupt state of human nature, no
degree of virtue or natural firmness will make a man at all times proof against
these little passions.

It is lamentable, when we see a man of dignity of conduct, noble sentiments,
great comprehension of mind, extensive erudition, and sound judgment, forget
the great principles of his subject, lose his balance, and fret himself out of
temper, in patronizing any little local interests and partial attachments. --
Good Heaven! how he lessens! how he sinks! how out of character he appears!
like a clergyman of sanctity grown foolish with drink; a grave judge losing his
law in a passion; or a senator, entrusted with the confidence and counsels of a
nation, fribbling and acting like a fool to please a courtezan.

If the above principles and reasonings are allowed to be just and conclusive,
our next business will be to look for a place for a seat of government, to
which they will apply; I will venture to propose PHILADELPHIA for the place.

I. It is as near the geographical center as any place in any manner capable of
accommodating Congress; its distance from the south line of the States is about
700 miles; from the north-east extremity, about the same; from Mississippi, on
an east and west line, perhaps a little more; the said east and west line will
divide the territory of the Union into two parts, of nearly equal acres.

The computation cannot be made with accuracy, because the northern boundary,
as well as the northern part of the western boundary, is little known, and, of
course, the lines, having never been measured, cannot by computation be reduced
to certainty; but as far as the best maps we have may be depended on, the
difference is not very great, though the southern part is the largest of the two,
but is greatly covered and incumbered by many huge mountains of immense length,
every where rendered incapable of cultivation by their height, precipices, and
rocks, also by vast barren plains of hot, coarse sand, and by dry knolls of
land full of shrubs, hard soil, and stones; all which can never be capable of
but small cultivation, if any at all. The northern part is better land, more
capable of extensive and uniform cultivation, has a better air, and climates
much more healthy.

The present population of the northern part is the most numerous, if we may
compute from the number of Delegates in Congress, which are sent from the two
parts, allowing seven of the Pennsylvania Delegates to the northern part, and
one of them to the southern; as the said line leaves about one-eighth part of
Pennsylvania on the southern side; but the inhabitants of the northern part are
much the most robust and industrious, and, of course, the most likely to
increase the wealth and strength of the Union.

The inexhaustible fisheries in which the northern people are concerned, will
add greatly to their population and wealth, for the wives of fishermen are
noted for bearing the most numerous and strongest children: the simple
herring-fishery is said to be one of the greatest sources of wealth and
population in Holland; if so, it is probable the immense fisheries of our
northern people will have a similar effect, and of much greater extent.

Indeed, the chance of rapid population is generally much greater in the
northern part than in the southern, for their natural increase is much greater,
and their people are not only more enterprising, but stronger and more
industrious, and, of course, more able and fit to endure the hardships of new
beginnings. The natural increase of New England is not less than 30,000 souls
yearly, and their emigrations will be almost wholly to the westward, not to the
southward, for they are generally prejudiced against the southern climates.

From all this it appears, that Philadelphia is as near the center of the
Union, as any point which can be found in the great line of navigation, and in
all probability will continue to be so for at least an age or two to come.

II. Philadelphia is, and undoubtedly will be acknowledged by every one, the
greatest center of wealth, trade, navigation, and intelligence, both foreign
and domestic, which is any where to be found in the United States: this needs
no proof.

III. It is seated on the banks of the river Delaware, which is the best
station or harbor for shipping that can be any where found, or even desired.
It has the following qualities or accommodations: 1. It is capable of easy and
most impregnable fortification and defense from the chaps of Newcastle Bay, 80
miles from the sea, up to the city, which is about 50 miles above the said
chaps. So that, by its distance from the sea and its defenses, it is perfectly
secure, or may be easily made so, against any sudden surprisal, or even
invasions, of an enemy. 2. It affords sufficient water for any ship that ever
was built, as far up as Wilmington, which is 15 miles above the said chaps, and
24 feet water from Wilmington up to the city. 3. It affords the best anchorage,
and is wholly secure against all winds, tides, and storms, the whole length
from the said chaps up to the city. 4. The common tides rise and fall about 6
feet, which is a great advantage in many respects. 5. Its waters not only
produce no encumbrance to a ship's bottom, but instantly kill all worms,
cockles, and other vermin which may happen to infest a ship on her first
arrival from sea. 6. It is furnished with the greatest plenty of timber, iron,
and all other materials and stores for building, rigging, and repairing ships,
and provisions for victualling them. 7. It is furnished with all natural
conveniences for dry docks; which may be built in sufficient number and extent
for every purpose of cleaning ships. 8. It is spacious enough to afford
anchorage and every other accommodation of security for perhaps all the ships
in the world. 9. The port of Philadelphia, being the grand center of commercial
navigation, will always furnish plenty of seamen, and render the manning of a
navy always easy, or at least practicable. These are the rare, singular, and
excellent advantages of this port and river.

I know of but one considerable inconvenience, which can be objected to it,
viz. the ice usually stops navigation in the river about two months in the
year; but this is in the middle of winter, when we rarely wish to have ships at
sea; and if they should happen to come on the coast in that season, they may
easily make a harbor in New York or Chesapeak Bay; ships that winter in the
river are easily secured against any damage from the ice, as we never have any
floods which rise more than a foot or two above common high water.

IV. Philadelphia can furnish more local accommodations for Congress, and all
the vast number of people who will resort to the seat of government, than any
other city in America. When compared with any of them, it has more houses, more
inhabitants, more riches, more churches, and more play houses, and quite as
much virtue, though perhaps somewhat less sociability, but more punctuality in
payments, which is some indication of more honesty.

V. The climate is temperate, and the air, good; the spring and ^all are
delightful; the winters mostly moderate, with no more snow or frost than in
necessary for the convenience of the inhabitants and the growth of vegetables,
etc. the heat of summer is rarely intense, and if at any time it becomes
violent, it seldom lasts long; it is very uncommon to have the Mercury at 90.

But I suppose the greatest objection to it is its numerous population. I
cannot conceive what objection Congress can have to residing in a large city;
their accommodations are better and cheaper, their intelligence and
communication more full and easy, their means of information from conversation,
large libraries, maps, etc. are much greater, and their dignity and
respectability more conspicuous than they could possibly be in lesser places.

I never heard of the least inconvenience, which the English Parliament ever
suffered from sitting in Westminster, which is the most populous spot in
Europe. The city of Rome, which contained 6,000,000 of people, was the seat of
the Roman government, and all the inconveniences which were felt, arose not
from the continuance of it there, but from the removal of it to Constantinople;
this soon brought on a division of the Empire into Eastern and Western, or
Roman and Grecian; which soon terminated in the total ruin, and even
extinction, of the Western Empire; the courts of most of the States and
kingdoms of Europe are held in the most populous cities, without any mischiefs
arising from their population that I ever heard of.

But if there are mischiefs in this, they are unavoidable, for let them fix
their seat where they please, a populous city will soon grow round them, which
can never be avoided without repeated removals.

I never heard of but one inconvenience arising from the largeness of the city
which is the seat of Congress, which is this, viz. the various allurements and
pleasures of the place are apt to divert some of their Members from their
attention to the public business and their duty in the House; but this, I
conceive, is by no means to be remedied by running away from the mischief, but
by imposing severe laws on their own Members, and rigidly punishing, and even
expelling, SUCH of them as are guilty of any immoral and scandalous practices,
which reflect disgrace on their body, or corrupt their morals or counsels; or
SUCH who, on any account, neglect their attendance and duty in the House.

When persons appointed to such high and dignified stations, happen to be so
lost to all sense of duty, honor, and even shame, as to disgrace themselves and
the august body to which they belong, by levities, debaucheries, negligence of
their duty, and of the most important interests they are appointed to manage,
these men, I say, are the proper objects of punishment; and if they cannot be
reformed, the honor and safety of the States require that they be expelled from
the House. And this, I conceive, is the only practicable method of curing the
mischief; and this, if put into proper execution, will very effectually cure it.

It is very manifest that the dignity, the honor, the respectability, example,
and even universal visible virtue of Congress are in their own keeping. No
other authority can interpose to correct a failure in any of these, unless it
is the awful tribunal of the press, which is a most dreadful court, that always
multiplies and increases the mischief in order to remedy it; and I should
suppose, a Congress of the least degree of prudence would take the matter under
their own direction, in order to prevent an appeal to that most sovereign,
indeed, but most mortifying and disgraceful, of all umpires.

The virtues and example of Congress are of infinite importance to the Union.
Vices and corruptions planted in a court (where they make their first
appearance with a sort of brilliance, derived from their connection, or at
least close neighborhood, with the first honors of the nation) have a very
high introduction, and spread fast among the people. Nobody can watch and
suppress the first budding of this fruitful source of evil, more fatal than the
opening of Pandora's box, but Congress itself.

There is no situation in either town or country, no grandeur of show or
pompous parade, no virtues of a few, no combination of every excellency in the
President, nor any strength, wealth, and majesty of the States they represent,
which can give dignity to Congress, so long as the Members have not virtue and
discretion to give dignity to themselves, and fitness to their resolutions. The
vices, the negligence, and even the levities, of a few, will tarnish the glory
and lessen the dignity of that august body, and diminish the confidence of the
subject in them.

Some very extraordinary things which have lately passed, induce me to turn my
attention to the great principles of economy and delicate morals, which are
absolutely necessary to be practiced in an infant State.

I. Any appearance of pomp, grandeur, and magnificence of dress, of equipage,
of buildings, or of entertainments should be carefully avoided.

1. Because the dignity, the establishment, the defense, and internal police of
the States, do not at all consist in any of these; Fabricius, with his
disinterestedness and poverty, exhibited in Greece a much more striking sample
of the dignity and excellence of the Roman mind and police, than Lucullus, when
he returned to Rome through the same place, with all the blaze of Eastern luxury
and magnificence.

2. Our people being generally of middle rank, have not been accustomed to
these grand appearances, and are apt to think there is something foppish and
puerile in them, something that indicates weakness and vanity, or, which is
worse, may imagine they are designed to exhibit and keep up a sort of hauteur,
loftiness, and pride of station, which is to cow down and dispirit the subject,
and depress him with a sense of his own inferiority, when he comes near the
court.

3. Luxuries and levities, magnificence and show, take up much time, and are
inconsistent with that gravity of counsel, fixed attention, and steady pursuit,
which the great affairs of the nation require of its ministers; it is well
known that hard students, or men deeply engaged in pursuit of any kind of
business, neglect all pageantries, and generally despise them.

4. All these appearances are attended with expense which is not only needless,
but hurtful; as it must be a burden either to the public treasury, or to the
individual concerned, and may probably become a very bad example of luxury and
little pride, which a young State, like all n^w beginners, should ever avoid.

Besides all this, the great bulk of our citizens are made up of people who set
out in the world with small beginnings, and, by unwearied industry and thrift,
have by little and little accumulated the competency they now enjoy. Any
departure from this line of conduct they have commonly seen followed by poverty
and wretchedness; such people have a high sense of the value of money, because,
by long labor and careful economy, they have earned and preserved it. To people
of these fixed habits, any excess of liberal grandeur and sumptuous parade must
appear very dangerous; like a gulf which will soon swallow up all the public
money; this makes them averse to the payment of taxes or cash, which is like to
be consumed and lost in prodigal expenses.

More than all this, very great numbers of our people are derived from
ancestors, who left their native soil on account of religion; whose devotion
and morals were very severe, and a religious gravity and austerity of manners
has marked the character of their descendants ever since; not so much as a
playhouse could be admitted, till very lately, in the most capital cities;
and, of course, every excess of levity, gaiety, dress, equipage, parties of
pleasure, gallantries, amors, etc. etc. appear to such people like debauchery,
dissipation, and corruption of morals, and prudence directs that not only evil,
but all appearance of it, is to be avoided.

Some respect should certainly be paid to the strong habits, customs, tempers,
and sentiments of any people, by persons who reside among them, especially by
persons who have the management and direction of their most precious and
delicate interests. I am sure the gaieties, pleasures, and expenses of
New York, since the new Congress have resided there, are the common talk and
lamentation of the people where I live; who are not the most noted in the world
for rigid manners or parsimony of living.

II. Another great article of economy, most necessary to be observed by
Congress and all the States, is the appointments or emoluments annexed to all
public offices. Making money or accumulating fortunes ought not to be the
ruling object either in those who give, or those who take, public offices; the
greatest integrity, learning, and official abilities are commonly found among
men whose habits are formed under the practice of moderate living and prudent
economy; who would very cheerfully accept a public office with very moderate
emoluments, and execute it in the best manner.

An abundant sufficiency of men of this cast may be found in the Union, whose
mediocrity of desires and prudent economy will enable them to afford very well
to accept the place on moderate terms; and whose habits of industry,
steadiness, and integrity will almost insure a faithful and proper performance
of the duties of it.

What madness is it then to (...) by this sort of men, and offer the public
offices to men of either such great fortunes or great business, that they
cannot afford to attend to the duties of them, without very great emoluments?
To hear men talk in Congress of the sacrifices of fortune which they make by
accepting their places, raises my indignation; not against the impatient
sufferer so much, indeed, as against the fools who appointed him, who, I
conceive, made much greater sacrifices of their common sense in giving him the
place, than he did of his money in accepting it.

Besides, where a man's wants are supplied by his diligence, he will naturally
be very industrious and persevering; but it is commonly found that industry is
very apt to abate, where the occasions of it are lessened or removed. I do not
know a more effectual way to spoil a public officer, than making him too rich;
such a man is apt to turn over the public concerns to clerks or subalterns, and
to devote more of his time to indolence or pleasures, than to the business of
his office.

Whether any of these observations will apply to the compensations which
Congress have voted to themselves, the great officers of state, the collectors
and officers of the revenue, the door-keepers, and sundry other public
officers, I leave to be discussed another time; without going into any detail
of that matter at present, I have only to say, that the compensations are
generally deemed (by people I have conversed with) to be about double of what
they ought to be, in order to insure the business of the respective offices to
be well done; and as they are amazingly higher than the States of the Union in
general allow to their officers of a similar nature, I suppose they will be
thought excessive, and, of course, will be complained of, and probably viewed
with uneasiness and dissatisfaction.

Certainly the extravagancies of the courts of Europe in this respect are no
kind of rule for us, and I think any gentleman might be ashamed to quote their
example (which is and ever has been universally exploded in America) as a
reason why we should imitate it. But it may be noted, that no compensations
allowed in Europe or America to the Members of any Parliament, Diet, States
General, Assembly, or any other body similar to that of Congress, ever were
one-third of what Congress have granted to themselves; at least this is true as
far as I could ever gain information of the matter.

I suppose they give no credit for the honor of their stations, their
acquaintance with all the capital characters in America, and all those of
Europe, which repair to the federal court, their information of the state and
principle of the manufactures, agriculture, commerce, and policies of all the
States of the Union, the opportunities they acquire of serving their children
and friends, and the consequence which their residence in Congress will ever
after give to them and their families in their respective States, whenever they
shall return home. I should suppose all these advantages, or even any one of
them, would be compensation enough for a few months' residence in Congress,
without any money at all; especially if their simple and necessary expenses
were born by the public into the bargain.

III. Economy absolutely requires the payment of the public debts, at least the
annual or half-yearly interest of them; the public would derive greater
advantages from this, by the general animation of every sort of business it
would produce, than would compensate the burden of raising the money to do it,
even if we pay no regard to the public justice, honor, credit, morality,
gratitude, and even compassion, which all conspire to enforce the same measure.

But if all this cannot be done at present, enough may doubtless be done to
satisfy the original holders of the public securities, who are manifestly the
most meritorious, as well as the greatest, sufferers, and the most distressed
and ruined by the public defaults of any among us; but I touched on this
before, and it is needless to add more on this dreary subject in this place.

IV. Economy requires that the public moneys should be raised in that way that
is easiest to the people, and least troublesome, disgusting, and expensive in
the collection; an impost on imported luxuries and articles of unnecessary
consumption, but just high enough to reduce the excessive use of them down to
that degree, which is most conducive to the health, morals, and wealth of our
people, together with the small impost on other articles already assessed,
will, I conceive, produce all the supplies which the public exigences require;
the collection of all this will be cheap and easy; a few officers in the places
of navigation will be sufficient; and the importers who pay the duty, will be
few, and will all be reimbursed in their sales.

But a general excise (which, I hear, is in contemplation) will require an
almost infinite number of officers, whose pay will amount to vast sums, and
whose duty will be of the most disgusting and mortifying kind to the people;
for my part, I had rather pay a dollar a gallon, impost duty, on all the
spirits and wines I consume, than suffer the mortifying intrusions of an
excise-officer, to examine my liquors, though his demand was but a shilling; and
after all, it will be totally impossible to collect this duty in the exterior
parts of the States with any kind of general uniformity and equality, as all
experience has ever made manifest. But I have treated this more fully in my
Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Essays on Free Trade and Finance, to which I refer
any body who wishes to see my sentiments on this subject more fully explained.

I write with the most unlimited freedom, and I expect the candor of my
countrymen; if my sentiments are wrong, condemn them; if right, approve and
adopt them; it is not an itch of writing which impels me, but a zeal for a good
government and a wise administration prompts me to write, and dictates every
line. I lament that any one advantage of my country should be lost for want of
proper management, or that we should ever incur the old censure of fools,
having a price put into their hands, but no hearts to improve it. May Heaven
direct our public counsels, and give prosperity and establishment to our union.

REMARKS ON THE Address of Sixteen Members OF THE ASSEMBLY OF PENNSYLVANIA, TO
THEIR CONSTITUENTS, Dated September 29, 1787. With some Strictures on their
Objections to the CONSTITUTION recommended by the late Federal Convention. When
the New Constitution was laid before the Assembly of Pennsylvania, in
September, 1787, a resolution passed the House (forty-three against nineteen)
to call a Convention to consider it, etc. Sixteen of the Dissentients published
an Address to their Constituents, dated September 27, 1787, stating their
conduct and assigning the reasons of it: but as there was very little in all
this affair that reflected much honor on the dissenting Members or on the State
to which they belonged, and nothing that could affect or concern any body out
of that State, I have here omitted my remarks on all of it, but their
objections to the New Constitution itself, which being of general consequence
to the States, in as much as that Constitution (with a few amendments since
adopted) is the same which now exists in full establishment through the Union, I
therefore here insert, I say, their objections and my remarks on them, and
leave out all the rest as matter of (...) concern at that time, but like to be
little interesting to the public in general at this or any future time.

[First published in Philadelphia, October 12, 1787.]
I AM now to consider the objections of our sixteen Members to the New
Constitution itself, which is much the most important part that lies on me.

1. Their first objection is, that the government proposed will be too
expensive. I answer, that if the appointments of offices are not more, and the
compensations or emoluments of office not greater, than is necessary, the
expense will be by no means burdensome, and this must be left to the prudence
of Congress; for I know of no way to control supreme powers from extravagance
in this respect. Doubtless many instances may be produced of many needless
offices being created, and many inferior officers, who receive far greater
emoluments of office than the first President of the State.

2. Their next objection is against a legislature consisting of three branches.
This is so far from an objection, that I consider it as an advantage. The most
weighty and important affairs of the Union must be transacted in Congress; the
most essential counsels must be there decided, which must all go through three
several discussions in three different chambers (all equally competent to the
subject and equally governed by the same motives and interests, viz. the good
of the great Commonwealth, and the approbation of the people) before any
decision can be made; and when disputes are very high, different discussions
are necessary, because they afford time for all parties to cool and reconsider.

This appears to me to be a very safe way, and a very likely method to prevent
any sudden and undigested resolutions from passing; and though it may delay, or
even destroy, a good bill, will hardly admit the passing of a bad one, which is
by far the worst evil of the two. But if all this cannot stop the course of a
bad bill, the negative of the President will at least give it further
embarrassment, will furnish all the new light which a most serious discussion
in a third House can give, and will make a new discussion necessary in each of
the other two, where every member will have an opportunity to revise his
opinion, to correct his arguments, and bring his judgment to the greatest
maturity possible: if all this can not keep the public decision within the
bounds of wisdom, natural fitness, right, and convenience, it will be hard to
find any efforts of human wisdom that can do it.

I believe it would be difficult to find a man in the Union, who would not
readily consent to have Congress vested with all the vast powers proposed by
the New Constitution, if he could be sure that those powers would be exercised
with wisdom, justice, and propriety, and not be abused; and I do not see that
greater precautions and guards against abuses can well be devised, or more
effectual methods used to throw every degree of light on every subject of
debate, or more powerful motives to a reasonable and honest decision can be set
before the minds of Congress, than are here proposed.

And if this is the best that can be obtained, it ought in all prudence to be
adopted till better appears, rather than to be rejected merely because it is
human, not perfect, and may be abused. At any rate I think it very plain that
our chance of a right decision in a Congress of three branches, is much greater
than in one of a single chamber: but however all this may be, I cannot see the
least tendency in a Legislature of three branches to increase the burdens or
taxes of the people. I think it very evident that any proposition of
extravagant expense would be checked and embarrassed in such an Assembly, more
than in a single House.

Further, the two Houses being by their election taken from the body of the
States, and being themselves principal inhabitants, will naturally have the
interest of the Commonwealth sincerely at heart, their principle must be the
same, their differences must be (if any) in the mode of pursuing it, or arise
from local attachments; I say, the great interest of their country, and the
esteem, confidence, and approbation of their fellow-citizens, must be strong
governing principles in both Houses, as well as in the President himself. Vide
this subject fully discussed in my Dissertation on that Constitution which is
necessary for the United States, page 198.


3. Another objection is, that the Constitution proposed will annihilate the
State-governments, or reduce them to mere corporations. I take it that this
objection is thrown out (merely invidiae causa) without the least ground for
it; ^or I do not find one article of the Constitution proposed, which vests
Congress, or any of their officers or courts, with a power to interfere in the
least in the internal police or government of any one State, when the interests
of some other State, or strangers, or the Union in general, are not concerned;
and in all such cases it is absolutely and manifestly necessary that Congress
should have a controlling power, otherwise there would be no end of
controversies and injuries between different States, nor any safety for
individuals, nor any possibility of supporting the Union with any tolerable
degree of honor, strength, or security.

4. Another objection is against the power of taxation vested in Congress. But
I answer, this is absolutely necessary and unavoidable, from the necessity of
the case; I know it is a tender point, a vast power, and a terrible engine of
oppression and tyranny, when wantonly, injudiciously, or wickedly used, but
must be admitted; for it is impossible to support the Union, or indeed any
government, without expense -- the Congress are the proper judges of that
expense, the amount of it, and the best means of supplying it; the safety of
the States absolutely requires that this power be lodged somewhere, and no
other body can have the least pretensions to it; and no part of the resources
of the States can, with any safety, be exempt, when the exigencies of the Union
or government require their utmost exertion.

The stronger we make our government, the greater protection it can afford us,
and the greater will our safety be under it.

It is easy enough here to harangue on the arts of a court to create occasions
for money, or the unbounded extravagance with which they can spend it; but all
this notwithstanding, we must take our courts as we do our wives, for better or
for worse. We hope the best of an American Congress, but if they disappoint us,
we cannot help it; it is in vain to try to form any plan of avoiding the
frailties of human nature. -- Would any man choose a lame horse l^st a sound
one should run away with him? or will any man prefer a small tent to live in,
before a large house, which may fall down and crush him in its ruins? No man
has any right to find fault with this article, till he can substitute a better
in its room.

The sixteen Members attempt to aggravate the horrors of this devouring power,
by suggesting the rigid severity with which Congress, with their faithful
soldiers, will exact and collect the taxes. This picture, stripped of its black
drapery, amounts to just this, viz. that whatever taxes are laid will be
collected, without exception, from every person charged with them, which must
look disagreeable, I suppose, to people who, by one shift or another, have
avoided paying taxes all their lives.

But it is a plain truth, and will be obvious to any body who duly considers
it, that nothing can be more ruinous to a State, or oppressive to individuals,
than a partial and dilatory collection of taxes, especially where the tax is an
impost or excise, because the man who avoids the tax, can undersell, and
consequently ruin, him who pays it, i. e. smuggling ruins the fair trader, and
a remedy of this mischief, I cannot suppose, will be deemed by our people in
general such a very awful judgment, as the sixteen Members would make us
believe their constituents will consider it to be.

5. They object, that the liberty of the press is not asserted in the
Constitution. I answer, neither are any of the ten commandments, but I do not
think, that it follows that it was the design of the Convention to sacrifice
either the one or the other to contempt, or to leave them void of protection
and effectual support.

6. It is objected further, that the Constitution contains no declaration of
rights. I answer, this is not true: the Constitution contains a declaration of
many rights, and very important ones, e. g. that people shall be obliged to
fulfill their contracts, and not avoid them by tenders of any thing less than
the value stipulated; that no ex post fact^ laws shall be made, etc. but it was
no part of the business of their appointment to make a code of laws; it was
sufficient to fix the Constitution right, and that would pave the way for the
most effectual security of the rights of the subject.

7. They further object, that no provision is made against a standing army in
time of peace. I answer, that a standing army, i. e. regular troops, are often
necessary in time of peace, to prevent a war, to guard against sudden
invasions, for garrison-duty, to quell mobs and riots, as guards to Congress
and perhaps other courts, etc. etc. as military schools to keep up the
knowledge and habits of military discipline and exercise, etc. etc. and as the
power of raising troops is rightfully and without objection vested in Congress,
so they are the properest and best judges of the number requisite, and the
occasion, time, and manner of employing them; if they are not wanted on
military duty, they may be employed in making public roads, fortifications, or
any other public works: they need not be an useless burden to the States: and
for all this the prudence of Congress must be trusted, and nobody can have a
right to object to this, till they can point out some way of doing better.

8. Another objection is, that the New Constitution abolishes trial by jury in
civil causes. I answer, I do not see one word in the Constitution, which, by
any candid construction, can support even the remotest suspicion that this ever
entered in the heart of one Member of the Convention: I therefore set down the
suggestion for sheer malice, and so dismiss it.

9. Another objection is, that the federal judiciary is so constructed as to
destroy the judiciaries of the several States, and that the appellate
jurisdiction, with respect to law and fact, is unnecessary. I answer, both the
original and appellate jurisdiction of the federal judiciary are manifestly
necessary, where the cause of action affects the citizens of different States,
the general interest of the Union, or strangers (and to cases of these
descriptions only does the jurisdicdiction of the federal judiciary extend) I
say, these jurisdictions of the federal judiciary are manifestly necessary for
the reasons just now given under the third objection.

I do not see how they can avoid trying any issues joined before them, whether
the thing to be decided is law or fact; but I think no doubt can be made, that
if the issue joined is on fact, it must be tried by a jury.

10. They object, that the election of Delegates for the House of
Representatives is for two years, and of Senators, for six years. I think this
a manifest advantage, rather than an objection. Very great inconveniences must
necessarily arise from a too frequent change of the Members of large
legislative or executive bodies, where the revision of every past transaction
must be taken up, explained, and discussed anew for the information of the new
Members; where the settled rules of the House are little understood by them,
etc. etc. all which ought to be avoided, if it can be with safety.

Further, it is plain that any man who serves in such bodies, is better
qualified the second year than he could be the first, because experience adds
qualifications for every business, etc. the only objection is, that long
continuance affords danger of corruption, but for this the Constitution
provides a remedy by impeachment and expulsion, which will be a sufficient
restraint, unless a majority of the House and Senate should become corrupt,
which is not easily presumable: in fine, there is a certain mean between too
long and too short continuances of Members in Congress, and I cannot see but it
is judiciously fixed by the Convention.

Upon the whole matter, I think the sixteen Members have employed an
address-writer of great dexterity, who has given us a strong sample of
ingenious malignity and ill nature -- a masterpiece of high coloring in the
scarecrow way; in his account of the conduct of the sixteen Members, by an
unexpected openness and candor, he avows facts which he certainly cannot expect
to justify, or even hope that their constituents will patronize or even
approve, but he seems to lose all candor when he deals in sentiments; when he
comes to point out the nature and operation of the New Constitution, he appears
to mistake the spirit and true principles of it very much; or, which is worse,
takes pleasure in showing it in the worst light he can paint it in.

I however agree with him in this, 'that this is the time for consideration and
minute examination;' and, I think, the great subject, when viewed seriously,
without passion or prejudice, will bear, and brighten under, the severest
examination of the rational inquirer. If the provisions of the law or
Constitution do not exceed the occasions, if the remedies are not extended
beyond the mischiefs, the government cannot be justly charged with severity; on
the other hand, if the provisions are not adequate to the occasions, and the
remedies not equal to the mischiefs, the government must b^ too lax, and not
sufficiently operative to give the necessary security to the subject: to form a
right judgment, we must compare these two things well together, and not suffer
our minds to dwell on one of them alone, without considering it in connection
with the other; by this means we shall easily see that the one makes the other
necessary.

Were we to view only the gaols and dungeons, the gallows and pillories, the
chains and wheel-barrows, of any State, we might be induced to think the
government severe; but when we turn our attention to the murders and
parricides, the robberies and burglaries, the piracies and thefts, which merit
these punishments, our idea of cruelty vanishes at once, and we admire the
justice, and perhaps clemency, of that government, which before shocked us as
too severe.

So when we fix our attention only on the superlative authority and energetic
force vested in Congress, and our federal executive powers by the New
Constitution, we may at first sight be induced to think that we yield more of
the sovereignty of the States and of personal liberty, than is requisite to
maintain the federal government; but when, on the other hand, we consider with
full survey the vast supports which the union requires, and the immense
consequence of that UNION to us all, we shall probably soon be convinced that
the powers aforesaid, extensive as they are, are not greater than is necessary
for our benefit: for,

1. No laws of any State, which do not carry in them a force which extends to
their effectual and final execution, can afford a certain and sufficient
security to the subject; for,

2. Laws of any kind, which fail of execution, are worse than none, because
they weaken the government, expose it to contempt, destroy the confidence of
all men, both subjects and strangers, in it, and disappoint all men who have
confided in it.

In fine, our union can never be supported without definite and effectual laws,
which are co-extensive with their occasions, and which are supported by
authorities and powers which can give them execution with energy; if admitting
such powers into our Constitution can be called a sacrifice, it is a sacrifice
to safety, and the only question is, whether our UNION or federal government is
worth this sacrifice.

Our UNION, I say, under the protection of which every individual rests secure
against foreign and domestic insult and oppression; but without it we can have
no security against invasions, insults, and oppressions of foreign powers, or
against the inroads and wars of one State on another, or even against
insurrections and rebellions arising within particular States, by which our
wealth and strength, as well as ease, comfort, and safety, will be devoured and
destroyed by enemies growing out of our own bowels.

It is our UNION alone which can give us respectability abroad in the eyes of
foreign nations, and secure to us all the advantages both of trade and safety,
which can be derived from treaties with them.

The Thirteen States all united and well cemented together, are a strong, rich,
and formidable body, not of stationary, maturated power, but increasing every
day in riches, strength, and numbers.

Thus circumstanced, we can demand the attention and respect of all foreign
nations, but they will give us both in exact proportion to the solidity of our
union: for if they observe our union to be lax, from insufficient principles of
cement in our Constitution, or mutinies and insurrections of our own people
(which are the direct consequence of an insufficient cement of union) I say,
when foreign nations see either of these, they will immediately abate of their
attention and respect to us, and confidence in us.

And as it appears to me, that the New Constitution does not vest Congress with
more or greater powers than are necessary to support this important union, I
wish it may be admitted in the most cordial and unanimous manner by all the
States.

It is a human composition, and may have errors which future experience will
enable us to discover and correct; but I think it is pretty plain, if it has
faults, that the address-writer of the sixteen Members has not been able to
find them; for he has all along either hunted down phantoms of error, that have
no real existence, or, which is worse, tarnished real excellencies into
blemishes.

I have dwelt the longer on these remarks of this writer, because I observe
that all the scribblers in our papers against the New Constitution, have taken
their cue principally from him; all their lucubrations contain little more than
his ideas dressed out in a great variety of forms; one of which colors so high
as to make the New Constitution strongly resemble the Turkish government (vide
Gazetteer of the 10th instant) which, I think, comes about as near the truth as
any of the rest, and brings to my mind a sentiment in polemical divinity, which
I have somewhere read, that there were once great disputes and different
opinions among divines about the mark which was set on Cain, when one of them
very gravely thought it was a horn fully grown out on his forehead. It is
probable he could not think of a worse mark than that.

On the whole matter, there is no end of the extravagancies of the human fancy,
which are commonly dictated by poignant feelings, disordered passions, or
affecting interests; but I could wish my fellow-citizens, in the matter of vast
importance before us, would divest themselves of bias, passion, and little
personal or local interests, and consider the great subject with that dignity
of reason, and independence of sentiment, which national interests ever require.

I have here given my sentiments with the most unbiassed freedom, and hope they
will be received with the most candid attention and unbiassed discussion by the
State in which I live, and in which I expect to leave my children.

I will conclude with one observation, which I take to be very capital, viz.
that the distresses and oppressions, both of nations and individuals, often
arise from the powers of government being too limited in their principle, too
indeterminate in their definition, or too lax in their execution, and, of
course, the safety of the citizens depends much on full and definite powers of
government, and an effectual execution of them.

The Weaknesses of Brutus exposed: OR, SOME REMARKS In Vindication of the
Constitution PROPOSED BY THE LATE FEDERAL CONVENTION, AGAINST THE OBJECTIONS
and GLOOMY FEARS of that WRITER.
[First published in Philadelphia, Nov. 4, 1787.]
THE long piece signed BRUTUS (which was first published in a New York paper,
and was afterward copied into the Pennsylvania Packet of Oct. 26, 1787) is
wrote in a very good style; the language is easy, and the address is polite and
insinuating: but the sentiments, I conceive, are not only unsound, but wild and
chimerical; the dreary fears and apprehensions, altogether groundless; and the
whole tendency of the piece, in this very important crisis of our politics,
very hurtful. I have, therefore, thought it my duty to make some animadversions
on it; which I here offer, with all due deference, to the author and to the
public.

HIS first question is, Whether a confederated government is best for the
United States?

I answer, -- If Brutus, or any body else, cannot find any benefit resulting
from the union of the Thirteen States; if they can do without as well as with
the respectability, the protection, and the security, which the States may
derive from that union, I have nothing further to say: but if that union is to
be supported in any such manner as to afford respectability, protection, or
security to the States, I say it must be done by an adequate government, and
cannot be otherwise done.

This government must have a supreme power, superior to and able to control
each and all of its parts. It is essential to all government, that such a power
be somewhere existing in it; and if the place where the proposed Constitution
has fixed it, does not suit Brutus and his friends, I will give him leave to
stow it away in any other place that is better: but I will not consent to have
it annihilated; neither will I agree to have it cramped and pinched for room,
so as to lessen its energy; for that will destroy both its nature and use.

The supreme power of government ought to be full, definite, established, and
acknowledged. Powers of government too limited, or uncertain and disputed, have
ever proved, like Pandora's box, a most fruitful source of quarrels,
animosities, wars, devastation, and ruin, in all shapes and degrees, in all
communities, states, and kingdoms on earth.

Nothing tends more to the honor, establishment, and peace of society, than
public decisions, grounded on principles of right, natural fitness, and
prudence; but when the powers of government are too limited, such decisions
cannot be made and enforced; so the mischief goes without a remedy: dreadful
examples of which we have felt, in instances more than enough, for seven years
past.

Further, where the powers of government are not definite but disputed, the
administration dare not make decisions on the footing of impartial justice and
right; but must temporize with the parties, lest they lose friends or make
enemies: and, of course, the righteous go off injured and disgusted, and the
wicked go off grumbling too; for it is rare that any sacrifices of a court can
satisfy a prevailing party in the State.

It is necessary in States, as well as in private families, that controversies
should have a just, speedy, and effectual decision, that right may be done
before the contention has time to grow up into habits of malignity, resentment,
ill nature, and ill offices. If a controversy happens between two States, must
it continue undecided, and daily increase, and be more and more aggravated, by
the repeated insults and injuries of the contending parties, till they are ripe
for the decision of the sword? or must the weaker States suffer, without
remedy, the groundless demands and oppressions of their stronger neighbors,
because they have no avenger, or umpire of their disputes?

Or shall we institute a supreme power, with full and effectual authority to
control the animosities and decide the disputes of these strong, contending
bodies? In the one proposed to us, we have perhaps every chance of a righteous
judgment, that we have any reason to hope for; but I am clearly of opinion,
that even a wrongful decision would, in most cases, be preferable to the
continuance of such destructive controversies.

I suppose that neither Brutus nor any of his friends would wish to see our
government embroiled abroad, and, therefore, will admit it necessary to
institute some federal authority, sufficient to punish any individual or State,
who shall violate our treaties with foreign nations, insult their dignity, or
abuse their citizens, and compel due reparation in all such cases.

I further apprehend, that Brutus is willing to have the general interest and
welfare of the States well provided for and supported, and, therefore, will
consent that there shall exist in the States an authority to do all this
effectually; but he seems grieved that Congress should be the judges of this
general welfare of the States. If he will be kind enough to point out any other
more suitable and proper judges, I will consent to have them admitted.

Indeed, I begin to have hopes of Brutus, and think he may come right at last;
for I observe (after all his fear and trembling about the new government) the
constitution he defines and adopts, is the very same as that which the Federal
Convention have proposed to us, viz. "that the Thirteen States should continue
thirteen confederated republics, under the direction and control of a supreme
federal head, for certain defined national purposes only." Where we may observe,

1. That the New Constitution leaves all the Thirteen States, complete
republics, as it found them, but all confederated under the direction and
control of a federal head, for certain defined national purposes only, i. e. it
leaves all the dignities, authorities, and internal police of each States in
free, full, and perfect condition; unless when national purposes make the
control of them by the federal head or authority, necessary to the general
benefit.

2. These powers of control by the federal head or authority are defined in the
New Constitution, as minutely as may be, in their principle; and any detail of
them which may become necessary, is committed to the wisdom of Congress.

3. It extends the controlling power of the federal head to no one case, to
which the jurisdiction or power of definitive decision of any one State can be
competent. And,

4. In every such case, the controlling power of the federal head is absolutely
necessary to the support, dignity, and benefit of the national government, and
the safety of individuals; neither of which can, by any possibility, be secured
without it.

All this falls in pretty well with Brutus's sentiments; for he does not think
that the New Constitution in its present state so very bad, but fears that it
will not preserve its purity of institution, but, if adopted, will immediately
verge to, and terminate in, a consolidation, i. e. a destruction of the
State-governments. For argument, he suggests the avidity of power natural to
rulers, and the eager grasp with which they hold it when obtained, and their
strong propensity to abuse their power, and encroach on the liberties of the
people.

He dwells on the vast powers vested in Congress by the New Constitution, i. e.
of levying taxes, raising armies, appointing federal courts, etc. takes it for
granted that all these powers will be abused and carried to an oppressive
excess; and then harangues on the dreadful case we shall be in, when our wealth
is all devoured by taxes; our liberty destroyed by the power of the army; and
our civil rights all sacrificed by the unbounded power of the federal courts,
etc.

And when he has run himself out of breath with this dreary declamation, he
comes to the conclusion he set out with, viz. that the Thirteen States are too
big for a republican government, which requires small territory, and cannot be
supported in more extensive nations; that in large States liberty will soon be
swallowed up, and lost in the magnitude of power requisite in the government,
etc.

If any conclusion at all can be drawn from this baseless assemblage of gloomy
thoughts, I think it must be against any union at all; against any kind of
federal government. For nothing can be plainer than this, viz. that the union
cannot by any possibility be supported with success, without adequate and
effectual powers of government.

We must have money to support the union, and, therefore, the power of raising
it must be lodged somewhere; we must have a military force, and, of
consequence, the power of raising and directing it must exist; civil and
criminal causes of national concern will arise, therefore, there must be
somewhere a power of appointing courts to hear and determine them.

These powers must be vested in Congress; for nobody pretends to wish to have
them vested in any other body of men.

The Thirteen States have a territory very extensive, and inhabitants very
numerous, and every day rapidly increasing; therefore, the powers of government
necessary to support their union must be great in proportion. If the ship is
large, the mast must be proportionably great, or it will be impossible to make
her sail well. The federal powers must extend to every part of the federal
territory, i. e. to the utmost limits of the United States, and to every part
of them; and must carry with them sufficient authority to secure the execution
of them; and these powers must be vested in Congress, and the execution of them
must be under their direction and control.

Th^se powers are vast, I know; and the trust is of the most weighty (...)
(...) can be committed to human direction; and the (...) and administration of
it will require the (...) wisdom, knowledge, firmness, and integrity in that
august body; and I hope they will have all the abilities and virtues necessary
to their important station, and will perform their duty well; but if they fail,
the fault is in them, not in the Constitution. The best Constitution possible,
even a divine one, badly administered, will make a bad government.

The Members of Congress will be the best we can get; they will all of them
derive their appointment from the States, and if the States are not wise enough
to send good and suitable men, great blame, great sin will lie at their door.
But I suppose nobody would wish to mend this fault by taking away the election
of the people, and directing the appointment of Congress to be made in any
other way.

When we have gotten the best that can be obtained, we ought to be quiet and
cease complaining. It is not in the power of human wisdom to do more; it is the
^ate of human nature to be imperfect and to err; and no doubt but Congress,
with all their dignity of s^ation and character, with all their opportunities
to gain wisdom and information, with all their inducements to virtue and
integrity, will err, and abuse or misapply their powers in more or less
instances. I have no expectation that they will make a court of angels, or be
any thing more than men: it is probable many of them will be insufficient men,
and some of them may be bad men.

The greatest wisdom, care, and caution, has been used in the mode of their
appointment; in the restraints and checks under which they must act; in the
numerous discussio^s and deliberations which all their acts must pass (...)
before they can receive the stamp of authority; in the ^^^rors of punishment if
they misbehave. I say, in all these ways the greatest ca^^ has been used to
procure and form a good Congress.

The dignity and importance of their station and character will afford all the
inducements to virtue and effort, which can influence a mind capable of their
force.

Their own personal reputation, with the eyes of all the world on them, -- the
approbation of their fellow-citizens, which every man in public station
naturally wishes to enjoy, and the dread of censure and shame, -- all
contribute very forcible and strong inducements to noble, upright, and worthy
behavior.

The particular interest which every Member of Congress has in every public
order and resolution, is another strong motive to right action. For every act
to which any Member gives his sanction, if it be raising an army, levying a
tax, instituting a court, or any other act to bind the States, such act will
equally bind himself, his nearest connexions, and his posterity.

Another mighty influence to the noblest principle of action will be, the fear
of God before their eyes; for while they sit in the place of God, to give law,
justice, and right to the States, they must be monsters indeed, if they do not
regard his law, and imitate his character.

If all this will not produce a Congress fit to be trusted, and worthy of the
public confidence, I think we may give the matter up as impracticable. But
still we must make ourselves as easy as we can, under a mischief which admits
no remedy, and bear with patience an evil which cannot be cured: for a
government we must have; there is no safety without it; though we know it will be
imperfect, we still must prefer it to anarchy or no government at all. It is
the height of folly and madness to reject a necessary convenience, because it
is not a perfect good.

UPON this statement of facts and principles (for the truth and reality of
which, I appeal ^o every candid man) I beg leave to remark,

1. That the Federal Convention, in the Constitution proposed to us, have
exerted their utmost to produce a Congress worthy of the public confidence, who
shall have abilities adequate to their important duty, and shall act under
every possible inducement to execute it faithfully.

2. That this affords every chance which the nature of the thing will admit, of
a wise and upright administration.

3. Yet all this notwithstanding, it is very possible that Congress may err,
may abuse or misapply their powers, which no precaution of human wisdom can
prevent.

4. It is vain, it is childish, it is contentious to object to a Constitution
thus framed and guarded, on pretense that the Commonwealth may suffer by a bad
administration of it; or to withhold the necessary powers of government from
the supreme rulers of it, lest they should abuse or misapply those powers. This
is an objection which will operate will equal force against every institution
that can be made in this world, whether of policy, religion, commerce, or any
other human concern, which can require regulations: for it is not possible to
form any institution however necessary, wise, and good, whose uses may not be
lessened or destroyed by bad management.

If Brutus or any body else can point out any checks, cautio^s or regulations,
which have been hitherto omitted, which will make Congress more wise, more
capable, more diligent, or more faithful, I am willing to attend to them.

But to set Congress at the head of the government, and object to their being
vested with full and sufficient power to manage all the great departments of
it, appears to me absurd, quite wild, and chimerical: it would produce a plan
which would destroy itself as it went along, would be a sort of
counter-position of contrary parts, and render it impossible for rulers to
render those services, and secure those benefits, to the States, which are the
only great ends of their appointment.

The Constitution, under Brutus's corrections, would stand thus, viz. Congress
would have power to raise money, but must not direct the quantity, or mode of
levying it; they might raise armies, but must not judge of the number of
soldiers necessary, or direct their destination; they ought to provide for the
general welfare, but must not be judges of what that welfare consists in, or in
what manner it is to be provided for; they might control the several States for
defined national purposes, but must not be judges of what purposes would come
within that definition, etc.

Any body with half an eye may see what sort of administration the Constitution
thus corrected would produce, e. g. it would require much greater trouble to
leave the work undone, than would be necessary to get it well done, under a
Constitution of sufficient powers. If any one wishes to view more minutely this
blessed operation, he may see a lively sample of it in the last seven years'
practice of our federal government.

5. Brutus all along founds his objections and fears on extreme cases of abuse
or misapplication of supreme powers, which may possibly happen under the
administration of a wild, weak, or wicked Congress; but it is easy to observe,
that all institutions are liable to extremes, but ought not to be judged by
them; they do not often appear, and perhaps never may; but if they should
happen in the cases supposed (which God forbid) there is a remedy pointed out
in the Constitution itself.

It is not supposable that such abuses could rise to any ruinous height, before
they would affect the States so much, that at least two-thirds of them would
unite in pursuing a remedy in the mode prescribed by the Constitution, which
will always be liable to amendment, whenever any mischiefs or abuses appear in
the government, which the Constitution, in its present state, cannot reach and
correct.

6. Brutus thinks we can never be too much afraid of the encroaching avidity of
rulers; but it is pretty plain, that however great the natural lust of power in
rulers may be, the jealousy of the people in giving it is about equal; these
two opposite passions will always operate in opposite directions to each other,
and, like action and reaction in natural bodies, will ever tend to a good
balance.

At any rate, the Congress can never get more power than the people will give,
nor hold it any longer than they will permit; for should they assume tyrannical
powers, and make encroachments on liberty without the consent of the people,
they would soon atone for their temerity with shame and disgrace, and probably
with their heads.

But it is here to be noted, that all the danger does not arise from the
extreme of power in the rulers; for when the balance verges to the contrary
extreme, and the power of the rulers becomes too much limited and cramped, all
the nerves of government are weakened, and the administration must unavoidably
sicken and lose that energy which is absolutely necessary for the support of
the State, and the security of the people. For it is a truth worthy of great
attention, that laws are not made (...) much for the righteous as for the
wicked; who never fail to shelter themselves from punishment whenever they can,
under the defects of the law, and the weakness of government.

I now come to consider the grand proposition which Brutus sets out with,
concludes with, and interlards all along, and which seems to be the great gist
of his performance, viz. that a confederation of the Thirteen States into one
great republic is not best for them: and goes on to prove by a variety of
arguments, that a republican form of government is not compatible, and cannot
be convenient to so extensive a territory as the said States possess. He begins
by taking one assumption for granted (for I cannot see that his arguments prove
it at all) viz. that the Constitution proposed will melt down and destroy the
jurisdiction of the particular States, and consolidate them all into one great
republic.

I cannot see the least reason for this sentiment, nor the least tendency in
the New Constitution to produce this effect. For the Constitution does not
suffer the federal powers to control in the least, or so much as to interfere
in, the internal policy, jurisdiction, or municipal rights of any particular
State; except where great and manifest national purposes and interests make
that control necessary.

It appears very evident to me, that the Constitution gives an establishment,
support, and protection to the internal and separate police of each State,
under the superintendency of the federal powers, which it could not possibly
enjoy in an independent state. Under the confederation each State derives
strength, firmness, and permanency from its compact with the other States. Like
a stave in a cask well bound with hoops, it stands firmer, is not so easily
shaken, bent, or broken, as it would be were it set up by itself alone, without
any connection with its neighbors.

There can be no doubt that each State will receive from the union great
support and protection against the invasions and inroads of foreign enemies, as
well as against riots and insurrections of their own citizens; and, of
consequence, the course of their internal administration will be secured by
this means against any interruption or embarrassment from either of these
causes.

They will also derive their share of benefit from the respectability of the
Union abroad, from the treaties and alliances which may be made with foreign
nations, etc.

Another benefit they will receive from the control of the supreme power of the
Union is this, viz. they will be restrained from making angry, oppressive, and
destructive laws; from declaring ruinous wars with their neighbors; from
fomenting quarrels and controversies, etc. all which ever weaken a State, tend
to its fatal disorder, and often end in its dissolution. 'Righteousness exalts
and strengthens a nation; but sin is a reproach and weakening of any people.'

They will, indeed, have the privilege of oppressing their own citizens by bad
laws or bad administration; but the moment the mischief extends beyond their
own State, and begins to affect the citizens of other States, strangers, or the
national welfare, -- the salutary control of the supreme power will check the
evil, and restore strength and security, as well as honesty and right, to the
offending State.

It appears then very plain, that the natural effect and tendency of the
supreme powers of the Union is, to give strength, establishment, and permanency
to the internal police and jurisdiction of each of the particular States; not
to melt down and destroy, but to support and confirm, them all.

By what sort of assurance, then, can Brutus tell us, that the New
Constitution, if executed, must certainly and infa^^ibly terminate in a
consolidation of the whole into one great republic, subverting all the
State-authorities. His only argument is, that the federal powers may be
corrupted, abused, and misapplied, till this effect shall be produced. It is
true, that the Constitution, like every other on earth committed to human
management, may be corrupted by a bad administration, and be made to operate to
the destruction of the very capital benefits and uses, which were the great end
of its institution.

The same argument will prove, with equal cogency, that the Constitution of
each particular State may be corrupted in practice, become tyrannical and
inimical to liberty. In short, the argument proves too much, and, therefore,
proves nothing: ^t is empty, childish, and futile, and a serious proposal of it
is, I conceive, an affront to the human understanding.

But, after all, supposing this event should take place, and, by some strange
fatality, the several States should be melted down and merged in the great
Commonwealth, in the form of counties or districts; I do not see why a
commonwealth mode of government would not be ^s suitable and convenient for the
great State, as any other form whatever; I cannot see any sufficient ground or
reason for the position pretty often and boldly advanced, that a republican
form of government can never be suitable for any nation of extensive territory
and numerous population.

For if Congress can be chosen by the several States, though under the form and
name of counties or election-districts, and be in every respect instituted as
directed by the New Constitution, I do not see but we shall have as suitable a
national council, as wise a legislative, and as strong and safe an executive,
power, as can be obtained under any form of government whatever, let our
territory be ever so extensive or populous.

The most despotic monarch that can exist, must have his councils and officers
of state; and I cannot see any one circumstance of their being appointed under
a monarchy, that can afford any chance of their being any wiser or better than
ours may be. It is true, indeed, the despot may, if he pleases, act without ^^y
advice at all; but when he does so, I conceive it will be very rare that the
nation will receive greater advantage^ from his unadvised edicts, than may be
drawn from the deliberate acts and orders of our supreme powers. All that can
be said in favor of those is, that they will have less chance of delay, and
more of secrecy, than these; but I think it probable, that the latter will be
grounded on better information and greater wisdom, will carry more weight, and
be better supported.

The Romans rose from small beginnings to a very great extent of territory,
population, and wisdom; I do not think their constitution of government was
near so good as the one proposed to us, yet we find their power, strength, and
establishment were raised to their utmost height under a republican form of
government. Their State received very little acquisition of territory,
strength, or wealth, after their government became imperial; but soon began to
weaken and decay.

The Carthaginians acquired an amazing degree of strength, wealth, and extent
of dominion, under a republican form of government. Neither they nor the Romans
owed their dissolution to any causes arising from that kind of government: it
was the party rage, animosity, and violence of their citizens, which destroyed
them both; i. e. weakened them, till the one fell under the power of their
enemies, and was thereby reduced to ruin; the other changed their form of
government to a monarchy, which proved in the end equally fatal to them.

The same causes, if they cannot be restrained, will weaken or destroy any
nation on earth, let their form of government (...) what it will; witness the
division and dissolution of the Roman empire; the late dismemberment of Poland:
the intestine divisions, rage, and wars of Italy, of France, of Spain, and of
England.

No form of government can preserve a nation, which cannot control the party
rage of its own citizens; when any one citizen can rise above the control of
the laws, ruin draws near. It is not possible for any nation on earth to hold
their strength and establishment, when the dignity of their government is lost,
and this dignity will for ever depend on the wisdom and firmness of the
officers of government, aided and supported by the virt^^ and patriotism of
their citizens.

On the whole, I do not see but that any form of government may be safe and
practicable, where the controlling authority of the supreme powers is strong
enough to effect the ends of its appointment, and, at the same time,
sufficiently che^ked to keep it within due bounds, and limit it to the objects
of its duty; and, I think, it appears that the Constitution proposed to us has
all these qualities in as great perfection as any form we can devise.

But after all, the grand secret of forming a good government is, to put good
men into the administration: for wild, vicious, or idle men, will ever make a
bad government, let its principles be ever so good; but grave, wise, and
faithful men, acting under a good Constitution, will afford the best chance of
security, peace, and prosperity to the citizens, which can be derived from
civil police, under the present disorders, and uncertainty of all earthly
things.

AN ESSAY ON CREDIT: IN WHICH The Doctrine of BANKS is considered, AND Some
REMARKS are made on the PRESENT STATE of the BANK OF NORTH AMERICA.
[First published in Philadelphia, Feb. 10, 1786.]
CREDIT is the confidence which mankind place in the virtue and good character
of its object: so when we say of a man, 'he is a person of credit and
reputation,' the meaning is, that he is a man in whose virtue and good
character people in general place confidence.

Credit, in a commercial sense, is the confidence which people place in a man's
integrity and punctuality in fulfilling his contracts and performing his
engagements. When we speak of a merchant of credit, we mean a merchant in whose
ability, integrity, and punctuality in fulfilling his contracts and
engagements, people have confidence, i. e. a man of integrity and truth, who is
fit to be believed and trusted; the contrary or reverse of this is a man of no
integrity in his dealings, who will quibble and shuffle, evade his contracts,
violate his word and truth, delay his payments, disappoint his creditors, use
deceit, chicanery, and falsehood, etc. i. e. is not fit to be believed or
trusted.

From this view of the matter it appears, that credit is a most valuable thing
in society, it gives hearts-ease, it gives wealth, it is a nurse of every
social virtue, it makes a ^oil suitable for the growth of public spirit and
every public virtue; the worth and value of this may, perhaps, be best
illustrated by comparing it or viewing it in contrast with its contrary; how
much better do we feel, how much richer do we grow, how much more easy, safe,
and satisfied do we enjoy ourselves, when we live among citizens to whom we can
give full credit, in whom we can have safe confidence, and whom we can trust,
than when we find ourselves among people to whom we can give no credit, in whom
we can have no confidence, and whom we cannot trust, and where every concern or
contract we make with them is attended with anxiety, uneasiness, and fear, and
commonly followed by deceit, loss, and disappointment? In this case, I desire,
I can need, no better argument, no better proof, no better explanation of my
subject, than an appeal to the instant feelings of my fellow-citizens.

But however valuable and excellent in society, however profitable and
happyfying, however soothing to our warmest wishes, credit public or private
may be, it is in vain to hope for it, or even to imagine the possibility of its
existence, without its proper object, which is honesty or integrity; it can no
more be forced by laws, it can no more be obtruded by authority, however high
and puissant, than an article of faith can be forced on the understanding,
without proper proof or evidence.

Credit and honesty are in their nature correlatives, and must and for ever
will imply and support each other. Integrity will generate credit and
confidence the moment it is known in any part of the world; and the moment that
integrity or honesty is observed to cease, the credit or confidence which was
generated by it, instantly ceases too; it dies, it can never be brought to draw
another breath, after the integrity which generated it and supplied all its
vital motions, is gone.

It is here to be noted, that however necessary and even essential integrity is
to credit, yet in a commercial sense, i. e. as far as it relates to trade,
money, or wealth, it is not the only thing necessary; power or ability must be
added; for however clear and plain it is, that an honest man will never
contract beyond his power of performance, yet it often happens that his power
of performance may be much lessened between the time of contract and the time
of fulfillment, by many incidents which may and often do take place, which at
once lessen his credit, or the confidence of his neighbors in his engagements.

These incidents often affect honest merchants so deeply, as to occasion their
failure or bankruptcy, and their failure often produces another in their
creditors, that a third, and that a fourth, etc. This succession of failures
often originates in a swindler or rascal, who knowingly contracts vastly beyond
his ability of performance, and, of course, ruins not only himself, but a
numerous succession of honest men.

This affords us one instance of the vast mischief which a community may and
often does suffer, from one dishonest man residing among them; very many others
might be produced of like mischief, effected in a great variety of ways, and to
such a degree that a national character may be deeply stained by the iniquity
and knavery of a few.

This shows that it is of most serious consequence to every State, to use every
possible means, not only to preserve the national credit and character of their
State in good purity and honor, but also to introduce, as far as may be, habits
of integrity and honor among their citizens, and extirpate, as far as can be
done, all such villainous and scandalous practices, as naturally tend to
disgrace the national character, and ruin the fortunes of private citizens.

These observations will appear with greater force and advantage, if we recur
for a moment to what I just now mentioned, viz. the great ease, satisfaction,
and convenience of living in a State where the public finance is so managed,
that all private citizens can safely rely on the justice and punctuality of the
public engagements, and where the habits of honesty and integrity are so
general among the private citizens, that they may safely trust one another, so
that credit and mutual confidence in each other may prevail through the community.

Thus circumstanced, every man may safely employ his stock in any business of
advantage, either of merchandise, mechanism, or husbandry; whereas if he lived
in a State, and among citizens, of contrary character, he would be afraid to
let his stock go out of his own keeping, le^t it should fall into hands, either
public or private, which would retain it from him, so that he could not recover
it again, though the advantages of improvement, both to the public and himself,
might be very great and inviting.

In a State, and among citizens, so happily disposed, any man, with industry
and economy, though his means were small, might live very easy and comfortable,
and the man of fortune might improve his estate very safely and happily, to the
great advantage both of the public and himself. Strangers would have every
encouragement to flock in to such a State, and thereby increase the population,
and, of course, the commerce, manufactures, and husbandry of it.

From this view of the subject it appears strikingly evident, that credit, both
public and private, and the mutual confidence of citizens in the public justice
and in each other, is of most momentous advantage, of most capital convenience,
both to the public and to the individual members of it; it contributes most
decidedly and essentially to the internal establishment, security, and safety
of the government, and to the ^ase, wealth, and happiness of private citizens;
therefore, it follows, that it is the high interest and great duty of every
State to adopt and pursue every practicable method of securing, enlarging, and
extending to the utmost degree, all the advantages and blessings which can
result from such public and private credit, and the mutual confidence of the
subjects of the State in the public and in each other.

The wisest and richest nations of Europe, long before we were born, have seen
this subject and its most momentous importance in a light so strong and
glaring, as induced them to adopt every practicable method in their power, to
secure to themselves such invaluable advantages. In their practice we have an
example, and in their success we have encouragement, and very strong inducement
to imitate it.

For this purpose, the richest trading cities of Europe long since adopted the
plan of establishing public BANKS; this plan they formed upon the most
deliberate consideration; they had the greatest opportunities of information,
had the greatest experience in the subject; they knew the importance,
operation, and effects of both cash and credit, the best of any men then in the
world, as their trade and wealth were then the greatest of any in the world. It
is not to be supposed that their first essays reached the perfection of the
subject, but they found advantages enough in their first trial, to induce them
to continue the practice ever since.

Genoa was the first State in Europe which established a public bank; their
bank of St. George was established in 1407, by a public act of that republic.
The plan was soon followed by Venice, whose bank, which continues to this day
with the greatest advantage to the State, as well as to their private citizens,
and has ever been in the highest reputation and credit both at home and through
all Europe, was established by a public act of their State.

The city of Amsterdam long after followed their example, and their present
bank received a public establishment by an act of their States General in 1609.
The cities of Rotterdam and Hamburgh adopted the same practice; and England,
who is always phlegmatic and late in adopting the example of the other European
States, instituted and established its bank in 1694; and France, whose
attention in those days was little turned to improvements in trade, came later
into it; their royal bank at Paris was established by public authority in 1718.

Besides these, very many other banks of less extent and consequence, both
public and private, are now established in the greatest trading cities and
banks are become the great receptacles of the cash of Europe, and almost all
mercantile receipts and payments are made through them.

The bank of Genoa, indeed, failed in 1746, after that republic had, for a
great length of time, enjoyed most signal and capital benefits from it; but its
ruin was not brought on by any defect of its principle, or mismanagement of its
directors, but by the madness of the rulers of that State; they were not mad
enough, indeed, to decry it as an useless or dangerous institution, but they
adopted the contrary extreme, they magnified its strength and power too much,
and compelled the directors to make advances to the State, beyond what their
funds would bear.

The other banks have continued to this day, and with such incredible and most
acknowledged benefit to the several States in which they are established, that
their credit or decline has generally been considered as a ^ort of sure
criterion of the strength or weakness of the State in which they are
established. When nations are at war, they ever have thought it a sure way to
bring fatal embarrassments on an enemy, if they can by any possible means shake
the credit of their bank; and every State has always been ready to go great
lengths to support their bank, if, by any turn of affairs, it has happened to
be in distress.

It must, therefore, be very absurd to suppose that such an institution can be
hurtful or even useless, that has stood the test of such extensive and durable
trial and practice, among so many nations of the greatest experience and most
accurate knowledge of the subject; an institution through which not only the cash
of private merchants, but of the greatest and richest trading companies, and
even the treasure of nations, has been so long negotiated, and which, through so
great a length of time, up to this very hour, supports its credit and character
of vast utility, by the universal suffrage of nations, through all ranks of
people, from crowns and the most dignified assemblies of statesmen, and the
most wealthy companies of merchants, down to the lowest dealer.

But all this notwithstanding, people may be found, little acquainted with the
subject, and wholly unexperienced in it, who will give their opinion that such
an institution is injurious to a State, and incompatible with the safety of it.
This may be considered as an instance and proof of that height of absurdity
which people may arrive at, who grow zealous and positive in things they do not
understand.

But however well the nature of banks may be understood in Europe, and however
immense the advantages and profits which are derived from them may be, yet the
thing is new in America, and by many people thought unfavorably of.

The BANK OF NORTH AMERICA, though established by act of Congress ( December 31,
1781) which is the highest authority of the Union, and recognized expressly by
many of the States, and implicitly by them all, is nevertheless treated by many
people here as a most dangerous and injurious thing, utterly incompatible with
the safety of the State, and, of course, they think it ought to be demolished
without ceremony, and that even the common forms of dissolution are
unnecessary, as people are not very nice in the manner, or delicate in the
choice of means, of hunting down a beast of prey, or destroying a common enemy.

But as I suppose my fellow-citizens will ever be willing to hear before they
condemn a thing that has once saved them, and very often afforded many of them
a material convenience, I apprehend a short dissertation, showing the nature of
a bank, will not be unacceptable.

A BANK is a large repository of cash, deposited under the direction of proper
officers (say, a president and directors) for the purpose of establishing and
supporting a great and extensive credit, to be made use of in every case where
an established credit will answer in exchange or payment as well as cash, or
better than cash, as in many circumstances will manifestly and undoubtedly be
the case: for instance, suppose this State should incorporate a bank, and order
all the revenues of the State to be paid into it, and should direct that all
the debts of the State should be paid in checks on the bank, or in bank-bills,
payable to the bearer, which bearer should have liberty, whenever he pleases,
to carry his bill to the bank, and receive cash for it, and should direct
further, that if such bank-bills, in any circumstance, happen to suit any
citizen better than cash, he should be at liberty to carry his cash to the
bank, and take out bank-bills for it.

The effect or operation of such a bank, when its credit becomes established (
i. e. when the people at large believed with full confidence that the fund or
stock was sufficient, and the management fair and upright) I say, the operation
or effect of such a bank would be, that very few of the people who should be
possessed of such bank-bills, would carry them into the bank, and receive cash
for them, because the bills would answer by far the greatest part of the
purposes of cash as well as specie, i. e. they would purchase any kind of
commodities, and pay any kind of debts, as well as cash, as we find is the case
of the bank-bills of the Bank of North America, at this time.

Further, such bills would not only be as good as specie for almost every
purpose where cash is used or needed, but, on many accounts, they would be
better than cash, as any sum of them is easier and more certainly counted than
cash; the danger of counterfeits would be less; the carriage would be easier;
they would be less exposed to thefts and robberies than cash (for a man can
conceal from a thief 1000 dollars in bills, or run from a robber with them,
easier than with 1000 dollars of silver); in case they are destroyed by fire,
water, or other accident, they are not lost, but on proof made at the bank,
they may be replaced, etc.

The advantage would be still greater, if, instead of bank-bills, the owner
would take a bank credit, and draw checks on the bank whenever he needed his
money; this would enable him to pay any sum exactly, without the trouble of
making change; he would be able in any future time to prove his payments, if he
preserved his checks which he received cancelled from the bank, as every man
ought to do; this would at once free him from all danger of loss by fire,
robbers, mislaying, dropping them on the road, etc. etc. This practice is found
by experience to be so very convenient, that it is almost universally adopted
b^ people who keep their cash in our present bank.

These and many other advantages which bank-bills or bank-credit have beyond
what cash can have, would doubtless induce most people to prefer bills or bank
credit to cash, and, of course, very few possessors of either would demand cash
at the bank; the consequence of which would be, that at the end of the year
much of the cash would remain in the bank, though the whole amount of the
bank-stock should have been paid out in bills, and been constantly circulating
among the people, with every advantage that cash could have, and many other
very valuable advantages that cash could not have, as has been just now shown.

The benefits or uses of the bank, when thus established, are various: 1. The
bank gains all the lost paper, i. e. all such bank-bills as are lost (where the
loss cannot be proved) and, of course, can never be brought to the bank for
redemption or payment.

2. The bank can, on any public emergency, emit bank-bills beyond the amount of
the cash or stock in the bank, and, of course, can have the benefit of a
considerable sum to circulate or use for the public benefit, without paying
interest, or having it known to an enemy that they are embarrassed or in debt.
Or,

3. If the exigencies of the State should not require this, they may
accommodate their citizens with discounts or loans on interest, to the great
increase of the bank-stock or revenue, as well as doing great favor to
individuals, and increasing the trade, manufactures, and husbandry of the
State; this is the best and perhaps the only proper way of supporting a public
loan-office in a State. And,

4. If the revenues should increase beyond the expenditures of the State, they
will accumulate in the bank till the amount may be very great; and a rich
State, like a rich individual, derives many and great advantages from wealth,
and even from the reputation of wealth.

These advantages have been found by experience to be much greater, vastly
greater, than a sanguine speculator, upon a bare view of the nature of the
subject, would imagine. The force and energy of credit, perfectly well
established and permanent, is vast almost beyond conception; it is found by
experience to supply the place of cash, and much better than cash, in almost
all transactions, except in small expenses, where small change is necessary,
such as traveling expenses, market-money, etc.

It is also found by experience, that any sum of money in the stock of a bank
well regulated and managed, is sufficient to support the credit of double or
treble its amount in bank-bills, whilst each of those bills is indisputably as
good as cash, because the possessor may at any time exchange them at the bank
for solid hard money, whenever, either through distrust of the bank, or his own
convenience, he may choose to do it; it follows then,

5. That a good bank may increase the circulating medium of a State to double
or treble the quantity of real cash, without increasing the real money, or
incurring the least danger of a depreciation. And,

6. A good bank will receive no money but good coin of standard weight and
fineness, and this will naturally and unavoidably keep the current coin, cash,
or medium good, or discover its defects; for if, by any means, a debased or
light coin, or public bills of depreciated value, should gain a currency in any
State (all which have often happened) the standard of the bank will discover
their defects, and an exchange or agio of such depreciated money and that of
the bank, will at once determine the true or real value of such depreciated
currency.

7. Another capital use and advantage of a bank is, that it makes one of the
best repositories for money that is designed to lie for any great length of
time on interest, as it affords a much better security than can be found in the
hands of any private man, and the half-yearly dividends are more than equal to
any profit that can be derived from them when put to interest on mortgage, and
the punctuality of payment better secured, and the trouble of collection much
less.

Such moneys as are here intended, are legacies or any other provision which is
made for young children, to be paid to them with the interest, at their full
age; any provision which a man may wish to make for himself or wife, against
old age; the funds of public institutions of religion or charity, such as
churches, hospitals, poor-houses, widows' fund, sea-captains' fund, etc. any
accumulation of cash, which a man may choose to prepare, in order to complete
some great payment, or accomplish some great purchase at a future day, such as
a house, a far^, etc. etc. And as bank-stock of a good bank can at any time be
sold for cash, the bank becomes the surest fund to produce the principal cash
reposited in it, when needed, and also the interest in the mean time, which may
be used, if needed, when it is paid in, or may be added to the principal in the
bank.

This will appear to be a very important use of a bank, if we attend to the
subject a little, especially to the case of orphans and infants, and see in how
many ways they are defrauded or somehow deprived of the cash. which their
parents have carefully laid up for them, whilst their infancy prevents their
taking care of it themselves.

8. Another great use of a good bank is, that it probably may very much promote
economy and industry, as particularly in many of the forementioned instances,
viz. when a man is engaged in accumulating any sum of money for any capital
purpose, such as making provision for his infant children, or himself in old
age, or for a heavy purchase, or any other desi^n which lies near his heart, he
will be very industrious, and his economy will be very good, till he has made
up his heap, or got the necessary sum together, and by that time he may perhaps
have acquired such habits of industry and economy, that he may not stop at the
acquirement of the sum first proposed, but may be induced to keep on and
enlarge it beyond the original design.

The bank gives a sure operation to such a scheme, at least in point of safe
keeping and punctual payment. Neighbors may see the example and its
advantages, and fall into it themselves, and so on till the instances of such
accumulations, and, of course, of such economy and industry, may become general
among monied men through the State, to the great advantage and strength of the
State, the bank, and themselves.

These are only a few of the benefits derived from a bank, which our short
experience will enable us clearly to understand, and which in point of fact or
reality are demonstrated by the same experience so clearly and fully, as to put
the matter beyond a doubt. I do not pretend to comprehend the great subject
enough to explain all the infinite uses and advantages which the long
experience of the greatest cities of Europe has found resulting from banks, or
the still greater advantages which a further experience may discover either to
them or to us; but these are certainly sufficient to induce every friend to the
integrity, wealth, and honor, interest and genuine respectability of his
country, to think favorably of the subject, and to exert all proper endeavors
to participate of its uses.

But to pursue the matter further -- suppose a number of private citizens form
a bank, each of whom puts in one or more shares, and raise in that way a
bank-stock of any proper sum (say, 1,000,000 dollars) for a fund to support a
large and extensive credit, for the purpose of deposits, loans, and discounts,
and appoint proper officers to manage the same, and obtain a public
establishment by a charter, or other public act of the government; this will be
a private bank, because the stock of it is the money of private men, and the
officers or directors are appointed by private stockholders; but it may in some
sense be deemed public, both on account of its extensive utility and public
importance, and the public patronage and establishment it receives from
government.

This bank will have a nature and operation similar to the other, and will
a^^ord the same kind of convenience to the citizens who choose to be concerned
in it, and in both cases the particular profits of the bank will go to the
stockholders, i. e. to the private stockholders, whose contributions compose
the stock, or to the State, as far as the public funds are vested in
bank-stock, if it should be thought proper to vest any part of the public
treasure in such stock, but the management of it would be exclusively under the
conduct of its own stockholders and directors.

Of this kind is the BANK OF NORTH AMERICA, and has a much greater capital
(about 900,000 dollars) than any state-bank can have in the present condition
of our finances, and its operation, effects, and uses are much more extensive,
and its accommodations to the citizens, and even to the State, much greater
than a state-bank could have; this may afford one answer to an objection which
some may raise against the present bank, viz.

That it would be better to discontinue the present bank, and erect a state or
public bank in its stead; another answer may be, that no plan of this sort can
be so sure of a proper management under the State, as it would be under the
direction of its own proprietors. A bank is a sort of mercantile institution,
or at least has such a close connection with the whole mercantile interest, that
it will more naturally and properly fall under the direction of merchants, than
of any other sort of men less acquainted with its nature and principles, and
less interested in its success.

Another reason is, that a bank, whose stock is made up by the subscription of
private men, and managed by the stockholders, is the surest antidote or
preservative against tyranny in the government, that can be named; its owners
are the rich men of the State, who will never be concerned in needless popular
clamors or sedition against the government, but, at the same time, have both
influence and inducement enough to be a check and restraint on government, when
it becomes oppressive, and really verges toward tyranny.

The rich have an interest in their poor fellow-citizens, and (as some men use
their wives) however tyrannical they may be themselves, they will not suffer
any body else to tyrannize over them. Trade and banks cannot flourish in a
despotic government, and, of course, where they do exist, they will keep
despotism, as far as possible, out of the State. The stockholders are too
numerous, too much scattered, of sentiments and connexions too different, to
admit any danger of becoming tyrants themselves. I never heard an instance of a
State whose government was corrupted by a private bank.

But a state-bank, if we could possibly suppose that it would be well managed,
and grow rich, would tend immediately and directly to tyranny in the
government, because it would give the minister or ruler the command of a vast
sum of money; and I never knew a rich treasury at the command of a minister,
whose head was not turned by it, and the insanity never fails to take a
direction toward tyranny.

The better way, I should think, would be to join both together, so as that all
the state-revenues may be paid into the bank, and all public payments be made
by checks on the bank, and let the State become stockholders as far as they
please, and take sums out of the bank to the amount of their stock, whenever it
is necessary. Many advantages would arise from this method:

1. The bank is more responsible for any deficiency than any private man can be.

2. It has the best convenience and security for safe keeping the cash
deposited in it.

3. No minister or other man can pay away public money otherwise than by a
check on the bank, which is in some degree a matter of notoriety, and involves
a responsibility.

4. The receipts and payments would be settled up to a shilling (according to
the custom of the bank) at least once a month.

5. The commission or allowance to a treasurer for this service would be saved,
as the bank would be very willing to undertake the business of receiving all or
any part of the public revenue, and paying the same out, without any commission
or salary, i. e. without any allowance or charge for the service; this would be
a great saving, even if the commission allowed to a treasurer was not more than
a real compensation for the service.




This will answer every purpose of the State as well as a state-bank, will
increase the stock of the present bank, and, of course, extend the power and
energy of it so much, that it will be able to supply the necessities of the
State with any loans of cash, which (without the most violent convulsions) can
ever be necessary; and, at the same time, would be able to afford most ample
accommodations to private citizens or companies, to the vast benefit and
increase, not only of private fortunes, but of our trade, manufactures, and
husbandry in general.

The present funds of the BANK OF NORTH AMERICA, or the cash which supports it,
is, 1st. the bank-stock, or the money paid in by the stock-holders, which is
about 900,000 dollars: and, 2d. the money deposited by men of all descriptions,
who may draw it out by checks on the bank whenever they please.

These sums are variable, indeed, but always very considerable, as no person
ever draws checks beyond his deposit, very few ever draw quite up, and very
many people have large sums there, because their cash lies in the bank not only
more secure, but is more convenient for payments there, than it could be in the
keeping of its owner.

Some objections have been made to the present bank, which it may be proper to
consider --

I. Such vast sums of money are ^oarded up in the bank, that cash is become
scarce in town and country. I answer, -- This is not true in fact:

1. Because the bank circulates daily more cash than it has in the bank, and,
of course, makes cash plentier than it would be, if we had no bank. And,

2. A very great part of the bank-stock, on the strength of which the bank
issues and supports the circulation it gives out, belongs not to this State or
its neighborhood, but to people who live in distant parts, to whom it must be
remitted if the bank should be broke up.

II. Another objection is, that monied men find a greater advantage in
purchasing bank-stock than in letting their money on interest to people in the
country, as formerly was done, and, of course, though the monied men in town may
gain by the bank, yet the country people suffer by it. -- This is a strange
sort of sentiment to appear in form of an objection; because the bank enhances
the value, or increases the use, of cash or any other property, so that the
possessor can be more benefited by it than before; therefore, the bank is
hurtful.

The same cause ( i. e. the bank) raises the price of wheat and flour, to the
benefit of the country farmer, indeed, but to the damage of the merchant in
town, who must pay more for them than before; if our country produce was all
consumed in the State, these mischiefs and benefits would balance one another;
because what one citizen lost, another would gain; but a very considerable part
of our produce is exported and paid for by foreigners; and therefore the higher
the price, the greater is the benefit to the State.

But this evil complained of does not originate in the bank, but in quite
different causes; many monied men who used to lend money on interest, have lost
their money by the war, by the enemy, or by the depreciation of money, or by
evasions of payment which have been introduced since, and, of course, have no
money to lend; and all who have any, have found the danger of letting it in the
old way so great, that few will venture into it again; and, lastly, the
objection is hardly true in fact; because any man in the country who has credit
enough in town to get a good indorser, can have money out of the bank, as well
as a merchant of the city.

III. Another objection to the bank is, that the discounts of the bank make
money of such easy acquirement, that it induces merchants to over-trade their
stocks, and dissipating young fellows to spend their money faster than they
would do, if it was harder to get it. I believe this is all true, and not only
arises from, but is an actual proof of, the great convenience and public
utility of the bank.

This is just of the nature of all other objections against a good thing;
because it may be made an ill use of; and will prove that a good farm is worse
than a bad one, because it makes the farmer lazy, in as much as a little work
on good land will raise his bread; good victuals and drink are worse than bad,
because gluttons and drunkards will eat and drink to excess; a loving wife is
worse than a cross one, because her husband will be apt to lie in bed too long
with her; and riches are worse than poverty, because they introduce luxury,
etc. etc. But I cannot be made to believe that blessings ought to be driven out
of the State, because some people will make an ill use of them.

I shall ever believe that it is easier living in a place where a man can raise
a sum of ready cash on any emergency, without delay or difficulty, than where
such a thing cannot be obtained without great delay, trouble, or perhaps
selling property to great disadvantage for it. Such a facility is an advantage
which, I think, is not to be despised or easily parted with.

IV. Another objection is, that all the benefits of the bank center in the city
and near confines of it, but the country reaps no advantage from it. I answer,
-- suppose this was true (which cannot well be admitted) as it costs the
country nothing, why do they begrudge the advantages of it to the city? I dare
say the inhabitants of the city would all rejoice most heartily to see the
country in full enjoyment of every advantage and convenience of life, that
could be derived from nature or art.

But it is very evident that the country derives a great advantage from the
bank, for the richer the merchants are, and the greater their trade, the better
market they afford for the produce of the country. This is a particular of
capital consequence to the country, for their husbandry is animated and
supported by their market; indeed, the husbandman and the merchant ever
mutually support and benefit each other: and it is scarcely possible that
either of them should be benefited or hurt, but the other will be affected by
it.

V. Another objection is, that the great wealth of the bank will give it an
undue influence on the government. There is no doubt but wealth creates
influence; but it is that sort of influence which has ever been found safe to
the State. Our bank is a sort of mercantile institution, and the influence of
merchants is the safest of any that can affect a government.

The parson lives on the sins of the people, the doctor on their diseases, and
the lawyer on their disputes and quarrels (and, I suppose, they all think they
ought to pray for their daily bread) but the merchant lives on the wealth of
the people. He never wishes for a poor customer or a poor country; the richer
his customers are, the more they can purchase, and the better payments they can
make to him. The merchant has every inducement to seek and promote the wealth
of the State.

Wealth rarely begets sedition; that baneful production generally springs from
poverty, vice, and disappointment. These are the characters which find an
interest in fishing in troubled waters. We have, perhaps, no instance of a
nation ruined by its merchants. I never heard of a State distressed by a
private bank; but instances are plenty enough of States served and saved by
such a bank.

On the whole, I think it absurd to banish wealth from a State, for fear it
should gain too much influence in government, or generate faction in the State;
but of all kinds of wealth, a bank would be the least likely to produce these
effects, because the stock-holders of the bank are made up of all parties, and
are as likely to balance each other's influence there, as in any other part of
the State. It would, in my opinion, be much more politic, to make a levelling
act, to prevent the great wealth of individuals, who are much more likely to
become dangerous to the State, than any aggregate bodies of men, however
wealthy they may be.

VI. Another objection is, that the general benefits of a bank depend on the
integrity of the directors, who may, in many ways, by a corrupt or partial
management, destroy these uses, or make the whole stock of the bank subservient
to the interests of a few favorites, and, of course, the great body of the
people must be excluded from the advantages of it. I answer, -- this is an
objection that may be made with equal force against every institution on earth;
none of which are so good and beneficial, but their uses may be lessened or
destroyed by corrupt management; and when our directors are called upon to
vindicate themselves against any such charge, it will be time enough to think
of an answer: in the mean time, the present internal strength and good
condition of our bank demonstrate, that the management of the directors has
been conducted with great prudence.

I here beg leave to subjoin a short history of the Bank of North America, with
an account of some great difficulties it has had to struggle with from its
first commencement (four years ago) down to this time, and to make some remarks
on its present state.

I. I shall attempt to give a short history of our bank. -- It being observed
that the finances of the wisest and best regulated States of Europe, have for a
long time been negotiated through their banks, or at least been so closely
connected with them, as to derive the most capital benefits and assistances
from them, mr Morris, in 1781, when our finances were in a crisis almost
desperate, I say, mr. Morris, being then Financier-General, adopted the scheme
of forming a bank in America, which was proposed to and approved by Congress,
to which a thousand shares, of 400 dollars each, were soon subscribed, and
application was made to Congress for a charter of incorporation, which was
granted by their public ordinance of December 31, 1781. It appears by the
preamble of said ordinance, that Congress approved and adopted the scheme from
a conviction of the support which the finances of the United States would
receive from a national bank, and that the exigencies of the United States made
it indispensably necessary that such a bank should be incorporated.

Though this act of incorporation passe^^^^ Congress, Dec. 31, 1781, yet it was
no new or sudden thought; for the Financier-General had laid the plan of a
national bank before them as early as May 17, Preceding, and on the 26th day of
the same month Congress approved the same, and engaged to grant an act of
incorporation, as soon as the subscription should be full; nor was the thing
new to any of the States, for the scheme of the bank, and the resolution of
Congress of May 26, were published in all the States, and subscriptions were
publicly opened in them all.

In the resolution last mentioned, Congress recommended to all the States to
make all necessary laws for support of the BANK, and in particular to make it
felony to counterfeit the bank-notes, seal of the bank, etc. etc.

All the States recognized the act of Congress for incorporating the bank, many
of them most explicitly, the rest implicitly, as none of them objected to it,
but all made use of the bank, and participated of the benefits of it, as far as
their opportunity and convenience prompted them.

The State of Pennsylvania recognized not only the said recommendations, by
their act of March 18, 1782, against counterfeiting bank-bills, etc. but by
another act of April 1, 1782, counting upon the act of Congress incorporating
the bank, did grant an act of incorporation to the bank, similar to, and in the
same words of, that of Congress, enacting THAT THOSE WHO ARE AND THOSE WHO
SHALL BECOME SUBSCRIBERS TO THE SAID BANK, BE AND FOR EVER HEREAFTER SHALL BE,
A CORPORATION AND BODY POLITIC, BY THE NAME AND STYLE OF THE PRESIDENT,
DIRECTORS, AND COMPANY OF THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA.

By these public acts, the subscribers to the bank consider themselves and
their property in the bank for ever, under the most solemn and sacred sanction
and protection of the law, and guarantied in the most effectual manner
conceivable by the public faith, pledged to them both by Congress and the
State; for it is not possible that the public faith can be plighted more
solemnly and more effectually by any supreme or subordinate authority, than by
a formal public act.

Under this sacred sanction of the law, and fully confiding in the honor,
justice, and even contract, of our Legislature, the Directors, in January 1784,
resolving to make their institution as extensive and useful as possible, opened
their books for new subscriptions. Under the inducement and encouragement of
these firm establishments, very many persons, both citizens and foreigners,
became subscribers, and placed their money in our bank; the amount of the new
subscriptions, after the charter of this State was obtained, was above 500,000
dollars. Old men placed the money designed for the support of their old age in
the bank; the money of widows and orphans likewise was lodged there, as well as
the moneys of the merchants, and every other description of men.

The amount of the old and new subscriptions arose up to the vast sum of
900,000 dollars, which is the present amount of the stock of the bank, a vast
sum indeed for the new beginnings of America, though small when compared with the
immense stock of some European banks. -- With the deposits and this great
capital stock (which was permanent, and not liable to be withdrawn by the
proprietors, as the deposited moneys were) with the deposits and the permanent
stock, I say, the bank was in condition with great safety to make such
extensive negotiations, as could afford very capital accommodations both to the
public and to private citizens, whenever their occasions and exigencies made
the assistance of the bank necessary to them.

So great was its success, and so amazing were its effects, that it appears by
the bank-books, that its cash-account in one year, viz. from January 1, 1784,
to January 1, 1785 (the third year of its operation) amounted to the almost
incredible sum of 59,570,000 Mexican dollars; and though the attacks upon the
bank, and many other difficulties which much diminished its negotiations in the
succeeding year, were so great as seemed almost fatal, yet such was its great
internal strength, and the energy of its very nature, that its transactions
from January 1, 1785, to January 1, 1786, amounted to about 37,000,000 dollars.

II. I now proceed to give some account of the difficulties which the bank has
had to struggle with, from its first beginning down to this time.

1. The first difficulties arose from the novelty of the thing. The Directors
were engaged in a business in which they had no experience (nothing of the kind
having ever before been practiced in America) and though they acted with the
greatest consideration, care, and caution possible, yet all this
notwithstanding, it is hardly supposable but some errors in management must
have been committed. These (if any have happened) by experience will be
discovered, and by prudence may be corrected and avoided in future time, but
they form no conclusion against the principles of the bank or its natural
utility.

The same novelty of the thing prevented a general confidence in the bank at
first among the people.

It was further unlucky, that the bank was first opened at a time when the
people had so often been disappointed and deceived in every species of public
propositions and engagements relative to money, that they knew not whom they
could trust; they hesitated lest they should be taken in by the bank, as they
had often been by very numerous proposals to which their confidence had been
courted. But the fidelity of the Directors, and the perfect punctuality of all
payments at the bank, soon got the better of this diffidence, and the bank
gained an almost universal credit and confidence among the people, even among
its professed and bitterest enemies.

2. Another difficulty with the bank has ever been, that the balance of foreign
trade has been against America, ever since the bank was first established. This
has occasioned such great exportations of cash as render it scarce, and, of
course, embarrasses all cash business. This must deeply affect the bank, as it
is obvious at first ^ight to every one.

3. Another sort of difficulties arose from numerous enemies, who, from
different motives, embarrassed the operation of the bank much; they began with
crying up the public utility of the institution, and its great profits to the
stockholders, and thought that one set of men ought not to monopolize the
reputation and opportunity of doing so much good, and engrossing such great
profits to themselves, and withal threw out hints, importing that the Directors
were haughty, partial, and not obliging enough, etc.

To remedy all which, in 1784 they set on ^oot a scheme for a new bank, by the
name of the Bank of Pennsylvania, got large subscriptions for a fund to begin
with, and petitioned the Assembly of this State for a charter, etc. not a word
was heard all this time against the bank, as an institution hurtful to the
States or individuals, but its mischiefs were made to grow out of its great
utility and salutary effects.

The Directors, with much trouble, put a stop to this plan, by strongly urging
the fatal consequences arising from two capital banks operating in one city,
which might, perhaps, act in opposition to each other, and, of course, destroy
each other. They finally persuaded the subscribers to the new bank to
relinquish their scheme, and join the old bank, and add their subscriptions to
it, which they at last agreed to, and so that difficulty was got over.

But the bank did not rest long, for soon after this last mentioned difficulty
subsided, there arose a pretty numerous party in the State who adopted the
scheme of paper money to be issued by our General Assembly. All the difficulty
was to make it pass equal to hard money, and they had little hopes of this,
unless the bank would give it a currency, which every body saw plain enough
that the Directors could not do. The bank, therefore, and the scheme for paper
money, were considered as inconsistent with each other, and one or the other,
of course, must fall. The party for paper money determined at once that the
bank must be sacrificed, and united with all its other enemies to decry it as
an institution injurious to the State, and incompatible with the public safety.

They raised (and declaimed upon) many objections to it, the most material of
which (that I heard of) I have considered already in the foregoing pages of
this Essay. The matter was carried so far, that an act of the Legislature of
this State was obtained, and passed September 13, 1785, repealing the act of
April 1, 1782, which granted the state-charter to the bank, and also the act of
March 18, 1782, which made it felony to counterfeit the bank-bills, etc. and
thus stands the matter at present.

III. I now proceed to make some remarks on the present state of the bank.

1. Notwithstanding all the difficulties abovementioned, the bank is now in
good condition; its internal strength is not weakened; its funds are not
diminished, though its energy and extent of operation has been indeed somewhat
lessened, as was observed before.

2. The present funds or wealth of the bank consists in* 1st. the bank-stock,
about 900,000 Mexican dollars. 2d. In the discounted bills now in the bank, and
payable to it. 3d. The cash deposited in the bank for safe keeping, and which
the owners may draw out whenever they please. 4th. The furniture and utensils
of the bank, and any small profits which may have lain over or arisen since the
last dividend.

The debts of the bank to be paid out of their stock are, 1st. All the
bank-bills now in circulation. 2d. All the bank-credits or balances due to such
persons as have deposits in the bank. N. B. When both these are deducted from
the stock, they leave a balance of about 900,000 dollars in favor of the bank.

3. The legal establishment of this bank is derived from the charter of
Congress, of December 31, 1781; from the charter of the State of
Massachusetts Bay, of March 9, 1782; from the charter of Delaware State, of
February 2, 1786; from the recognisance of the charter of Congress, publicly
made by the State of Pennsylvania, in their act of March 18, 1782, and their
charter of incorporation of the bank, by their act of April 1, 1782: but it is
to be observed, that these two last mentioned acts of the State of Pennsylvania
were repealed by their act of September 13, 1785. This repeal of the said two
acts of the Legislature of Pennsylvania has given rise to several very
important questions.

Question I. Whether Congress has a right to establish a national bank, so as
to make it such a legal institution as the laws of the States of the Union are
obliged to acknowledge or recognize?

1. I answer, -- this objection is grounded principally on the second article
of the Confederation, viz. "Each State retains its sovereignty, freedom, and
independence, and every power, jurisdiction, and right, which is not expressly
delegated to the United States in Congress assembled." But the answer is easy;
for,

1st. A power of incorporating a national bank never did exist in any of the
States. They might erect banks, or any other corporations, and call them by
what name they pleased; but their authority, like that of all their other laws,
must be limited by the bounds of the State, and could not extend beyond them.
Nor,

2d. Does this act of Congress limit the power of any of the States? -- They
still retain and (...) exercise every power, jurisdiction, and right of
incorporating banks, as fully as ever they had them: for,

3d. The said second article of Confederation does not restrain Congress from
having or exercising any sovereignty, power, jurisdiction, or right, whatever;
it only restrains them from exercising it in such manner as to deprive the
States of it. Notwithstanding all the sovereignty and power of Congress, they
shall ever be so limited, that each State shall retain its own sovereignty,
power, etc. even concurrent jurisdictions (if these can be called such) often
exist together without the least restraint of each other.

2. The act of Congress incorporating the bank, is an act of finance; they
considered it most expressly as a means, a very important means, of finance,
which is a branch of power that most undoubtedly falls within their authority
or jurisdiction. They are not expressly empowered, indeed, to appoint a
Financier, give him instructions, receive his plans, or form a bank. But, as
all those were necessary means of promoting the general interest, the
liberties, and general welfare of the States, which are the grand and most
acknowledged objects of the Confederation, they are doubtless comprehended
within its powers.

3. The Confederation (article 9) empowers Congress to borrow money on the
credit of the States, and this certainly implies a power to find or procure
somebody who will lend it to them; and this they effected to a great degree by
incorporating the bank, which supplied them to a very large amount. -- They
owed the bank at one time 400,000 Mexican dollars, for money lent them by the
bank; and all the moneys lent at different times to Congress, and to the
different departments under their direction, amounted to above 2,000,000
Mexican dollars; and these loans were of such capital and essential service in
that most deranged and weak state of the public finances, that (in the opinion
of those best acquainted with the matter) the war could not have been continued
without them.

The bank also lent at different times to this State, for its defense and other
public purposes, above 130,000 dollars, which certainly proves that the bank
was very convenient to the public, and very necessary to the general welfare
and general interest of it; and, therefore, must be comprehended in the powers
granted to Congress, to manage the general interest, and secure the liberties,
defense, and general welfare of the States.

4. The independence, defense, and almost the very existence, of our present
political establishments must depend on the bank, in case of an invasion of an
enemy; for it is very certain, that, in such case, due and necessary opposition
and defense could not be made by a depreciating currency; nor do I think it
would be possible for the Congress or States to borrow elsewhere moneys
sufficient, and in season, for our defense; or to issue paper bills enough for
that purpose, which would not depreciate. -- I apprehend I shall not be called
on for any proof of this.

I therefore go on to infer, that Congress, who are expressly empowered to
secure the defense, liberties, welfare, and general interests of the States,
are, of course, empowered to institute a bank, which is so apparently and
essentially necessary to all these great purposes. -- It follows then, that
those who oppose the bank, oppose the essential means of our defense, and, of
course, lay us open to destruction, the first time any enemy shall invade our
country.

5. If we should admit that there was a defect in the powers of Congress to
incorporate the bank, yet that defect is amply supplied by the subsequent
recognisance of the States, their acquiescence in the institution, and
participation of the benefits of it, for a course of years; for a subsequent
consent of the principal is as good as a previous order, to every purpose of
establishment or legitimation of any act of a substitute.

On the whole, then, I conclude that the Bank of North America, by the
ordinance of Congress for its incorporation, is a well-established and legal
institution, and as such ought to be considered and recognized by all the
States, both in their laws and all judicial proceedings, as far as the same may
affect the said bank.

Question II. What is the meaning, energy, and operation of the act of this
State of March 18, 1782, making it felony to counterfeit the seal or bills of
the bank? -- I answer --

1. It carries in it the strongest recognisance or acknowledgment of (...)
legal establishment of the bank; and, of course, of the authority and lawful
force of the ordinance of Congress for its incorporation, on which alone the
legality of the bank then depended; for it is trifling, it is ridiculous, it is
infamous, to suppose that the Legislature of this State would, by a most solemn
act, make it felony, i. e. death, to counterfeit the seal and bills of any
number of men, who had no legal right to make a seal, issue bills, or assume to
themselves any other powers, liberties, or privileges of a corporate body.

2. That act implies the most solemn consent of this State to the aforesaid
ordinance of Congress, and carries in it further the nature and energy of a
solemn stipulation and compact of this State with Congress, i. e. with all the
States, to support that public measure of the Union, with all the weight and
authority which this State could give to it, in all the particulars or clauses
mentioned or enacted in the said law.

The public and vigorous support of the particular States gives great force to
an act of Congress, though it might be considered as fully legal without it,
gives confidence in the public measures, and is a good reason and strong
inducement to engage the public councils of the particular States, as well as
individuals, strongly to exert themselves and risk their fortunes therein.
Therefore,

3. That act cannot, of right, be repealed by this State, without consent of
Congress, i. e. of the other States of the Union. It is a part of that support
of a public measure of the Union, on which the other States have, and ought to
have, dependence and confidence. Mutual confidence is the end of the Union, as
that alone can produce defense and other exertions for the public welfare; all
the States have therefore an interest in that support, a very great interest,
indeed, and cannot be deprived of it, without a violation of the union; it is a
part of that band of union, which holds the States together; to take it away,
therefore, is to weaken the union, and, of course, to lessen its power of
operation, and the benefits resulting from it.

Indeed, if this State can repeal the said act without consent of the other
States, I do not see why they may not go on to repeal all the acts they have
ever made in support of the union, and all the powers of it, even up to that
act of theirs which consented to and adopted the Confederation itself.

Question III. What is the meaning, energy, and effect of the act of this State
of April 1, 1782, incorporating the bank? I answer, --

1. It carries in it the most public and full acquiescence and satisfaction of
our Legislature in the act of Congress for incorporating the bank; because it
counts upon that act, without the least censure, but with most apparent
approbation of it.

2. It imports their approbation, because they show a readiness to give it all
the support which the authority of this State could give, and add to its
establishment the further sanction of a charter of this State, conceived in the
very words of Congress.

3. Though, as I take it, this state-charter did not add any thing to the
legality of the bank's establishment under the charter of Congress, yet it
served to obviate and satisfy the prejudices of many people, who had formed an
opinion, that it would be safer to trust their property in the bank, with a
state-charter, than without one, and, on the account, withheld their
subscriptions till the state-charter was made.

I never heard that any body, at that time, disputed or called in question the
legal authority of Congress to give a charter to the bank; but the public
faith, plighted by Congress, relating to money, had been at that time so often
and recently violated, that very little confidence was placed by many people in
their public acts or resolutions of any sort, who therefore thought themselves
more secure under a state-charter, than they should be under a charter of
Congress, without such support.

This I take to be the true reason why the President and Directors of the bank
applied to our Assembly for a state-charter, which manifestly removed many
prejudices and obstacles which operated against the bank, as it was plain that
subscriptions to it were offered faster, and bank-stock was more coveted, after
the state-charter was obtained than before: therefore, I think it very evident
that,

4. This act operated by way of strong inducement and encouragement to very
many citizens, as well as strangers, to subscribe to the bank, and trust their
property in it; and that the act was purposely made with intention that it
might have this operation and effect; and therefore ought to secure the
proprietors from any disappointment, as far as the whole force of the act can
do it; for certainly it cannot be justifiable in any State to hold out
encouragement to the people, to draw them into a snare, and then leave them in
the lurch.

5. Whatever might be the effect of this act on the bank, by way of aiding the
legality of its establishment, or giving it support as a Continental
institution, there is no doubt but it had this one perfect effect, viz. it
incorporated the subscribers to the bank into a legal company, and instituted a
complete, established, and legal bank of Pennsylvania, though by the name of the
President, Directors, and Company of the Bank of North America; for any State
may give what name or title they please to their coporations, though they cannot
extend their authority or privileges beyond their own jurisdiction.

This act, therefore, undoubtedly brought the bank under the cognizance of the
laws of Pennsylvania, and entitled the Company, and every proprietor of it, to
the full protection of these laws. Whether this put them into any better
condition than they were before, made their establishment any more legal, or
increased their right to the protection of the laws of Pennsylvania, or not,
may be a question; but it can be no question, that very many people were of
this opinion, and governed their conduct by it.

It is further certain that this state-charter may eventually prove of most
capital service to the stockholders; for it is possible that Congress may
repeal their ordinance for incorporating the bank, or, by some other act of
sovereignty, may vacate its charter (for stranger things happen sometimes) or
the union of the Thirteen States may, by some means or other, be dissolved
(which, I think, would soon happen, if each State should withdraw its supports)
and, by that means, the authority of all their acts might cease, and, of
course, their charter of the bank might fall with the rest.

Yet, I say (all these mishaps notwithstanding) under the charter of
Pennsylvania, the bank would continue to be a legal state-establishment, and
might go on with its negotiations, and, in short, pursue the whole business
which the great interests of the concern might make necessary.

Question IV. Can the act of March 18, 1782 (making it felony to counterfeit
bank-bills, etc.) and that of April 1, 1782 (incorporating the bank) I say, can
these acts, of right, be repealed by our Legislature, without consent of the
parties interested. -- I give my answer in the negative, and for this my
opinion I beg the reader's candid attention to the following reasons, which
appear to me to deserve great consideration, even by those who may not think
them of sufficient force to justify my conclusion.

1. These acts vest a right, privilege, and interest, i. e. a valuable property
in all the stockholders of the bank, and therefore cannot, of right, be
repealed by any act of the Legislature, without the consent of the
stockholders. These acts are of the nature of bargains or contracts between the
Legislature and the stockholders, in which the stipulations were, that in
consideration that the stockholders had or should put their money into the
bank, the Legislature would give such support and legal establishment to the
bank, as should enable them to make and enjoy all the advantages and profits
which should result from it, under the firm protection of the law.

On this encouragement, the stockholders held or placed their fortunes in the
bank, and the Legislature passed the said acts in support of it, and so the
bargain was finished. I take it that when the act of the Legislature vests in
or grants to any individual or company of men, on valuable consideration ( i.
e. for which the grantee pays his money) any valuable right, interest, or
property, the grantees instantly become legally seized of such right, which
thereby becomes as much guarantied or warranted to them by the law of the ^^^d,
as is any other property whatever which they may or can possess; and,
therefore, they cannot be divested or depr^^^d of it by any act of the
Legislature, any more than of their lands, cattle, furniture, or any other
estate, of which they are lawful owners, and which they hold under the full
protection of the law.

The sort of acts of the Legislature which I here mean (that vest a right or
interest in any individual or company of men) are such as these, viz. an act
granting a commission of sewers to owners of meadows, who expend much money in
banking and ditching them, to make them useful to the public and their owners;
an act granting toll to persons who shall build a bridge, for which they
contribute their money; an act granting wild lands to people who will cultivate
and improve them, and who expend their money for that purpose; any acts for
supporting and incorporating the subscribers of a bank, in consideration of
large sums of money subscribed or contributed to it, and in prospects of great
benefits resulting from it, both to the public and to the stockholders; an act
for incorporating churches, universities, hospitals, schools, etc. in
consideration of money paid or to be paid by the contributors, etc. etc.

I conceive that all acts of this kind vest such rights, privileges, or
interests in the grantees (who thereby gain such protection of the laws in the
enjoyment of them) that they cannot be rightfully divested or deprived by any
act of repeal of the charters or acts which give their title, or by any other
act of the Legislature whatever.

2. The second great reason of this is, that the declaration of rights (which
is part of the Constitution of this State) gives every citizen a right to be
protected in the enjoyment of his property. It knows but two ways by which the
subject can be divested of his lawful property; 1st. by crime and forfeiture;
and, 2d. by his own contract or consent: if his property is challenged or
demanded of him in either of these ways, or by any other way, let the
controversy be of what nature soever, respecting property, he is entitled to a
fair trial by jury. [See articles 8, 9, and 11.] This can be had no where but
in a judicial court.

The General Assembly are not such a court; they have the legislative, but not
the executive or judicial, power of the State; they can neither empannel a
jury, nor make a judicial decision without one, much less can they deprive any
individual or company of subjects of any of their legal rights, interests,
property, or privileges, without any trial, summons, or examination at all, by
any act or repeal of acts whatever, which they can make.

3. I take it, that the declaration of rights is of superior authority to any
act which the General Assembly can make, and will control and even render
totally null and void any act of the Assembly which infringes it; and will and
ought to be considered so by the judges of our courts, whenever the same may be
pleaded before them: for when two contradictory laws are pleaded before a
court, it is impossible but the one or the other must be judged void; and if
one of these laws appears to be grounded on a superior authority to that of the
other, there can be no doubt but the superior authority must control the lesser.

I consider the Assembly as the mere creatures of their constituents, and
acting merely by a substituted power; and the declaration of rights I consider
as the capital instructions which they receive from their constituents, by
which they are bound to regulate their conduct, and by which their power and
authority are altogether limited. This doctrine ought to be brought into full
view, and to be recognized by every subject, in its whole importance and
energy, whenever we see our Assembly infringing the declaration of rights, in
so capital and alarming an instance, as to make any act whatever, which will,
in its operation, unavoidably and eventually deprive any subject, or number of
subjects, of any right, interest, or property, without trial by jury.

The very persons whose wishes or prejudices may be gratified by such acts of
the Legislature, ought to tremble at their consequences, for the two-edged
sword, which has one edge turned against our enemy, has another which may be
turned against ourselves, i. e. it can cut both sides alike, and is equally
qualified to wound both parties, whenever it may be applied to them.

Charters (or rights of individuals or companies secured by an act of the
State) have ever been considered as a kind of scored things, not to be vacated
by a bare holding up a few hands, and soiling a page of paper, without any
further previous or subsequent forms or ceremonies; but in all wise States have
ever been considered as securities of such capital consequence, that any
attempts to destroy them have ever excited a general alarm, and have rarely
happened but in times of great corruption of government and dangerous
encroachments of arbitrary power.

I think it, on the whole, very manifest, that a Legislature, which, for
valuable consideration paid, has by public act sold and granted certain
valuable rights, privileges, or interests to any individual or company of men;
I say, such Legislature have no more right by repeal of their act to vacate the
title and destroy the estate of such grantees, and to release themselves, than
any private contractor has to release himself, and refuse to execute his own
contract, whenever he grows sick of his bargain.

Indeed, I think the sacred force of contracts binds stronger in an act of
state, than in the act of an individual, because the whole government is
injured and weakened by a violation of the public faith, but the vacillation of
a private man can produce no more than private damages.

But as public faith is an old threadbare topic of argument, and is as much out
of fashion as going to church or reading the bible, and has been dinned in the
ears of some folks, till, like the doctrine of repentance to sinners, it rather
nauseates than convicts, I will forbear pressing it further at this time, as I
wish not to disgust but to persuade.

4. The ordinance of Congress for granting the charter of the bank is a measure
of the Union, solemnly recognized by this State (in the two repealed acts) in
which all the States are interested, and is, therefore, of such high authority
as controls all the States to such a degree, that any attempts of this State
(by an act of repeal, or any other act) to withdraw their support, and thereby
weaken and embarrass such measure of the Union, must be void, ipso facto, in
itself.

For I take it, that every act of Congress appointing or directing any measure
of the Union, when recognized by the States, either by their express act of
approbation, or by long acquiescence and practice, is of superior authority to
any act of any of the States, nor does it remain in the power of any particular
State to withdraw their support from it, or to release and discharge themselves
from their obligations to it, or to make any act which shall, in its operation,
lessen the energy and effect of it. But I have touched on this before, and so
need not enlarge on it further in this place.

5. The act of repeal ( Sept. 13, 1785) deprives a great number of our citizens
and strangers of their rights, privileges, and property, to a vast amount, and
to the utter ruin of many families; rights, privileges, and property which were
guarantied and secured to them for ever, by the most solemn act of our
Legislature, and, of course, by the whole force and power of the law; and all
this by an act of mere sovereignty, without so much as alleging against them
any crime by which they have forfeited, or contract by which they have
alienated, them, and without any summons, or trial, or judgment of court, or
verdict of jury.

This is so directly in the very face of our declaration of rights, as
manifestly infringes it, and, of course, renders the act void. This is, indeed,
rather an epitome of what I said before than a new argument, but the immensity
of the doss or damage occasioned by the said act of repeal, may, perhaps,
engage the reader's attention, and set the subject in a stronger light of
importance, than it might appear in, were the consequences less fatal and
ruinous both to the Union in general, to each of the States, and all the
individuals who are concerned in the bank.

But admitting that the act of Sept. ^3, 1785, for repealing the said acts of
March 8, 1782, and of April 1, 1782, is to all intents and purposes valid in
law, and, of course, that the bank is thereby deprived of all the support and
legal establishment which it once received from the said laws, when they were
in force, there arises another question, viz.

Question V. In what condition does the said act of repeal leave the bank? I
answer, --

1. In point of its legality, the said act of repeal leaves the bank just where
the said repealed acts found it, when they were first made; the repeal takes
away no more than the acts themselves gave, and, of course, if the bank was a
legal establishment before these acts were made, it continues so still after
the repeal of them: therefore,

2. The President, Directors, any Company of the Bank remain a legal corporate
body, under the charter of Congress, and may do all acts as such in the same
manner as before the said repealed acts of this State were made.

Upon the whole matter, I think it very plain that the supreme authority of all
States under all forms of government, whether monarchical, oligarchical, or
democratical (a theocracy only excepted) is lodged in the body of the people.

1st. Because the right to be secured by, and which are the sole end of, all
civil government, are vested in them: and,

2d. Because the great force or strength which must support all civil
government is lodged in them, and, of course, all pacta conventa or capital
constitutions established by them, do bind and control all authorities whatever
which act under them, and, of course, it appears that the Legislature of this
State have not an original but a derived authority, which, of course, is not
absolute but limited, it is limited,

1st. By the laws of GOD:

2d. By the Constitution of this State: and,

3d. By the confederation or union of the Thirteen States, and, of course, by
every legal act of Congress under that union, for the general welfare of the
States: therefore, if our Legislature should make an act to repeal the ten
commandments, or to infringe the Constitution, or to destroy or weaken the
Union, or any legal measures of Congress, it would, of course, be ipso facto
void.

Further, I take it that our General Assembly are limited and ^^^d down to the
sort or kind of authority which is given to them; all acts proper for a
legislative body, they are empowered to do, subject to the aforesaid
limitations, but they cannot assume to themselves or exercise the judicial or
executive powers of government; these powers are totally out of their
commission or jurisdiction, and they can no more intrude on, or exercise the
authority of these departments, than a sheriff can obtrude himself on the
judge's seat, or a chief justice serve a writ.

Therefore, it follows that if the Legislature should pass an act, which, by
its operation, takes away the life, liberty, or lawful rights, privileges, or
property of any subject, i. e. such as the subject holds under the protection
and sanction of the law, it must be void; for if any thing of this sort is to
be done in the State, or if any controversy or question about it, is to be
decided, the Constitution has ordained a different method, a quite different
court or authority, in and by which it must be done.

It is no objection to this, to say that much and many important things must be
left to necessity and the discretion of the Assembly; for such necessity must
exist, before it can operate, or justify any act grounded on it; and because
much is left to the discretion of the Assembly, it does not follow, that they
have a right to throw by all discretion, and act without any. There is no doubt
but such a combination and concurrence of event may happen, as will make a
departure not only from the ordinary course of administering justice, but even
from the common maxims of justice itself, necessary.

Such a necessity was found in France, when a remedy was to be provided for the
flagrant mischiefs of the Mississippi scheme.

The South Sea bubble produced a like necessity in England; in order to obviate
the enormous and complex mischiefs of that fatal excess of speculation.

The National Assembly in France have found a like necessity in order to reduce
the enormous accumulation of the wealth of the community into ^^w ^ands ( viz.
of their nobility and clergy) and to liberate the nation from the distress,
weakness, and ruin thence arising.

Perhaps every cession of territory from one nation or state to another
involves in it some such necessity.

And we may probably meet the same necessity, if our nation should see ^it to
exonerate itself from the immense burden of providing about 30,000,000 dollars,
to pay speculators who never earned a shilling of it, nor ever rendered any
services or valuable consideration whatever to the nation or any body else, for
any part of it.

But it is to be here noted with great care, that such necessity must exist,
before it can operate, or be pleaded in excuse of the extraordinary measures
which it will justify; but a pretense of such necessity, when it does not
really exist, is not only ridiculous, but very dangerous. This is arguing on
false position, a sad example of which we have in the troubles of Charles I. of
England. -- The King, or rather his court, held out,

1. The vast powers and prerogatives of the crown in cases of extreme
necessity, i. e. when the country was invaded, or otherwise in imminent danger;
and,

2. That the King, holding the supreme executive power, was the legal and
proper judge of that necessity.

On these positions they proceeded to justify the power at that time claimed
and practiced by the King, of raising money without act of Parliament, such as
ship money, coal and conduit money, etc. etc. i. e. it was only saying that the
King judged the existing necessity sufficient to warrant these measures, and
the matter was all legal; that was the clin^^er that finished the business. I
am told, this argument of necessity and imminent danger was often called up and
urged in the Assembly of Pennsylvania, when the repeal of the charter of the
bank was debated there.




But waving all questions of law, I beg to consider the bank one moment in the
light of prudence. Supposing the bank and all its operations could be broke up
and entirely stopped on March 1, next, what would be the consequence?

1. The great and usual circulation of cash (through which 37,000,000 dollars
were negotiated last year) would at once be stopped.

All discounted bills must immediately be paid or sued, which would ruin very
many, I think I may say, scores of substantial families; and their failures
would occasion,

3. A great loss to the bank, and, of course, to the stockholders. And,

4. The stockholders must lie out of their money till the bank-accounts could
be settled, which would probably be some years.

5. All the moneys belonging to subscribers out of the State, must be carried
out of it as fast as they could be collected: and,

6. A most fatal wound would be given to our credit, as well as to all our
trade, and every kind of business which depends on the circulation of cash. --
Who but an enemy would wish for such calamities, or promote the means of them?

I will conclude my Essay on this very important and interesting subject, with
only observing, that I have stated the facts with all care and the best
information, and, I believe, with exactness and truth; should I have erred, I
am ready to submit to better information; the sentiments and reasonings are
open and obvious to every one, and, I wish, may be received and considered in
the same light of importance in which they appear to me. I have no interest in
the subject distinct from that of my fellow-citizens, and as I would not be
willing to be misted myself, so neither do I wish to lead them into error.
Magna est veritas at praevalebit.

STRICTURES ON THE NET PRODUCE OF THE TAXES OF GREAT BRITAIN, In the Year 1784,
as published by Order of their House of Commons.
[First published in Philadelphia, Aug. 4, 1785.]
HAVING by accident met with a list or detail of the British taxes for 1784,
and the net produce of each of them, which lays open in a pretty clear manner
the sources of the British revenues, and points out the ways and means by which
those immense sums are raised, which are necessary for the current services of
the year, payment of the interest of their vast national debt, support of their
public credit, etc. and as the attention of the Thirteen American States is, or
ought to be, much fixed on a public revenue, and, of course, on our trade, out
of which it must grow; I thought the practice and example of so old, so
experienced, and successful a people as the Britons, might be of use to us at
this time, and therefore procured the account or list of their revenues above
referred to, to be published in the Pennsylvania Packet of August 4, 1785, and
added these Strictures on them.

Whether the British government has expended the vast, the immense sums
produced by their finance for the last 90 years, for purpose salutary and
beneficial to the nation, or not, is out of the present question; but their
success in raising these vast sums is certainly surprising. Especially when we
consider that this has been done in such a manner, that the nation has not
only, not been impoverished thereby, but has been increasing rapidly in the
most substantial riches, during the whole time it supported the immense
pressure of their taxes.

The houses of Great Britain are now much more valuable than they were 90 years
ago; the live stock (...) their farms is greatly increased; their lands are
better cultivated, and much more productive; their conveniences for
transportation are greatly increased by mending roads, opening canals, and
clearing rivers for inland navigation: their manufactures are vastly increased,
both in quantity and value; the trading stock of their merchants, their
shipping, and the exports of their manufactures, and produce of their lands,
are vastly increased since the year 1694, when the Bank of England was first
instituted, and the scheme of funding the public debts had its origin. By these
only the wealth of the nation can be truly estimated.

This real wealth, considered as national, has very little connection with the
public funds or stocks; for should they all sail, this must continue, and out
of it might always be produced funds or stocks sufficient for the use of the
public: this kind of wealth must then be considered as the real, substantial
wealth of the nation; the great basis on which all the superstructures of
public credit or nominal wealth must be built, and by which they must be
supported.

The fact is, then, that this real wealth of Britain is much greater now than
it was 90 years ago, notwithstanding the amazing taxes which have been paid
during the whole of the last 90 years, and the vast debt which now lies on the
nation: indeed, this real wealth, as observed (...) has little connection with
^word public debt; but, on (...), is rather helped than hurt by it; for it
appears very plain, that the national wealth has increased faster under the
weight of that debt, than ever it did before the doctrine of creating and
funding a national debt was thought of.

It appears, then, that the national debt, or the public credit, may fail,
without destroying the real and substantial wealth of the nation; for if the
public credit was to fail, as our Continental money, and their South Sea stock,
once did, and every person who had any thing in the funds should lose it all,
this would not destroy the houses, fields, cattle, etc. of the country; it
would only produce a shift of property from one person to another; would
produce infinite injustice and ruin to individuals, indeed, and no degree of
punishment would be too great for those, through whose mismanagement, fraud, and
corruption, such a thing should happen; but it would by no means bring on the
destruction of the nation.

All that could happen would be, that those who had moneys in the stocks would
lose them; and those who were taxed to support the stocks, would be liberated
from the burden of tax; but the fields would produce the same quantity of
wheat, and the meadows would fatten the same number of cattle, as before; and,
of course, the bread and the meat would be as plenty as ever, and the more
bread and meat the country produced, the richer it certainly would be.

Therefore, a man who buys lands and puts them into high cultivation, or erects
mills, shops, etc. for manufactories and conveniences of life, possesses most
substantial wealth of high independence; whilst the man who deals in public
securities and paper credit, depends on the humor, the honor, the wisdom, and
the justice of the nation, and therefore acquires a wealth 'which is liable to
moth and rust, and which thieves can steal.'

The long experience of Great Britain affords a most irrefragable proof of
fact, that both those kinds of wealth are mutual supports of each other, i. e.
that public credit increases the value and produce of the lands and
manufactures, whilst, at the same time, the lands and manufactures produce the
great staple and extensive commerce, which enable the nation, by a proper
management, to support the public credit; and, therefore, what this proper
management is, becomes a matter of much importance for us to know, and
carefully attend to.

For Britain and America, in one great thing, are alike, viz. the source of
wealth in both countries is the same; the lands and manufactures are the first
matter which affords the great staples of commerce, as well as the most capital
home-supplies of the people; therefore, it is probable, that the same
management or line of conduct which has proved advantageous to them, may be so
to us.

We see in the account of the taxes of Britain, a specimen and a good deal of
the detail of this important management, -- on which I beg leave to remark --

I. They are very careful to make their revenues in such form that their
produce shall be certain, and their amount capable of pretty exact computation.

II. To be guarded against all possible delay or disappointment, they circulate
their revenues mostly through the bank, or at least keep the exchequer so closely
connected with the bank, that they can at all times avail themselves of a
bank-credit when they need it: so that they are always able to satisfy the
demands of every creditor of the public funds, without the least delay or
trouble: this could not, perhaps, by any possibility, be done in any other
method than by the help of the bank, and the importance of it will be obvious
to any body, who considers that public credit can by no possibility be
supported in any other way than by most punctual payments to the public
creditors: the experience of all nations, but especially our own, has taught us
that public promises and paper, or public laws of regulation and tender, can do
nothing toward the support of public credit, without punctual payment of the
public creditors.

III. They have ever made it an object of great care, to lay and collect the
public taxes in such a manner as should be the most easy, the most insensible,
and the most advantageous of any they could devise: this is, indeed, the
materia magna of the whole subject (which is odious and heavy, under all forms
of delicacy and prudence that any administration can devise) as instances of
this, it is easy to observe --

1. That the great burden of their taxes consists in the customs, excise, and
stamps; the net produce of these is above 9,000,000 l. sterling, in all which,
lands, labor, and farmer's stock are not called on, nor is any person compelled
to pay any of the taxes, unless he chooses to be concerned in the articles
taxed.

2. The tax is laid in a very great measure on either articles of mere luxury,
or such fine and rich goods as are consumed mostly by people of wealth, e. g.
about one half of this (...) is on drinkable liquors (for under this class I
shall doubtless be allowed to rank malt, hops, tea, etc. etc. the sole use of
which is to make such liquors) these are mostly articles of luxury, as wines,
spirits, strong beer, etc. Tobacco and snuff are great articles, as also are
East India goods, carriages, etc. most of which are either articles of mere
luxury, or the consumption of very wealthy people. But,

3. Goods of necessary consumption are not wholly omitted, as we see in the
articles of hides, tallow, candles, salt, cools, paper, etc. but in these the
heaviest part of the burden falls on the rich, as they consume these articles
with much greater prodigality and profuseness than the poor.

4. Very poor people have very small use for any papers which pay a stamp-duty,
and, of course, those duties are almost wholly paid by people of at least good
substance, if not great wealth.

5. The heaviest and most painful part of said taxes is that on houses and
windows, ranked under the head of incidents; this is said to be paid by the
poor tenants, many of whom brick up their windows to avoid the tax.

6. The land tax at 4s. on the pound (not mentioned in the account) produces
about 2,000,000 a year: but this, though called 4 s. is really not more than 1 s.
or perhaps not 6 d. because that tax is laid on an old assessment or estimate
of the lands of England, which sets them at less than a quarter of their
present value, and some very improved estates are not estimated at one-tenth of
their present value, and, of course, if a man has rents to amount of 100 l. per
annum, his tax may be 5 l. or perhaps not 40 s. This, and the tax on houses and
windows, are all which bear any resemblance to our taxes on polls and estates,
and, in point of weight and burden, bear no proportion to ours.

On the mode of the English taxes, and the operation of their national debt,
the following things may be noted, and deserve our consideration.

I. Their taxes being chiefly on luxuries are a benefit and saving to the
nation; they lessen the consumption, and of course restrain the excesses, of
luxury, and present the vices, expenses, and mischiefs, which would otherwise
ensue.

II. The taxes prevent the exportation of money; that part of the price of the
goods taxed, which goes to pay the duty, cannot be exported, but goes into the
public treasury, whence it issues in half-yearly payments to the public
creditors all over the nation.

III. This produces a great plenty and brisk circulation of cash; for these
payments are all made without the least delay, and in ready cash, and the
amount being very large (perhaps, about half the current cash of the nation
yearly) makes a very large and brisk circulation of cash, and the frequency of
the payments keeps up that circulation into almost an equable ^low through the
year.

IV. From this plenty and quick circulation of cash produced by the taxes, each
individual, or at least the nation at large, derives a benefit which more than
compensates the tax which is the purchase of it; for every one knows the odds
of doing business in a place where cash is plenty and briskly circulating, and
in a place where it is scarce and stagnant; this will soon produce a difference
in the proceeds of any man's business, equal to his share of the tax.

V. This shows a reason why the British nation increases rapidly in wealth
under the pressure of vast taxes, and has uniformly done so for 90 years past,
i.e. the benefits resulting from the tax are more than a compensation for the
inconvenience of paying it. So that it leaves a balance of profit in favor of
the nation or individual who pays it.

VI. This benefit results chiefly from the great punctuality with which the
public creditors are paid -- to a day -- to an hour -- without the least put
off or delay. This not only sets the example, but gives the power, of punctual
payments, and strongly tends to introduce the general practice of it, to the
vast advantage of all trade. This depends on the same principle as the old
adage, viz. "If you would make money fast, pay a high rent;" i. e. it is better
to have a stand in a place of brisk business, though the rent is high, than to
sit down in a dull place at a low rent, or even rent-free.

VII. This punctuality of the public payments, which produces so many vast
advantages, becomes practicable only by the close connection which subsists
between the public treasury and the bank; but these advantages are not the
whole of the benefits thence derived, the same thing enables the treasury to
furnish any sum of money in an instant, which any emergency may make necessary;
so that the nation is never in danger of losing the benefit of any important
maneuver for want of cash.

By this means they have often been enabled to oppose foreign enemies, crush
interior rebellions, support their great trading companies at a hard push, give
aid to the bank, and ever to preserve their public credit.

And could that discerning, successful people have possessed wisdom and gravity
of counsel enough to make the best use of their own advantages, sua si bona
norint, their happiness and glory must have been vast indeed. Had they in
improvements of their husbandry and trade, in meliorating and decorating their
country, spent the money which they have wasted in needless subsidies to
foreign princes, in Continental and American wars, and many other fatal
policies, their strength, their riches, their respectability, their happiness
would have risen superior to that of any nation on the face of the earth.

This is the nation from which we derive our origin, and I hope we may respect
the honors of our parentage, without imitating the vices of our ancestors. And
what I have to wish is, that though we are broken off from them, we may have
wisdom and sound judgment enough to esteem and imitate those parts of their
policy which have raised them above the nations round them, whilst their fatal
calamities may sufficiently warn us to avoid their mistakes and errors. It is
with this view that I offer these thoughts to my fellow-citizens, which, I
doubt not, will be received with candor, as I know they are written with
sincerity.

AN ESSAY ON TEST-ACTS Imposed with Penalties. By the act of the Legislature of
Pennsylvania, June 13, 1777, the following oath was required, viz.

I (...) do swear, or affirm, that I renounce and refuse all allegiance to
George III. King of Great Britain, his heirs, and successors; and that I will
be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as a
free and independent State; and that I will not at any time do, or cause to be
done, any matter or thing that will be prejudicial or injurious to the freedom
and independence thereof, as declared by Congress; and also that I will
discover and make known to some one justice of peace of the said State, all
treasons, or traitorous conspiracies, which I now know or hereafter shall know
to be formed against this or any of the United States of America.

On which I beg leave to remark,

I. That a very great number of the principal inhabitants of Pennsylvania, and
as respectable and well-behaved as any in the State, from scruples of
conscience had ever refused to take or subscribe any oath or affirmation of
allegiance to any government, either British or American.

II. Very many very serious and good men, and fast friends to America and the
American cause, thought at that time that the Declaration of Independence was
premature; and it was a matter of great doubt with all men, whether that
independence could be finally supported; and, should it fail, many thought,

III. That abjuring the British government would involve them in perjury, or,
at least, in a shameful and ridiculous duplicity of contact, under the most
awful and solemn crisis of deportment.

IV. Many wise men had a great attachment to the British government, under
which they were born and educated; and though they (...) and condemned the
demands and conduct of the British court as much as any man in Congress yet did
not think that a redress of American grievances was (...), or that it was the
real, true interest of America to be disjoined from the British Empire; at
least, they thought the American independence ought to the settled, and the war
should be ever, and the disputes between the contending States should be
adjusted, before an oath of allegiance to the one, or abjuration of the other,
should be demanded.

V. Many good men thought they did not understand the nature and essential
qualities of treasons or treasonable conspiracies, well enough to be safe in
swearing to give information of all such as came within their knowledge; or
they might know such, but not be able to make proof of them, and, of course,
their information would expose them not only to the resentment, but to real
actions of defamation.

I do not pretend to determine whether any or all of the above objections
against taking said oath, were good and proper or not; but they had such weight
with great numbers, that near half of our most serious people refused taking
the oath.

Yet, I conceive, all men will allow that Pennsylvania was as true to the
American cause, and supported it with as much effort, zeal, and unanimity as
any State in the Union; and the ^ew (...) we had, who retained any attachment
to the British government, were most effectually converted by the samples of
British faith, honor, and (...) exhibited by General How, whilst he commanded
the British army in Philadelphia and its neighborhood.

But be all this as it may, the extraordinary penalties with which the oath was
enforced, were, in my opinion, equally useless, absurd, and ^ever^^ some of
which were as follows, viz.

That every person above the age of eighteen years, refusing or neglecting to
take and subscribe the said oath or affirmation, shall, during the time of such
neglect or refusal, be incapable of holding any office or place of trust in
this State, serving on juries, suing for any debts, electing or being elected,
buying, selling, or transferring any lands, tenements, or hereditaments, and
shall be disarmed, etc.

-- Traveling out of the city or county where he usually resides, without a
certificate of his having taken the oath or affirmation, may be committed to
the common gaol to remain without bail or mainprise.

Shall be disabled to sue or use any action, bill, plaint, or information in
course of l^w, or to prosecute any suit in equity or otherwise howsoever, or to
be guardian of the person or estate of any child, or to to be executor or
administrator of any person^ shall be incapable of any legacy or deed of gi^^^
or to make any will or testament; and shall be compelled to pay double taxes,
etc.

All non-juring trustees, provosts, rectors, professors, masters and tutors of
any college or academy, and all schoolmasters and us^^^^s merchants and
traders, sergeants and counselors at law, barristers, advocates atto^nies,
solicitors, proctors, clerks or notaries, apothecaries, druggists, and every
person practicing physic, are disabled in law to use any of those employments,
and liable to be fined 500 l. for practicing in any of them.

Two justices may summon any non-juring person before them, and, on refusal to
take the said oath or affirmation, commit him to the common gaol or house of
correction for three months, unless he pay any sum, with costs, under 10 l.
which they may require, and also become bound with sufficient sureties to
appear at the ne^t court of general quarter sessions of the peace; where, if he
refuses to take the oath or affirmation, he shall, under the direction of the
court, depart the State in thirty days, and forfeit his goods and chattels to
the State, and his lands and tenements to the persons who would by law be
entitled to inherit the same, in case such offender was dead intestate, etc.
etc.

N. B. By act of Assembly of March 29, 1787 the abovementioned oath, with all
the shocking penalties of it, was repealed, after it had done infinite mischief
in the State, and had kept the party that made it, in the saddle about ten
years (which, by the way, I conceive, was the principal design and use of it)
and there was substituted in the stead of it, a very simple oath of allegiance,
without any of the exceptionable clauses of the former, by which the rights of
our citizens are restored, and a happy peace and general satisfaction of our
people have succeeded.



[First published in Philadelphia, Sept. 12, 1781.]
TEST-ACTS imposed with penalties, I humbly conceive, are hurtful; because,

I. Their address is to the hidden things of the heart, to the secret
sentiments of the understanding, which are not controllable by any human
authority, nor amenable to it; they belong to God only, and the conscience of
the possessor, and no man can be obliged to confess or divulge them, more than
to accuse himself. Test-acts, though in a less degree, are of the same nature as
racks and tortures, are calculated for the same ends, produce the same effects,
and are therefore grounded on the same principles, and, of course, are
reprobated by the same reasons; their end is to wring out those hidden things
of the heart, which no man living has a right to demand, and, of course, no man
can be under any obligation to disclose. It is impossible that any man should
have a higher and more exclusive right to any thing whatever, than to the
secrets of his own mind; and, therefore, to force them from a man is a direct
violation of the most sacred, as well as most delicate, rights of human nature.

II. Every man has a right (in the use of his reason) to form sentiments of
government, as well as of religion, and every thing else which concerns his
well-being. There can be no crime in this, and, therefore, his sentiments of
government (be they what they may) ought not to subject him to any kind of
punishment either of pain or loss, or deprive him of any one privilege or
benefit of civil society. It is true, if he accepts an office under a
government which he disapproves, he ought to execute the office faithfully and
legally, or he is punishable; if he cannot do this, he ought not to accept the
office: he doubtless ought also to be a quiet and peaceable subject of the
government which exists, and to use none but lawful means to mend or alter it.

He is supposed to be of a minor party, who must be governed by the major vote;
but such minor party, having no guilt, is entitled to every blessing and
benefit of government, as much as any of that party who are most cordial to the
present establishment, i. e. government ought to hold an even, true, and just
balance over every subject, and secure and defend the rights, liberties,
property, privileges, etc. of every individual equally. The law is the equal
right of every man, and therefore every man has an equal right to all its
benefits, protections, securities, privileges, and advantages of every kind,
till by some act of guilt the shall forfeit them.

It may be objected here, -- shall the enemies of the present Constitution The
Constitution of Pennsylvania then newly made (but since abrogated by the late
Convention of the State) was greatly opposed by most men of gravity and wisdom,
though it was carried by a warm party which prevailed at that time, and was
propped up by test-acts, etc.
enjoy the same privileges under it as its friends, who have run every risk,
and made the strongest exertions, to introduce and establish it? I answer --
Yes. It is to be presumed, that the zeal of the patrons of the Constitution has
ever been directed in all their exertions with a single eye to the public good,
otherwise they certainly deserve no favor; if their design was to introduce a
partial government, not equal to all, in which they and their friends could
monopolize the benefits and emoluments of government to themselves, they must
be deemed very execrable, and their plan and administration most pernicious to
society.

Government (both in theory and practice, system and administration) is a sort
of public thing, in which every individual has an interest, and this interest
is of so high and delicate a kind, that any violation of it excites the highest
resentment in the sufferer. To be thrown out of the protection of the law, is a
punishment of a very high nature, and all good governments pre-supposes a
conviction of some very black and atrocious crime, some crime of a very high
nature and deep guilt. Wherefore, the least disfranchisement, or deprivation of
any one benefit, which ought to flow from government equally on every subject,
must partake of the nature of that high punishment, and, of course, ought never
to take place, but where there has preceded a conviction of such high guilt as
will justify it.

To adopt any principles or administration of government, which, from their
nature, must keep party resentments alive, and fret the community with the
perpetual gnawing anguish of continued oppressions, is the height of absurdity,
must keep society in a perpetual ferment, and will for ever prevent the
community from cementing in such an union, confidence, and acquiescence in the
government, as are essential to the well-being of civil society; for human
nature must cease to be what it is, before any part of mankind will acquiesce
in an administration which treats them with distinctions of contempt, like
underlings cut off from those honors or emoluments of the State, which the
government diffuses with equal benevolence on all their neighbors.

If the government be good and properly administered, it will prove itself so
by practice; the benefits of it will be diffused through the community, and be
felt by every one. This will naturally reconcile every opposer to its
principles and practice, and it will soon have all good men for its friends;
and when this is the case, there will be little danger of public disquietude
arising from the wicked and guilty part of the community, who are uneasy with
the government only because it restrains their wickedness, follies, or lusts.

It appears, then, that the test-acts, which have for their object the secret
thoughts, opinions, sentiments, and designs of men, have an object which no
human authority can or ought to reach; that the very attempt to do this is a
violation of the most sacred rights of the subject; It is an intrusion into the
great and exclusive prerogative of the ALMIGHTY, to whom alone secret things
belong; goes on a supposition that is both useless and impossible, viz. that
the secret opinions, sentiments, and designs of all men can or ought to be
alike; limits the rights, privileges, liberties, and security of the subject,
to conditions which are absurd and ridiculous, because they have no connection
with the virtue or vice, the merit or demerit of the subject; and is so far
from securing the peace, good order, and safety of society, that it cannot
fail, on most natural principles, to keep up a perpetual fret and resentment of
parties, to plant and keep alive that discord, uneasiness, and revenge, which
is of the worst tendency, and generally produces very hurtful, and often very
tragical, effects.

In fine, human nature is such, that all mankind have secret things about them,
which they wish and think they have right to hold secure against the forcible
intrusion of any body: if they disclose them, it must and ought to be their own
voluntary act, to which they ought to be courted, not compelled; any attempt,
therefore, by violence and the force of laws, to wring such secrets from the
possessor, is against nature, is an insult on the natural feelings of every
person living; the absurdity, indecency, and injury of which all men living see
fast and clear enough, when it is put in practice by their enemies on
themselves or their friends.

But what adds to the absurdity of this ill-fated piece of policy, is, that the
little benefit which is hoped for and expected from it, fails entirely in the
effects; and so after all the risks, scandals, cruelties, and mischiefs wrought
by it, there remains no balance of profit at all, and the measure turns up at
last, after all the trouble and pother about it, ridiculously useless. For,

III. The benefits expected from it all fail upon the trial. It would, indeed,
be a fine thing to have a criterion by which we might distinguish our friends
from our enemies, to have all our subjects under the strongest voluntary ties
to the government, and to have the sacred power of religion (...) in aid of our
civil policy: but plain fact and the ^ullest experience prove, that these
effects are not, will (...) cannot be produced by test-acts.

(...) of the weak reigns of the bloody Queen Mary the (...) (persecutri^) of
James I. and Charles I. (...) of Henry II. Charles IX. and Henry III. of
France; in which test-acts greatly abounded (and, I think, they are ever a sign
of a weak administration:) in all these we find a cloud of evasions,
explanations, mental reservations, etc. which, with infinite variety of
operation, never cease till they have totally avoided or obliterated the force
of the acts.

For, whatever obligation the imposers of these acts may conceive to be in
them, or whatever force the decisions of divines, civilians, or canonists may
give them, it is plain that the general sense and practice of mankind, when
harassed with them, give them mighty little or none at all. It is a well-known
maxim, that the construction of any statute obtained by usage and common
practice, is of more effect than the words, because such usage always controls
the words: and if this rule may be allowed to apply, mighty little binding
force will be left in the test-acts.

Indeed, I think it requires but little acquaintance and observation of the
world, to see plain enough, that it is matter of general sentiment, that the
most of mankind always did and always will believe, that if rulers or robbers
attempt by force to wring from you any secret of your mind, which they neither
have not can have any right to know, that it is very proper and lawful for you
to deceive them, cheat them, bubble them, and get rid of them any how that you
can, and retain your own secret.

Can any man in his senses expect to get a true answer, were he to demand an
oath of each subject of any State, whether he was or ever would be a traitor or
heretic? and this I take to be the meaning of every test-act and oath of
allegiance forcibly imposed on the subject, with this difference (which often
makes a notable difficulty) the question sometimes is, not whether you are or
will be traito^ (...) the State, but to some proposition, fact, whim, or system
^^^^ified in the oath, and which is not always thought (...) the same thing
with the true interests of the (...).

If any man thinks true answers can be obtained (...) method of interrogation,
it may not be improper (...) the precious expedient in a ^ew other (...) viz.
(...) to oblige a woman to answer on oath, whether (...) will be a whore; a
clergyman, whether he is or ever will be a liar, drunkard, or heretic; a
merchant, whether he ever did or will make false entries in his books, or forge
bills of exchange. I am of opinion, that a little practice of such a sweet cue
on various subjects, would soon demonstrate the utility or absurdity of this
magical kind of logic, or method of investigating truth, show how it will suit
the ordinary feelings of the human heart, and discover what rare inducements
such curious questions must excite in sensible minds, to tell the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

But if this unreasonable, indelicate method of investigating truth would
always produce it, I have still a pretty cogent reason against the practice of
it, viz. that the public would not be benefited, but greatly prejudiced by such
a discovery. I think it is very evident that many sins do less hurt while they
lie concealed, than they would do, if published; caves-droppers rarely hear any
good of themselves; jealousy is a low, uneasy passion, and is commonly
gratified by an increase of torment; and people that are anxiously fond of
fishing for secrets, rarely fail to hook in trouble; and these observations are
not less true, and commonly more dangerous, in state policy than in private
life; but in both equally indicate weakness of intellects, disorders of
imagination, great ignorance of human nature, and that painful, ridiculous
anxiety which generally accompanies irritable nerves, and want of true, ^ound
judgment.

This weakness of human nature is a kind of womanish imbecility, like tears,
which appear much more ridiculous in subjects of dignity and gravity, than in
the weaker sex, to which they more properly belong. Government may enjoin a
thousand oaths, and thereby occasion ten thousand perjuries, not one of which
can be proved or punished without over acts, and such overt acts will have
equal effect both of conviction and punishment of all the abjured treason,
without the oaths as with them; and, of course, the oaths are at least useless,
if not hurtful.

Dignity and gravity ought always to be most carefully maintained in
government; which will ever lose its respectability, when it descends to low,
pimping methods of administration. The tree is to be judged by its fruit only.

It is by overt acts only that the designs of the heart can be made to appear;
within this line of evidence we are limited by the laws of nature, as within
brazen walls, beyond which the human powers cannot go. Nor does the safety of
human society require this to be exceeded; for I am fully persuaded, if the
well-being of mankind had required any other or better way of discovering the
secrets of the heart, the great Governor of the world would have communicated
to men some other way in which it could be done.

I have on the whole no opinion that test-acts or even oaths of allegiance
afford any kind of security to the State; nor have I any very high opinion of
oaths of office, but I do greatly object to any oaths being tacked to an
office, more than the simple adjuration to execute the office legally and
faithfully; and I equally object to municipal rights and privileges being made
dependent on test-oaths or solemn declarations of secret opinions or sentiments.

I have heartily given my reasons for my opinion, which I hope will be heartily
considered; and beg leave to move, with some hope and great humility, that all
acts which enjoin such oaths, especially the test-acts, may be repealed by the
proper authority. But if a repeal of those acts should be thought too much, I
beg leave to recommend the removal of some of the severities which are imposed
by these acts on the non-jurors; particularly their double tax, and the demand
of that part of their tax in hard money, which the jurors are allowed to pay in
paper of about one-third the value of hard money.

As a reason for this, I humbly urge, over and above the capital arguments
drawn from the justice of government, and the equality and impartiality with
which it ought to be administered to all orders and ranks of people, I say,
besides this, I wish to urge the necessity of convincing all our people, by the
equity and impartiality of our government, that it is a safe and sure
protection of person and property; that the burdens of it are equally laid, so
that no one part of the community is oppressed or burdened more than the rest.

This will give a practical proof that our government carries in i^ the most
characteristic marks of a free, just, and gentle policy, which is directly
opposed to tyranny, the essence of which consists in a denial or partial
distribution of justice, and laying unequal burdens on one part of the
community, in favor of other parts. This will soon gain the approbation and
confidence of all people of serious and cool reflection; the violent ravings of
passion and prejudice will soon spend their own strength, and subside of
course, when all real ground of complaint is taken away.

The non-jurors are very numerous; our business and interest is to get them
reconciled, not exterminated. Mankind will ever like that government best,
where they can enjoy most security, justice, and peace. Our political
character, both among neighbors and foreign nations, requires this; if great
numbers of our own people have a strong aversion to our government, it will
afford a presumption to strangers, that either our people or our government
must be very bad. Either of which will lessen our dignity and weight, and
injure our public character abroad, and discourage that accession of
foreigners, which is necessary to increase our population, trade, and husbandry.

Rigor and force can never govern any people longer than till they can find an
opportunity of avoiding or revenging it. The understandings of the people must
be convinced and courted, and the cements of society cannot be long wanting. We
may, by perpetual, galling, and odious distinctions, keep up the heat and
virulencies of parties, as long as those of the Guelphs and Gibbelines lasted
in Italy, and to about as much advantage, i. e. till the peace, wealth, and
morality of the country are all ruined.

We may, if we please, with more ease, like Henry IV. of France, by giving
equal justice, benefit, and favor to all, soon convince all, that the
government is their best friend and surest protection; then they will love and
trust it for their own sakes, and when interest and allegiance conspire
together, and mutually support each other, the government has the highest
possible security of good order, public peace, and social happiness.

Sundry other reasons and observations might be added on this subject, which I
can only hint at here, and leave the reader to enlarge on them as he pleases.

I. A great multiplicity of oaths makes them common and families, and thereby
lessens their solemnity and practical force.

II. It cannot be expected that they will be sincerely taken and kept; and,
therefore, they will introduce many perjuries, evasions, etc. which naturally
tend to eradicate from the mind the high obligation of such awful appeals to
the ALMIGHTY, and that solemn sense of truth, which most effectually secures
the benefits of an oath.

III. It is presumed that very few of the present non-jurors refuse the oaths
because they wish to return to the English government, or because they are
averse to the American independency; but for a great variety of other reasons,
which might be easily mentioned; and for the truth of this I appeal to the
non-jurors themselves, who can best explain their own opinions and sentiments.

IV. Some of the enjoined oaths contain facts which many do not believe to be
true, and contradictions which cannot be reconciled.

V. People of the most delicate sentiments of religion and truth only, i. e.
the best people in the world, may be governed and perhaps hurt by them; whilst
people of a contrary character will all avail themselves of some shift or other
to avoid their whole effects.

VI. The experience of ages and nations proves that this measure has ever
failed of producing the effects proposed and intended by it. Have we secured
the obedience and goodwill of one American subject by it? We have seen, with
indignation and contempt, the British generals rigidly imposing their oath of
allegiance wherever they gained footing, and hanging such as have relapsed; the
consequence is, they have disaffected and lost all their friends in the
southern governments lately, and in all the rest long ago; the revolts against
them are nearly universal.

VII. The real object of these tests is not always the safety of the State;
they are too often made use of as engines of a ruling party, to entrap and
punish such people as they suppose inimical to themselves, and whose conduct is
so prudent and inoffensive, that they are not liable to punishment, but by some
law which creates a crime which can be proved and punished without the evidence
of overt acts. This is the height of abomination, a most execrable corruption
and abuse of the most sacred rights of law.

VIII. When, by such wicked tricks, numbers of our freemen are excluded from
their right of election, and bearing their part in the government of the State,
the essential principle on which the government of the United States is
founded, is violated. This principle is, that all rights of government lies in
the people, and that our government is a government of the people; which cannot
be the case where numbers of the people, who have a right to a share in it, are
excluded.

It is easy enough for any party which gets into the saddle, to keep their
places there, by imposing some condition which is either impossible or
impracticable, on all the people of different sentiments from themselves, e. g.
they may make the very point in question between the two parties a term of
admission or exclusion of the civil privileges and franchises of the people.

This is a short way of cutting down opposing parties, and destroying their
weight in society, and changing the very essence of the Constitution from being
the government of the people, to that of being a government of part of the
people only: for there is a very wide difference between a government by major
vote of all the people, and a government by a major vote of part of the people,
whilst the other part are excluded from voting at all; for by this method of
proceeding, the governing or voting part may, by repeated exclusions, reduce
the government to a very small number, a mere junto of a few, from which the
main body of the people may be excluded; which is not the free government of
the people intended by our Constitution, but a mere unchecked tyranny of a few.

To effect all which, nothing more is necessary than this, viz. whenever there
arises an opposition to any point carried by a majority, for that same majority
to require an oath approving the very point in dispute, and imposing a penalty
of exclusion from all right of voting, on such as refuse the oath, and so go on
toties quoties, whenever an opposition arises. This will effectually exclude
the opposition from future voting; for men will often conform to a matter
carried by a majority against them, who would by no means swear an approbation
of it.

This may be repeated till there are but two voters left in the whole State,
and then one of them has nothing more to do than to kill the other, and he will
be sold tyrant, and will be very safe, if he can get a standing army to support
him: and this will not be difficult, if he has money enough: and this too will
be easy; for the voting part of the community can always lay what taxes and
raise what money they please, and the army which is to receive that money, can
easily enforce the collection or payment of it.

Nor is this any very unnatural, strained, or extravagant supposition; for we
have often seen Commonwealths, by the fatal errors of their policy, run into a
monarchical and despotic tyranny: and the only sure way to avoid the fatal
consequences of such errors, is to nip them in the bud; obstare principiis, to
detect their principles, and restrain and correct the first beginnings of them,
before they gain such strength as to be irresistible. I am here almost
compelled to offer to public consideration one more proposal, viz.

To take off all disfranchisements and disabilities created by any of our
statutes, for no other cause than neglecting the test-acts, oath of allegiance,
Test-acts, at the time this Essay was written, were deemed so important, that
any objection to them, or doubt of their use, was cried out upon and reprobated
by the violent party which then prevailed in the State, as malignancy against
the American independence, disaffection to the government, and a sort of
treason. I was (...) and much threatened for writing this Essay. A very angry
writer, under the signature of A Constitutionalist, in the Freeman's Journal of
Sept. 28, 1781, undertook to blacken it most effectually; then went on to
defend test-acts, and answer my Essay. After applying pretty liberally all the
hard words he could think of, he gives the character of it as follows -- "Of
all publications hitherto exhibited in print, since the establishment of our
independence, this Essay is foremost in barefaced and undisguised principles,
to to^^ism favorable; to our Revolution inimical; and of our Constitution
subversive:" and then goes on to observe, that every independent State ought to
be guarded by some criterion, by which good citizens may be distinguished from
bad ones; and that all such States have good right and authority to adopt any
such criterion or term of citizenship, which they think proper; and that
test-acts are of this kind, etc.

In my reply, published in the same Journal, Oct. 5, 1781, I urge that
test-acts have no more connection with the independent government of the Union,
or the Constitution of this State, than with all other governments; but they
may be necessary to toryism, as they have been generally most adopted and
pressed in the weakest and worst governments; -- that I do not dispute the
authority of any independent State to make test-acts; it is the expediency only
of making them which I object to -- that very many good men will refuse them,
and many bad men will take them -- that the merits and qualities of citizens
ought to be taken and estimated by their conduct or overt acts, not by the
secrets of their hearts, which are cognisable by GOD alone, not by the State,
till by overt acts they are made known: the Constitutionalist says, that
non-jurors are aliens, not citizens; this I denied; for were they aliens, they
could not be ^olden to any municipal obedience or duties, such as taxes,
services, etc. or be capable of treasons, or crimes against the State, to which
(if aliens) they could owe no allegiance -- I further urged, that test-acts,
where the most that could be, was made of them, amounted to no more than a
man's testimony in his own case, which was not admitted in matters of the
smallest moment, and, of course, the most important of all interests ought not
to be controlled or limited by it -- that pressing test-acts was a sure way to
keep alive the most galling frets and discontents, in a State, and was very bad
policy even in a ruling party, because the same measures might be retorted upon
themselves, if they should happen to slip out of the saddle, and their
opponents should get into it. --

On the whole I much prefer a government which secures to every man the secrets
of his own mind, and makes him amenable for his conduct and overt acts only,
rather than one which intrudes on such secrets, and makes the discovery of them
on oath a term of the richest and noblest benefits and privileges of society.

If any body may wish to see more of this matter, I refer him to the pieces at
large, which are preserved in the Freeman's Journal, as quoted above.


and c.

I write under a most serious conviction of the importance of my subject, and
truth of my arguments, and really myself mean to be as open as I wish my
readers to be, to the conviction of sound reason, and the dictates of true
policy, and therefore think I have a right to hope for indulgence, even where
my sentiments cannot obtain approbation.

AN ESSAY ON THE EXTENT AND VALUE OF OUR WESTERN UNLOCATED LANDS, AND THE
PROPER METHOD Of disposing of them, so as to gain the greatest possible
Advantage from them.
[First published in Philadelphia, April 25, 1781.]
IN my several treatises on finance, I have all along endeavored to open and
explain the great general principles of the subject, viz. improvement of the
revenue, and economy in the expenditures. In this Essay I mean to confine
myself to one particular source or object of public wealth, out of which great
revenue may be obtained by proper and timely wisdom and care, I mean, our
vacant, unsettled lands. I will endeavor to arrange, as clearly as I can, what
I have to say on this subject, under the following heads, viz.

I. The whole territory or extent of the Thirteen States is the aggregate of
them all, i. e. the territory or extent of each of the States added together,
make the whole territory or extent of right and dominion of the United States;
and, of course, whatever is comprehended within the boundaries of each State,
now makes a part of our Commonwealth.

This is to be considered as our present possession, our present decided right,
which is guarantied to us by the treaty with France (Article XI.) together with
any 'additions or conquests, which our Confederation may obtain during the war,
from any of the dominions now or heretofore possessed by Great Britain in
North America;' so that by conquest we may extend our dominion further, if we
can; and, in this case, we shall have the guarantee of the treaty aforesaid for
our security; but if this cannot be done, our present possessions are
absolutely and unconditionally guarantied to us, with liberty, sovereignty, and
independence, absolute and unlimited, in and over the same.

And as the great interests of France and our Commonwealth will always make the
perpetual union of them necessary, so these powers united will be able to
afford such a sure mutual protection to the whole dominions of each other, as
will render them wholly secure and free of danger from any other powers
whatever; so that we may safely compute on all the advantages of our present
possessions, and turn our thoughts on the ways and means of making the best of
them; while, at the same time, we have a rich and valuable chance of acquiring
by conquest new dominions, and having, of course, such new acquisitions covered
by the same guarantee which now secures our present possessions.

Nobody can pretend to deny that our present possessions comprehend all the
lands included within the boundaries of the Thirteen States, as the same
existed at the time our independence first began; but it will be strongly urged
that they cannot extend beyond them, so as to cover any lands not included
within the bounds of some one of the States, unless we can make a claim to a
further extent by conquest; indeed, I do not see how we can otherwise support a
claim to independence, sovereignty, and dominion over any thing which was not
within our bounds at that time: therefore, it follows,

1. That wherever we fix the exterior limit or bounds of any one of the States,
there we fix the bounds of our Commonwealth; and it will be urged against us,
that all beyond is not our territory, our right, or dominion: and, therefore,

2. It is our interest to extend the exterior boundary of each of our States as
far as we fairly can; and, of course, any attempt (arising from envy or any
little disputes) to abridge or reduce the limits of any of the States to lines
short of their true extent, and so prevent their covering the whole territory
to which their original charters, or usual prescriptive titles, give them
right, is the height of folly and absurd policy, and operates directly against
the great interest of the Commonwealth.

And here I cannot but take notice of the madness, shortsighted policy, and
public mischief, of a late pamphlet, entitled Public Good, which, by very weak
and trifling arguments, attempts to limit the territory of Virginia to a very
inconsiderable part of its original and true extent. I think some note of
disapprobation should be fixed on that treatise, lest it should be produced in
future debates, as a proof of the general sense of the States at this time.

There is, indeed, as is well known, some obscurity of description to be found
in all the ancient charters of these States, which, by that means, admit of a
latitude of construction; but most of these are reduced to a determinate
certainty by subsequent acts, decisions, usages, and c. and, I conceive, that
for most obvious reasons.

II. The boundaries of the several States are to be taken and ascertained from
their original charters, such construction as has obtained by subsequent usage,
judicial decisions, or any other acts of the crown or the inhabitants, which
tend to give them a determinate and fixed definition. If, in any case, no light
can be drawn from such usage or subsequent acts, the particular boundaries must
depend on the words of the charters, with such reasonable construction as shall
give them their greatest effect, and be most adequate to the original intention
of them, or, in law language, so ut res magis valeat quam pereat; by which rule
of construction, there can be no doubt but Virginia, having boundaries
sufficiently fixed on the seacoast, is to extend west, and carry her breadth
to the South Sea, or at least as far as the dominion of the crown extended, at
the time when American independence first began.

Two things are sufficiently clear,

1st. That all the States are so bounded on each other, that there are no
strips of land lying between any two of them; and,

2d. That their western boundary is the South Sea, or at least the western
boundary of the dominions of the crown, at the commencement of our Commonwealth.

So that the country or territory of the Thirteen States, is clearly bounded on
the west as aforesaid; on the south, by the south line of Georgia (about N.
lat. 30 22) on the east, by the sea, including the islands lying in the o^^ing
of the coast; and north, by the north line of the Province of Maine,
New Hampshire, and the Massachusetts State (about N. lat. 45) its length, north
and south, is about 1000 miles; and its breadth, east and west (if it extends
no farther than the Mississippi river) about 600 miles on the southern part,
and 1250 miles on the northern part.

The contents of which are somewhat more than 810,000 square miles; more than
equal to those of France, Spain, Germany, and Italy, and much more valuable in
respect of air, climate, soil, timber, fossils, fisheries, harbors, rivers,
etc. with all convenience for transportation, both by maritime and inland
navigation.

It is further to be noted here, that with respect to Virginia, and some other
governments, which either never had any charters, or whose charters have been
surrendered to the crown, that the soil and jurisdiction of them were both in
the crown, and therefore the King ever claimed right to make new grants of
soil, and carve out and establish any new jurisdictions or governments which he
thought expedient, and on this principle actually did carve Maryland and part
of Pennsylvania out of Virginia; how justly I am not to say; but this does not
hinder Virginia from taking her departure from her true eastern boundary on the
seacoast, and covering all the lands within her limits (not included in these
c^rvatures) to her utmost western boundary.

It is, indeed, to be observed here, that ascertaining the boundaries of any
State, does not prove the title or right of such State to all lands included
within such boundaries. There is a distinction to be made between those lands
which have been alienated by the crown, the title of which, at the date of our
independence, was not in the crown, but vested in particular persons, either
sole or aggregate, and those which remained in the crown, the title of which
the crown then held in right of its sovereignty, which was a right vested in
the supreme authority, in nature of a trust for the use of the public.

There is no doubt but every right and title of all persons and bodies politic
are as effectually secured and confirmed to the owners, to all intents and
purposes, under the Commonwealth, as they were formerly under the crown; but it
cannot be admitted that any individual or bodies politic should acquire new
rights by the Revolution, to which they were not entitled under the crown, i.
e. each State has right to claim, hold, or alienate whatever property or estate
it had right to obtain, hold, or alienate, whilst it was a colony under the
crown; but cannot have right to claim, hold, or alienate any estate, the claim,
tenure, or alienation of which was then the right of the crown.

But every such estate being then held by the crown in right of sovereignty, or
its supreme power, in trust for the use of the whole community or body politic,
of which it was the supreme power, must pass, by the Revolution, into the
supreme power of our Commonwealth, i. e. into the Congress, and be vested in
them in trust for the public use of the body politic, of which they are the
supreme power; and the right of tenure and alienation must be vested in them
alone.

Indeed, in all revolutions of government which have ever happened in Europe,
and perhaps in the whole world, all crown lands, jewels, and all other estate
which belonged to the supreme power which lost the government, ever passed by
the revolution into the supreme power which gained it; and all such estate
always became vested in the latter occupant, in the same condition and under
the same limitations to which it was subject under the tenure of the former
occupant.

Nor can I see the least pretense of reason, why we should depart from a rule
of right grounded on the most plain and natural fitness, adopted by every
nation in the world under like circumstances, and justified and confirmed by
the experience and sanction of ages. I think that nothing but our
unacquaintedness with the heights to which we are risen, the high sphere in
which we now move, and an incapacity of viewing and judging of things on a
great scale, could give rise to so extravagant an idea, as that one State
should be more entitled than another to the crown lands, or any other property
of the crown, which ever was in its nature public, and ought to continue so, or
be disposed of for the use and benefit of the whole public community; or that
one State should acquire more right, or property, or estate than another, by
that Revolution which was the joint act, procured and perfected by the joint
effort and expense, of the whole. We have too long and too ridiculously set up
to be wiser than all the world besides, and too long refused to be instructed
by the experience of other nations.

III. The vast territory of the Thirteen States above described, and containing
something more than 500,000,000 acres of land, is mostly wild and uncultivated;
a strip only adjoining to the sea, and not containing more than one-third, or
at most two-fifths, of the whole, and that by far the poorest part of the soil
is any how become private property and settled; the rest remains a large extent
of the richest wild lands in the world, to be disposed of and cultivated in
future time; and the part which I call settled, is so far from being filled
with inhabitants, that it does not contain more than one-tenth part of the
people which the soil, in a state of perfect cultivation, would support; the
frontiers are every where thinly settled, and, of course, very liable to the
inroads of the enemy, and very difficult to defend.

IV. Six only of the States have a large western extent of unsettled lands,
viz. Massachusetts, Connecticut, Virginia, North and South Carolina, and
Georgia; the other seven are limited within much narrower bounds.

V. Though the title and right of the said six States to their whole western
extent should be indisputable, yet the preservation and use of it are secured
to them, and the whole must for ever be defended, by the arms and at the
expense of the States General. The quotas of this expense ought to be
proportioned to the value and extent of the thing secured and defended by it;
qui sentit commodum, sentire debet quoque onus: but if the quotas of the said
six States should be increased in proportion to the great extent of their
territory, or even the value of the same, it would bring such a very pressing
weight on the present inhabitants, as might be beyond their strength, or at
least very inconvenient to them.

For here it is to be considered, that the expense of the war is not to be
estimated merely by the cash it has cost; but the devastations of the enemy,
the loss of lives, and c. are to be brought into the account; and when the
estimate comes to be made on these principles, it will rise very high on such
parts of the interest defended as could lose no lives, because it had no
inhabitants; and was incapable of devastation, because it had no improvements
which could be destroyed.

Besides, as all the States have exerted themselves with equal ardor, danger,
and effort in carrying on the war, it is but reasonable they should all share
alike in the advantages resulting from it. To these might be added many more
strong reasons why the said six States should cede or grant their western
uncultivated lands to the States General, to remain a common stock, till they
can be disposed of for the good of the whole.

But I deem it needless to urge this matter farther, because I am informed that
a general conviction of the expediency of this measure prevails through all the
States, and that it is freely agreed on the part of the said six States, to
make such a cession or grant to the States General, as above mentioned, and
that the same will soon be done. The foregoing ideas and arguments were such as
were suggested at the time when this Essay was first published, and were
matters of much conversation and discussion both in and out of Congress, but
have all been long since adjusted and settled.

The boundaries of the Union were defined in the treaty of peace with
Great Britain, in Feb. 1783, and extended much beyond the limits here proposed.

And the affair of the great western extent of the six States was accommodated
to general satisfaction, by cessions of such parts of them to Congress (...)
lay beyond their settlements, since which the lands so ceded have been
considered as public property, and as such subject to the disposal of Congress,
for the benefit of the whole Union.




We will suppose, then, that this is done, and the right and title of these
western uncultivated lands vested in the States General; what is to be done
with them? i. e. how are they to be managed, in order to obtain the greatest
national benefit possible from them?

Some people think we ought to sell or mortgage them to foreign States, for
money in our present distress. But I have many reasons against this method. The
first is,

That it is capable of the most demonstrative proof, that no importation of
money can help us, even if it was given to us, much less if our lands are to be
mortgaged for it. We are in much more danger from the plenty of money coming
from all quarters in upon us, than from any scarcity of it; our salvation must
arise from the wealth and virtue which abounds in the country, not in hunting
abroad for money.

Besides, I abhor the very idea of strangers having their paw on any of our
lands in any shape whatever: and,

Further, they would bring mighty little in this way, i. e. very little present
benefit, though enough of future trouble; it would be like killing the goose that
laid an egg every day, in order to tear out at once all that was in her belly.
But every idea of this sort is painful to me; I wish not to dwell longer on it,
but beg leave to propose a method which appears to me more for our advantage.

I. Let the ceded territory be divided from the unceded by the plainest lines,
and let it be kept in its present uncultivated state, and preserved from the
intrusion of any settlers whatever, by the most rigid and effectual
prohibitions, till the lands adjoining are fully settled: then,

II. Survey out townships of six, eight, or ten miles square, contiguous to the
settled country, and sell the lands at vendue to the highest bidder, on the
following conditions:

1. That none be sold at less than a Spanish dollar per acre.

2. That every purchaser be obliged to settle and improve his purchase within
two or three years, or forfeit his lands; the particular regulations of which
should be published at the time of sale, and be rigidly executed; and when the
first course or tier of townships are sold, and the settlement of them secured,
lay out another tier, sell them in like manner, and so on through the whole. This
method will have the following advantages, viz.

1. All the lands sold will bring at least a dollar per acre; and if we admit,
as above computed, those 300,000,000 acres of our western territory to become
the public property of the States General, and allow 100,000,000 acres for
lakes, ponds, beds of rivers, barrens, etc. there will remain 200,000,000 acres
of good land to be sold; which, at a dollar per acre, will produce 200,000,000
hard dollars for the treasury of the United States; the annual interest of
which, at 5 per cent. will be 10,000,000 dollars per annum: a sum much more
than sufficient to defray the whole public expenses of the Thirteen States, in
a time of peace, and, of course, a large surplus to be expended on a navy,
roads, canals, and many other improvements of our country, with a sufficient
sum to be laid up for a time of war.

2. This method will push our settlements out in close columns, much less
assailable by the enemy, and more easily defended, than extensive, thin
populations; there will be people here for defense near the frontiers; they
will have the inducements of a near interest to animate them to the service;
their course of life and acquaintance with the country will render them much
more fit for the service, than people drawn from the interior parts of the
country; and the necessary force may be collected and put into action much
quicker, and with much less expense, than if the same was drawn from distant
parts.

These and many more and great advantages will naturally result from our
pushing out our settlements in close columns, which cannot be expected or hoped
for from a vastly extended fronti^^ thinly inhabited.

Add to this, that every new beginner makes his first improvement in company of
near neighbors, and at but small distance from older settlements, much more
easily than he could do alone in a wilderness, where he could receive no helps
from neighbors, let his necessity be ever so great.

3. This method would obviate one abuse very hurtful to new settlements, most
injurious to the individuals who first migrate and bear the hardships of first
cultivation, and which greatly retards the population and improvement of a new
country, viz. large quantities of land lying unimproved in the hands of
non-residents or absentees, who neither dwell on the ^and, nor cause it to be
cultivated at all, but their land lies in its wild state, a refuge for bears,
wolves, and other beasts of prey, ready to devour the produce of the
neighboring farmers, bears no part of the burden of first cultivation, and
keeps the settlers at an inconvenient distance from each other, and obstructs
the growth and riches of the townships in which it lies; whilst the owner, by
the rise of the land, makes a fortune out of the labor and toils of the
neighboring cultivators. This is a most cruel way of enriching one man by the
labor of another, and so very hurtful to the cultivation of the country, that
it ought to be restrained by the most decisive measures.

4. This method will give every inhabitant of the Thirteen States an equal
chance of availing himself of any advantage of procuring lands for the
accommodation of himself or family; whilst, at the same time, the ceding State
will reap great benefit from the produce and trade of the adjoining
settlements, which will, at the same time, become a secure barrier to their
frontiers, against the incursions of an enemy on that side.

5. In this method we can extend our laws, customs, and civil police as fast
and as far as we extend our settlements; of course, our frontier people will
enjoy every benefit of civil society and regular administration of justice;
which cannot take place with equal perfection in the great extent of a thin
settled frontier.

6. Another thing very necessary to be observed in the whole management of this
affair is, to cultivate a good and friendly correspondence with the Indian
natives, by a careful practice of justice and benevolence toward them. They
are an innumerable race of people, probably extending over a vast country to
the west seas, and very great advantages may be derived from their trade, if we
can gain and preserve their confidence.

Whereas nobody ever yet gained any thing by an Indian war. Their spoils are of
no value; but their revenge and depredations are terrible. It is much cheaper
to purchase their lands, than to dispossess them by force; and justice in all
cases is more profitable than violence and wrong.

It may be noted here, that many inhabitants are already on the lands supposed
to be ceded. What is to be done with them? I answer -- if their continuance is
matter of uneasiness to the Indians, and is likely to produce broils with them,
they are by all means to be removed. For it is unreasonable that the public
tranquillity should be endangered for the sake of the convenience of a few
people, who, without the least pretense of right, have fixed themselves down on
lands not their own.

But notwithstanding this, if their continuance will not endanger the public
security, let them keep their possessions on express condition, viz. that, when
the townships in which their possessions shall be included when the future
surveys shall be made, shall be sold, they shall pay as much for their lands as
the other purchasers of the same township pay on an average for theirs,
excluding every idea of favor, to which they may think themselves entitled for
their first migration and cultivation. For I esteem all this very wrong and
injurious to the public, which rather deserves punishment than reward.

But there is another objection more forcible, which, I suppose, will be pretty
readily made to my scheme, viz. all the benefits of this scheme are future, are
a great way off; but we want present supplies, to relieve the present
necessities of our country. This was Esau's argument, when he ^old his
birthright for a mess of pottage, and is certainly a very good one, when really
grounded on fact; for no doubt a man had better give his whole fortune for one
meat of victuals, than starve to death for want of it; but I think wise men
will examine this fact very closely, and be very decidedly convinced, that the
supposed present necessity is really great enough to induce us to forego all
the forementioned advantages for the sake of the pittance, the trifle of money
which those lands would now bring, if sold or mortgaged at present for the
utmost they would bring, attended with all the shocking and mortifying
disadvantages of giving any foreigners a footing in our country, and a claim
upon our most essential and central interests.

But I think the objection itself is grounded on an error; for I think the
present advantages resulting from my plan greater than could arise from any
kind of mortgage or alienation of these lands; for I consider them like a rich,
valuable, and sure reversion, which never fails to give the owner a great
estimation, credit, and respectability in the eyes of his neighbors, though he
receives no pernancy of present^ profits; but if this reversion was sold or
mortgaged for a trifle, and soon dissipated (as doubtless would be our case)
the owner would appear in a light more contemptible, and in every view much
more disadvantageous, than if he had never owned the right.

It cannot be too often repeated, that we are not capable of being saved, or
even helped, by the importation of foreign money; it will destroy our industry,
it will introduce luxury; the increase of quantity and ease of acquirement will
depreciate it, and thereby defeat its own uses.

This is as true as the diurnal rotation of the earth, but, like it, not
obvious to the perceptions of every mind. Unhappy for us! the nature of money,
and the radical essence of the public finance, depend on principles too latent
for easy comprehension; and what makes the matter more dangerous, like many
delusive appearances in the natural world, is, they seem to be perfectly easy
and obvious, when they are least understood; and therefore it has been observed
in all (...), that they work like magic under the direction of unskilful men,
ever producing effects the least expected, as well as failing of those most
sanguinely computed upon.

Their operations, like other doctrines which depend on an infinity of
relations, are governed by so many cooperating causes, that their delineation
is very difficult, and their demonstration intricate, and not to be understood
without a long and deep attention.

They make a part of the great law of proportions, which nature never fails to
regulate and adjust with perfect exactness, but which the greatest and
strongest intellects, with the most nervous attention, can but imperfectly
comprehend.

Therefore, in this, as in all other branches of physical knowledge, our safest
cue and surest principles must be drawn from experiment. But to return to my
subject --

I do not apprehend the actual pernancy of profits from our western lands, when
disposed of according to my plan, so very distant as many may imagine. The
argument of analogy, from what has been to what will be, is generally allowed
to be a good one. If, therefore, upon this rule of reasoning, we may suppose
that the increase of population in our country shall continue the same in time
to come as we have experienced in time past, viz. that the number of souls
double once in 25 years, it will appear very probable that our own eyes may
live to see the commencement of a great demand and rapid sale of our western
territory. The number of souls in the Thirteen States in 1775, was generally
computed at 3,000,000. [Some people of great observation were of opinion, this
number was much exceeded.] On the aforesaid scale of computation, the number of
souls in these States, at the end of the next century, will amount to
96,000,000; enough to extend over the whole territory of our Commonwealth, and
more than Spain, France, Germany, and Italy now contain.

7. I will here subjoin one thing more, which may perhaps be thought worthy of
some consideration, viz. that in surveying and granting the western lands, all
saltlicks, and mines of metallic ores, coals, minerals, and all other valuable
fossils (in all which the country greatly abounds) may be reserved and
sequestered for public use: a great revenue may grow out of them: and it seems
unreasonable that those vast sources of wealth should be engrossed and
monopolized by any individuals. I think they ought to be improved to the best
public advantage, but in such manner, that the vast pro^^^^ ^ssuing from them
should flow into the public treasury, and thereby inure to the equal advantage
of the whole community.

The foregoing considerations open to view such great objects, such prospects
of vast population and national wealth, as may at first sight appear
chimerical, illusory, and incredible. A great minister of state was formerly so
astonished at the very mention of the vast supplies predicted by the prophet
Elisha, that he, with amazement mixed with unbelief, exclaimed, "If the Lord
would make windows in heaven, might this thing be!" But I mean to subject this
Essay to the most rigid examination. Please to review every proposition, and
closely examine every argument and inference I make, and if they do not justify
the conclusion, reject them; but if you find the facts alleged, true, the
propositions just, and the inferences fairly drawn, do not start at your own
good fortune, or shrink from the blessings which Heaven pours on your country.
The boundaries herein described, by which the contents of our territories are
computed, are taken from Mitchel's map, published in 1755, at the request of
the Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, and is chiefly composed from
draughts, charts, and actual surveys of different parts of the English colonies
and plantations in America, great part of which have been lately taken by their
Lordships' orders, and transmitted to the plantation-office, as is certified by
John Pownal, secretary of said office, and is perhaps a map of the best
authority and greatest accuracy of any extant. The facts are of public
notoriety. The computations are all made on obvious principles, and may be
corrected by any body, if wrong. The sentiments are my own, and are cheerfully
submitted to the most rigorous scrutiny that can consist with truth and candor.
The subject is very large; I do not pretend to exhaust it, or that this Essay
is a finished piece; it is a sketch only, a draught of outlines, which, I hope,
will be allowed to deserve at least a candid attention. I wish it might be
sufficient to produce a full conviction, that it cannot be the interest of the
United States either, 1st. to suffer such vast and valuable blessings to be
ravished from us by our enemies; or, 2d. to consent to their being sold and
alienated to foreigners, for any little, trifling present considerations; such
foolish bargains must originate in very narrow views of the subject, and
terminate in shame and loss, and in every stage be marked with mortification,
disputes, and embarrassment.

I will conclude by just observing, that this Essay is wholly confined to one
branch only, to one single resource, of our public revenue; only one item of
our national wealth: an income vast indeed, not drawn at all from the purses of
the people, but capable of being so conducted, that every individual who
chooses to be interested in it, may find a good profit resulting from the
concern. I do not doubt but if the whole great subject was properly surveyed by
a mind capable of such reflections, many other sources of revenue might be
found, of vast utility to the public, and in no sense injurious, but highly
profitable, to individuals. So to graft the revenue on the public stock, so to
unite and combine public and private interests, that they may mutually support,
feed, and quicken each other, is the secret art, the true spirit of
financiering; but we must never lose sight of this one great truth, viz. that
all resources of public wealth and safety are only materials put into our hands
for improvement, and will prove either profitable or hurtful according to the
wisdom or folly with which they are managed. Ruin may grow out of national
wealth, as well as from national poverty. Perhaps it may require more great and
good talents to support an affluent fortune than a narrow one. Affluence has at
least as many dangers as indigence. All depends on the characters of the men
who manage them. The happiness and wretchedness of nations depend on the
abilities and virtue of the men employed in the direction of their public
affairs. And I pray God to impress a due sense of this great and most important
doctrine on the minds of all electors, and others concerned in the appointment
of public officers. It may be worth notice here (though it does not immediately
belong to the subject of the foregoing Essay)

1st. That the first Congress under the New Constitution met at New York, March
4, 1788; and, after two long sessions, adjourned to Philadelphia. The first
session which was held there was on Dec. 4, 1790; and the session concluded on
March 3, 1791.

2d. That eleven States only had adopted the New Constitution at the time of
the first session of Congress under it; but the two deliberating States, viz.
North Carolina and Rhode Island, soon acceded, and their delegates were
admitted in Congress.

3d. That two new States, viz. Kentucky and Vermont, were admitted into the
Union in Feb. 1791: so that the American Union now consists of fifteen States.




SCALES of DEPRECIATION of Continental Money.
Of Congress. Of Pennsylvania, by act of Assembly, From the merchants' books
For Philadelphia. For Virginia. 1777. January 1 1-2 1 1-4 1 1-4 February Value
of 100 Continen^ dollars in specie. 1 1-2 1 1-2 1 1-4 March 2 2 2 April 2 1-2 2
2 May 2 1-2 2 1-2 2 June 2 1-2 2 1-2 2 July Dollars. 90 ths. 8 ths. 3 3 3
August 3 3 3 September 100 00 0 3 3 3 October 90 77 3 3 3 3 November 82 73 0 3
3 3 December 74 70 0 4 4 4 1778. January 67 85 0 4 4 4 February 61 83 2 5 5 5
March 56 79 6 5 5 5 April 48 74 4 6 6 5 May 42 77 5 5 5 5 June 36 86 1 4 4 5
July 32 79 3 4 4 5 August 27 87 3 5 5 5 September 24 78 5 5 5 5 October 20 84 5
5 5 5 November 17 88 0 6 6 6 December 14 89 2 6 6 6 1779. January 12 85 1 8 7 8
9 8 February 10 85 6 10 10 10 March 9 87 1 10 1-2 10 11 10 April 8 89 7 17 12
14 l6 22 16 May 7 89 5 24 22 24 20 June 6 89 2 20 22 20 18 20 July 6 40 0 19 18
19 20 21 August 5 89 6 20 20 22 September 4 88 5 24 20 28 24 October 30 30 28
November 3 89 6 38 1-2 32 45 36 December 3 30 0 41 1-2 45 38 40 1780. January 3
40 0 40 1-2 40 45 42 February 2 89 1 47 1-2 45 55 45 March 2 45 0 61 1-2 60 65
50 April 2 45 0 61 1-2 60 60 May 2 45 0 59 60 60 June 2 45 0 61 1-2 60 65 July
2 45 0 64 1-2 60 65 65 August 2 45 0 70 65 75 70 September 2 45 0 72 75 72
October 2 45 0 73 75 80 73 November 2 45 0 74 80 100 74 December 2 45 0 75 100
75 1781. January 2 45 0 75 100 75 February 2 45 0 75 100 120 80 March 2 45 0 75
120 135 90 April 2 45 0 75 135 200 100 May 2 45 0 75 200 500 150

May 31, 1781, Continental money ceased to pass as currency, but was afterward
bought and sold as an article of speculation, at very uncertain and desultory
prices, from 500 to 1000 to 1.

The exchange of State-money of Pennsylvania, in May 178^, was 2, 6, 7, 5, and
4, to 1 hard Money.

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF REMARKABLE EVENTS.
AMERICA first discovered by Columbus in the year of our Lord, 1492
North America discovered by Cabot, 1499 Penn's charter for Pennsylvania, 1680
American Philosophical Society established, 1762 Tea destroyed at Boston, Dec.
16, 1773 Boston port shut, June 1, 1774 First Congress met at Philadelphia,
Sept. 5, Battle of Lexington, April 19, 1775 First emission of Continental
money, May 10, Genesis Washington appointed, June, Battle at Bunker's-hill, June
17, Charlestown (Massachusetts) burnt, June 17, Falmouth burnt, Oct. 18, Canada
invaded by the Americans, Genesis Montgomery fell, Dec. 31* Norfolk burnt, Jan.
1776 Boston evacuated by the British, March 17, Siege of Quebec raised, May,
Battle at Sulivan's Island, June 28, Declaration of independence, July 4,
Canada evacuated by the Americans, Battle on Long Island, Aug. 27, New York
taken by the British, Sep. 15, Battle of White-plains, Oct. 28, New Jersey
overrun by the British, Dec. 14, General Washington took 900 Hessians at
Trenton, Dec. 26, Battle of Princeton, Jan. 3, 1777 Battle of Brandywine, Sept.
11, Wilmington (Delaware) taken, Sept. 19, Battle of Benington, Sept.
Philadelphia taken, Sept. 27, 1777 Battle of Germantown, Oct. 4, Burgoyne taken
by Genesis Gates, Oct. 17, Esopus burnt, Oct. Treaty with France, Feb. 6, 1778 The
British commence hostilities with France, June 17, Philadelphia evacuated by
the British, June 18, Battle of Monmouth, June 28, Savanna taken, Sept. 29,
Stony-point taken by Genesis Wayne, July 16, 1779 New Haven taken, July Spain
begins a war with Britain, July 16, Fairfield burnt, July Charlestown (S.
Carolina) taken, May 12, 1780 French army arrives at Rhode Island, July 10,
Battle of Camden, Aug. 16, Britain declares war against Holland, Dec. 20,
Wilmington (N. Carolina) taken, Jan. 1781 Articles of Confederation finally
ratified, Mar. 1, Continental money ceased to circulate as cash, May Battle of
Eutaw Springs, Sept. 8, New London burnt, Sept. 13, Wilmington (N. Carolina)
evacuated, Oct. Cornwallis surrendered, Oct. 19, Savanna evacuated, July 11,
1782 Charlestown (S. Carolina) evacuated, Dec. 14, Preliminary treaty signed,
Jan. 20, 1783 Treaty with Sweden, April 3, The first air-balloon let off by M.
Montgolfier at Paris, Aug. 27, Definitive treaty of peace ratified, Sept. 3,
New York evacuated, Nov. 25, The American army disbanded: Genesis Washington
resigns his commission, Dec. Convention met for revising the Federal Government
of the United States of America, May 25, 1787 Finished their deliberations on a
plan of government for the United States of America, and published the same,
Sept. 17, First Congress under the New Constitution met at New York, Mar. 4,
1788 And, after two long sessions, adjourned to Philadelphia; the first session
at which place was, Dec. 4, 1790
FINIS.

