REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE, TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, OF
THE QUANTITY AND SITUATION OF THE LANDS NOT CLAIMED BY THE INDIANS, NOR GRANTED
TO, NOR CLAIMED BY ANY CITIZENS, WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF THE UNITED STATES.

READ IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, NOVEMBER 10, 1791.

The SECRETARY OF STATE, to whom was referred by the PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES, the Resolution of Congress, requesting the President 'to cause an
estimate to be laid before Congress at their next session, of the quantity and
situation of the LANDS not claimed by the Indians, nor granted to, nor claimed
by any citizens of the United States, within the territory ceded to the United
States by the state of North Carolina, and within the territory of the United
States, north-west of the river Ohio,' makes thereon the following REPORT.
THE territory ceded by the state of North Carolina to the United States,
South-western Territory.
by deed bearing date the 25th day of February 1790, is bounded as follows, to
wit: Beginning in the boundary between Virginia and North Carolina, that is to
say, in the parallel of latitude 36 degrees north from the equator, on the
extreme height of the Stone Mountain, where the said boundary or parallel
intersects it, and running thence along the said extreme height to the place
where Wataugo River breaks through it; thence a direct course to the top of the
Yellow Mountain, where Bright's Road crosses the same; thence along the ridge
of the said mountain between the waters of Do River and the waters of Rock
Creek, to the place where the road crosses the Iron Mountain; from thence along
the extreme height of said mountain to where Nolichuckey River runs through the
same; thence to the top of the Bald Mountain; thence along the extreme height
of the said mountain to the Painted Rock, on French Broad River; thence along
the highest ridge of the said mountain, to the place where it is called the
Great Iron or Smoaky Mountain; thence along the extreme height of the said
mountain to the place where it is called Unaka Mountain, between the Indian
towns of Cowee and Old Chota; thence along the main ridge of the said mountain,
to the southern boundary of the said state of North Carolina, that is to say,
to the parallel of latitude 35 degrees north from the equator; thence
westwardly along the said boundary or parallel, to the middle of the river
Missisippi; thence up the middle of the said river to where it is intersected
by the first mentioned parallel of 36 degrees; thence along the said parallel
to the beginning: which tract of country is a degree and a half of latitude
from north to south, and about 360 miles, in general, from east to west, as
nearly as may be estimated from such maps as exist of that country.

The Indians having claims within the said tract of country, Indian claims.
are the Cherokees and Chickasaws, whose boundaries are settled by the treaties
of Hopewell, concluded with the Cherokees on the twenty-eighth day of November,
1785, and with the Chickasaws, on the tenth day of January 1786, and by the
treaty of Holston, concluded with the Cherokees, July second, 1791. These
treaties acknowledge to the said Indians all the lands westward and southward
of the following lines, to wit; beginning in the boundary between South and
North Carolina, where the South Carolina Indian boundary strikes the same;
thence north to a point from which a line is to be extended to the river
Clinch, that shall pass the Holston, at the ridge which divides the waters
running into Little River, from those running into the Tannissee; thence up the
river Clinch to Campbell's Line, and along the same to the top of the
Cumberland mountain; thence in a direct course toward the Cumberland river,
where the Kentucky road crosses it, as far as the Virginia line, or parallel
aforesaid, of 30 degrees; thence westwardly, or eastwardly, as the case shall
be, along the said line or parallel to the point thereof, which is due
north-east from another point to be taken on the dividing ridge of Cumberland
and Duck rivers, 40 miles from Nashville; thence south-west to the point last
mentioned, on the said dividing ridge, and along the said dividing ridge
north-westwardly, to where it is intersected by the said Virginia line, or
parallel of 36 degrees. So that there remained to the United States, the right
of pre-emption of the lands westward and southward of the said lines, and the
absolute right to those northward thereof, that is to say; to one parcel to the
eastward, somewhat triangular, comprehending the counties of Sullivan and
Washington, and parts of those of Green and Hawkins, running about 150 miles
from east to west, on the Virginia boundary, as its base, and between 80 and 90
miles from north to south, where broadest; and containing, as may be
conjectured, without pretending to accuracy, between seven and eight thousand
square miles, or about five millions of acres: And to one other parcel to the
westward, somewhat triangular also, comprehending parts of the counties of
Sumner, Davidson, and Tannissee, the base whereof extends about 150 miles also,
from east to west, on the same Virginia line, and its height, from north to
south, about 55 miles, and so may comprehend about four thousand square miles,
or upwards of two and a half millions of acres of land.

Claims of citizens.
Within these triangles, however, are the following claims of citizens, reserved
by the deed of cession, and consequently forming exceptions to the rights of
the United States.

I. Appropriations by the state of North Carolina, for their continental and
state officers and soldiers.

II. Grants and titles to grants vested in individuals by the laws of the state.

III. Entries made in Armstrong's office, under an act of that state, of 1783,
for the redemption of specie and other certificates.

The claims covered by the first reservation are,

Military bounties.
1st. The bounties in land given by the said state of North Carolina, to their
continental line, in addition to those given by Congress; these were to be
located within a district bounded northwardly by the Virginia line, and
southwardly by a line parallel thereto, and 55 miles distant: westwardly, by
the Tannissee, and eastwardly by the meridian of the intersection of the
Virginia line, and Cumberland river; grants have accordingly issued for
1,239,498 acres, and warrants for the further quantity of 1,549,726 acres,
making together 2,789,224 acres.

It is to be noted that the southwestern and southeastern angles of this
district, constituting perhaps a fourth or a fifth of the whole, are south of
the lines established by the treaties of Hopewell and Holston, and consequently
in a country wherein the Indian title is acknowledged and guarantied by the
United States. No information is received of the exact proportion of the
locations made within these angles.

2d. Bounties in land to Evan's battalion, raised for state purposes. These
were to be taken west of the Cumberland Mountain. The locations are not yet
made.

The second reservation covers the following claims:

Entries and grants.
1. Lands for the surveyor-general's fees for laying out the military bounties,
to be located in the military district. The grants already issued on this
account amount to 30,203 acres.

2. Grants to Isaac Shelby, Anthony Bledsoe, and Absalom Tatum, commissioners
for laying out the military bounties; Commissioners.
and to guards, chain-carriers, markers, and hunters, who attended them,
already issued to the amount of 65,932 acres, located in the military district.

3. Entries in Washington county amounting to 746,362 acres; for 214,549 of
which grants have already issued. Washington county.
Of the remaining 531,812 acres, a considerable proportion were declared void
by the laws of the state, and were particularly excluded from the cover of the
reservation in the deed of cession, by this clause in it, to wit, "Provided
that nothing herein contained shall extend, or be construed to extend, to the
making good any (...) or entries, or any grant or grants, heretofore declared
void, by any act or (...) of the General Assembly of this state." Still it is
to be considered, that many of these persons have settled and improved the
lands, are willing, as is said, to comply with such conditions as shall be
required of other purchasers, form a strong barrier on the new frontier,
acquired by the treaty of Holston, and are therefore objects meriting the
consideration of the Legislature.

4. Entries in Sullivan county, amounting to 240,624 acres; Sullivan county.
for 173,332 acres of which, grants have already issued; of the remaining
entries, many are certified void, and others understood to be lapsed or
otherwise voidable under the laws of the state.

5. Certain pre-emption rights granted to the first settlers of Davidson
county, Pre-emptions.
on Cumberland river, amounting to 309,760 acres.

6. A grant of 200,000 acres to Richard Henderson and others on Powel's and
Clinch's rivers, Henderson.
extending up Powel's river in a breadth of not less than 4 miles, and down
Clinch's from their junction in a breadth not less than 12 miles. A great part
of this is within the Indian territory.

Among the grants of the state now under recapitulation, as forming exceptions
out of the absolute rights of the United States, are not to be reckoned here
two grants of 2,000 acres each to Alexander Martin and David Wilson, Martin and
Wilson.
adjacent to the lands allotted to the officers and soldiers; nor a grant of
25,000 acres on Duck river to the late Major General Green; General Green.
because they are wholly within the Indian territory, as acknowledged by the
treaties of Hopewell and Holston.

The extent of the third reservation in favor of entries made in Armstrong's
office is not yet entirely known, nor can be till the 20th of December, 1702,
Armstrong's office.
the last day given for perfecting them: the sum of certificates, however,
which had been paid for these warrants into the treasury of the state, before
the 20th day of May 1790, reaches in all probability near to their whole
amount; this was L.373,649: 6: 5, currency of that state, and at the price of
L.10 the hundred acres, established by law, shows that warrants had issued for
3,736,493 acres; for 1,762,660 of these, grants have passed, which appear to
have been located partly in the counties of Green and Hawkins, and partly in
the country, from thence to the Missisippi, as divided into Eastern, Middle,
and Western districts. Almost the whole of these locations are within the
Indian territory. Besides the warrants paid for as before mentioned, it is
known that there are some others out-standing and not paid for: but perhaps
these need not be taken into account, as payment of them has been disputed on
the ground, that the lands being within the Indian territory, cannot now be
delivered to the holders of the warrants.

On a review of all the reservations, after making such conjectural allowance
as our information authorizes, for the proportion of them, which may be within
the Indian boundaries, it appears probable that they cover all the ceded lands
susceptible of culture, and cleared of the Indian title, that is to say, all
the habitable parts of the two triangles beforementioned, excepting only the
lands south of French Broad, and Big Pigeon Rivers. These were part of the
tract appropriated by the laws of the state, to the use of the Indians, whose
title being purchased at the late treaty of Holston, they are now free to be
disposed of by the United States, and are probably the only lands open to their
disposal, within this south-western territory, which can excite the attention
of purchasers. They are supposed to amount to about 300,000 acres, and we are
told that 300 families have already set down upon them without right or license.

The territory of the United States north-west of the Ohio, North-western
territory.
is bounded on the south by that river, on the east by Pennsylvania, on the
north and west, by the lines which divide the United States from the dominions
of Great Britain and Spain.

Claims of Indians.
The part of this territory occupied by Indians, is north and west of the
following lines, established with the Wiandots, Delawares, Chippawas, and
Ottawas, by the treaty of Fort M'Intosh, and, with the Shawanese, by that of
the Great Miami, to wit: beginning at the mouth of the Cayahoga, and running up
the river to the portage, between that and the Tuscaroras branch of the
Muskingum, then down the said branch to the Forks, at the crossing place above
Fort Lawrence, then westwardly, toward the portage of the Big Miami, to the
main branch of that river, then down the Miami to the fork of that river next
below the old Fort, which was taken by the French in 1752; thence due west to
the river De la Panse, and down that river to the Wabash. So far the lines are
precisely defined, and the whole country southward of these lines, and eastward
of the Wabash cleared of the claims of those Indians, as it is also of those of
the Poutiwatimas, and Sacs, by the treaty of Muskingum. How far on the other
side of the Wabash, the southern boundary of the Indians has been defined, we
know not. It is only understood in general, that their title to the lower
country, between that river and the Illinois, has been formally extinguished by
the French, while in their possession. As to that country then, and what lies
still beyond the Illinois, it would seem expedient that nothing be done, till a
fair ascertainment of boundary can take place, by mutual consent, between us
and the Indians interested.

The country within the Wabash, the Indian line before described, the
Pennsylvania line, and the Ohio, contains, on a loose estimate, about 55,000
square miles, or 35 millions of acres.

During the British government, great numbers or persons had formed themselves
into companies under different names, Ancient companies.
such as the Ohio, the Wabache, the Illinois, the Missisippi, or Vandalia
companies, and had covered, with their applications, a great part of this
territory. Some of them had obtained orders on certain conditions, which,
having never been fulfilled, their titles were never completed by grants.
Others were only in a state of negotiation, when the British authority was
discontinued. Some of these claims being already under a special reference by
order of Congress, and all of them probably falling under the operation of the
same principles, they will not be noticed in the present report.

Claims of Citizens.
The claims of citizens to be here stated will be,

I. Those reserved by the states in their deeds of cession.

II. Those which have arisen under the government of the United States
themselves.

Under the first head presents itself the tract of country from the completion
of the 41st degree, Connecticut
to 42 degrees. 2 min. of north latitude, and extending from the Pennsylvania line
before mentioned, 120 miles westward, not mentioned in the deed of Connecticut,
while all the country westward thereof, was mentioned to be ceded; about two
and a half millions of acres of this may perhaps be without the Indian lines
before mentioned.

French at Kaskaskias, etc.
2. A reservation in the deed of Virginia of the possessions and titles of the
French and Canadian inhabitants and other settlers of the Kaskaskias, St.
Vincents, and the neighboring villages, who had professed themselves citizens
of Virginia, which rights have been settled by an act of the last session of
Congress, entitled, "An act for granting lands to the inhabitants and settlers
at Vincennes and the Illinois country in the territory north-west of the Ohio,
and for confirming them in their possessions." These lands are in the
neighborhood of the several villages.

Clarke's regiment.
3. A reservation in the same deed of a quantity not exceeding 150,000 acres of
land for General George Rogers Clarke, and the officers and soldiers of his
regiment who were at the reduction of Kaskaskias, and St. Vincents, to to be
laid off in such place on the north-west side of the Ohio, as a majority of the
officers should choose. They chose they should be laid off on the river
adjacent to the rapids, which accordingly has been done.

4. A reservation, in the same deed, Virginia line.
of lands between the Scioto and Little Miami, to make up to the Virginia
troops on continental establishment, the quantity which the good lands, in
their southern allotments, might fall short of the bounties given them by the
laws of that state. By a statement of the 16th of September, 1788, it appears
that 724,045 ^/3 acres had been surveyed for them on the south-eastern side of
the Ohio; that 1,395,385 ^/3 acres had been surveyed on the north-western side;
that warrants for 649,649 acres more, to be laid off on the same side of the
river, were in the hands of the surveyor, and it was supposed there might still
be some few warrants not yet presented; so that this reservation may be stated
at 2,045,034 acres, or perhaps some small matter more.

II. The claims of individual citizens derived from the United States
themselves are the following.

1. Those of the continental army, Continental army.
founded on the resolutions of Congress of September 16, 1776, August 12, and
September 30, 1780, and fixed by the ordinance of May 20, 1785. The resolution
of October 22, 1787, and the supplementary ordinance of July 9, 1788, in the
seven ranges of townships, beginning at a point on the Ohio, due north from the
western termination of a line then lately run, as the southern boundary of
Pennsylvania: or in a second tract of a million of acres, bounded east, by the
7th range of the said townships, south by the lands of Cutler and Sargent;
north, by an extension of the northern boundary of the said townships; and
going toward the west so far as to include the above quantity; or, lastly, in
a third tract of country; beginning at the mouth of the Ohio, and running up
the Missisippi to the river Au Va^^e, thence up the same till it meets a west
line from the mouth of the Little Wabash; thence along that line to the Great
Wabash; thence down the same, and the Ohio, to the beginning. The sum total of
the said military claims is 1,851,800 acres.

2. Those of the individuals who made purchases of land at New York, Purchasers
at New York.
within the said seven ranges of townships, according to the resolutions of
Congress of April 21, 1787, and the supplementary ordinance of July 9, 1788,
which claims amount to 150,896 acres.

3. The purchase of one million and a half acres of land by Cutler and Sargent,
on behalf of certain individuals, Ohio company^
associated under the name of the Ohio Company. This begins where the Ohio is
intersected by the western boundary of the seventh range of townships, and runs
due north on that boundary 1306 chains and 25 links; thence due west to the
western boundary of the 17th range of townships; thence due south to the Ohio,
and up that river to the beginning; the whole area containing 1,781,760 acres
of land, whereof 281,760 acres, consisting of various lots and townships, are
reserved to the United States.

4. The purchase by the same Cutler and Sargent on behalf also of themselves
and others. Scioto company
This begins at the north-eastern angle of the tract of their purchase before
described, and runs due north to the northern boundary of the tenth township
from the Ohio; thence due west, to the Sioto; thence down the same, and up the
Ohio to the south-western angle of the said purchase before described, and
along the western and northern boundaries thereof to the beginning; the whole
area containing 4,901,480 acres of land, out of which, however, five lots, to
wit, Nos. 8, 11, 16, 26, and 29 of every township, of six miles square, are
retained by the United States, and out of the whole are retained the three
townships of Gnadenhutten, Schoenbrun, and Salem; and certain lands around
them, as will be hereafter mentioned.

5. The purchase of John Cleves Symmes, Symmes.
bounded on the west by the Great Miami; on the south by the Ohio; on the east
by a line which is to begin on the bank of the Ohio, 2^ miles from the mouth of
the Great Miami, as measured along the several courses of the Ohio, and to run
parallel with the general course of the said Great Miami; and on the north by
an east* and west line, so run as to include a million of acres in the whole
area, whereof five lots, numbered as before mentioned, are reserved out of
every township by the United States.

It is suggested that this purchaser, under color of a first and larger
proposition to the board of treasury, which was never closed, (but pending that
prosition) sold sundry parcels of land, between his eastern boundary before
mentioned, and the Little Miami; and that the purchasers have settled thereon.
If these suggestions prove true, the settlers will, perhaps, be thought to
merit the favor of the legislature, as purchasers for valuable consideration,
and without notice of the defect of title.

The contracts for lands, which were at one time under consideration with
Messrs. Flint and Parker, Flint and Parker. Morgan.
and with Colonel Morgan, were never so far prosecuted as to bring either party
under any obligation. All proceedings thereon were discontinued at a very early
stage, and it is supposed that no further views exist with any party. These,
therefore, are not to be enumerated among existing claims.

6. Three townships were reserved by the ordinance of May 20, 1785, adjacent to
Lake Erie, Canadian refugees.
for refugees from Canada and Nova Scotia, and for other purposes, according to
resolutions of Congress, made or to be made on that subject. These would of
course contain 69,120 acres.

Christian Indians.
7. The same ordinance of May 20, 1785, appropriated the three towns of
Gnadenhutten, Schoenbrun, and Salem, on the Muskingum, for the christian
Indians formerly settled there, or the remains of that society, with the
grounds round about them, and the quantity of the said circumjacent grounds,
for each of the said towns, was determined by the resolution of Congress of
September 3d, 1788, to be so much as, with the plat of its respective town,
should make up 4000 acres; so that the three towns and their circumjacent lands
were to amount to 12,000 acres. This reservation was accordingly made out of
the larger purchase of Cutler and Sargent, which comprehended them. The
Indians, however, for whom the reservation was made, have chosen to emigrate
beyond the limits of the United States, so that the lands reserved for them,
still remain to the United States.

On the whole, it appears that the United States may rightfully dispose of all
the lands between the Wabash, Connecticut, about 2,500,000 Kaskaskians, etc.
abt. 100,000 Clark's regt, 150,000 Virginia line, 2,^45,03^ Continental army,
^,^51,800 Purchasers at N. Y. 150,8^^ Ohio company, 1,500,000 Sioto Co. ^^^36
of 4,00^.^^0-12,000 4,208,720 Symmes, 1,000,000 13,^06,450 35,^00,^^0 21,^93,550

the Ohio, Pennsylvania, the forty-first parallel of latitude, and the Indian
lines described in the treaties of the Great Miami, and Fort M'Intosh, with
exceptions only of the rights saved by the deed of cession of Virginia, (...)
of all rights legally derived from the government of the United States, (...)
supposing the parts south of the Indian lines, to contain as before
conjectured, about 35 millions of acres, and that the claims of citizens before
enumerated may amount to between thirteen and fourteen millions, there remain
at the disposal of the United States upwards of twenty-one millions of acres,
in this north-western quarter.

And though the want of actual surveys of some parts, and of a general
delineation of the whole on paper, so as to exhibit to the eye the locations,
forms, and relative positions of the rights before described, may prevent our
forming a well defined idea of them at this distance, yet, on the spot these
difficulties exist but in a small degree: The individuals there employed in the
details of buying, selling, and locating, possess local informations of the
parts which concern them, so as to be able to keep clear of each others rights;
or, if in some instances a conflict of claims should arise, from any want of
certainty in their definition, a local judge will doubtless be provided to
decide them without delay, at least provisionally. Time, instead of clearing up
these incertainties, will cloud them the more, by the death or removal of
witnesses, the disappearance of lines and marks, change of parties, and other
casualties.

TH. JEFFERSON, Secretary of State.
November 8, 1791.

