REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE, ON THE SUBJECT OF THE COD AND WHALE
FISHERIES, MADE CONFORMABLY TO AN ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
UNITED STATES, REFERRING TO HIM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE GENERAL COURT OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS ON THOSE SUBJECTS; FEBRUARY 1, 1791.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS CHILD'S AND JOHN SWAIN.

M, DCC, XCI.

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE.
THE Secretary of State, to whom was referred by the House of Representatives,
the representation from the General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
on the subjects of the Cod and Whale Fisheries, together with the several
papers accompanying it, has had the fame under consideration, and thereupon
makes the following --

REPORT.

THE representation sets forth that, before the late way, about four thousand
seamen, and twenty-four thousand tons of shipping were annually employed, from
that State, in the whale fishery, the produce whereof was about three hundred
and fifty thousand pounds lawful money a year.

That, previous to the same period, the cod fishery of that State, employed
four thousand men, and twenty-eight thousand tons of shipping* and produced
about two hundred and fifty thousand pounds a year.

That these branches of business, annihilated during the war, (...) in some
degree, recovered since: but that they labor under many and heavy
embarrassments, which, if not removed, or lessened, will render the fisheries
every year less extensive and important.

That these embarrassments are, heavy duties on their produce abroad, and
bounties on that of their competitors: and duties at home on several articles,
particularly used in the fisheries.

And it asks that the duties be taken off; that bounties be given to the
fishermen; and the national influence be used abroad for obtaining better
markets for their produce.

The cod and whale fisheries, carried on by different persons, from different
ports, in different vessels, in different seas, and seeking different markets,
agree in one circumstance, in being as unprofitable to the adventurer, as
important to the public. A succinct view of their rise, progress, and present
state, with different nations, may enable us to note the circumstances which
have attended their prosperity, and their decline, to judge of the
embarrassments, which are said to oppress ours; to see whether they depend on
our own will, and may, therefore, be remedied immediately by ourselves, or,
whether, depending on the will of others, they are without the reach of remedy,
from us, either directly or indirectly.

Their history, being as unconnected as their practice, they shall be
separately considered.

Within twenty years after the supposed discovery of Newfoundland by the
Cabots, we find that the abundance of fish on its banks, had already drawn the
attention of the people of Europe. For, as early as 1517, or 1519, we are told
of fifty ships being seen there at one time. The first adventurers in that
fishery, were the Biscayans of Spain, the Basques and Bas-Bretons of France,
all united anciently in language, and still in habits and in extreme poverty.
The last circumstance enabled them long to retain a considerable share of the
fishery. In 1577, the French had one hundred and fifty vessels there; the
Spaniards had still one hundred; and the Portuguese fifty, when the English had
only fifteen. The Spaniards and Portuguese seem, at length, to have retired
silently, the French and English claiming the fishery exclusively, as an
appurtenance to their adjacent colonies, and the profits being too small for
nations surcharged with the precious metals proceeding from their mines.

Without materials to trace the intermediate progress, we only know that so
late as 1744, the French employed there five hundred and sixty-four ships, and
twenty seven thousand five hundred seamen, and took one million two hundred and
forty six thousand kentals of fish, which was three times the extent to which
England and her colonies together carried this fishery at that time.

The English, in the beginning of the seventeenth century, had employed,
generally, about one hundred and fifty vessels in the Newfoundland fishery.
About 1670, we find them reduced to eighty, and one hundred, the inhabitants of
New England beginning now to supplant them. A little before this, the British
parliament, perceiving that their citizens were unable to subsist on the scanty
profits which sufficed for their poorer competitors, endeavored to give them
some advantage by prohibiting the importation of foreign fish: and, at the
close of the century, they formed some regulations for their government and
protection: and remitted to them some duties. A successful war enabled them in
1713 to force from the French, a cession of the island of Newfoundland. Under
these encouragements, the English and American fisheries began to thrive. In
1731, we (...) the English take two hundred thousand kentals of fish, and the
Americans two hundred and thirty thousand, besides the refuse fish not fit for
European markets. They continue to gain ground, and the French to lose it,
insomuch, that about 1755, they are said to have been on a par: and, in 1768,
the French have only two hundred and fifty-nine vessels of twenty-four thousand
four hundred and twenty tons, nine thousand seven hundred and twenty-two
seamen, taking two hundred thousand kentals, while America alone, for some
three or four years before that, and so on to the commencement of the late war,
employed six hundred and sixty-five vessels, of twenty-five thousand six
hundred and fifty tons, and four thousand four hundred and five seamne, and
took from three hundred and fifty thousand, to upwards of four hundred thousand
kentals of fish, and England a still greater quantity, five hundred and
twenty-six thousand kentals, as is said.

Spain had formally relinquished her pretensions to a participation in these
fisheries, at the close of the preceding war: and, at the end of this, the
adjacent continent and islands, being divided between the United States, the
English and French (for the last retained two small islands merely for this
object) the right of fishing was appropriated to them also.

France, sensible of the necessity of balancing the power of England on the
water, and therefore, of improving every resource for raising seamen, and
seeing that her fishermen could not maintain their competition without some
public patronage, adopted the experiment of bounties on her own fish, and
duties on that of foreign nations brought into her markets. But notwithstanding
this, her fisheries dwindle, from a change taken place, insensibly, in the
character of her navigation, which, from being the most economical, is now
become the most expensive. In 1786, she is said to have employed but seven
thousand men in this fishery, and to have taken four hundred and twenty-six
thousand kentals; and in 1787, but six thousand men, and one hundred and
twenty-eight thousand kentals. She seems not yet sensible that the
unthriftiness of her fisheries proceeds from the want of economy, and not the
want of markets; and that the encouragement of our fishery abridges that of a
rival nation, whose power on the ocean has long threatened the loss of all
balance on that element.

The plan of the English government, since the peace, has been to prohibit all
foreign fish in their markets, and they have given from eighteen to fifty
pounds sterling, on every fishing vessel complying with certain conditions.
This policy is said to have been so far successful as to have raised the number
of seamen employed in that business in 1786, to fourteen thousand, and the
quantity of fish taken, to seven hundred and thirty-two thousand kentals. The
table No. 1, hereto annexed, will present to the eye, this history more in
detail.

The fisheries of the United States, annihilated during the war; their vessels,
utensils, and fishermen destroyed; their markets in the Mediterranean and
British America lost, and their produce dutied in those of France, their
competitors enabled by bounties to meet and under sell them at the few markets
remaining open, without any public aid, and indeed, paying aids to the public:
such were the hopeless auspices, under which this important business was to be
resumed. Yet it was resumed, and, aided by the mere force of natural
advantages, they employed, during the years 1786, -- 7, -- 8, -- 9, on an
average, five hundred thirty-nine vessels, of nineteen thousand one hundred
eighty five tons, three thousand two hundred eighty-seven seamen, and took two
hundred fifty thousand six hundred fifty kentals of fish: (see No. 2) and an
official paper (No. 3) shows that, in the last of those years, our exportation
amounted to three hundred seventy-five thousand and twenty kentals, and thirty
thousand four hundred sixty-one barrels, deduction made of three thousand seven
hundred one kentals, and six thousand three hundred forty three barrels of
foreign fish received and re-exported. (See No. 4.) Still, however, the
calculations in (No. 5) which accompany the representation, show, that the
profits of the sales in the years 1787, -- 8, were too small to afford a living
to the fisherman, and on those of 1789, there was such a loss as to withdraw
thirty-three vessels, of the town of Marblehead, alone, from the further
pursuit of this business: And the apprehension is, that, without some public
aid, those still remaining will continue to withdraw, and this whole commerce
be engrossed by a single nation.

This rapid view of the cod-fishery, enables us to discern under what policy it
has flourished or declined in the hands of other nations, and to mark the fact,
that it is too poor a business to be left to itself, even with the nation the
most advantageously situated.

It will now be proper to count the advantages which aid, and the disadvantages
which oppose us in this contest.

Our advantages are --

1. The neighborhood of the great fisheries, which permits our fishermen to
bring home their fish to be salted by their wives and children.

2. The shore fisheries, so near at hand as to enable the vessels to run into
port in a storm, and so lessen the risk, for which distant nations must pay
insurance.

3. The winter fisheries, which, like household manufactures, employ portions of
time which would otherwise be useless.

4. The smallness of the vessels, which the shortness of the voyage enables us
to employ, and which, consequently, require but a small capital.

5. The cheapness of our vessels, which do not cost above the half of the
Baltic fir vessels, computing price and duration.

6. Their excellence as sea boats, which decreases the risk, and quickens the
returns.

7. The superiority of our mariners in skill, activity, enterprise, sobriety
and order.

8. The cheapness of provisions.

9. The cheapness of casks, which, of itself, is said to be equal to an extra
profit of fifteen per cent.

These advantages are of such force, that, while experience has proved that no
other nation can make a mercantile profit on the Newfoundland fishery, nor can
support it without national aid, we can make a living profit, if vent for our
fish can be procured.

Of the disadvantages opposed to us, those which depend on ourselves, are --

Tonnage, and naval duties on the vessels employed in the fishery.

Impost duties on salt, on tea, rum, sugar, molasses, hooks, lines and leads,
duck, cordage and cables, iron, hemp and twine. Used in the fishery.

Course woollens worn by the fishermen; and the poll-tax levied by the State on
their persons. The statement, No. 6, shows the amount of these, exclusive of
the State tax, and drawback on the fish exported, to be 5.25 dollars per man,
or 57.75 dollars per vessel of sixty-five tons. When a business is so nearly in
equilibrio, that one can hardly discern whether the profit be sufficient to
continue it, or not, smaller sums than these suffice to turn the scale against
it. To these disadvantages, add ineffectual duties on the importation of
foreign fish. In justification of these last, it is urged that the foreign fish
received, is in exchange for the produce of agriculture. To which it may be
answered, that the thing given, is more merchantable than that received in
exchange, and that agriculture has too many markets to be allowed to take away
those of the fisheries. It will rest, therefore, with the wisdom of the
legislature, to decide whether prohibition should not be opposed to
prohibition, and high duty to high duty, on the fish of other nations: Whether
any, and which of the naval and other duties, may be remitted, or an equivalent
given to the fisherman in the form of a drawback or bounty; and whether the
loss of markets abroad may not, in some degree, be compensated by creating
markets at home; to which might contribute the constituting fish a part of the
military ration, in stations, not too distant from navigation, a part of the
necessary sea stores of vessels, and the encouraging private individuals to let
the fisherman share with the cultivator, in furnishing the supplies of the
table. A habit introduced from motives of patriotism, would soon be followed,
from motives of taste: And who will undertake to fix limits to this demand, if
it can be once excited, with a nation which doubles, and will long continue to
double at very short periods?

Of the disadvantages, which depend on others, are -- 1. The loss of the
Mediterranean markets. 2. Exclusions from the markets of some of our
neighbors. 3. High duties in those of others, and -- 4. Bounties to the
individuals in competition with us.


The consideration of these will find its place more aptly, after a review of
the condition of our whale fishery, shall have led us to the same point. To
this branch of the subject, therefore, we will now proceed.

The whale fishery was first brought into notice of the southern nations of
Europe, in the fifteenth century, by the same Biscayans and Basques, who led
the way to the fishery of Newfoundland. They began it on their own coasts, but
soon found that the principal residence of the whale, was in the northern seas,
into which, therefore, they pursued him. In 1578, they employed twenty-five
ships in that business; the Dutch and Hamburghers took it up after this, and
about the middle of the seventeenth century, the former employed about two
hundred ships, and the latter three hundred and fifty.

The English endeavored also to participate of it. In 1672, 25. Car. II. c. 7.
they offered to their own fishermen a bounty of six shillings a ton, on the
oil they should bring home, and instituted at different times, different
exclusive companies, all of which failed of success. They raised their bounty
in 1733 6. G. II. c. 33.
, to twenty shillings a ton on the admeasurement of the vessel. In 1740, to
thirty shillings, with a privilege to the fisherman against being impressed.
The Basque-fishery, supported by poverty alone, had maintained but a feeble
existence, before competitors, aided by the bounties of their nation, and was,
in fine, annihilated by the war of 1745, at the close of which, the English
bounty was raised to forty shillings. From this epoch, their whale fishery went
on between the limits of twenty-eight and sixty-seven vessels, till the
commencement of the last war.

The Dutch in the mean time, had declined gradually to about one hundred and
thirty ships, and have since that fallen down to less than half that number: so
that their fishery, notwithstanding a bounty of thirty florins a man, as well
as that of Hamburgh, is now nearly out of competition.

In 1715, the Americans began their whale fishery. They were led to it at first
by the whales which presented themselves on their coasts. They attacked them
there in small vessels of forty tons. As the whale, being infested, retired
from the coast, they followed him farther and farther into the ocean, still
enlarging their vessels, with their adventures, to sixty, one hundred, and two
hundred tons. Having extended their pursuit to the Western Islands, they fell
in, accidently, with the spermacaeti whale, of a different species from that of
Greenland, which alone had been hitherto known in commerce; more fierce and
active, and whose oil and head-matter was found to be more valuable, as it
might be used in the interior of houses without offending the smell. The
distinction now first arose between the northern and southern fisheries* the
object of the former being the Greenland whale, which frequents the northern
coasts and seas of Europe and America, that of the latter being the spermacaeti
whale, which was found in the southern seas, from the Western Islands and coast
of Africa to that of Brazil, and still on to the Falkland Islands. Here again,
within soundings, on the coast of Brazil, they found a third species of whale,
which they called the black, or Brazil whale, smaller than the Greenland,
yielding a still less valuable oil, fit only for summer use, as it becomes
opaque at fifty degrees of Farenheit's thermometer, while that of the
spermacaeti whale is limped to forty-one, and of the Greenland whale to
thirty-six, of the same thermometer. It is only worth taking therefore, when it
falls in the way of the fishermen, but not worth seeking, except when they have
failed of success against the spermacaeti whale, in which case this kind,
easily found and taken, serves to moderate their loss.

In 1771, the Americans had one hundred and eighty-three vessels, of thirteen
thousand eight hundred and twenty tons, in the northern fishery, and one
hundred and twenty-one vessels, of fourteen thousand and twenty tons, in the
southern, navigated by four thousand and fifty-nine men. At the beginning of
the late war, they had one hundred and seventy-seven vessels in the northern,
and one hundred and thirty-two in the southern fishery.

At that period, our fishery being suspended, the English seized the
opportunity of pushing theirs. They gave additional bounties of five hundred,
four hundred, three hundred, two hundred, one hundred pounds sterling,
annually, to the five ships, which should take the greatest quantities of oil.
The effect of which was such, as, by the year 1786, to double the quantity of
common oil necessary for their own consumption. Finding, on a review of the
subject, at that time, that their bounties had cost the government thirteen
pounds ten shillings sterling a man annually, or sixty per cent. on the
cargoes, a part of which went consequently to ease the purchases of this
article made by foreign nations, they reduced the northern bounty from forty to
thirty shillings the ton of admeasurement.

They had some little time before turned their attention to the southern
fishery, had given very great bounties in it, 26 G. III. c. 50.
and had invited the fishermen of the United States, to conduct their
enterprises. Under their guidance, and with such encouragement, this fishery,
which had only begun with them in 1784 or 1785, was rising into value. In 1788,
they increased 28 G. III. c. 20.
their bounties, and the temptations to our fishermen, under the general
description of foreigners who had been employed in the whale-fishery, to pass
over with their families and vessels to the British dominions either in America
or Europe, but preferably to the latter. The effect of these measures had been
prepared by our whale oils becoming subject, in their market, to the foreign
duty of eighteen pounds five shillings sterling the ton, which, being more than
equal to the price of the common oil, operated as a prohibition on that, and
gave to their own spermacaeti oil a preferance over ours to that amount. The
particulars of this history are presented to the eye, more in detail, in the
table No. 7.

The fishermen of the United States, left without resource by the loss of their
market, began to think of accepting the British invitation, and of removing --
some to Nova Scotia, preferring smaller advantages in the neighborhood of
their ancient country and friends, others to Great Britain, postponing country
and friends to high premiums.

The government of France could not be inattentive to these proceedings. They
saw the danger of letting four or five thousand seamen, of the best in the
world, be transferred to the marine strength of another nation, and carry over
with them an art, which they possessed almost exclusively. To give time for a
counter plan, the Marquis de la Fayette, the valuable friend and citizen of
this, as well as that country, wrote to a gentleman in Boston to dissuade the
fishermen from accepting the British proposals and to assure them that their
friends in France would endeavor to do something for them. A vessel was then
arrived from Halifax, at Nantucket, to take off those who had proposed to
remove. Two families had gone aboard, and others were going. In this moment,
the letter arriving, suspended their designs. Not another went aboard, and the
vessel returned to Halifax with only the two families.

The plan adopted by the French ministry, very different from that of the first
mover, was to give a counter invitation to the Nantucket men to remove and
settle in Dunkirk, offering them a bounty of fifty livres (between nine and ten
dollars) a ton on the admeasurement of the vessels they should equip for the
whale fishery, with some other advantages. Nine families only, of thirty-three
persons, accepted this invitation. This was in 1785. In 1786, the ministry were
led to see, that their invitation would produce but little effect, and that the
true means of preventing the emigration of our fishermen to the British
dominions, would be to enable them still to follow their calling from their
native country, by giving them a new market for their oils, instead of the old
one they had lost. The duties were, therefore, abated on American whale oil
immediately, and a further abatement promised by the letter, No. 8, and in
December, 1787, the arret, No. 9, was passed.

The rival fishermen immediately endeavored to turn this measure to their own
advantage, by pouring their whale oils into the markets of France, where they
were enabled, by the great premiums received from their government, perhaps too
by extraordinary indemnifications, to undersell both the French and American
fishermen. To repel this measure, France shut her ports to all foreign fish
oils whatever, by the arret No. 10. The British whale fishery fell, in
consequence, the ensuing year, from two hundred and twenty-two to one hundred
and seventy-eight ships. But this general exclusion had palsied our fishery
also. On the seventh of December, 1788, therefore, by the arret No. 11, the
ports of France, still remaining shut to all other nations, were again opened
to the produce of the whale fisheries of the United States; continuing,
however, their endeavors to recover a share in this fishery themselves, by the
aid of our fishermen. In 1784, -- 5, -- 6, they had had four ships; in 1787,
three; in 1788, seventeen in the two fisheries, of four thousand five hundred
ton. These cost them in bounty, two hundred and twenty-five thousand livres,
which divided on one thousand five hundred and fifty tons of oil, the quantity
they took, amounted to one hundred and forty-five livres (near twenty-seven
dollars) the ton; and on about one hundred natives on board the seventeen
ships, (for there were one hundred and fifty Americans engaged by the voyage)
came to two thousand two hundred and fifty livres, or about four hundred and
sixteen dollars and two-thirds a man.

We have had during the years 1787, 1788, 1789, on an average, ninety-one
vessels, of five thousand eight hundred and twenty tons, in the northern, and
thirty-one, of four thousand three hundred and ninety tons, in the southern
fishery. See No. 12.

These details will enable Congress to see with what a competition we have to
struggle for the continuance of this fishery, not to say it is increase. Against
prohibitory duties in one country, and bounties to the adventurers in both of
those which are contending with each other for the same object, ours have no
auxiliaries but poverty and rigorous economy. The business, unaided, is a
wretched one. The Dutch have peculiar advantages for the northern fishery, as
being within six or eight days sail of the grounds, as navigating with more
economy than any other nation in Europe, their seamen content with lower wages,
and their merchants with lower profits. Yet the memorial No. 13, from a
committee of the whale merchants to the States General of Holland in the year
1775, states that fourteen millions of guilders, equal to five millions six
hundred thousand dollars, had been lost in that fishery in forty-seven years,
being about one hundred and twenty thousand dollars a year. The States General
thereupon gave a bounty of thirty guilders a man to the fishermen. A person
intimately acquainted with the British whale fishery, and whose information
merits confidence, has given assurance that the ships employed in their
northern fishery in 1788, sunk eight hundred pounds each on an average, more
than the amount of the produce and bounties. An English ship of three hundred
tons and forty-two seamen in this fishery generally brings home, after a four
months voyage, twenty-five ton of oil, worth four hundred and thirty-seven
pounds ten shillings sterling; but the wages of the officers and seamen will be
four hundred pounds, there remain but thirty-seven pounds ten shillings, not
worth taking into account toward the outfit and merchants profit. These then
must be paid by the government; and it is on this idea that the British bounty
is calculated.

Our vessels for the northern fishery average sixty-four tons, and cost when
built, fitted out, and victualled for their first voyage, about three thousand
dollars. They have taken on an average the three last years, according to the
statement No. 12, eighteen tons of oil, worth, at our market, nine hundred
dollars, which are to pay all expenses, and subsist the fisherman and merchant.
Our vessels for the southern fishery average one hundred and forty tons, and
cost, when built, fitted out, and victualled, for their first voyage, about six
thousand five hundred dollars. They have taken on an average the three last
years, according to the same statement, thirty-two tons of oil, each worth at
our market three thousand two hundred dollars, which are, in like manner, to
pay all expenses and subsist the owners and navigators. These expenses are
great, as the voyages are generally of twelve months duration. No hope can
arise of their condition being bettered by an augmentation of the price of oil.
This is kept down by the competition of the vegetable oils, which answer the
same purposes, not quite so well, but well enough to become preferable, were
the price to be raised, and so well indeed as to be more generally used than
the fish oils for lighting houses and cities.

The American whale fishery is principally followed by the inhabitants of the
island of Nantucket, a sand bar of about fifteen miles long and three broad,
capable of maintaining by its agriculture about twenty families: but it
employed in these fisheries before the war, between five and six thousand men
and boys; and in the only harbor it possesses, it had one hundred and forty
vessels, one hundred and thirty-two of which were of the larger kind, as being
employed in the southern fishery. In agriculture then, they have no resource,
and, if that of their fishery cannot be pursued from their own habitations, it
is natural they should seek others from which it can be followed, and
preferably those where they will find a sameness of language, religion, laws,
habits, and kindred. A foreign emissary has lately been among them, for the
purpose of renewing the invitations to a change of situation. But attached to
their native country, they prefer continuing in it, if their continuance there
can be made supportable.

This brings us to the question, what relief does the condition of this fishery
require?

1st. A remission of duties on the articles used for their calling.

2d. A retaliating duty on foreign oils, coming to seek a competition with them
in or from our ports.

3d. Free markets abroad.

1st. The remission of duties will stand on nearly the same ground with that to
the cod fishermen.

2d. The only nation whose oil is brought hither for competition with our own,
makes ours pay a duty of about eighty-two dollars the ton, in their ports.
Theirs is brought here too, to be re-shipped fraudulently under our flag into
ports where it could not be received under theirs, and ought not to be covered
by ours, if we mean to preserve our own admission into them. The

3d, And principal object, is to find markets for the vent of oil.

Portugal, England, Holland, Sweden, Denmark, Prussia, Russia, the Hanse towns,
supply themselves and something more. Spain and Italy receive supplies from
England, and need the less as their skies are clearer. France is the only
country which can take our surplus, and they take principally of the common
oil; as the habit is but commencing with them of ascribing a just value to that
of the spermacaeti whale. Some of this, however, finds its vent there. There
was, indeed, a particular interest perpetually soliciting the exclusion of our
oils from their markets. The late government there saw well, that what we
should lose thereby, would be gained by others, not by themselves. And we are
to hope that the present government, as wise and friendly, will also view us,
not as rivals, but as co-operators against a common rival. Friendly
arrangements with them, and accommodation to mutual interest, rendered easier
by friendly dispositions existing on both sides, may long secure to us this
important resource for our seamen. Nor is it the interest of the fisherman
alone, which calls for the cultivation of friendly arrangements with that
nation. Besides five-eighths of our whale oil, and two-thirds of our salted
fish, they take from us one-fourth of our tobacco, three-fourths of our live
stock (No. 14.) a considerable and growing portion of our rice, great supplies
occasionally of other grain; in 1789, which, indeed, was extraordinary, four
millions of bushels of wheat, and upwards of a million of busbels of rye and
barley (No. 15.) and nearly the whole carried in our own vessels (No. 16.) They
are a free market now, and will in time be a valuable one for our ships and
ship-timber, potash and peltry.

England is the market for the greater part of our spermacaeti oil. They impose
on all our oils, a duty of eighteen pounds five shillings sterling the ton,
which, as to the common kind, is a prohibition, as has been before observed,
and as to that of the spermacaeti, gives a preference of theirs over ours to
that amount, so as to leave in the end, but a scanty benefit to the fisherman;
and not long since, by a change of construction, without any change of the law,
it was made to exclude our oils from their ports, when carried in our own
vessels. On some change of circumstance, it was construed back again to the
reception of our oils, on paying always, however the same duty of eighteen
pounds five shillings. This serves to show that the tenure by which we hold the
admission of this commodity in their markets, is as precarious as it is hard.
Nor can it be announced, that there is any disposition on their part, to
arrange this or any other commercial matter, to mutual convenience. The exparte
regulations which they have begun for mounting their navigation on the ruins of
ours, can only be opposed by counter regulations on our part. And the loss of
seamen, the natural consequence of lost and obstructed markets for our fish and
oil, calls in the first place, for serious and timely attention. It will be too
late when the seaman shall have changed his vocation, or gone over to another
interest. If we cannot recover and secure for him these important branches of
employment, it behooves us to replace them by others equivalent. We have three
nurseries for forming seamen; --

1. Our coasting trade, already on a safe footing.

2. Our fisheries, which in spite of natural advantages, give just cause of
anxiety.

3. Our carrying trade, the only resource of indemnification for what we lose
in the other. The produce of the United States, which is carried to foreign
markets, is extremely bulky. That part of it now in the hands of foreigners,
and which we may resume into our own, without touching the rights of those
nations who have met us in fair arrangements by treaty, or the interests of
those, who, by their voluntary regulations, have paid so just and liberal a
respect to our interests, as being measured back to them again, places both
parties on as good ground, perhaps, as treaties could place them: the
proportion, I say, of our carrying trade, which may be resumed without
affecting either of these descriptions of nations, will find constant
employment for ten thousand seamen, be worth two millions of dollars annually,
will go on augmenting with the population of the United States, secure to us a
full indemnification for the seamen we loss, and be taken wholly from those who
force us to this act of self-protection, in navigation.

Hence too would follow that their Newfoundland ships, not receiving provisions
from us in their bottoms, nor permitted (by a law of their own) to receive in
ours, must draw their subsistence from Europe, which would increase that part
of their expenses in the proportion of four to seven, and so far operate as a
duty toward restoring the level between them and us. The tables No. 2, and 12,
will show the quantity of tonnage, and consequently the mass of seamen whose
interests are in distress; and No. 17, the materials for indemnification.

If regulations, exactly the counterpart of those established against us, would
be ineffectual from a difference of circumstances, other regulations equivalent
can give no reasonable ground of complaint to any nation. Admitting their right
of keeping their markets to themselves, ours cannot be denied of keeping out
carrying trade to ourselves. And if there be any thing unfriendly in this, it
was in the first example.

The loss of seamen unnoticed, would be followed by other losses in a long
train. If we have no seamen, our ships will be useless, consequently our
ship-timber, iron and hemp; our ship-building will be at an end, ship
carpenters go over to other nations, our young men have no call to the sea, our
produce carried in foreign bottoms, be saddled with war-freight and insurance
in times of war; and the history of the last one hundred years, shows that the
nation which is our carrier has three years of war for every four years of
peace. (No. 18) We lose, during the same periods, the carriage for belligerant
powers, which the neutrality of our flag would render an incalculable source of
profit; we lose at this moment the carriage of our own produce to the annual
amount of two millions of dollars, which in the possible progress of the
encroachment, may extend to five or six millions, the worth of the whole, with
an increase in the proportion of the increase of our numbers. It is easier as
well as better, to stop this train at its entrance, than when it shall have
ruined or banished whole classes of useful and industrious citizens.

It will doubtless be thought expedient that the resumption suggested should
take effect so gradually as not to endanger the loss of produce for the want of
transportation; but that, in order to create transportation, the whole plan
should be developed, and made known at once, that the individuals who may be
disposed to lay themselves out for the carrying business may make their
calculations on a full view of all circumstances.

On the whole, the historical view we have taken of these fisheries proves they
are so poor in themselves as to come to nothing with distant nations, who do
not support them from their treasury. We have seen that the advantages of our
position place our fisheries on a ground somewhat higher, such as to relieve
our treasury from the necessity of giving them support, but not to permit it to
draw support from them, nor to dispense the government from the obligation of
effectuating free markets for them, that for the great proportion of our salted
fish, for our common oil, and a part of our spermacaeti oil, markets may
perhaps, be preserved by friendly arrangements toward those nations whose
arrangements are friendly to us, and the residue be compensated by giving to
the seamen thrown out of business the certainty of employment in another branch
of which we have the sole disposal.

Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of State.
FEBRUARY 1st, 1791.
-- No. I. -- An historical View of the COD-FISHERIES of France, England and
the United States.
FRANCE. ENGLAND. UNITED STATES. Vessels. Tonnage. Seamen. Kentals. Value
Dollars. Vessels. Tonnage. Seamen. Kentals. Value Dollars. Vessels. Tonnage.
Seamen. Kentals. Value Dollars. 1577 150 -- -- -- -- 15 1615 -- -- -- -- -- 150
1626 -- -- -- -- -- 150 -- 8,000 1670 -- -- -- -- -- 80 1676 -- -- -- -- -- 102
-- 9,180 -- 1,738,800 1731 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 200,000 540,000 -- -- --
230,000 621,000 1744 564 -- 27,500 1,441,500 -- 1764 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
300 1765 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 665 25,000 4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1766 --
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 665 25,000 4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1767 -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- 665 25,000 4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1768 259 24,420 9,722 200,000
861,723 -- -- -- -- 665 25,000 4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1769 -- -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- 665 25,000 4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1770 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 665
25,000 4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1771 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 665 25,000 4,405
350,500 1,071,000 1772 -- -- -- -- -- -- 25,000 486,561 -- 665 25,000 4,405
350,500 1,071,000 1773 264 24,996 10,128 -- -- -- -- 516,000 -- 665 25,000
4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1774 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 516,000 -- 665 25,000 4,405
350,500 1,071,000 1775 -- -- -- -- -- 400 36,000 ^0,000 600,000 2,250,000 665
25,000 4,405 350,500 1,071,000 1785 -- -- -- -- -- -- 7,000 1786 -- -- 7,000
426,000 -- -- -- 470,000 -- 539 19,185 3,287 250,650 609,900 1787 -- -- 6,000
128,000 -- -- 14,000 732,000 -- 539 19,185 3,287 250,650 609,900 1788 -- -- --
-- -- -- -- -- -- 539 19,185 3,287 250,650 609,900 1789 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
-- 539 19,185 3,287 250,650 609,900 1790 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 539 19,185
3,287 354,276 865,207

-- No. II. --
State of COD-FISHERY of Massachusetts, from 1765, to 1775. From 1786 to 1790,
inclusive. Vessels annually. Tonnage. Seaman. Kentals to Europe, a 3.5 Dols.
Kentals to West Indies, a 2.6 Dols. Vessels annually. Tonnage. Seamen. Kentals
to Europe, a 3 Dols. Kentals to West Indies, a 2 Dols. MARBLEHEAD, 150 7,500
1,200 80,000 40,000 90 5,400 720 50,000 25,000 GLOUCESTER, 146 5,530 888 35,000
42,500 160 3,600 680 19,500 28,500 MANCHESTER, 25 1,500 200 10,000 10,000 15
900 120 3,000 7,500 BEVERLEY, 15 750 120 6,000 6,000 19 1,235 157 5,200 10,000
SALEM, 30 1,500 240 12,000 12,000 20 1,300 160 6,000 10,000 NEWBURYPORT, 10 400
60 2,000 2,000 10 460 80 1,000 5,000 IPSWICH, 50 900 190 8,000 5,500 56 860 248
3,000 6,000 PLYMOUTH, 60 2,400 420 8,000 16,000 36 1,440 252 6,000 12,000
COHASSET, 6 240 42 800 1,600 5 200 35 1,000 1,500 HINGHAM, 6 240 42 800 1,600 4
180 32 800 1,200 SITUATE, 10 400 70 1,000 3,000 2 90 16 400 600 DUXBOROUGH, 4
160 28 400 1,200 9 360 72 1,500 3,000 KINGSTON, 6 240 42 800 1,600 4 160 28 700
1,300 YARMOUTH, 30 900 180 3,000 6,000 30 900 180 2,000 10,000 WELLFLEET, 3 90
21 300 600 TRURO, 10 400 80 1,000 3,000 PROVINCETOWN, 4 160 32 500 1,100 11 550
88 3,000 5,200 CHATHAM, 30 900 240 4,000 8,000 30 900 240 3,000 9,000
NANTUCKET, 8 320 64 1,000 2,200 5 200 40 500 1,500 MAINE, 60 1,000 230 4,000
8,000 30 300 120 1,000 3,500 WEYMOUTH, 2 100 16 200 600 3 150 24 1,000 1,250
665 25,630 4,405 178,800 172,500 539 19,185 3,287 108,600 142,050

-- No. III. -- ABSTRACT of the Produce of the FISHERIES, exported from the
United States, from about August 20th, 1789, to September 30th, 1790.
Fish dried. Fish pickled. Oil Whale. Oil spermacaeti Whale-bone. Candles sper.
Quantity Value. Quantity Value. Quantity Value. Quantity Value. Quantity Value.
Quantity Value. Total value. Kentals. Dollars. Barrels. Dollars Barrels.
Dollars Barrels. Dollars Pounds. Dollars Pounds. Dollars Dollars. France, 543
1,086 12 20 9,914 73,767 ^,403 17,523 108,807 17,917 1,200 480 749,497 French
West Indies, 251,116 518,288 29,294 90,818 1,756 13,685 80 1,029 -- -- 38,754
14,884 Amount of first class, 251,659 519,374 29,306 90,838 11,670 87,452 1,483
18,552 108,807 17,917 39,954 15,364 749,497 Spain, 72,300 194,457 280 813 593
4,174 -- -- -- -- 2,896 1,256 203,276 Spanish West Indies and Florida, 824 978
300 886 5 38 -- -- -- -- 1,685 674 Great Britain, 5 10 -- -- 1,738 21,048 3,840
60,000 1,075 215 -- -- 89,859 British West Indies, 1,970 4,114 795 3,075 15 124
-- -- -- -- 756 353 Nova Scotia, -- -- 13 40 1 10 100 870 -- -- -- -- Holland,
-- -- 15 45 807 5,683 -- -- 5,220 1,050 -- -- 79,404 Dutch West Indies, 23,822
48,631 4,778 13,404 179 1,317 -- -- -- -- 23,162 9,274 Portugal, 18,594 41,306
69 242 4 60 -- -- -- -- -- -- 55,137 Portuguese Islands, 5,432 11,307 292 801
139 1,243 8 120 -- -- 148 58 Germany, -- -- -- -- 470 2,990 -- -- 6,150 1,230
-- -- 4,220 Danish West Indies, 1,180 2,386 803 2,421 3 27 -- -- -- -- -- --
4,834 African Isl. and C. Africa 613 1,324 147 564 6 4^ -- -- -- -- 165 66
1,996 Mediterranean, 2,314 4,628 6 36 135 700 -- -- 29 5 238 150 5,519 Sweden.
8 16 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 16 East Indies, -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
-- 1,285 529 529 Amount of second class 127,062 309,157 7,498 22,327 4,095
37,456 3,948 60,990 12,474 2,500 30,423 12,360 444,790 Amount of both classes,
378,721 828,531 36,804 113,165 15,765 124,908 5,431 79,542 121,281 20,417
70,379 27,724 1,194,287

-- No. IV. -- ABSTRACT of articles imported into the United States from
British colonies, for one year, commencing the 15th August, 1789, and ending on
the 14th August, 1790, as far as the accounts have been rendered.
6,343 barrels of pickled fish. Cwt. 3,701.2. 20 lbs. of dried fish.
NOTE. -- Oil and lumber imported, paying a duty ad valorem, the quantity of
each can only be ascertained by the several collectors having reference to the
original entries.

JOSEPH NOURSE, Register.
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's Office, 23d November, 1790.
-- No. V. --
WE the subscribers, being a Committee appointed by the owners of fishing
vessels, in the town of Marblehead, to take into consideration the many
grievances and burdens the cod fishery now labors under, and to make a
statement of them; which statement so made, to be handed to Col. Glover, by him
to be laid before the Committee of the General Court, appointed to consider the
same, do report the said statement as follows, viz. 1. Impost duties on salt.
2. duties and excise on rum, sugar and molasses. 3. on hooks, lines and leads.
4. on coarse woollens. 5. on duck, cordage and cables. 6. on hemp, iron and
twine. 7. Tonnage and naval duties. 8. The ineffectual duties on foreign fish.
9. The duties our fisheries pay at foreign markets, while the fisheries of
France and England receive large privileges and bounties from their
governments. 10. The heavy poll-tax laid on the fishermen. 11. Excise on
New England rum.


It appears to the committee from an exact investigation, that the earnings and
expenses of the fishing schooners of this town, for the years 1787, -- 8, -- 9,
were to the earnings of each schooner, viz. For the year 1787, L. 145 For the
year 1788, 137 For the year 1789, 82 And that the annual average expenses of
these vessels, inclusive of insurance, 124


It also appears, that the number of schooners employed in the grand bank
fishery for the year 1789, were one hundred and twenty-four, nineteen of which
were property of persons not belonging to the town, and of which number
thirty-three sail have been taken out of the fishery from the declension of the
business, exclusive of the aforementioned disadvantages.

That the bounty granted to the fishery by Congress, as a compensation for the
duty on salt, this Committee humbly conceive will not operate to that purpose
so effectually, as if paid direct into the hands of the owners of the vessels,
instead of the shippers of the fish.

MARBLEHEAD, Feb. 1st, 1790. JOHN GLOVER, ISRAEL FOSTER, EDWARD FETYPLACE,
WILLIAM KNIGHT, SAMUEL HOOPER, ROBERT HOOPER, jun. WILLIAM R. LEE, RICHARD
PEDRICK, KNOTT PEDRICK, SAMUEL R. GERRY, RICHARD JAMES, JOSHUA ORNE, MARSTON
WATSON.

A true Copy. Attest, JOHN AVERY, jun. Secretary.

-- No. VI. --
AN estimate of the duties paid by the proprietors and navigators of a fishing
vessel of sixty-five tons and eleven hands.

Duty on Salt, 80.25 Rum, 14 Tea, 2.64 Sugar, 3.3 Molasses, 99 Coarse woollens,
7.33 Lines, lead and hooks, 2.9 Sail cloth, -- yearly average, 2.5 Cordage,
cables, do. 20 Tonnage, 3.9 Iron, -- yearly average, 1 138 divided on eleven
men, is 12.5 cents per man.
But deducting the drawback of the duty on salt, it remains 57.75 dolls. on the
whole, or 5.25 dolls. on each man.

-- No. VII. -- An historical View of the WHALE-FISHERIES of HOLLAND, ENGLAND,
and the UNITED STATES.
Holland. England. Holland. England. 1578 -- Basques, 25 1758 159 52 1612 -- 2
-- 1759 155 34 1615 11 4 -- 1760 154 40 1620 -- 7 -- 1761 161 31 1663 202 --
1762 165 28 1669 138 -- 1763 30 1670 148 Hamburgh abt. 350 1764 161 32 1678 120
Eng. bounty 6s. 1765 165 33 AMERICA, 150 1683 242 -- 1766 167 35 1686 189 --
1767 165 39 1688 214 -- 1768 160 41 1692 32 -- 1769 152 44 United States North
South Tons. Tons. 1702 224 -- 1770 150 50 183 121 viz. 13,820 nor. 14020 sou.
4059 men. 1713 93 -- 1771 150 50 1715 -- Americans begin. 1772 131 48 1721 260
Hamburgh, 79 1773 134 55 Basques, 20 1725 226 12 -- 1774 130 65 1726 218 14 --
1775 129 96 177 132 Eng. bounty 500l. 400l. 300l. 200l. 100l. 1727 202 16 --
1776 123 91 1728 182 18 -- 1777 116 77 -- -- -- Dutch bounty 30fl. a man. 1729
184 20 Basques, 27 1778 111 71 1730 168 22 Basques, 38 1779 105 59 -- -- --
English bounty 30s. Tons. 1731 164 22 America 1300, on their own coast. 1780 82
52 173^ 176 21 -- 1781 34 -- -- -- English bounty 40s. 17^^ 184 2 Basques, 15
to 20 Eng. bounty 20s. 1782 38 17^6 191 1 -- 1783 55 47 17^7 196 Basques, 10 to
12 1784 62 93 -- -- -- France 4 ships. North. South 1774 -- -- Eng. bounty 30s.
1785 65 154 18 -- -- Basques, 5 or 6 1748 94 -- 1786 67 158 -- -- -- English
bounty 30s. 1755 181 66 Eng. bounty 40s. 1787 67 217 38 91 31 viz. 5,820 tons
north, 4,390 tons south, -- 1,611 men. France 3 ships. 1756 186 67 -- 1788 69
222 54 91 31 France 17 ships. 1757 180 55 -- 1789 178 91 31 Hamburgh 32.

-- No. VIII. -- M. JEFFERSON, Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States.
Fontainbleau, October 22, 1786. SIR,
AS it is the intention of the King to favor, as much as possible, the commerce
of the United States, I have the honor to communicate to you the measures that
have been taken on this subject.

By a letter of the 9th January, 1784, to the Marquis de la Fayette, I informed
him that instead of two free ports promised by the treaty with the United
States, the King had determined to grant them four, which has been done; and I
promised him that I would direct my attention to the custom-houses and duties
which are prejudicial to commerce, observing however that this object demanded
long investigations, which are not yet completed. By another letter I informed
him, that his Majesty had suppressed the duties upon the exportation of brandy,
and I expected this suppression would be useful to the American commerce; I
likewise promised him that the duties of the King and the admiralty, payable by
an American vessel on her arrival in a French port, should be diminished and
reduced to a single duty, and regulated according to the number of masts and
draught of water, and not by the uncertain estimation of measurement. This
reduction requires a perfect knowledge of all the duties paid in our ports; and
as they are of various kinds, the statements which I have ordered to be made
are not ready.

You know, sir, that the King has appointed a Committee for the particular
purpose of examining our commercial connections with the United States, and
that the Marquis de la Fayette has presented a project conformable to the ideas
contained in your letter to the Count de Vergennes; but you will consider how
imprudent it would be to hazard by a change of system, the product of a branch
of revenue which amounts to twenty-eight millions, upon an article which is not
of the first necessity -- after a long discussion of every means that can be at
present adopted to encourage the importation of American tobacco, it has been
resolved not to break the agreement made with Mr. Morris, but that after the
expiration of this contract, no similar one shall be made, and that in the mean
while, the farmers general should be obliged to purchase, annually, about
fifteen thousand hogsheads of American tobacco imported directly from the
United States, in French or American vessels at the same price, on the same
conditions which have been stipulated by the contract with Mr. Morris.

You will remember, sir, that before a regulation could be made in favor of the
importation of whale oil, the Marquis de la Fayette had taken a particular
arrangement with Mr. Sangrain for the sale of this article, to the amount of
eight hundred thousand livres, and that I had granted him passports in order to
render this first importation, free from all duties whatsoever. The same Mr.
Sangrain, afterward made an agreement with some merchants of Boston, to the
yearly amount of four hundred thousand livres, to last during six years, for
which his Majesty has granted the same favors which are enjoyed by the Hanse
Towns.

This matter having been lately more extensively examined, the administration
to whom the Committee communicated their wish, agreeable to the Marquis de la
Fayette's demand and your opinion, entirely to abolish all duties upon oil,
have found that at present, they could not consent to it, on account of the
engagements made with other powers. All that could be done was to grant, during
ten years, to the whale oil, spermacaeti, and whatever is comprehended within
these denominations, imported from the United States in French or American
vessels, the same favors, the same diminution of duties which the Hanse Towns
enjoy.

His Majesty hopes that the commercial connections between the United States
and France, will become so considerable as to engage him to continue the effect
of this provisional determination; and as it has been observed by the
Committee, that a great duty of fabrication has been hitherto paid upon the
most favored whale oil, and even upon the national, his Majesty consents to
abolish the duty of fabrication with respect to the whale oil and spermacaeti,
directly imported from the United States in French or American bottoms, so that
this oil and spermacaeti shall not pay, during ten years, any other duty but
seven livres ten sols, and ten sols per livre; this last augmentation of ten
sols per livre, shall cease in 1790.

It has also been determined that particular informations be taken concerning
the consumption of Carolina rice in France, and that means be devised to
encourage the importation of this article.

Representations having been made concerning the considerable duties laid upon
the importation of pot-ash and pearl-ash, also upon beaver-skins and hair and
raw leather, his Majesty has suppressed all duties whatsoever upon those
articles, if imported of the growth of the United States in French or American
vessels. He is likewise desirous of encouraging every article of American fur.

His Majesty has moreover consented to abolish all duties upon masts, yards,
keels for ships, red cedar, green oak, and in a word, all kinds of wood fit for
ship-building imported from the United States in French or American vessels.

The Committee having likewise represented, that there was a duty of five per
cent. on the purchase of foreign built ships, and that this duty was
prejudicial to the sale of American vessels, his Majesty has been pleased to
exempt from all duties, the purchase of ships which shall be proved to be built
in the United States.

Great duties having formerly been laid upon all shrubs, trees and seed, his
Majesty has abolished these duties, when the above articles shall be imported
in French or American vessels.

It having been represented that the state of Virginia had ordered the arms for
her militia to be made in France, an order is passed, that the prohibitions
which hitherto have prevented the exportation of arms and gunpowder, as well as
the duties laid upon these articles when exported by permission, shall be
abolished; and that whenever the United States shall think it expedient to
export from France, arms, guns and gunpowder, they shall have full permission,
provided these articles are exported in French or American vessels, and they
shall be liable only to a very small duty, in order to facilitate the
calculation of exports.

Lastly, his Majesty has received with the same favor, the applications made to
the Committee for the suppression of the heavy duties actually paid upon books
and papers of all kinds: the King abolishes all these duties when the above
articles shall be exported to the United States in French or American vessels.

It is with great pleasure, sir, that I inform you of the dispositions of his
Majesty; they are a new testimony of his great desire to establish the most
intimate commercial connection between the two nations, and of the favorable
attention he will always pay to any proposal made in the name of the United
States of America.

I have the honor of being, with sincere attachment, SIR, Your most humble, and
Most obedient servant, De COLONNE.
P. S. Your nation will undoubtedly receive with pleasure, the information of
the facilities which the King has just granted to the exportation of the wines
of Bourdeaux, Guienne, and Touraine, and the suppression of the duties granted
by different arrets of Council, of which the Marquis de la Fayette will give
you notice.



-- No. IX. -- An ACT of the King's Council of State, for the encouragement of
the commerce of France with the United States of America.
December 29th, 1787. Extract from the Records of the Council of State.
THE King desirous of encouraging the commerce of his subjects, with the United
States of America, and of facilitating between the two nations connections
reciprocally useful: Having heard the report of the Sieur Lambert, Counselor
of State, and of the Royal Council of Finance and Commerce, Comptroller General
of Finance, his Majesty being in his Council, has ordained and does ordain as
follows:

ARTICLE I.
Whale oils and spermacaeti, the produce of the fisheries of the citizens and
inhabitants of the United States of America, which shall be brought into France
directly in French vessels, or, in those of the United States, shall continue
to be subjected to a duty only of seven livres ten sols the barrel of five
hundred and twenty pounds weight, and whale-fins shall be subject to a duty of
only six livres thirteen sols four deniers the kental, with the ten sols per
livre on each of the said duties; which ten sols per livre shall cease on the
last day of December one thousand seven hundred and ninety; his Majesty
reserving to himself to grant further favors to the produce of the whale
fisheries carried on by the fishermen of the United States of America, which
shall be brought into France in French vessels, or in those of the United
States, if, on the information which his Majesty shall cause to be taken
thereon, he shall judge it expedient for the interest of the two nations.

II.
The other fish oils, and dry or salted fish, the produce in like manner of the
fisheries of the citizens and inhabitants of the United States, and brought
also directly into France, in their, or in French vessels, shall not pay any
other nor greater duties than those to which the oils and fish of the same
kind, the produce of the fisheries of the Hanseatic Towns, or of other the most
favored nations, are or shall be subject in the same case.

III.
The manufacture of candles and tapers of spermacaeti, shall be permitted in
France, as that of other candles and tapers.

IV.
Corn, wheat, rye, rice, peace, beans, lentils, flax-seed and other seeds,
flour, trees and shrubs, pot-ash and pearl-ash, skins and fur of beaver, raw
hides, furs and peltry, and timber brought from the United States directly into
France in French vessels or in those of the United States, shall not be subject
but to a duty of one eighth per cent. on their value.

V.
Vessels built in the United States and sold in France, or purchased by
Frenchmen, shall be exempt from all duties, on proof that they were built in
the United States.

VI.
Turpentine, tar and pitch, the produce of the United States of America, and
brought directly into France in French vessels or in those of the United
States, shall pay only a duty of two and a half per cent. on their value; and
as well the duties mentioned in this as in the fourth article, shall be exempt
from all addition of sous per livre.

VII.
The exportation of arms of all sorts, and of gunpowder, for the United States
of America, shall be always permitted in French vessels, or in those of the
United States, paying for the arms a duty of one-eighth per cent. on their
value; and gunpowder in that case shall be exempt from all duty, on giving a
cautionary bond.

VIII.
Papers of all sorts; even paper hangings and colored papers, paste-board and
books, shall be exempt from all duties on their embarkation for the United
States of America, in French vessels or in those of the United States, and
shall be entitled in that case to a restitution of the fabrication duties on
paper and paste-board.

IX.
The admiralty duties on the vessels of the United States entering into, or
going out of the ports of France, shall not be levied but conformably with the
edict of the month of June last, in the cases therein provided for, and with
the letters-patent of the tenth of January, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy, for the objects for which no provision shall have been made by the
said edict: his Majesty reserving to himself moreover to make known his
intentions as to the manner in which the said duties shall be levied, whether
in proportion to the tonnage of the vessels or otherwise: as also to simplify
the said duties of the admiralty, and to regulate them as far as shall be
possible, on the principle of reciprocity, as soon as the orders shall be
completed which were given by his Majesty according to the twenty-sixth article
of the said edict of the month of June last.

X.
The entrepot (or storing) of all the productions and merchandise of the United
States, shall be permitted for six months, in all the ports of France, open to
the commerce of her colonies; and the said entrepot shall be subject only to a
duty of one-eighth per cent.

XI.
To favor the exportation of arms, hardware, jewelry, bonnetery This term
includes bonnets, stockings, socks, under waistcoats, drawers, gloves and
mittens, as sold by the bonnetiers.
of wool and of cotton, coarse woollens, small draperies and stuffs of cotton
of all sorts, and other merchandises of French fabric, which shall be sent to
the United States of America in French vessels, or in those of the United
States, his Majesty reserves to himself to grant encouragements which shall be
immediately regulated in his council, according to the nature of each of the
said merchandises.

XII.
As to other merchandises not mentioned in this act, brought directly into
France from the United States in their or in French vessels, or carried from
France to the said United States in French vessels, or in those of the United
States, and with respect to all commercial conventions whatsoever, his Majesty
wills and ordains that the citizens of the United States enjoy in France the
same rights, privileges and exemptions with the subjects of his Majesty: saving
the execution of what is provided in the ninth article hereof.

XIII.
His Majesty grants to the citizens and inhabitants of the United State, all
the advantages which are enjoyed, or which may be hereafter enjoyed by the most
favored nations in his colonies of America; and moreover his Majesty assures to
the said citizens and inhabitants of the United States, all the privileges and
advantages which his own subjects of France enjoy, or shall enjoy, in Asia and
in the scales leading thereto: Provided always that their vessels shall have
been fitted out and dispatched in some port of the United States.

His Majesty commands and orders M. le duc de Penthievre, Admiral of France,
the Intendants and Commissaries de parti in the provinces, the Commissaries de
parti for the observation of the ordinances in the admiralties, the Officers of
the admiralties, Masters of the ports, Judges des traites, and all others to
whom it shall belong, to be aiding in the execution of the present regulation,
which shall be registered in the offices of the said admiralties, read,
published and posted wherever shall be necessary.

Done in the King's Council of State, his Majesty present, held at Versailles
the twenty-ninth of December, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven.
(Signed) Le Ct. De La LUZERNE.

-- No. X. -- ARRET of the King's Council of State, prohibiting the importation
of foreign whale and spermacaeti oil into his kingdom, 28th September, 1788.
Extract from the Registers of the Council of State.
THE King having taken information on the success attending the whale fishery,
and the prospect of its greater prosperity within his kingdom, and his Majesty
being willing to grant a special protection to this important fishery which has
just commenced in France, and which may become an abundant source of riches,
while at the same time it affords to the marine a nursery for seamen of great
consequence to the service of the state -- his Majesty has conceived that the
prohibition of foreign oil would be the most beneficial encouragement that
could be granted to this branch of industry. Being willing to provide
accordingly, and having heard the report of the Sieur Lambert, Counselor of
State and Ordinary to the Council of Dispatches, and to the Royal Council of
Finances and Commerce, the King being present in his Council, has ordained, and
does ordain, that, computing from the day of publishing the present arret, the
introduction of foreign whale and spermacaeti oils shall be prohibited
throughout his dominions. His Majesty commands and orders the Duke de
Penthievre, Admiral of France, the Intendants and Commissaries throughout the
provinces, the Commissaries deputed for the observation of the ordinances in
the Admiralties, the officers of the Admiralties, Masters of Ports, Judges of
Treaties, and all others whom it may concern, to assist in the execution of the
present arret, which shall be registered in the offices of the said
Admiralties, read, published and posted wherever it shall appear necessary.

Done in the King's Council of State, his Majesty being present, held at
Versailles, 28th September, 1788. (Signed) La LUZERNE.

-- No. XI. -- ARRET of the King's Council of State, excepting whale and other
fish oil, and also whalebone, the product of the fisheries of the United States
of America, from the prohibition contained in the arret of the 28th of
September last.
December 7th, 1788. Extract from the Registers of the Council of State.
THE King having taken information on the arret pronounced in his council the
28th December last, prohibiting the importation of whale oil and spermacaeti,
the produce of foreign fisheries, into the kingdom, observing that oil made
from sea calves and other fish, and sea animals, not being comprehended in the
said arret, a fraudulent importation of whale oil might take place under the
name of the aforesaid oils; and that on the other hand it might be inferred
from the tenor of the said arret, that oils the produce of the fisheries of the
United States were prohibited: And his Majesty wishing to remove every doubt on
this head, to provide therefore for the same, having heard the report of the
Sieur Lambert, Counselor, of State in ordinary, and of the Council of
Dispatches and royal Council of Finances and Commerce, the King being present
in his council, has ordained and does ordain, that reckoning from the first day
of April next, oil made from sea calves, and from fish and other sea animals,
produced from foreign fisheries, as well as whale-bone produced in like manner
from the said foreign fisheries, shall be prohibited from importation into the
kingdom, without permitting the said prohibition nevertheless to extend either
to the said kinds of oils, or to the said whale oils and spermacaeti, or the
whale-bone produced from the fisheries of the United States of America, and
imported directly into France in French vessels, or those belonging to the
subjects of the said United States; which shall continue to be provisionally
admitted, agreeable to the first and third article of the arret of the 29th of
December last; on condition however, that the captains of the said vessels
belonging to the United States, bring with them certificates from the Consuls
of France residing in the ports of the said United States, or where these
cannot be obtained, from the Magistrates of the places where the embarkation of
the said oil shall be made, for the purpose of proving that the cargo of the
said vessels is the produce of the fisheries carried on by the citizens of the
United States; which certificates shall be presented to the Officers of the
Admiralty, also to the Commissioners of the Farms, in the ports of France where
it shall be landed, to be mentioned in the report of their arrival.

His Majesty commands and orders the Duke de Penthievre, Admiral of France, the
Intendants and Commissaries throughout the provinces, the Commissary appointed
to observe the ordinances of the Admiralty, the Officers of the Admiralty,
Masters of Ports, Judges of Treaties, and all others whom it may concern, to
assist in the execution of the present Arret, which shall be registered in the
offices of the said Admiralties, read, published and posted wherever it may
appear necessary.

Done in the King's Council of State, his Majesty being present, held at
Versailles the seventh of December, 1788. (Signed) La LUZERNE.

-- No. XII. --
State of the WHALE-FISHERY in Massachusetts, from 1771 to 1775.
PORTS from which the equipments were made. The number of vessels fitted out
annually for the northern fishery. Their tonnage. The number of vessels fitted
out annually for the southern fishery. Their tonnage The number of seamen
employed. Barrels of spermacaeti oil taken annually. Barrels of whale oil taken
annually. Nantucket, 65 4,875 10 10,200 2,025 20,000 4,000 Wellfleet, 20 1,600
1,000 420 2,250 2,250 Dartmouth, 60 4,500 20 2,000 1,040 7,200 1,400 Lynn, 1 75
1 120 28 200 100 Martha's Vineyard, 12 720 -- -- 156 900 300 Barnstable, 2 150
-- -- 26 240 -- Boston, 15 1,300 5 700 260 1,800 600 Falmouth in the county of
Barnstable, 4 300 -- -- 52 400 -- Swanzey, 4 300 -- -- 52 400 -- 183 13,820 121
14,020 4,059 39,390 8,650 STATE of the WHALE-FISHERY, from 1787 to 1789, both
inclusive.
Nantucket, 18 1,350 18 2,700 487 3,800 8,260 Wellfleet and other ports at
Cape-Cod, 12 720 4 400 212 -- 1,920 Dartmouth, 45 2,700 5 750 650 2,700 1,750
Cape-Ann, -- -- 2 ^50 28 -- 1,200 Plymouth, 1 60 -- -- 13 100 -- Martha's
Vineyard, 2 120 1 100 39 220 -- Boston, 6 450 -- -- 78 360 -- Rochester and
Wareham, 7 420 1 90 ^04 800 91 5,820 31 4,390 1,611 7,980 13,130

True Copy, Attest, JOHN AVERY, jun. Sec'ry.

N. B. About one quarter of the spermacaeti is head-matter, one quarter of
which was exported to Great Britain, the remainder manufactured into candles.
The spermacaeti oil, previous to the revolution, was mostly exported to
Great Britain. The average price in that market for five years previous to the
war, about forty pounds sterling for the spermacaeti oil, and fifty pounds for
head. The whale oil was formerly about one half exported to the French and
English West India islands, the other half sold in the United States. The
average price of this oil, about seventy dollars per ton. A whale producing one
hundred and twenty barrels whale oil, will generally produce two thousand
pounds bone, which was chiefly exported to Great Britain, the price about half
a dollar per pound: a whale producing fifty to sixty barrels, will generally
produce nearest ten pounds of bone to a barrel of oil. -- The average price of
oil for three years past, as follows, viz. Spermacaeti, one hundred dollars per
ton. Whale oil, fifty dollars per ton. Head-matter, one hundred and fifty
dollars per ton. Bone, about fifteen cents per pound.


-- No. XIII. -- Extract from a Memorial presented to the States General in
1775, by a Committee of the Merchants engaged in the Whale Fishery.
THE whale fishery is of great importance to Holland, as the produce yielded by
the sea may properly be considered as our country produce, which furnish employ
for thousands of hands; all the apparatus being made, and the vessels fitted
out in our own country.

A new vessel from 110 to 116 feet, including anchors, cables, rigging, etc.
cost from 32 to 36000 Guilders. Sixty or seventy lines, six or seven sloops,
casks, harpoons, and other materials, 8 to 9000 Guilders. Store rent, lighters,
victualling, etc. for 42 to 48 men, 4 to 5000 Guilders. Total, 44 to 50,000
Guilders.
From these outfits the country evidently derives real advantages, whereas
those immediately concerned risque their property, as has formerly been
represented, that during a period of forty-seven years, fourteen millions have
been lost in this traffic, besides the loss arising from the decrease of
capital.

The instances which have proved profitable to the owners are but few; greater
losses are to be apprehended from the present high prices of all the
necessaries and materials. To clear the expenses of a voyage, each vessel must
at least bring a return of fifteen thousand guilders, exclusive of one thousand
guilders for insurance, besides the yearly decrease of capital, which may be
calculated on an average, at thirty thousand guilders for every vessel
completely equipped, making the sum of three million eight hundred and seventy
thousand guilders for one hundred and twenty-nine vessels which have been
fitted out this present year, and which must each fetch out of the sea twenty
tons of net goods to clear themselves. The prospect of doing this is very
unfavorable, as all our neighbors use greater exertions in that trade than
ever; to which they are encouraged by the aid of their respective governments,
in particular the British, who allow forty shillings sterling per ton to each
vessel which is employed in the whale fishery; by which means the number of
their whaling vessels have, since the year 1749, (when the bounty was granted)
increased from two to one hundred and nine vessels, which in the spring 1775,
sailed from England and Scotland, measuring in the whole thirty-three thousand
three hundred and eighteen tons, and amounting, at forty shillings per ton, to
sixty-six thousand six hundred and thirty-six pounds, equal to seven hundred
and thirty-two thousand nine hundred and ninety-six guilders, which amounts
upon an average to six thousand seven hundred and twenty-five guilders for each
vessel.

The fisheries in Sweden and Denmark have also received additional strength
from the encouragements offered by their governments, without which they would
have but little inducement to that trade; so that instead of Holland formerly
exceeding all the other nations together in the whale fishery, they at present
exceed the Dutch by one third in the number of vessels -- nay, England alone
now sends out nearly as many vessels as Holland.

Another obstacle presents itself with regard to the whale-bone trade. Of this
article Holland formerly shipped five-eighth parts to Great Britain, of which
sale we are now deprived, on account of the high duty imposed on all foreign
whale-bone imported into that kingdom, and which may be considered as an
additional premium on the fishery of that nation, amounting commonly to fifty
guilders per one hundred weight. Our exportation of whale oil is also on the
decline. Hamburgh and Bremen receive great supplies, partly from their own
fisheries and partly from England and Russia, so as to be able to furnish the
greatest part of Germany with that article. France and Spain are mostly
supplied from England; and as it has been always computed, that three-fourths
of the product of our fisheries are exported, the competition of those and
other rival nations will scarcely leave a foreign market for us: our own
provinces and the river Rhine, will be our limits.

Another disadvantage ought not to pass unnoticed, which is, that the prices of
the produce of the fisheries are considerably reduced; the whale-bone of the
latest voyage having already been sold as low as ninety guilders or less, which
gives a loss. Oil may also in case of a successful season, fall from sixty to
forty guilders per twelve stekan (sixty-three gallons); and in that case,
vessels that return with one half or two thirds of their cargo, must sink money.

These are the most material circumstances that impede the progress of our
fisheries. The effect of the premium granted by the British parliament has
already been severely felt by our Greenland fleets, having, since that period,
decreased one third in number.

-- No. XIV. -- ABSTRACT of LIVE STOCK exported from the United States, from
about August 20th, 1789, to September 30th, 1790, from returns in the
Treasury-Office.
French W. Indies. All other countries Total. Heads. Value. Heads. Value.
Heads. Value. Horned Cattle, 3,573 66,915 1,833 33,045 ^,406 99,960 Horses,
6,970 263,^81 1,658 76,235 ^,628 339,516 Mules, 22 833 215 8,013 237 8,846
Sheep, 5,379 ^,502 4,679 8,537 10,058 17,039 Hogs, 4,185 9,580 1,119 4,901
5,304 14,481 20,129 349,111 9,504 130,731 29,633 479,^42

-- No. XV. -- GRAIN and FLOUR imported from the United States of America, into
the ports of France, in the year 1789, -- from an official statement.
Fr. Kentals. lbs. Rice, 123,401 69 equal to 24,680 tierces of 500 Fren. pounds
each. Flour, 256,545 94 140,959 American barrels. Wheat, 2,015,297 3 3,664,176
American bushels. Rye, 307,390 96 558,891 American bushels. Barley, 260,131 52
520,262 American bushels.

-- No. XVI. --
Office of the balance of Commerce of France. Statement of the VESSELS entered
in the ports of France, from the United States of America, in the year 1789.

Vessels. Tons. French, 13 2,105 Imperial, 3 370 English, 43 4,781 Dutch, 1 170
Hanseatic, 1 200 American, 163 24,173 224 31,799

-- No. XVII. -- ABSTRACT of the Tonnage of foreign Vessels entered in the
Ports of the United States, from Oct. 1st, 1789, to Sept. 30, 1790.
France, 13,435 Holland, 8,815 Sweden, 311 Prussia, 394 Spain, 8,551 Portugal,
2,924 Denmark, 1,619 Germany, 1,368 British dominions, 22^ ^95 262,912
-- No. XVIII. --
That the encouragement of our carrying business is interesting, not only to
the carrying states, but in a high degree also to the others, will result from
the following facts.

The whole exports of the United States may be stated at 25,000,000 Dollars.
Great Britain carries two fifths of these in value, that is to say, 10,000,000
Dollars. Freight and insurance on this in times of peace, are about twenty-two
and one half per cent. 2,250,000 Dollars. The same charges in war are very
various, according to the circumstances of the war, we may say, however,
fifty-five per cent. 5,500,000 Dollars. The difference between peace and war
freight and insurance, then is annually 3,250,000 Dollars.
Taxed on our agriculture by British wars, during their continuance, and our
dependence on British bottoms.

Of the last one hundred years, Great Britain has had Y. M 1689. May. Y. M. 8 4
WAR. PEACE. 4 8 1697. Sept. 1702. May. 10 3 6 4 1712. Aug. 1718. Dec. 2 6 5 ^
1721. June 1727. Mar. 0 2 12 4 1727. May. 1739. Oct. 8 7 7 0 1748. May. 1755.
June 7 5 15 7 1762. Nov. 1778. June 4 9 6 2 1783. Mar. 1789. May. 42 0 57 9


forty-two years of war and fifty-eight of peace, which is three of war to every
four of peace, nearly.

In every term of seven years then, we pay three times three million two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars, or nine million seven hundred and fifty
thousand, which, averaged on the years of peace and war, are annually and
constantly one million three hundred and ninety-two thousand eight hundred and
fifty-seven more than we should pay, if we could raise our own shipping to be
competent to the carriage of all our productions. Besides this, many of our
bulky articles, not bearing a war freight, cannot be exported if exposed to
that; so that their total loss is to be added to that before estimated.


