REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY OF THE UNITED STATES, ON THE SUBJECT
OF MANUFACTURES.

PRESENTED TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, December 5, 1791.

PRINTED BY CHILD'S AND SWAIN.

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, December 5th, 1791. SIR,
I have the honor to send herewith a Report, on the subject of Manufactures,
pursuant to an order of the House of Representatives of the 15th day of
January, 1790.

I have the honor to be, With perfect respect, SIR, Your obedient and Humble
servant, ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Secretary of the Treasury.
The Honorable the SPEAKER Of the House of Representatives.
THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, IN Obedience to the Order of the HOUSE of
REPRESENTATIVES, of the 15th Day of January, 1790, has applied his Attention,
at as early a Period as his other Duties would permit, to the Subject of
MANUFACTURES; and particularly to the Means of promoting such as will tend to
render the UNITED STATES independent on foreign Nations, for Military and other
essential Supplies:
AND HE THEREUPON RESPECTFULLY SUBMITS THE FOLLOWING
REPORT.
THE expediency of encouraging manufactures in the United States, which was not
long since deemed very questionable, appears at this time to be pretty
generally admitted. The embarrassments which have obstructed the progress of
our external trade, have led to serious reflections on the necessity of
enlarging the sphere of our domestic commerce: the restrictive regulations,
which in foreign markets abridge the vent of the increasing surplus of our
agricultural produce, serve to beget an earnest desire, that a more extensive
demand for that surplus may be created at home: And the complete success which
has rewarded manufacturing enterprise, in some valuable branches, conspiring
with the promising symptoms which attend some less mature essays in others,
justify a hope, that the obstacles to the growth of this species of industry
are less formidable than they were apprehended to be; and that it is not
difficult to find, in its further extension, a full indemnification for any
external disadvantages, which are or may be experienced, as well as an
accession of resources, favorable to national independence and safety.

There still are, nevertheless, respectable patrons of opinions, unfriendly to
the encouragement of manufactures. -- The following are, substantially, the
arguments by which these opinions are defended:

"In every country (say those who entertain them) agriculture is the most
beneficial and productive object of human industry. This position, generally,
if not universally true, applies with peculiar emphasis to the United States,
on account of their immense tracts of fertile territory, uninhabited and
unimproved. Nothing can afford so advantageous an employment for capital and
labor, as the conversion of this extensive wilderness into cultivated farms.
Nothing equally with this, can contribute to the population, strength and real
riches of the country."

"To endeavor, by the extraordinary patronage of government, to accelerate the
growth of manufactures, is, in fact, to endeavor, by force and art, to transfer
the natural current of industry, from a more to a less beneficial channel.
Whatever has such a tendency must necessarily be unwise: Indeed it can hardly
ever be wise in a government, to attempt to give a direction to the industry of
its citizens. This, under the quick-sighted guidance of private interest, will,
if left to itself, infallibly find its own way to the most profitable
employment; and it is by such employment, that the public prosperity will be
most effectually promoted. To leave industry to itself, therefore, is, in
almost every case, the soundest as well as the simplest policy."

"This policy is not only recommended to the United States, by considerations
which affect all nations; it is, in a manner, dictated to them by the imperious
force of a very peculiar situation. The smallness of their population, compared
with their territory, the constant allurements to emigration from the settled
to the unsettled parts of the country; the facility with which the less
independent condition of an artisan can be exchanged for the more independent
condition of a farmer; these, and similar causes, conspire to produce, and for
a length of time must continue to occasion, a scarcity of hands for
manufacturing occupation, and dearness of labor generally. To these
disadvantages for the prosecution of manufactures, a deficiency of pecuniary
capital being added, the prospect of a successful competition with the
manufacturers of Europe, must be regarded as little less than desperate.
Extensive manufactures can only be the offspring of a redundant, at least of a
full population. Till the latter shall characterise the situation of this
country, it is vain to hope for the former."

"If, contrary to the natural course of things, an unseasonble and premature
spring can be given to certain fabrics, by heavy duties, prohibitions,
bounties, or by other forced expedients; this will only be to sacrifice the
interests of the community to those of particular classes. Besides the
misdirection of labor, a virtual monopoly will be given to the persons employed
on such fabrics; and an enhancement of price, the inevitable consequence of
every monopoly, must be defrayed at the expense of the other parts of the
society. It is far preferable, that those persons should be engaged in the
cultivation of the earth, and that we should procure, in exchange for its
productions, the commodities, with which foreigners are able to supply us in
greater perfection, and upon better terms."

This mode of reasoning is founded upon facts and principles, which have
certainly respectable pretensions. If it had governed the conduct of nations,
more generally than it has done, there is room to suppose, that it might have
carried them faster to prosperity and greatness, than they have attained by the
pursuit of maxims too widely opposite. Most general theories, however, admit of
numerous exceptions, and there are few, if any, of the political kind, which do
not blend a considerable portion of error with the truths they inculcate.

In order to an accurate judgment how far that which has been just stated ought
to be deemed liable to a similar imputation, it is necessary to advert
carefully to the considerations which plead in favor of manufactures, and
which appear to recommend the special and positive encouragement of them, in
certain cases, and under certain reasonable limitations.

It ought readily to be conceded, that the cultivation of the earth, as the
primary and most certain source of national supply; as the immediate and chief
source of subsistence to man; as the principal source of those materials which
constitute the nutriment of other kinds of labor; as including a state most
favorable to the freedom and independence of the human mind; one, perhaps,
most conducive to the multiplication of the human species; has intrinsically a
strong claim to pre-eminence over every other kind of industry.

But, that it has a title to any thing like an exclusive predilection, in any
country, ought to be admitted with great caution. That it is even more
productive than every other branch of industry, requires more evidence than has
yet been given in support of the position. That its real interests, precious
and important as, without the help of exaggeration, they truly are, will be
advanced, rather than injured by the due encouragement of manufactures, may, it
is believed, be satisfactorily demonstrated. And it is also believed, that the
expediency of such encouragement, in a general view, may be shown to be
recommended by the most cogent and persuasive motives of national policy.

It has been maintained, that agriculture is, not only, the most productive,
but the only productive species of industry. The reality of this suggestion, in
either respect, has, however, not been verified by any accurate detail of facts
and calculations; and the general arguments, which are adduced to prove it, are
rather subtle and paradoxical, than solid or convincing.

Those which maintain its exclusive productiveness are to this effect: --

Labor, bestowed upon the cultivation of land, produces enough, not only to
replace all the necessary expenses incurred in the business, and to maintain
the persons who are employed in it, but to afford, together with the ordinary
profit on the stock or capital of the farmer, a nett surplus, or rent for the
landlord or proprietor of the soil. But the labor of artificers does nothing
more than replace the stock which employs them (or which furnishes materials,
tools and wages) and yield the ordinary profit upon that stock. It yields
nothing equivalent to the rent of land. Neither does it add any thing to the
total value of the whole annual produce of the land and labor of the country.
The additional value given to those parts of the produce of land, which are
wrought into manufactures, is counterbalanced by the value of those other parts
of that produce, which are consumed by the manufacturers. It can therefore only
be by saving or parsimony, not by the positive productiveness of their labor,
that the classes of artificers can in any degree augment the revenue of the
society.

To this it has been answered,

1. "That inasmuch as it is acknowledged, that manufacturing labor reproduces a
value equal to that which is expended or consumed in carrying it on, and
continues in existence the original stock or capital employed, it ought on that
account alone, to escape being considered as wholly unproductive: That though
it should be admitted, as alleged, that the consumption of the produce of the
soil, by the classes of artificers or manufacturers, is exactly equal to the
value added by their labor to the materials upon which it is exerted; yet it
would not thence follow, that it added nothing to the revenue of the society,
or to the aggregate value of the annual produce of its land and labor. If the
consumption for any given period amounted to a given sum, and the increased
value of the produce manufactured, in the same period, to a like sum, the total
amount of the consumption and production during that period, would be equal to
the two sums, and consequently double the value of the agricultural produce
consumed. And though the increment of value produced by the classes of
artificers should at no time exceed the value of the produce of the land
consumed by them, yet there would be at every moment, in consequence of their
labor, a greater value of goods in the market than would exist independent of
it."

2. "That the position, that artificers can augment the revenue of a society,
only by parsimony, is true in no other sense, than in one which is equally
applicable to husbandmen or cultivators. It may be alike affirmed of all these
classes, that the fund acquired by their labor and destined for their support,
is not, in an ordinary way, more than equal to it. And hence it will follow,
that augmentations of the wealth or capital of the community (except in the
instances of some extraordinary dexterity or skill) can only proceed, with
respect to any of them, from the savings of the more thrifty and parsimonious."

3. "That the annual produce of the land and labor of a country can only be
increased, in two ways -- by some improvement in the productive powers of the
useful labor, which actually exists within it, or by some increase in the
quantity of such labor: That with regard to the first, the labor of artificers
being capable of greater subdivision and simplicity of operation, than that of
cultivators, it is susceptible, in a proportionably greater degree, of
improvement in its productive powers, whether to be derived from an accession
of skill, or from the application of ingenious machinery; in which particular,
therefore, the labor employed in the culture of land can pretend to no
advantage over that engaged in manufactures: That with regard to an
augmentation of the quantity of useful labor, this, excluding adven^^^^us
circumstances, must depend essentially upon an increase of capital, which again
must depend upon the savings made out of the revenues of those, who furnish or
manage that, which is at any time employed, whether in agriculture, or in
manufactures, or in any other way."

But while the exclusive productiveness of agricultural labor has been thus
denied and refuted, the superiority of its productiveness has been conceded
without hesitation. As this concession involves a point of considerable
magnitude, in relation to maxims of public administration, the grounds on which
it rests are worthy of a distinct and particular examination.

One of the arguments made use of, in support of the idea may be pronounced
both quaint and superficial: It amounts to this -- That in the productions of
the soil, nature co-operates with man; and that the effect of their joint labor
must be greater than that of the labor of man alone.

This, however, is far from being a necessary inference. It is very
conceivable, that the labor of man alone laid out upon a work, requiring great
skill and art to bring it to perfection, may be more productive, in value, than
the labor of nature and man combined, when directed toward more simple
operations and objects: And when it is recollected to what an extent the agency
of nature, in the application of the mechanical powers, is made auxiliary to
the prosecution of manufactures, the suggestion which has been noticed, loses
even the appearance of plausibility.

It might also be observed, with a contrary view, that the labor employed in
agriculture is in a great measure periodical and occasional, depending on
seasons, liable to various and long intermissions; while that occupied in many
manufactures is constant and regular, extending through the year, embracing, in
some instances, night as well as day. It is also probable, that there are among
the cultivators of land, more examples of remissness, than among artificers.
The farmer, from the peculiar fertility of his land, or some other favorable
circumstance, may frequently obtain a livelihood, even with a considerable
degree of carelessness in the mode of cultivation; but the artisan can with
difficulty effect the same object, without exerting himself pretty equally with
all those, who are engaged in the same pursuit. And if it may likewise be
assumed as a fact, that manufactures open a wider field to exertions of
ingenuity than agriculture, it would not be a strained conjecture, that the
labor employed in the former, being at once more constant, more uniform and
more ingenious, than that which is employed in the latter, will be found at the
same time more productive.

But it is not meant to lay stress on observations of this nature; they ought
only to serve as a counterbalance to those of a similar complexion.
Circumstances so vague and general, as well as so abstract, can afford little
instruction in a matter of this kind.

Another, and that which seems to be the principal argument offered for the
superior productiveness of agricultural labor, turns upon the allegation, that
labor employed on manufactures yields nothing equivalent to the rent of land;
or to that nett surplus, as it is called, which accrues to the proprietor of
the soil.

But this distinction, important as it has been deemed, appears rather verbal
than substantial.

It is easily discernible, that what in the first instance is divided into two
parts under the denominations of the ordinary profit of the stock of the farmer
and rent to the landlord, is in the second instance united under the general
appellation of the ordinary profit on the stock of the undertaker; and that
this formal or verbal distribution constitutes the whole difference in the two
cases. It seems to have been overlooked, that the land is itself a stock or
capital, advanced or lent by its owner to the occupier or tenant, and that the
rent he receives is only the ordinary profit of a certain stock in land, not
managed by the proprietor himself, but by another to whom he lends or lets it,
and who, on his part, advances a second capital to stock and improve the land,
upon which he also receives the usual profit. The rent of the landlord and the
profit of the farmer are therefore nothing more than the ordinary profits of
two capitals belonging to two different persons, and united in the cultivation
of a farm: As in the other case, the surplus which arises upon any manufactory,
after replacing the expenses of carrying it on, answers to the ordinary profits
of one or more capitals engaged in the prosecution of such manufactory. It is
said one or more capitals; because in fact, the same thing which is
contemplated in the case of the farm, sometimes happens in that of a
manufactory. There is one, who furnishes a part of the capital, or lends a part
of the money, by which it is carried on, and another, who carries it on, with
the addition of his own capital. Out of the surplus which remains, after
defraying expenses, an interest is paid to the money lender for the portion of
the capital furnished by him, which exactly agrees with the rent paid to the
landlord; and the residue of that surplus constitutes the profit of the
undertaker or manufacturer, and agrees with what is denominated the ordinary
profits on the stock of the farmer. Both together make the ordinary profits of
two capitals employed in a manufactory; as in the other case the rent of the
landlord and the revenue of the farmer compose the ordinary profits of two
capitals, employed in the cultivation of a farm.

The rent therefore accruing to the proprietor of the land, far from being a
criterion of exclusive productiveness, as has been argued, is no criterion even
of superior productiveness. The question must still be, whether the surplus,
after defraying expenses, of a given capital, employed in the purchase and
improvement of a piece of land, is greater or less, than that of a like capital
employed in the prosecution of a manufactory; or whether the whole value
produced from a given capital and a given quantity of labor, employed in one
way, be greater or less than the whole value produced from an equal capital and
an equal quantity of labor employed in the other way; or rather, perhaps,
whether the business of agriculture or that of manufactures will yield the
greatest product, according to a compound ratio of the quantity of the capital
and the quantity of labor, which are employed in the one or in the other.

The solution of either of these questions is not easy; it involves numerous
and complicated details, depending on an accurate knowledge of the objects to
be compared. It is not known that the comparison has ever yet been made upon
sufficient data properly ascertained and analised. To be able to make it on the
present occasion with satisfactory precision would demand more previous enquiry
and investigation, than there has been hitherto either leisure or opportunity
to accomplish.

Some essays, however have been made toward acquiring the requisite
information; which have rather served to throw doubt upon, than to confirm the
hypothesis, under examination. But it ought to be acknowledged, that they have
been too little diversified, and are too imperfect to authorize a definitive
conclusion either way; leading rather to probable conjecture than to certain
deduction. They render it probable, that there are various branches of
manufactures, in which a given capital will yield a greater total product, and
a considerably greater nett product, than an equal capital invested in the
purchase and improvement of lands; and that there are also some branches, in
which both the gross and the nett produce will exceed that of agricultural
industry; according to a compound ratio of capital and labor. But it is on this
last point, that there appears to be the greatest room for doubt. It is far
less difficult to infer generally, that the nett produce of capital engaged in
manufacturing enterprises is greater than that of capital engaged in
agriculture.

The foregoing suggestions are not designed to inculcate an opinion that
manufacturing industry is more productive than that of agriculture. They are
intended rather to show that the reverse of this proposition is not
ascertained; that the general arguments which are brought to establish it are
not satisfactory; and consequently that a supposition of the superior
productiveness of tillage ought to be no obstacle to listening to any
substantial inducements to the encouragement of manufactures, which may be
otherwise perceived to exist, through an apprehension, that they may have a
tendency to divert labor from a more to a less profitable employment.

It is extremely probable, that on a full and accurate developement of the
matter, on the ground of fact and calculation, it would be discovered that
there is no material difference between the aggregate productiveness of the
one, and of the other kind of industry; and that the propriety of the
encouragements, which may in any case be proposed to be given to either, ought
to be determined upon considerations irrelative to any comparison of that
nature.

II. But without contending for the superior productiveness of manufacturing
industry, it may conduce to a better judgment of the policy, which ought to be
pursued respecting its encouragement, to contemplate the subject, under some
additional aspects, tending not only to confirm the idea, that this kind of
industry has been improperly represented as unproductive in itself; but to
evince in addition that the establishment and diffusion of manufactures have
the effect of rendering the total mass of useful and productive labor, in a
community, greater than it would otherwise be. In prosecuting this discussion,
it may be necessary briefly to resume and review some of the topics which have
been already touched.

To affirm that the labor of the manufacturer is unproductive because he
consumes as much of the produce of land as he adds value to the raw materials
which he manufactures, is not better founded, than it would be to affirm, that
the labor of the farmer, which furnishes materials to the manufacturer, is
unproductive, because he consumes an equal value of manufactured articles. Each
furnishes a certain portion of the produce of his labor to the other, and each
destroys a correspondent portion of the produce of the labor of the other. In
the mean time the maintenance of two citizens, instead of one, is going on; the
state has two members instead of one; and they together consume twice the value
of what is produced from the land.

If instead of a farmer and artificer, there were a farmer only, he would be
under the necessity of devoting a part of his labor to the fabrication of
clothing and other articles, which he would procure of the artificer, in the
case of there being such a person; and of course he would be able to devote
less labor to the cultivation of his farm, and would draw from it a
proportionably less product. The whole quantity of production, in this state of
things, in provisions, raw materials and manufactures, would certainly not
exceed in value the amount of what would be produced in provisions and raw
materials only, if there were an artificer as well as a farmer.

Again -- If there were both an artificer and a farmer, the latter would be
left at liberty to pursue exclusively the cultivation of his farm. A greater
quantity of provisions and raw materials would of course be produced, equal, at
least, as has been already observed, to the whole amount of the provisions, raw
materials and manufactures, which would exist on a contrary supposition. The
artificer, at the same time, would be going on in the production of
manufactured commodities; to an amount sufficient not only to repay the farmer,
in those commodities, for the provisions and materials which were procured from
him, but to furnish the artificer himself with a supply of similar commodities
for his own use. Thus then, there would be two quantities or values in
existence instead of one; and the revenue and consumption would be double in
one case, what it would be in the other.

If in place of both these suppositions, there were supposed to be two farmers
and no artificer, each of whom applied a part of his labor to the culture of
land, and another part to the fabrication of manufactures; in this case, the
portion of the labor of both bestowed upon land would produce the same quantity
of provisions and raw materials only, as would be produced by the entire sum of
the labor of one applied in the same manner, and the portion of the labor of
both bestowed upon manufactures, would produce the same quantity of
manufactures only, as would be produced by the entire sum of the labor of one
appplied in the same manner. Hence the produce of the labor of the two farmers
would not be greater than the produce of the labor of the farmer and artificer;
and hence it results, that the labor of the artificer is as positively
productive as that of the farmer, and, as positively, augments the revenue of
the society.

The labor of the artificer replaces to the farmer that portion of his labor
with which he provides the materials of exchange with the artificer, and which
he would otherwise have been compelled to apply to manufactures; and while the
artificer thus enables the farmer to enlarge his stock of agricultural
industry, a portion of which he purchases for his own use, be also supplies
himself with the manufactured articles of which he stands in need. He does
still more -- Besides this equivalent which he gives for the portion of
agricultural labor consumed by him, and this supply of manufactured commodities
for his own consumption; he furnishes still a surplus, which compensates for
the use of the capital advanced either by himself or some other person, for
carrying on the business. This is the ordinary profit of the stock employed in
the manufactory, and is, in every sense, as effective an addition to the income
of the society as the rent of land.

The produce of the labor of the artificer consequently, may be regarded as
composed of three parts; one by which the provisions for his subsistence and
the materials for his work are purchased of the farmer, one by which he
supplies himself with manufactured necessaries, and a third which constitutes
the profit on the stock employed. The two last portions seem to have been
overlooked in the system, which represents manufacturing industry as barren and
unproductive.

In the course of the preceding illustrations, the products of equal quantities
of the labor of the farmer and artificer have been treated as if equal to each
other. But this is not to be understood as intending to assert any such precise
equality. It is merely a manner of expression adopted for the sake of
simplicity and perspicuity. Whether the value of the produce of the labor of
the farmer be somewhat more or less, than that of the artificer, is not
material to the main scope of the argument, which hitherto has only aimed at
showing that the one, as well as the other, occasions a positive augmentation
of the total produce and revenue of the society.

It is now proper to proceed a step further, and to enumerate the principal
circumstances, from which it may be inferred. That manufacturing establishments
not only occasion a positive augmentation of the produce and revenue of the
society, but that they contribute essentially to rendering them greater than
they could possibly be, without such establishments. These circumstances are,
1. The division of labor. 2. An extension of the use of machinery. 3.
Additional employment to classes of the community not ordinarily engaged in the
business. 4. The promoting of emigration from foreign countries. 5. The
furnishing greater scope for the diversity of talents and dispositions which
discriminate men from each other. 6. The affording a more ample and various
field for enterprise. 7. The creating in some instances a new, and securing in
all, a more certain and steady demand for the surplus produce of the soil.
Each of these circumstances has a considerable influence upon the total mass
of industrious effort in a community: together, they add to it a degree of
energy and effect, which are not easily conceived. Some commen^s upon each of
them, in the order in which they have been stated, may serve to explain their
importance.

I. As to the division of labor. --

It has justly been observed, that there is scarcely any thing of greater
moment in the economy of a nation, than the proper division of labor. The
separation of occupations causes each to be carried to a much greater
perfection than it could possibly acquire, if they were blended. This arises
principally from three circumstances.

1st. The greater skill and dexterity naturally resulting from a constant and
undivided application to a single object. It is evident, that these properties
must increase, in proportion to the separation and simplification of objects
and the steadiness of the attention devoted to each; and must be less, in
proportion to the complication of objects, and the number among which the
attention is distracted.

2d. The economy of time, by avoiding the loss of it, incident to a frequent
transition from one operation to another of a different nature. This depends on
various circumstances; the transition itself, the orderly disposition of the
implements, machines and materials employed in the operation to be
relinquished, the preparatory steps to the commencement of a new one, the
interruption of the impulse, which the mind of the workman acquires, from being
engaged in a particular operation; the distractions, hesitations and
reluctances, which attend the passage from one kind of business to another.

3d. An extension of the use of machinery. -- A man occupied on a single object
will have it more in his power, and will be more naturally led to exert his
imagination in devising methods to facilitate and abrige labor, than if he were
perplexed by a variety of independent and dissimilar operations. Besides this,
the fabrication of machines, in numerous instances, becoming itself a distinct
trade, the artist who follows it, has all the advantages which have been
enumerated, for improvement in his particular art; and in both ways the
invention and application of machinery are extended.

And from these causes united, the mere separation of the occupation of the
cultivator, from that of the artificer, has the effect of augmenting the
productive powers of labor, and with them, the total mass of the produce or
revenue of a country. In this single view of the subject, therefore, the
utility of artificers or manufacturers, toward promoting an increase of
productive industry, is apparent.

II. As to an extension of the use of machinery, a point which though partly
anticipated, requires to be placed in one or two additional lights.

The employment of machinery forms an item of great importance in the general
mass of national industry. It Is an artificial force brought in aid of the
natural force of man; and, to all the purposes of labor, is an increase of
hands; an accession of strength, unincumbered too by the expense of maintaining
the laborer. May it not therefore be fairly inferred, that those occupations,
which give greatest scope to the use of this auxiliary, contribute most to the
general stock of industrious effort, and, in consequence, to the general
product of industry?

It shall be taken for granted, and the truth of the position referred to
observation, that manufacturing pursuits are susceptible in a greater degree of
the application of machinery, than those of agriculture. If so, all the
difference is lost to a community, which, instead of manufacturing for itself,
procures the fabrics requisite to its supply from other countries. The
substitution of foreign for domestic manufactures is a transfer to foreign
nations of the advantages accruing from the employment of machinery, in the
modes in which it is capable of being employed, with most utility and to the
greatest extent.

The cotton mill invented in England, within the last twenty years, is a signal
illustration of the general proposition, which has been just advanced. In
consequence of it, all the different processes for spinning cotton are
performed by means of machines, which are put in motion by water, and attended
chiefly by women and children; and by a smaller number of persons, in the
whole, than are requisite in the ordinary mode of spinning. And it is an
advantage of great moment that the operations of this mill continue with
convenience, during the night, as well as through the day. The prodigious
effect of such a machine is easily conceived. To this invention is to be
attributed essentially the immense progress, which has been so suddenly made in
Great Britain in the various fabrics of cotton.

III. As to the additional employment of classes of the community, not
originally engaged in the particular business.

This is not among the least valuable of the means, by which manufacturing
institutions contribute to augment the general stock of industry and
production. In places where those institutions prevail, besides the persons
regularly engaged in them, they afford occasional and extra employment to
industrious individuals and families, who are willing to devote the leisure
resulting from the intermissions of their ordinary pursuits to collateral
labors, as a resource for multiplying their acquisitions or their enjoyments.
The husbandman himself experiences a new source of profit and support from the
increased industry of his wife and daughters; invited and stimulated by the
demands of the neighboring manufactories.

Beside this advantage of occasional employment to classes having different
occupations, there is another of a nature allied to it and of a similar
tendency. This is, the employment of persons who would otherwise be idle (and
in many cases a burden on the community) either from the bias of temper,
habit, infirmity of body, or some other cause, indisposing or disqualifying
them for the toils of the country. It is worthy of particular remark, that, in
general, women and children are rendered more useful, and the latter more early
useful, by manufacturing establishments, than they would otherwise be. Of the
number of persons employed in the cotton manufactories of Great Britain, it is
computed that 4/7 nearly are women and children; of whom the greatest
proportion are children, and many of them of a tender age.

And thus is appears to be one of the attributes of manufactures, and one of no
small consequence, to give occasion to the exertion of a greater quantity of
industry, even by the same number of persons, where they happen to prevail,
than would exist, if there were no such establishments.

IV. As to the promoting of emigration from foreign countries.

Men reluctantly quit one course of occupation and livelihood for another,
unless invited to it by very apparent and proximate advantages. Many, who would
go from one country to another, if they had a prospect of continuing, with more
benefit, the callings to which they have been educated, will often not be
tempted to change their situation by the hope of doing better in some other
way. Manufacturers who, listening to the powerful invitations of a better price
for their fabrics, or their labor, of greater cheapness of provisions and raw
materials, of an exemption from the chief part of the taxes, burdens and
restraints, which they endure in the old world, of greater personal
independence and consequence, under the operation of a more equal government,
and of what is far more precious than mere religious toleration, a perfect
equality of religious privileges; would probably flock from Europe to the
United States to pursue their own trades or professions, if they were once made
sensible of the advantages they would enjoy, and were inspired with an
assurance of encouragement and employment, will, with difficulty, be induced to
transplant themselves, with a view to becoming cultivators of land.

If it be true then, that it is the interest of the United States to open every
possible avenue to emigration from abroad, it affords a weighty argument for
the encouragement of manufactures; which, for the reasons just assigned, will
have the strongest tendency to multiply the inducements to it.

Here is perceived an important resource, not only for extending the
population, and with it the useful and productive labor of the country, but
likewise for the prosecution of manufactures, without deducting from the number
of hands, which might otherwise be drawn to tillage; and even for the
indemnification of agriculture for such as might happen to be diverted from it.
Many, whom manufacturing views would induce to emigrate, would afterward yield
to the temptations, which the particular situation of this country holds out to
agricultural pursuits. And while agriculture would in other respects derive
many signal and unmingled advantages, from the growth of manufactures, it is a
problem whether it would gain or lose, as to the article of the number of
persons employed in carrying it on.

V. As to the furnishing greater scope for the diversity of talents and
dispositions, which discriminate mem from each other.

This is a much more powerful mean of augmenting the fund of national industry
than may at first sight appear. It is a just observation, that minds of the
strongest and most active powers for their proper objects fall below mediocrity
and labor without effect, if confined to uncongenial pursuits. And it is thence
to be inferred, that the results of human exertion may be immensely increased
by diversifying its objects. When all the different kinds of industry obtain in
a community, each individual can find his proper element, and can call into
activity the whole vigor of his nature. And the community is benefited by the
services of its respective members, in the manner, in which each can serve it
with most effect.

If there be any thing in a remark often to be met with, namely, that there is,
in the genius of the people of this country, a peculiar aptitude for mechanic
improvements, it would operate as a forcible reason for giving opportunities to
the exercise of that species of talent, by the propagation of manufactures.

VI. As to the affording a more ample and various field for enterprise.

This also is of greater consequence in the general scale of national exertion,
than might perhaps on a superficial view be supposed, and has effects not
altogether dissimilar from those of the circumstance last noticed. To cherish
and stimulate the activity of the human mind, by multiplying the objects of
enterprise, is not among the least considerable of the expedients, by which the
wealth of a nation may be promoted. Even things in themselves, not positively
advantageous, sometimes become so, by their tendency to provoke exertion. Every
new scene which is opened to the busy nature of man to rouse and exert itself,
is the addition of a new energy to the general stock of effort.

The spirit of enterprise, useful and prolific as it is, must necessarily be
contracted or expanded in proportion to the simplicity or variety of the
occupations and productions, which are to be found in a society. It must be
less in a nation of mere cultivators, than in a nation of cultivators and
merchants; less in a nation of cultivators and merchants, than in a nation of
cultivators, artificers and merchants.

VII. As to the creating, in some instances, a new, and securing in all a more
certain and steady demand, for the surplus produce of the soil.

This is among the most important of the circumstances which have been
indicated. It is a principal mean, by which the establishment of manufactures
contributes to an augmentation of the produce or revenue of a country, and has
an immediate and direct relation to the prosperity of agriculture.

It is evident, that the exertions of the husbandman will be steady or
fluctuating, vigorous or feeble, in proportion to the steadiness or
fluctuation, adequateness, or inadequateness of the markets on which he must
depend, for the vent of the surplus, which may be produced by his labor; and
that such surplus in the ordinary course of things will be greater or less in
the same proportion.

For the purpose of this vent, a domestic market is greatly to be preferred to
a foreign one; because it is in the nature of things, far more to be relied
upon.

It is a primary object of the policy of nations, to be able to supply
themselves with subsistence from their own soils; and manufacturing nations, as
far as circumstances permit, endeavor to procure from the same source, the raw
materials necessary for their own fabrics. This disposition, urged by the
spirit of monopoly, is sometimes even carried to an injudicious extreme. It
seems not always to be recollected, that nations, who have neither mines nor
manufactures, can only obtain the manufactured articles, of which they stand in
need, by an exchange of the products of their soils, and that, if those who can
best furnish them with such articles are unwilling to give a due course to this
exchange, they must of necessity make every possible effort to manufacture for
themselves; the effect of which is that the manufacturing nations abrige the
natural advantages of their situation, through an unwillingness to permit the
agricultural countries to enjoy the advantages of theirs, and sacrifice the
interests of a mutually beneficial intercourse to the vain project of selling
every thing and buying nothing.

But it is also a consequence of the policy, which has been noted, that the
foreign demand for the products of agricultural countries, is, in a great
degree, rather casual and occasional, than certain or constant. To what extent
injurious interruptions of the demand for some of the staple commodities of the
United States, may have been experienced, from that cause, must be referred to
the judgment of those who are engaged in carrying on the commerce of the
country; but it may be safely affirmed, that such interruptions are at times
very inconveniently felt, and that cases not unfrequently occur, in which
markets are so confined and restricted, as to render the demand very unequal to
the supply.

Independently likewise of the artificial impediments, which are created by the
policy in question, there are natural causes tending to render the external
demand for the surplus of agricultural nations a precarious reliance. The
differences of seasons, in the countries which are the consumers, make immense
differences in the produce of their own soils, in different years; and
consequently in the degrees of their necessity for foreign supply. Plentiful
harvests with them, especially if similar ones, occur at the same time in the
countries which are the furnishers, occasion of course a glut in the markets of
the latter.

Considering how fast and how much the progress of new settlements in the
United States must increase the surplus produce of the soil, and weighing
seriously the tendency of the system, which prevails among most of the
commercial nations of Europe; whatever dependence may be placed on the force of
natural circumstances to counteract the effects of an artificial policy; there
appear strong reasons to regard the foreign demand for that surplus as too
uncertain a reliance, and to desire a substitute for it, in an extensive
domestic market.

To secure such a market, there is no other expedient, than to promote
manufacturing establishments. Manufacturers who constitute the most numerous
class, after the cultivators of land, are for that reason the principal
consumers of the surplus of their labor.

This idea of an extensive domestic market for the surplus produce of the soil
is of the first consequence. It is of all things, that which most effectually
conduces to a flourishing state of agriculture. If the effect of manufactories
should be to detach a portion of the hands, which would otherwise be engaged in
tillage, it might possibly cause a smaller quantity of lands to be under
cultivation; but by their tendency to procure a more certain demand for the
surplus produce of the soil, they would, at the same time, cause the lands
which were in cultivation, to be better improved and more productive. And
while, by their influence, the condition of each individual farmer would be
meliorated, the total mass of agricultural production would probably be
increased. For this must evidently depend as much, if not more, upon the degree
of improvement, than upon the number of acres under culture.

It merits particular observation, that the multiplication of manufactories not
only furnishes a market for those articles which have been accustomed to be
produced in abundance, in a country; but it likewise creates a demand for such
as were either unknown or produced in inconsiderable quantities. The bowels as
well as the surface of the earth are ransacked for articles which were before
neglected. Animals, plants and minerals acquire a utility and value, which were
before unexplored.

The foregoing considerations seem sufficient to establish, as general
propositions, that it is the interest of nations to diversify the industrious
pursuits of the individuals, who compose them -- That the establishment of
manufactures is calculated not only to increase the general stock of useful and
productive labor; but even to improve the state of agriculture in particular;
certainly to advance the interests of those who are engaged in it. There are
other views, that will be hereafter taken of the subject, which, it is
conceived, will serve to confirm these inferences.

III. Previously to a further discusion of the objections to the encouragement
of manufactures which have been stated, it will be of use to see what can be
said in reference to the particular situation of the United States, against the
conclusions appearing to result from what has been already offered.

It may be observed, and the idea is of no inconsiderable weight, that however
true it might be, that a state, which possessing large tracts of vacant and
fertile territory, was at the same time secluded from foreign commerce, would
find its interest and the interest of agriculture, in diverting a part of its
population from tillage to manufactures; yet it will not follow, that the same
is true of a state, which having such vacant and fertile territory, has at the
same time ample opportunity of procuring from abroad, on good terms, all the
fabrics of which it stands in need, for the supply of its inhabitants. The
power of doing this at least secures the great advantage of a division of
labor, leaving the farmer free to pursue exclusively the culture of his land,
and enabling him to procure with its products the manufactured supplies
requisite either to his wants or to his enjoyments. And though it should be
true, that in settled countries, the diversification of industry is conducive
to an increase in the productive powers of labor, and to an augmentation of
revenue and capital; yet it is scarcely conceivable that there can be any thing
of so solid and permanent advantage to an uncultivated and unpeopled country,
as to convert its wastes into cultivated and inhabited districts. If the
revenue, in the mean time, should be less, the capital, in the event, must be
greater.

To these observations, the following appears to be a satisfactory answer --

1. If the system of perfect liberty to industry and commerce were the
prevailing system of nations, the arguments which dissuade a country in the
predicament of the United States, from the zealous pursuit of manufactures
would doubtless have great force. It will not be affirmed, that they might not
be permitted, with few exceptions, to serve as a rule of national conduct. In
such a state of things, each country would have the full benefit of its
peculiar advantages to compensate for its deficiencies or disadvantages. If one
nation were in condition to supply manufactured articles on better terms than
another, that other might find an abundant indemnification in a superior
capacity to furnish the produce of the soil. And a free exchange, mutually
beneficial, of the commodities which each was able to supply, on the best
terms, might be carried on between them, supporting in full vigor the industry
of each. And though the circumstances which have been mentioned, and others
which will be unfolded hereafter, render it probable, that nations merely
agricultural, would not enjoy the same degree of opulence, in proportion to
their numbers, as those which united manufactures with agriculture; yet the
progressive improvement of the lands of the former, might in the end, atone for
an inferior degree of opulence in the mean time; and in a case, in which
opposite considerations are pretty equally balanced, the option ought perhaps
always to be, in favor of leaving industry to its own direction.

But the system, which has been mentioned, is far from characterising the
general policy of nations. The prevalent one has been regulated by an opposite
spirit. The consequence of it is, that the United States are to a certain
extent in the situation of a country precluded from foreign commerce. They can
indeed, without difficulty, obtain from abroad the manufactured supplies, of
which they are in want; but they experience numerous and very injurious
impediments to the emission and vent of their own commodities. Nor is this the
case in reference to a single foreign nation only. The regulations of several
countries, with which we have the most extensive intercourse, throw serious
obstructions in the way of the principal staples of the United States.

In such a position of things, the United States cannot exchange with Europe on
equal terms; and the want of reciprocity would render them the victim of a
system, which should induce them to confine their views to agriculture, and
refrain from manufactures. A constant and increasing necessity, on their part,
for the commodities of Europe, and only a partial and occasional demand for
their own, in return, could not but expose them to a state of impoverishment,
compared with the opulence to which their political and natural advantages
authorize them to aspire.

Remarks of this kind are not made in the spirit of complaint. It Is for the
nations, whose regulations are alluded to, to judge for themselves, whether by
aiming at too much, they do not lose more than they gain. It Is for the United
States to consider by what means they can render themselves least dependent, on
the combinations, right or wrong, of foreign policy.

It is no small consolation, that already the measures which have embarrassed
our trade, have accelerated internal improvements, which upon the whole have
bettered our affairs. To diversify and extend these improvements, is the surest
and safest method of indemnifying ourselves for any inconveniences, which
those or similar measures have a tendency to beget. If Europe will not take
from us the products of our soil, upon terms consistent with our interest, the
natural remedy is to contract as fast as possible our wants of her.

The conversion of their waste into cultivated lands is certainly a point of
great moment in the political calculations of the United States. But the degree
in which this may possibly be retarded by the encouragement of manufactories
does not appear to countervail the powerful inducements to affording that
encouragement.

An observation made in another place is of a nature to have great influence
upon this question -- If it cannot be denied, that the interests even of
agriculture may be advanced more by having such of the lands of a state as are
occupied under good cultivation, than by having a greater quantity occupied
under a much inferior cultivation, and if manufactories, for the reasons
assigned, must be admitted to have a tendency to promote a more steady and
vigorous cultivation of the lands occupied, than would happen without them, it
will follow, that they are capable of indemnifying a country for a diminution
of the progress of new settlements; and may serve to increase both the capital
value and the income of its lands, even though they should abridge the number
of acres under tillage.

But it does, by no means, follow, that the progress of new settlements would
be retarded by the extension of manufactures. The desire of being an
independent proprietor of land is founded on such strong principles in the
human breast, that where the opportunity of becoming so is as great as it is in
the United States, the proportion will be small of those, whose situations
would otherwise lead to it, who would be diverted from it toward manufactures.
And it is highly probable, as already intimated, that the accessions of
foreigners, who originally drawn over by manufacturing views would afterward
abandon them for agricultural, would be more than an equivalent for those of
our own citizens, who might happen to be detached from them.

The remaining objections to a particular encouragement of manufactures in the
United States now require to be examined.

One of these tu^^s on the proposition, that industry, if left to itself, will
naturally find its way to the most useful and profitable employment: whence it
is inferred that manufactures without the aid of government, will grow up as
soon and as fast, as the natural state of things and the interest of the
community may require.

Against the solidity of this hypothesis, in the full latitude of the terms,
very cogent reasons may be offered. These have relation to the strong influence
of habit and the spirit of imitation, the fear of want of success in untried
enterprises, the intrinsic difficulties incident to first essays toward a
competition with those who have previously attained to perfection in the
business to be attempted, the bounties, premiums and other artificial
encouragements, with which foreign nations second the exertions of their own
citizens in the branches, in which they are to be rivalled.

Experience teaches, that men are often so much governed by what they are
accustomed to see and practice, that the simplest and most obvious
improvements, in the most ordinary occupations, are adopted with hesitation,
reluctance and by slow gradations. The spontaneous transition to new pursuits,
in a community long habituated to different ones, may be expected to be
attended with proportionably greater difficulty. When former occupations ceased
to yield a profit adequate to the subsistence of their followers, or when there
was an absolute deficiency of employment in them, owing to the superabundance
of hands, changes would ensue; but these changes would be likely to be more
tardy than might consist with the interest either of individuals or of the
society. In many cases they would not happen, while a bare support could be
ensured by an adherence to ancient courses; though a re^ort to a more
profitable employment might be practicable. To produce the desirable changes,
as early as may be expedient, may therefore require the incitement and
patronage of government.

The apprehension of failing in new attempts is perhaps a more serious
impediment. There are dispositions apt to be attracted by the mere novelty of
an undertaking; but these are not always those best calculated to give it
success. To this, it is of importance that the confidence of cautious,
sagacious capitalists, both citizens and foreigners, should be excited. And to
inspire this description of persons with confidence, it is essential, that they
should be made to see in any project, which is new, and for that reason alone,
if for no other, precarious, the prospect of such a degree of countenance and
support from government, as may be capable of overcoming the obstacles,
inseparable from first experiments.

The superiority antecedently enjoyed by nations, who have pre-occupied and
perfected a branch of industry, constitutes a more formidable obstacle, than
either of those, which have been mentioned, to the introduction of the same
branch into a country, in which it did not before exist. To maintain between
the recent establishments of one country and the long matured establishments of
another country, a competition upon equal terms, both as to quality and price,
is in most cases impracticable. The disparity, in the one, or in the other, or
in both, must necessarily be so considerable as to forbid a successful
rivalship, without the extraordinary aid and protection of government.

But the greatest obstacle of all to the successful prosecution of a new branch
of industry in a country, in which it was before unknown, consists, as far as
the instances apply, in the bounties, premiums and other aids which are
granted, in a variety of cases, by the nations in which the establishments to
be imitated are previously introduced. It is well known (and particular
examples in the course of this report will be cited) that certain nations grant
bounties on the exportation of particular commodities, to enable their own
workmen to undersell and supplant all competitors, in the countries to which
those commodities are sent. Hence the undertakers of a new manufacture have to
contend not only with the natural disadvantages of a new undertaking, but with
the gratuities and remunerations which other governments bestow. To be enabled
to contend with success, it is evident, that the interference and aid of their
own government are indispensable.

Combinations by those engaged in a particular branch of business in one
country, to frustrate the first efforts to introduce it into another, by
temporary sacrifices, recompensed perhaps by extraordinary indemnifications of
the government of such country, are believed to have existed, and are not to be
regarded as destitute of probability. The existence or assurance of aid from
the government of the country, in which the business is to be introduced, may
be essential to fortify adventurers against the dread of such combinations --
to defeat their effects, if formed, and to prevent their being formed, by
demonstrating that they must in the end prove fruitless.

Whatever room there may be for an expectation that the industry of a people,
under the direction of private interest, will upon equal terms find out the
most beneficial employment for itself, there is none for a reliance, that it
will struggle against the force of unequal terms, or will of itself surmount
all the adventitious barriers to a successful competition, which may have been
erected either by the advantages naturally acquired from practice and previous
possession of the ground, or by those which may have sprung from positive
regulations and an artificial policy. This general reflection might alone
suffice as an answer to the objection under examination; exclusively of the
weighty considerations which have been particularly urged.

The objections to the pursuit of manufactures in the United States, which next
present themselves to discussion, represent an impracticability of success,
arising from three causes -- scarcity of hands, dearness of labor, want of
capital.

The two first circumstances are to a certain extent real, and, within due
limits, ought to be admitted as obstacles to the success of manufacturing
enterprise in the United States. But there are various considerations, which
lessen their force, and tend to afford an assurance that they are not
sufficient to prevent the advantageous prosecution of many very useful and
extensive manufactories.

With regard to scarcity of hands, the fact itself must be applied with no
small qualification to certain parts of the United States. There are large
districts, which may be considered as pretty fully peopled; and which
notwithstanding a continual drain for distant settlement, are thickly
interspersed with flourishing and increasing towns. If these districts have not
already reached the point, at which the complaint of scarcity of hands ceases,
they are not remote from it, and are approaching fast toward it: And having
perhaps fewer attractions to agriculture, than some other parts of the union,
they exhibit a proportionably stronger tendency toward other kinds of
industry. In these districts, may be discerned, no inconsiderable maturity for
manufacturing establishments.

But there are circumstances, which have been already noticed with another
view, that materially diminish every where the effect of a scarcity of hands.
These circumstances are -- the great use which can be made of women and
children; on which point a very pregnant and instructive fact has been
mentioned; the vast extension given by late improvements to the employment of
machines, which substituting the agency of fire and water, has prodigiously
lessened the necessity for manual labor; the employment of persons ordinarily
engaged in other occupations, during the seasons, or hours of leisure; which,
besides giving occasion to the exertion of a greater quantity of labor by the
same number of persons, and thereby increasing the general stock of labor as
has been elsewhere remarked, may also be taken into the calculation, as a
resource for obviating the scarcity of hands -- lastly, the attraction of
foreign emigrants. Whoever inspects with a careful eye, the composition of our
towns, will be made sensible to what an extent this resource may be relied
upon. This exhibits a large proportion of ingenious and valuable workmen, in
different arts and trades, who, by expatriating from Europe, have improved
their own condition, and added to the industry and wealth of the United States.
It is a natural inference from the experience, we have already had, that as
soon as the United States shall present the countenance of a serious
prosecution of manufactures, as soon as foreign artists shall be made sensible
that the state of things here affords a moral certainty of employment and
encouragement, competent numbers of European workmen will transplant
themselves, effectually to ensure the success of the design. How indeed can it
otherwise happen considering the various and powerful inducements, which the
situation of this country offers; addressing themselves to so many strong
passions and feelings, to so many general and particular interests:

It may be affirmed therefore, in respect to hands for carrying on
manufactures, that we shall in a great measure trade upon a foreign stock;
reserving our own, for the cultivation of our lands, and the manning of our
ships; as far as character and circumstances shall incline. It is not unworthy
of remark, that the objection to the success of manufactures, deduced from the
scarcity of hands, is alike applicable to trade and navigation, and yet these
are perceived to flourish, without any sensible impediment from that cause.

As to the dearness of labor (another of the obstacles alleged) this has
relation principally to two circumstances; one that which has been just
discussed, or the scarcity of hands; the other, the greatness of profits.

As far as it is a consequence of the scarcity of hands, it is mitigated by all
the considerations which have been adduced as lessening that deficiency. It is
certain too, that the disparity in this respect, between some of the most
manufacturing parts of Europe and a large proportion of the United States, is
not nearly so great as is commonly imagined. It is also much less in regard to
artificers and manufacturers than in regard to country laborers; and while a
careful comparison shows, that there is, in this particular, much exaggeration;
it is also evident that the effect of the degree of disparity which does truly
exist, is diminished in proportion to the use which can be made of machinery.

To illustrate this last idea -- Let it be supposed, that the difference of
price, in two countries, of a given quantity of manual labor requisite to the
fabrication of a given article is as ten; and that some MECHANIC POWER is
introduced into both countries, which performing half the necessary labor,
leaves only half to be done by hand, it is evident, that the difference in the
cost of the fabrication of the article in question, in the two countries, as
far as it is connected with the price of labor, will be reduced from ten to
five, in consequence of the introduction of that POWER.

This circumstance is worthy of the most particular attention. It diminishes
immensely one of the objections, most strenuously urged, against the success of
manufactures in the United States.

To procure all such machines as are known in any part of Europe, can only
require a proper provision and due pains. The knowledge of several of the most
important of them is already possessed. The preparation of them here, is in
most cases practicable on nearly equal terms. As far as they depend on water,
some superiority of advantages may be claimed, from the uncommon variety and
greater cheapness of situations adapted to mill seats, with which different
parts of the United States abound.

So far as the dearness of labor may be a consequence of the greatness of
profits in any branch of business, it is no obstacle to its success. The
undertaker can afford to pay the price.

There are grounds to conclude that undertakers of manufactures in this country
can at this time afford to pay higher wages to the workmen they may employ than
are paid to similar workmen in Europe. The prices of foreign fabrics, in the
markets of the United States, which will for a long time regulate the prices of
the domestic ones, may be considered as compounded of the following
ingredients. The first cost of materials, including the taxes, if any, which
are paid upon them where they are made; the expense of grounds, buildings,
machinery and tools; the wages of the persons employed in the manufactory; the
profits on the capital or stock employed; the commissions of agents to purchase
them where they are made; the expense of transportation to the United States,
including insurance and other incidental charges; the taxes or duties, if any,
and fees of office which are paid on their exportation; the taxes or duties,
and fees of office which are paid on their importation.

As to the first of these items, the cost of materials, the advantage, upon the
whole, is at present on the side of the United States, and the difference, in
their favor, must increase, in proportion as a certain and extensive domestic
demand shall induce the proprietors of land to devote more of their attention
to the production of those materials. It ought not to escape observation, in a
comparison on this point, that some of the principal manufacturing countries of
Europe are much more dependent on foreign supply for the materials of their
manufactures, than would be the United States, who are capable of supplying
themselves with a greater abundance, as well as a greater variety of the
requisite materials.

As to the second item, the expense of grounds, buildings, machinery and tools,
an equality at least may be assumed; since advantages in some particulars will
counterbalance temporary disadvantages in others.

As to the third item, or the article of wages, the comparison certainly turns
against the United States; though as before observed, not in so great a degree
as is commonly supposed.

The fourth item is alike applicable to the foreign and to the domestic
manufacture. It is indeed more properly a result than a particular, to be
compared.

But with respect to all the remaining items, they are alone applicable to the
foreign manufacture, and in the strictest sense extraordinaries; constituting a
sum of extra charge on the foreign fabric, which cannot be estimated at less
than from 15 to 30 per cent. on the cost of it at the manufactory.

This sum of extra charge may confidently be regarded as more than a
counterpoise for the real difference in the price of labor; and is a
satisfactory proof that manufactures may prosper in defiance of it in the
United States.

To the general allegation, connected with the circumstances of scarcity of
hands and dearness of labor, that extensive manufactures can only grow out of a
redundant or full population, it will be sufficient, to answer generally, that
the fact has been otherwise. -- That the situation alleged to be an essential
condition of success, has not been that of several nations, at periods when
they had already attained to maturity in a variety of manufactures.

The supposed want of capital for the prosecution of manufactures in the United
States, is the most indefinite of the objections which are usually opposed to
it.

It is very difficult to pronounce any thing precise concerning the real extent
of the monied capital of a country, and still more concerning the proportion
which it bears to the objects that invite the employment of capital. It is not
less difficult to pronounce how far the effect of any given quantity of money,
as capital, or in other words, as a medium for circulating the industry and
property of a nation, may be increased by the very circumstance of the
additional motion, which is given to it by new objects of employment. That
effect, like the momentum of descending bodies, may not improperly be
represented, as in a compound ratio to mass and velocity. It seems pretty
certain, that a given sum of money, in a situation, in which the quick impulses
of commercial activity were little felt, would appear inadequate to the
circulation of as great a quantity of industry and property, as in one, in
which their full influence was experienced.

It is not obvious, why the same objection might not as well be made to
external commerce as to manufactures; since it is manifest that our immense
tracts of land, occupied and unoccupied, are capable of giving employment to
more capital than is actually bestowed upon them. It is certain, that the
United States offer a vast field for the advantageous employment of capital,
but it does not follow, that there will not be found, in one way or another, a
sufficient fund, for the successful prosecution of any species of industry
which is likely to prove truly beneficial.

The following considerations are of a nature to remove all inquietude on the
score of want of capital.

The introduction of banks, as has been shown on another occasion, has a
powerful tendency to extend the active capital of a country. Experience of the
utility of these institutions is multiplying them in the United States. It is
probable that they will be established wherever they can exist with advantage;
and wherever they can be supported, if administered with prudence, they will
add new energies to all pecuniary operations.

The aid of foreign capital may safely, and with considerable latitude be taken
into calculation. Its instrumentality has been long experienced in (...)
external commerce; and it has begun to be felt in various other modes. Not only
our funds, but our agriculture and other internal improvements have been
animated by it. It has already, in a few instances, extended even to our
manufactures.

It is a well known fact, that there are parts of Europe, which have more
capital, than profitable domestic objects of employment. Hence, among other
proofs, the large loans continually furnished to foreign states. And it is
equally certain that the capital of other parts may find more profitable
employment in the United States, than at home. And notwithstanding there are
weighty inducements to prefer the employment of capital at home, even at less
profit, to an investment of it abroad, though with greater gain, yet these
inducements are overruled, either by a deficiency of employment, or by a very
material difference in profit. Both these causes operate to produce a transfer
of foreign capital to the United States. It Is certain, that various objects in
this country hold out advantages, which are with difficulty to be equalled
elsewhere; and under the encreasingly favorable impressions, which are
entertained of our government, the attractions will become more and more
strong. These impressions will prove a rich mine of prosperity to the country,
if they are confirmed and strengthened by the progress of our affairs. And to
secure this advantage, little more is necessary, than to foster industry, and
cultivate order and tranquillity, at home and abroad.

It is not impossible, that there may be persons disposed to look with a
jealous eye on the introduction of foreign capital, as if it were an instrument
to deprive our own citizens of the profits of our own industry: But perhaps
there never could be a more unreasonable jealousy. Instead of being viewed as a
rival, it ought to be considered as a most valuable auxiliary; conducing to put
in motion a greater quantity of productive labor, and a greater portion of
useful enterprise, than could exist without it. It is at least evident, that in
a country situated like the United States, with an infinite fund of resources,
yet to be unfolded, every farthing of foreign capital, which is laid out in
internal ameliorations, and in industrious establishments of a permanent
nature, is a precious acquisition.

And whatever be the objects which originally attract foreign capital, when
once introduced, it may be directed toward any purpose of beneficial exertion,
which is desired. And to detain it among us, there can be no expedient so
effectual as to enlarge the sphere, within which it may be usefully employed:
though introduced merely with views to speculations in the funds, it may
afterward be rendered subservient to the interests of agriculture, commerce
and manufactures.

But the attraction of foreign capital for the direct purpose of manufactures
ought not to be deemed a chimerial expectation. There are already examples of
it, as remarked in another place. And the examples, if the disposition be
cultivated, can hardly fail to multiply. There are also instances of another
kind, which serve to strengthen the expectation; enterprises for improving the
public communications, by cutting canals, opening the obstructions in rivers,
and erecting bridges, have received very material aid from the same source.

When the manufacturing capitalist of Europe shall advert to the many important
advantages, which have been intimated, in the course of this report, he cannot
but perceive very powerful inducements to a transfer of himself and his capital
to the United States. Among the reflections, which a most interesting
peculiarity of situation is calculated to suggest, it cannot escape his
observation, as a circumstance of moment in the calculation, that the
progessive population and improvement of the United States, ensure a
continually increasing domestic demand for the fabrics which he shall produce,
not to be affected by any external casualties or vicissitudes.

But while there are circumstances sufficiently strong to authorize a
considerable degree of reliance on the aid of foreign capital, toward the
attainment of the object in view, it is satisfactory to have good grounds of
assurance, that there are domestic resources of themselves adequate to it. It
happens, that there is a species of capital, actually existing within the
United States, which relieves from all inquietude on the score of want of
capital -- This is the funded debt. --

The effect of a funded debt, as a species of capital, has been noticed upon a
former occasion; but a more particular elucidation of the point seems to be
required by the stress which is here laid upon it -- This shall accordingly be
attempted.

Public funds answer the purpose of capital, from the estimation in which they
are usually held by monied men; and consequently from the ease and dispatch
with which they can be turned into money. This capacity of prompt
convertibility into money causes a transfer of stock to be in a great number of
cases equivalent to a payment in coin -- And where it does not happen to suit
the party who is to receive, to accept a transfer of stock, the party who is to
pay, is never at a loss to find elsewhere a purchaser of his stock, who will
furnish him in lieu of it, with the coin of which he stands in need.

Hence in a sound and settled state of the public funds, a man possessed of a
sum in them can embrace any scheme of business, which offers, with as much
confidence as if he were possessed of an equal sum in coin.

This operation of public funds, as capital, is too obvious to be denied; but
it is objected to the idea of their operating as an augmentation of the capital
of the community, that they serve to occasion the destruction of some other
capital to an equal amount.

The capital which alone they can be supposed to destroy, must consist of --
The annual revenue, which is applied to the payment of interest on the debt,
and to the gradual redemption of the principal -- The amount of the coin, which
is employed in circulating the funds, or, in other words, in effecting the
different alienations which they undergo.

But the following appears to be the true and accurate view of this matter --

1st. As to the point of the annual revenue requisite for payment of interest
and redemption of principal.

As a determinate proportion will tend to perspicuity in the reasoning, let it
be supposed that the annual revenue to be applied, corresponding with the
modification of the 6 per cent. stock of the United States, is in the ratio of
eight upon the hundred; that is, in the first instance, six on account of
interest, and two on account of principal.

Thus far it is evident, that the capital destroyed to the capital created,
would bear no greater proportion than 8 to 10c. There would be withdrawn from
the total mass of other capitals a sum of eight dollars to be paid to the
public creditor; while he would be possessed of a sum of one hundred dollars,
ready to be applied to any purpose, to be embarked in any enterprise, which
might appear to him eligible -- Here then the augmentation of capital, or the
excess of that which is produced, beyond that which is destroyed, is equal to
ninety-two dollars.

To this conclusion it may be objected, that the sum of eight dollars is to be
withdrawn annually, until the whole hundred is extinguished, and it may be
inferred, that in process of time a capital will be destroyed equal to that
which is at first created.

But it is nevertheless true, that during the whole of the interval, between
the creation of the capital of 100 dollars, and its reduction to a sum not
greater than that of the annual revenue appropriated to its redemption -- there
will be a greater active capital in existence than if no debt had been
contracted. The sum drawn from other capitals in any one year will not exceed
eight dollars; but there will be at every instant of time during the whole
period in question, a sum corresponding with so much of the principal, as
remains unredeemed, in the hands of some person or other, employed, or ready to
be employed in some profitable undertaking. There will therefore constantly be
more capital, in capacity to be employed, than capital taken from employment.
The excess for the first year has been stated to be ninety-two dollars; it will
diminish yearly; but there always will be an excess, until the principal of the
debt is brought to a level with the REDEEMING ANNUITY; that is, in the case
which has been assumed by way of example, to EIGHT DOLLARS. The reality of this
excess becomes palpable, if it be supposed, as often happens, that the citizen
of a foreign country imports into the United States 100 dollars for the
purchase of an equal sum of public debt -- here is an absolute augmentation of
the mass of circulating coin to the extent of 100 dollars. At the end of a year
the foreigner is presumed to draw back eight dollars on account of his
principal and interest, but he still leaves, ninety-two of his original deposit
in circulation, as he in like manner leaves eighty-four at the end of the
second year, drawing back then also the annuity of eight dollars: And thus the
matter proceeds; the capital left in circulation diminishing each year, and
coming nearer to the level of the annuity drawn back. There are however, some
differences in the ultimate operation of the part of the debt, which is
purchased by foreigners, and that which remains in the hands of citizens. But
the general effect in each case, though in different degrees, is to add to the
active capital of the country.

Hitherto the reasoning has proceeded on a concession of the position, that
there is a destruction of some other capital, to the extent of the annuity
appropriated to the payment of the interest and the redemption of the principal
of the debt; but in this, too much has been conceded. There is at most a
temporary transfer of some other capital, to the amount of the annuity, from
those who pay to the creditor who receives; which he again restores to the
circulation to resume the offices of a capital. This he does either immediately
by employing the money in some branch of industry, or mediately by lending it
to some other person, who does so employ it, or by spending it on his own
maintenance. In either supposition, there is no destruction of capital: there
is nothing more than a suspension of its motion for a time; that is, while it
is passing from the hands of those who pay into the public coffers, and thence
through the public creditor into some other channel of circulation. When the
payments of interest are periodical and quick, and made by the instrumentality
of banks, the diversion or suspension of capital may almost be denominated
momentary. Hence the deduction on this account is far less, than it at first
sight appears to be.

There is evidently, as far as regards the annuity, no destruction nor transfer
of any other capital, than that portion of the income of each individual, which
goes to make up the annuity. The land which furnishes the farmer with the sum
which he is to contribute remains the same; and the like may be observed of
other capitals. Indeed as far as the tax, which is the object of contribution
(as frequently happens when it does not oppress by its weight) may have been a
motive to greater exertion in any occupation; it may even serve to increase the
contributory capital: This idea is not without importance in the general view
of the subject.

It remains to see, what further deduction ought to be made from the capital
which is created, by the existence of the debt, on account of the coin, which
is employed in its circulation. This is susceptible of much less precise
calculation than the article which has been just discussed. It is impossible to
say what proportion of coin is necessary to carry on the alienations which any
species of property usually undergoes. The quantity indeed varies according to
circumstances. But it may still without hesitation be pronounced, from the
quickness of the rotation, or rather of the transitions, that the medium of
circulation always bears but a small proportion to the amount of the property
circulated. And it is thence satisfactorily deducible, that the coin employed
in the negociations of the funds, and which serves to give them activity, as
capital, is incomparably less than the sum of the debt negociated for the
purpose of business.

It ought not, however, to be omitted, that the negotiation of the funds
becomes itself a distinct business; which employs, and by employing, diverts a
portion of the circulating coin from other pursuits. But making due allowance
for this circumstance, there is no reason to conclude, that the effect of the
diversion of coin in the whole operation bears any considerable proportion to
the amount of the capital to which it gives activity. The sum of the debt in
circulation is continually at the command of any useful enterprise, the coin
itself which circulates it, is never more than momentarily suspended from its
ordinary functions. It experiences an incessant and rapid flux and reflux to
and from the channels of industry to those of speculations in the funds.

There are strong circumstances in confirmation of this theory. The force of
monied capital which has been displayed in Great Britain, and the height to
which every species of industry has grown up under it, defy a solution from the
quantity of coin which that kingdom has ever possessed. Accordingly it has been
coeval with its funding system, the prevailing opinion of the men of business,
and of the generality of the most sagacious theorists of that country, that the
operation of the public funds as capital has contributed to the effect in
question. Among ourselves appearances thus far favor the same conclusion.
Industry in general seems to have been reanimated. There are symptoms
indicating an extension of our commerce. Our navigation has certainly of late
had a considerable spring, and there appears to be in many parts of the Union a
command of capital, which, till lately, since the revolution at least, was
unknown. But it is at the same time to be acknowledged, that other
circumstances have concurred (and in a great degree) in producing the present
state of things, and that the appearances are not yet sufficiently decisive to
be entirely relied upon.

In the question under discussion, it is important to distinguish between an
absolute increase of capital, or an accession of real wealth and an artificial
increase of capital, as an engine of business, or as an instrument of industry
and commerce. In the first sense, a funded debt has no pretensions to being
deemed an increase of capital; in the last, it has pretensions which are not
easy to be controverted. Of a similar nature is bank credit, and, in an
inferior degree, every species of private credit.

But though a funded debt is not in the first instance, an absolute increase of
capital, or an augmentation of real wealth; yet by serving as a new power in
the operations of industry, it has within certain bounds a tendency to increase
the real wealth of a community; in like manner as money borrowed by a thrifty
farmer, to be laid out in the improvement of his farm, may, in the end, add to
his stock of real riches.

There are respectable individuals, who, from a just aversion to an
accumulation of public debt, are unwilling to concede to it any kind of
utility, who can discern no good to alleviate the ill with which they suppose
it pregnant; who cannot be persuaded, that it ought in any sense to be viewed
as an increase of capital, lest it should be inferred, that the more debt the
more capital, the greater the burdens the greater the blessings of the
community.

But it interests the public councils to estimate every object as it truly is;
to appreciate how far the good in any measure is compensated by the ill; or the
ill by the good; either of them is seldom unmixed.

Neither will it follow, that an accumulation of debt is desirable, because a
certain degree of it operates as capital. There may be a plethora in the
political, as in the natural body; there may be a state of things in which any
such artificial capital is unnecessary. The debt too may be swelled to such a
size, as that the greatest part of it may cease to be useful as a capital,
serving only to pamper the dissipation of idle and dissolute individuals; as
that the sums required to pay the interest upon it may become oppressive, and
beyond the means which a government can employ, consistently with its
tranquillity, to raise them; as that the resources of taxation, to face the
debt, may have been strained too far to admit of extensions adequate to
exigencies, which regard the public safety.

Where this critical point is, cannot be pronounced; but it is impossible to
believe, that there is not such a point.

And as the vicissitudes of nations beget a perpetual tendency to the
accumulation of debt, there ought to be in every government a perpetual,
anxious and unceasing effort to reduce that, which at any time exists, as fast
as shall be practicable, consistently with integrity and good faith.

Reasonings on a subject comprehending ideas so abstract and complex, so little
reducible to precise calculation as those which enter into the question just
discussed; are always attended with a danger of running into fallacies. Due
allowance ought therefore to be made for this possibility -- But as far as the
nature of the subject admits of it, there appears to be satisfactory ground for
a belief that the public funds operate as a resource of capital to the citizens
of the United States, and, if they are a resource at all, it is an extensive
one.

To all the arguments which are brought to evince the impracticability of
success in manufacturing establishments in the United States, it might have
been a sufficient answer to have referred to the experience of what has been
already done -- It is certain that several important branches have grown up and
flourished with a rapidity which surprises; affording an encouraging assurance
of success in future attempts; of these it may not be improper to enumerate the
most considerable. --

I. Of skins. Tanned and ^awed leather, dressed skins, shoes, boots and
slippers, harness and sadlery of all kinds, portmanteaus and trunks, leather
breeches, gloves, muffs and tippets, parchment and glue.

II. Of Iron. Bar and sheet iron, steel, nail rods, and nails, implements of
husbandry, stoves, pots and other household utensils, the steel and iron work of
carriages, and for ship building, anchors, scale beams and weights, and various
tools of artificers, arms of different kinds, though the manufacture of these
last has of late diminished for want of demand.

III. Of Wood. Ships, cabinet wares and turnery, wool and cotton cards, and
other machinery for manufactures and husbandry, mathematical instruments,
coopers wares of every kind.

IV. Of Flax and Hemp. Cables, sail-cloth, cordage, twine and packthread.

V. Bricks and coarse tiles, and potters wares.

VI. Ardent spirits, and malt liquors.

VII. Writing and printing paper, sheathing and wrapping paper, pasteboards,
fullers or press papers, paper hangings.

VIII. Hats of fur and wool and of mixtures of both. Women's stuff and silk
shoes.

IX. Refined sugars.

X. Oils of animals and seeds, soap, spermaceti and tallow candles.

XI. Copper and brass wares, particularly utensils for distillers, sugar
refiners and brewers, andirons and other articles for household use --
philosophical apparatus.

XII. Tin wares for most purposes of ordinary use.

XIII. Carriages of all kinds.

XIV. Snuff, chewing and smoking tobacco.

XV. Starch and hair powder.

XVI. Lampblack and other painters colors.

XVII. Gunpowder.

Besides manufactories of these articles which are carried on as regular
trades, and have attained to a considerable degree of maturity, there is a vast
scene of household manufacturing, which contributes more largely to the supply
of the community, than could be imagined; without having made it an object of
particular enquiry. This observation is the pleasing result of the
investigation, to which the subject of this report has led, and is applicable
as well to the southern as to the middle and northern states; great quantities
of coarse cloths, coatings, serges and flannels, linsey-woolseys, hosiery of
wool, cotton and thread, coarse fustians, jeans and muslins, checked and
striped cotton and linen goods, bedticks, coverlets and counterpanes, tow
linens, coarse shirtings, sheetings, toweling and table linen, and various
mixtures of wool and cotton, and of cotton and flax, are made in the household
way, and in many instances to an extent not only sufficient for the supply of
the families in which they are made, but for sale, and even in some cases for
exportation. It is computed in a number of districts that two-thirds,
three-fourths, and even four-fifths of all the clothing of the inhabitants are
made by themselves. The importance of so great a progress, as appears to have
been made in family manufactures, within a few years, both in a moral and
political view; renders the fact highly interesting.

Neither does the above enumeration comprehend all the articles that are
manufactured as regular trades. Many others occur, which are equally well
established, but which not being of equal importance have been omitted. And
there are many attempts still in their infancy, which though attended with very
favorable appearances, could not have been properly comprised in an enumeration
of manufactories already established. There are other articles also of great
importance, which, though strictly speaking, manufactures, are omitted, as
being immediately connected with husbandry: such are flour, pot and pearl ash,
pitch, tar, turpentine and the like.

There remains to be noticed an objection to the encouragement of manufactures,
of a nature different from those which question the probability of success --
This is derived from its supposed tendency to give a monopoly of advantages to
particular classes at the expense of the rest of the community, who, it is
affirmed, would be able to procure the requisite supplies of manufactured
articles on better terms from foreigners, than from our own citizens, and who,
it is alleged, are reduced to a necessity of paying an enhanced price for
whatever they want, by every measure, which obstructs the free competition of
foreign commodities.

It is not an unreasonable supposition that measures, which serve to abridge
the free competition of foreign articles, have a tendency to occasion an
enhancement of prices, and it is not to be denied that such is the effect in a
number of cases; but the fact does not uniformly correspond with the theory. A
reduction of prices has in several instances immediately succeeded the
establishment of a domestic manufacture. Whether it be that foreign
manufacturers endeavor to supplant, by underselling our own, or whatever else
be the cause, the effect has been such as is stated, and the reverse of what
might have been expected.

But though it were true, that the immediate and certain effect of regulations
controuling the competition of foreign with domestic fabrics was an increase of
price, it is universally true, that the contrary is the ultimate effect with
every successful manufacture. When a domestic manufacture has attained to
perfection, and has engaged in the prosecution of it a competent number of
persons, it invariably becomes cheaper. Being free from the heavy charges,
which attend the importation of foreign commodities, it can be afforded, and
accordingly seldom or never fails to be sold cheaper, in process of time, than
was the foreign article for which it is a substitute. The internal competition,
which takes place, soon does away every thing like monopoly, and by degrees
reduces the price of the article to the minimum of a reasonable profit on the
capital employed. This accords with the reason of the thing and with experience.

Whence it follows, that it is the interest of a community, with a view to
eventual and permanent economy, to encourage the growth of manufactures. In a
national view, a temporary enhancement of price must always be well compensated
by a permanent reduction of it.

It is a reflection, which may with propriety be indulged here, that this
eventual diminution of the prices of manufactured articles, which is the result
of internal manufacturing establishments, has a direct and very important
tendency to benefit agriculture. It enables the farmer, to procure with a
smaller quantity of his labor, the manufactured produce, of which he stands in
need, and consequently increases the value of his income and property.

The objections which are commonly made to the expediency of encouraging and to
the probability of succeeding in manufacturing pursuits, in the United States,
having now been discussed, the considerations which have appeared in the course
of the discussion, recommending that species of industry to the patronage of
the government, will be materially strengthened by a few general and some
particular topics, which have been naturally reserved for subsequent notice.

I. There seems to be a moral certainty, that the trade of a country which is
both manufacturing and agricultural, will be more lucrative and prosperous,
than that of a country, which is merely agricultural.

One reason for this is found in that general effort of nations (which has been
already mentioned) to procure from their own soils, the articles of prime
necessity requisite to their own consumption and use; and which serves to
render their demand for a foreign supply of such articles in a great degree
occasional and contingent. Hence, while the necessities of nations exclusively
devoted to agriculture, for the fabrics of manufacturing states are constant
and regular, the wants of the latter for the products of the former, are liable
to very considerable fluctuations and interruptions. The great inequalities,
resulting from difference of seasons, have been elsewhere remarked: this
uniformity of demand on one side, and unsteadiness of it, on the other, must
necessarily have a tendency to cause the general course of the exchange of
commodities between the parties, to turn to the disadvantage of the merely
agricultural states. Peculiarity of situation, a climate and soil adapted to
the production of peculiar commodities may, sometimes, contradict the rule; but
there is every reason to believe that it will be found in the main, a just one.

Another circumstance which gives a superiority of commercial advantages to
states, that manufacture, as well as cultivate, consists in the more numerous
attractions, which a more diversified market offers to foreign customers, and
in the greater scope, which it affords to mercantile enterprise. It is a
position of indisputable truth in commerce, depending too on very obvious
reasons, that the greatest resort will ever be to those marts, where
commodities, while equally abundant, are most various. Each difference of kind
holds out an additional inducement: and it is a position not less clear, that
the field of enterprise must be enlarged to the merchants of a country, in
proportion to the variety, as well as the abundance of commodities which they
find at home for exportation to foreign markets.

A third circumstance, perhaps not inferior to either of the other two,
conferring the superiority which has been stated, has relation to the
stagnations of demand for certain commodities which at some time or other
interfere more or less with the sale of all. -- The nation which can bring to
market, but few articles is likely to be more quickly and sensibly affected by
such stagnations, than one, which is always possessed of a great variety of
commodities: the former frequently finds too great a portion of its stock of
materials, for sale or exchange, lying on hand -- or is obliged to make
injurious sacrifices to supply its wants of foreign articles, which are
numerous and urgent, in proportion to the smallness of the number of its own.
The latter commonly finds itself indemnified, by the high prices of some
articles, for the low prices of others -- and the prompt and advantageous sale
of those articles which are in demand enables its merchants the better to wait
for a favorable change, in respect to those which are not. There is ground to
believe, that a difference of situation, in this particular, has immensely
different effects upon the wealth and prosperity of nations.

From these circumstances collectively, two important inferences are to be
drawn; one, that there is always a higher probability of a favorable balance of
trade, in regard to countries, in which manufactures founded on the basis of a
thriving agriculture flourish, than in regard to those, which are confined
wholly or almost wholly to agriculture; the other (which is also a consequence
of the first) that countries of the former description are likely to possess
more pecuniary wealth, or money, than those of the latter.

Facts appear to correspond with this conclusion. The importations of
manufactured supplies seem invariably to drain the merely agricultural people
of their wealth. Let the situation of the manufacturing countries of Europe be
compared in this particular, with that of countries which only cultivate, and
the disparity will be striking. Other causes, it is true, help to account for
this disparity between some of them; and among these causes, the relative state
of agriculture; but between others of them, the most prominent circumstance of
dissimilitude arises from the comparative state of manufactures. In
corroboration of the same idea, it ought not to escape remark, that the
West India islands, the soils of which are the most fertile, and the nation,
which in the greatest degree supplies the rest of the world, with the precious
metals, exchange to a loss with almost every other country.

As far as experience at home may guide, it will lead to the same conclusion.
Previous to the revolution, the quantity of coin, possessed by the colonies,
which now compose the United States, appeared to be inadequate to their
circulation; and their debt to Great Britain was progressive. Since the
revolution, the states, in which manufactures have most increased, have
recovered fastest from the injuries of the late war; and abound most in
pecuniary resources.

It ought to be admitted, however, in this as in the preceding case, that
causes irrelative to the state of manufactures account, in a degree, for the
phenomena remarked. The continual progress of new settlements has a natural
tendency to occasion an unfavorable balance of trade; though it indemnifies for
the inconvenience, by that increase of the national capital which flows from
the conversion of waste into improved lands: and the different degrees of
external commerce, which are carried on by the different states, may make
material differences in the comparative state of their wealth. The first
circumstance has reference to the deficiency of coin and the increase of debt
previous to the revolution; the last to the advantages which the most
manufacturing states appear to have enjoyed; over the others, since the
termination of the late war.

But the uniform appearance of an abundance of specie, as the concomitant of a
flourishing state of manufactures, and of the reverse, where they do not
prevail, afford a strong presumption of their favorable operation upon the
wealth of a country. Not only the wealth, but the independence and security of
a country, appear to be materially connected with the prosperity of
manufactures. Every nation, with a view to those great objects, ought to
endeavor to possess within itself all the essentials of national supply. These
comprise the means of subsistence, habitation, clothing and defense.

The possession of these is necessary to the perfection of the body politic, to
the safety as well as to the welfare of the society; the want of either, is the
want of an important organ of political life and motion; and in the various
crises which await a state, it must severely feel the effects of any such
deficiency. The extreme embarrassments of the United States during the late
war, from an incapacity of supplying themselves, are still matter of keen
recollection: a future war might be expected again to exemplify the mischiefs
and dangers of a situation, to which that incapacity is still in too great a
degree applicable, unless changed by timely and vigorous exertions. To effect
this change, as fast as shall be prudent, merits all the attention and all the
zeal of our public councils; it is the next great work to be accomplished.

The want of a navy to protect our external commerce, as long as it shall
continue, must render it a peculiarly precarious reliance, for the supply of
essential articles, and must serve to strengthen prodigiously the arguments in
favor of manufactures.

To these general considerations are added some of a more particular nature.

Our distance from Europe, the great fountain of manufactured supply, subjects
us in the existing state of things, to inconvenience and loss in two ways.

The bulkiness of those commodities which are the chief productions of the
soil, necessarily imposes very heavy charges on their transportation, to
distant markets. These charges, in the cases, in which the nations, to whom our
products are sent, maintain a competition in the supply of their own markets,
principally fall upon us, and form material deductions from the primitive value
of the articles furnished. The charges on manufactured supplies, brought from
Europe are greatly enhanced by the same circumstance of distance. These
charges, again, in the cases in which our own industry maintains no
competition, in our own markets, also principally fall upon us; and are an
additional cause of extraordinary deduction from the primitive value of our own
products; these being the materials of exchange for the foreign fabrics, which
we consume.

The equality and moderation of individual property, and the growing
settlements of new districts, occasion, in this country an unusual demand for
coarse manufactures; the charges of which being greater in proportion to their
greater bulk, augment the disadvantage, which has been just described.

As in most countries domestic supplies maintain a very considerable
competition with such foreign productions of the soil, as are imported for
sale; if the extensive establishment of manufactories in the United States does
not create a similar competition in respect to manufactured articles, it
appears to be clearly deducible, from the considerations which have been
mentioned, that they must sustain a double loss in their exchanges with foreign
nations; strongly conducive to an unfavorable balance of trade, and very
prejudicial to their interests.

These disadvantages press with no small weight, on the landed interest of the
country. In seasons of peace, they cause a serious deduction from the intrinsic
value of the products of the soil. In the time of a war, which should either
involve ourselves, or another nation, possessing a considerable share of our
carrying trade, the charges on the transportation of our commodities, bulky as
most of them are, could hardly fail to prove a grievous burden to the farmer;
while obliged to depend in so great degree as he now does, upon foreign markets
for the vent of the surplus of his labor.

As far as the prosperity of the fisheries of the United States is impeded by
the want of an adequate market, there arises another special reason for
desiring the extension of manufactures. Besides the fish, which in many places,
would be likely to make a part of the subsistence of the persons employed; it
is known that the oils, bones and skins of marine animals, are of extensive use
in various manufactures. Hence the prospect of an additional demand for the
produce of the fisheries.

One more point of view only remains, in which to consider the expediency of
encouraging manufactures in the United States.

It is not uncommon to meet with an opinion, that though the promoting of
manufactures, may be the interest of a part of the union, it is contrary to
that of another part. The northern and southern regions are sometimes
represented as having adverse interests in this respect. Those are called
manufacturing, these agricultural states, and a species of opposition is
imagined to subsist between the manufacturing und agricultural interests.

This idea of an opposition between those two interests is the common error of
the early periods of every country, but experience gradually dissipates it.
Indeed they are perceived so often to succor and to befriend each other, that
they come at length to be considered as one; a supposition which has been
frequently abused, and is not universally true. Particular encouragements of
particular manufactures may be of a nature to sacrifice the interests of
landholders to those of manufacturers; but it is nevertheless a maxim well
established by experience, and generally acknowledged, where there has been
sufficient experience, that the aggregate prosperity of manufactures, and the
aggregate prosperity of agriculture are intimately connected. In the course of
the discussion which has had place, various weighty considerations have been
adduced operating in support of that maxim. Perhaps the superior steadiness of
the demand of a domestic market for the surplus produce of the soil, is alone a
convincing argument of its truth.

Ideas of a contrariety of interests between the northern and southern regions
of the Union, are in the main as unfounded as they are mischievous. The
diversity of circumstances, on which such contrariety is usually predicated,
authorizes a directly contrary conclusion. Mutual wants constitute one of the
strongest links of political connection, and the extent of these bears a
natural proportion to the diversity in the means of mutual supply.

Suggestions of an opposite complexion are ever to be deplored, as unfriendly
to the steady pursuit of one great common cause, and to the perfect harmony of
all the parts.

In proportion as the mind is accustomed to trace the intimate connection of
interest, which subsists between all the parts of a society, united under the
same government; the infinite variety of channels which serve to circulate the
prosperity of each to and through the rest, in that proportion will it be
little apt to be disturbed by solicitudes and apprehensions which originate in
local discriminations. It is a truth as important, as it is agreeable, and one
to which it is not easy to imagine exceptions, that every thing tending to
establish substantial and permanent order, in the affairs of a country, to
increase the total mass of industry and opulence, is ultimately beneficial to
every part of it. On the credit of this great truth, an acquiescence may safely
be accorded, from every quarter, to all institutions, and arrangements, which
promise a confirmation of public order, and an augmentation of national
resource.

But there are more particular considerations which serve to fortify the idea,
that the encouragement of manufactures is the interest of all parts of the
Union. If the northern and middle states should be the principal scenes of such
establishments, they would immediately benefit the more southern, by creating a
demand for productions; some of which they have in common with the other
states, and others of which are either peculiar to them, or more abundant, or
of better quality, than elsewhere. These productions, principally are timber,
flax, hemp, cotton, wool, raw silk, indigo, iron, lead, furs, hides, skins and
coals; of these articles cotton and indigo are peculiar to the southern states;
as are hitherto lead and coal, flax and hemp are or may be raised in greater
abundance there, than in the more northern states; and the wool of Virginia is
said to be of better quality than that of any other state: a circumstance
rendered the more probable by the reflection that Virginia embraces the same
latitudes with the finest wool countries of Europe. The climate of the south is
also better adapted to the production of silk.

The extensive cultivation of cotton can perhaps hardly be expected, but from
the previous establishment of domestic manufactories of the article; and the
surest encouragement and vent, for the others, would result from similar
establishments in respect to them.

If, then, it sati^factorily appears, that it is the interest of the United
States, generally, to encourage manufactures, it merits particular attention,
that there are circumstances which render the present a critical moment for
entering with zeal upon the important business. The effort cannot fail to be
materially seconded by a considerable and increasing influx of money, in
consequence of foreign speculations in the funds -- and by the disorders which
exist in different parts of Europe.

The first circumstance not only facilitates the execution of manufacturing
enterprises; but it indicates them as a necessary mean to turn the thing itself
to advantage, and to prevent its being eventually an evil. If useful employment
be not found for the money of foreigners brought to the country to be invested
in purchases of the public debt, it will quickly be re-exported to defray the
expense of an extraordinary consumption of foreign luxuries; and distressing
drains of our specie may hereafter be experienced to pay the interest and
redeem the principal of the purchased debt.

This useful employment too ought to be of a nature to produce solid and
permanent improvements. If the money merely serves to give a temporary spring
to foreign commerce; as it cannot procure new and lasting outlets for the
products of the country; there will be no real or durable advantage gained. As
far as it shall find its way in agricultural ameliorations, in opening canals,
and in similar improvements, it will be productive of substantial utility. But
there is reason to doubt, whether in such channels it is likely to find
sufficient employment, and still more whether many of those who possess it,
would be as readily attracted to objects of this nature, as to manufacturing
pursuits; which bear greater analogy to those to which they are accustomed, and
to the spirit generated by them.

To open the one field, as well as the other, will at least secure a better
prospect to useful employment, for whatever accession of money there has been
or may be.

There is at the present juncture a certain fermentation of mind, a certain
activity of speculation and enterprise, which if properly directed, may be made
subservient to useful purposes; but which if left entirely to itself, may be
attended with pernicious effects.

The disturbed state of Europe, inclining its citizens to emigration, the
requisite workmen, will be more easily acquired, than at another time; and the
effect of multiplying the opportunities of employment to those who emigrate,
may be an increase of the number and extent of valuable acquisitions to the
population, arts and industry of the country.

To find pleasure in the calamities of other nations would be criminal; but to
benefit ourselves, by opening an asylum to those who suffer, in consequence of
them, is as justifiable as it is politic.

A full view having now been taken of the inducements to the promotion of
manufactures in the United States, accompanied with an examination of the
principal objections which are commonly urged in opposition, it is proper in
the next place to consider the means by which it may be effected, as
introductory to a specification of the objects which in the present state of
things appear the most fit to be encouraged, and of the particular measures
which it may be advisable to adopt, in respect to each.

In order to a better judgment of the means proper to be resorted to by the
United States, it will be of use to advert to those which have been employed
with success in other countries. The principal of these are --

I. Protecting duties -- or duties on those foreign articles which are the
rivals of the domestic ones intended to be encouraged.

Duties of this nature evidently amount to a virtual bounty on the domestic
fabrics, since by enhancing the charges on foreign articles, they enable the
national manufacturers to undersell all their foreign competitors. The
propriety of this species of encouragement need not be dwelt upon; as it is not
only a clear result from the numerous topics which have been suggested, but is
sanctioned by the laws of the United States, in a variety of instances; it has
the additional recommendation of being a resource of revenue -- Indeed all the
duties imposed on imported articles, though with an exclusive view to revenue,
have the effect in contemplation, and except where they fall on raw materials
wear a beneficent aspect toward the manufactures of the country.

II. Prohibitions of rival articles, or duties equivalent to prohibitions.

This is another and an efficacious mean of encouraging national manufactures,
but in general it is only fit to be employed when a manufacture has made such a
progress, and is in so many hands as to ensure a due competition, and an
adequate supply on reasonable terms -- Of duties equivalent to prohibitions,
there are examples in the laws of the United States, and there are other cases
to which the principle may be advantageously extended, but they are not
numerous.

Considering a monopoly of the domestic market to its own manufacturers as the
reigning policy of manufacturing nations, a similar policy on the part of the
United States in every proper instance, is dictated, it might almost be said,
by the principles of distributive justice; certainly by the duty of endeavoring
to secure to their own citizens a reciprocity of advantages.

III. Prohibitions of the exportation of the materials of manufactures.

The desire of securing a cheap and plentiful supply for the national workmen,
and, where the article is either peculiar to the country, or of peculiar
quality there, the jealousy of enabling foreign workmen to rival those of the
nation, with its own materials, are the leading motives to this species of
regulation. It ought not to be affirmed, that it is in no instance proper; but
it is certainly one which ought to be adopted with great circumspection, and
only in very plain cases. It is seen at once, that its immediate operation, is
to abridge the demand and keep down the price of the produce of some other
branch of industry, generally speaking, of agriculture, to the prejudice of
those who carry it on; and though if it be really essential to the prosperity
of any very important national manufacture, it may happen that those who are
injured in the first instance, may be eventually indemnified, by the superior
steadiness of an extensive domestic market depending on that prosperity: yet in
a matter, in which there is so much room for nice and difficult combinations,
in which such opposite considerations combat each other, prudence seems to
dictate, that the expedient in question, ought to indulged with a sparing hand.

IV. Pecuniary bounties.

This has been found one of the most efficacious means of encouraging
manufactures, and it is in some views, the best. Though it has not yet been
practiced upon by the government of the United States (unless the allowance on
the exportation of dried and pickled fish and salted meat could be considered
as a bounty) and though it is less favored by public opinion than some other
modes -- Its advantages are these --

1. It is a species of encouragement more positive and direct than any other,
and for that very reason, has a more immediate tendency to stimulate and uphold
new enterprises, increasing the chances of profit, and diminishing the risks of
loss, in the first attempts.

2. It avoids the inconvenience of a temporary augmentation of price, which is
incident to some other modes, or it produces it to a less degree; either by
making no addition to the charges on the rival foreign article, as in the case
of protecting duties, or by making a smaller addition. The first happens when
the fund for the bounty is derived from a different object (which may or may
not increase the price of some other article, according to the nature of that
object); the second, when the fund is derived from the same or a similar object
of foreign manufacture. One per cent, duty on the foreign article converted
into a bounty on the domestic, will have an equal effect with a duty of two per
cent. exclusive of such bounty; and the price of the foreign commodity is
liable to be raised, in the one case, in the proportion of one per cent.; in
the other, in that of two per cent. Indeed the bounty when drawn from another
source is calculated to promote a reduction of price; because without laying
any new charge on the foreign article, it serves to introduce a competition
with it, and to increase the total quantity of the article in the market.

3. Bounties have not like high protecting duties, a tendency to produce
scarcity. An increase of price is not always the immediate, though, where the
progress of a domestic manufacture does not counteract a rise, it is commonly
the ultimate effect of an additional duty. In the interval, between the laying
of the duty and a proportional increase of price, it may discourage
importation, by interfering with the profits to be expected from the sale of
the article.

4. Bounties are sometimes not only the best, but the only proper expedient,
for uniting the encouragement of a new object of agriculture, with that of a
new object of manufacture. It is the interest of the farmer to have the
production of the raw material promoted, by counteracting the interference of
the foreign material of the same kind -- It is the interest of the manufacturer
to have the material abundant and cheap. If prior to the domestic production of
the material, in sufficient quantity, to supply the manufacturer on good terms,
a duty be laid upon the importation of it from abroad, with a view to promote
the raising of it at home, the interest both of the farmer and manufacturer
will be disserved -- By either destroying the requisite supply, or raising the
price of the article, beyond what can be afforded to be given for it, by the
conductor of an infant manufacture, it is abandoned or fails, and there being
no domestic manufactories to create a demand for the raw material, which is
raised by the farmer, it is in vain, that the competition of the like foreign
article, may have been destroyed.

It cannot escape notice, that a duty upon the importation of an article can no
otherwise aid the domestic production of it, than by giving the latter greater
advantages in the home market. It can have no influence upon the advantageous
sale of the article produced, in foreign markets; no tendency, therefore, to
promote its exportation.

The true way to conciliate these two interests, is to lay a duty on foreign
manufactures of the material, the growth of which is desired to be encouraged,
and to apply the produce of that duty by way of bounty, either upon the
production of the material itself, or upon its manufacture at home, or upon
both. In this disposition of the thing, the manufacturer commences his
enterprise, under every advantage, which is attainable, as to quantity or price
of the raw material: And the farmer, if the bounty be immediately to him, is
enabled by it to enter into a successful competition with the foreign material;
if the bounty be to the manufacturer on so much of the domestic material as he
consumes, the operation is nearly the same; he has a motive of interest to
prefer the domestic commodity, if of equal quality, even at a higher price than
the foreign, so long as the difference of price is any thing short of the
bounty, which is allowed upon the article.

Except the simple and ordinary kinds of household manufacture, or those for
which there are very commanding local advantages, pecuniary bounties are in
most cases indispensable to the introduction of a new branch. A stimulus and a
support not less powerful and direct is, generally speaking, essential to the
overcoming of the obstacles which arise from the competitions of superior skill
and maturity elsewhere. Bounties are especially essential, in regard to
articles, upon which those foreigners who have been accustomed to supply a
country are in the practice of granting them.

The continuance of bounties on manufactures long established, must almost
always be of questionable policy: Because a presumption would arise in every
such case, that there were natural and inherent impediments to success. But in
new undertakings, they are as justifiable, as they are oftentimes necessary.

There is a degree of prejudice against bounties from an appearance of giving
away the public money, without an immediate consideration, and from a
supposition, that they serve to enrich particular classes, at the expense of
the community.

But neither of these sources of dislike will bear a serious examination. There
is no purpose to which public money can be more beneficially applied, than to
the acquisition of a new and useful branch of industry; no consideration more
valuable than a permanent addition to the general stock of productive labor.

As to the second source of objection, it equally lies against other modes of
encouragement which are admitted to be eligible. As often as a duty upon a
foreign article makes an addition to its price, it causes an extra expense to
the community, for the benefit of the domestic manufacturer. A bounty does no
more. But it is the interest of the society in each case to submit to a
temporary expense, which is more than compensated, by an increase of industry
and wealth, by an augmentation of resources and independence; and by the
circumstance of eventual cheapness, which has been noticed in another place.

It would deserve attention, however, in the employment of this species of
encouragement in the United States, as a reason for moderating the degree of it
in the instances in which it might be deemed eligible, that the great distance
of this country from Europe imposes very heavy charges on all the fabrics which
are brought from thence, amounting from 15 to 30 per cent. on their value,
according to their bulk.

A question has been made concerning the constitutional right of the government
of the United States to apply this species of encouragement, but there is
certainly no good foundation for such a question. The National Legislature has
express authority "To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to
pay the debts and provide for the common defense and general welfare," with no
other qualifications than that "all duties, i^^^^^s, and excises, shall be
uniform throughout the United States, that no capita^ on or other direct tax
shall be laid unless in proportion to numbers ascertained by a census or
enumeration taken on the principles prescribed in the Constitution, and that
"no tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any sta^^"

These three qualifications excepted, the power to raise money is plenary and
indefinite; and the objects to which it may be appropriated are no less
comprehensive, than the payment of the public debts and the providing for the
common defense and general welfare. The terms " general welfare" were doubtless
intended to signify more than was expressed or imported in those which
preceded; otherwise numerous exigencies incident to the affairs of a nation
would have been left without a provision. -- The phrase is as comprehensive as
any that could have been used, because it was not fit that the constitutional
authority of the Union, to appropriate its revenues should have been restricted
within narrower limits than the "general welfare;" and because this necessarily
embraces a vast variety of particulars, which are susceptible neither of
specification nor of definition.

It is therefore of necessity left to the discretion of the National
Legislature, to pronounce, upon the objects, which concern the general welfare,
and for which, under that description, an appropriation of money is requisite
and proper. -- And there seems to be no room for a doubt that whatever concerns
the general interests of LEARNING, of AGRICULTURE, of MANUFACTURES, and of
COMMERCE, are within the sphere of the National Councils, as for as regards an
application of money.

The only qualification of the generality of the phrase in question, which
seems to be admissible, is this -- That the object to which an appropriation of
money is to be made be general and not local; its operation extending in fact,
or by possibility throughout the Union, and not being confined to a particular
spot.

No objection ought to arise to this construction from a supposition that it
would imply a power to do whatever else should appear to Congress conducive to
the general welfare. A power to appropriate money with this latitude, which is
granted too in express terms, would not carry a power to do any other thing,
not authorized in the Constitution, either expressly or by fair implication.

V. Premiums.

These are of a nature allied to bounties, though distinguishable from them in
some important features.

Bounties are applicable to the whole quantity of an article produced or
manufactured, or exported, and involve a correspondent expense -- Premiums
serve to reward some particular excellence or superiority, some extraordinary
exertion or skill, and are dispensed only in a small number of cases: But their
effect is to stimulate general effort -- contrived so as to be both honorary
and lucrative, they address themselves to different passions; touching the
chords as well of emulation as of interest. -- They are accordingly a very
economical mean of exciting the enterprise of a whole community.

There are various societies in different countries, whose object is the
dispensation of premiums for the encouragement of agriculture, arts,
manufactures, and commerce; and though they are for the most part voluntary
associations, with comparatively slender funds, their utility has been immense.
Much has been done by this mean in Great Britain: Scotland in particular owes
materially to it a prodigious amelioration of condition. From a similar
establishment in the United States, supplied and supported by the Government of
the Union, vast benefits might reasonably be expected. -- Some further ideas on
this head, shall accordingly be submitted, in the conclusion of this report.

VI. The exemption of the materials of manufactures from duty.

The policy of that exemption as a general rule, particularly in reference to
new establishments, is obvious. It can hardly ever be advisable to add the
obstructions of fiscal burdens to the difficulties which naturally embarrass a
new manufacture; and where it is matured and in condition to become an object
of revenue, it is generally speaking better that the fabric, than the material,
should be the subject of taxation. -- Ideas of proportion between the quantum
of the tax and the value of the article, can be more easily adjusted in the
former than in the latter case. An argument for exemptions of this kind in the
United States, is to be derived from the practice, as far as their necessities
have permitted, of those nations whom we are to meet as competitors in our own
and in foreign markets.

There are however exceptions to it; of which some examples will be given under
the next head.

The laws of the Union afford instances of the observance of the policy here
recommended, but it will probably be found advisable to extend it to some
other cases -- Of a nature, bearing some affinity to that policy, is the
regulation which exempts from duty the tools and implements, as well as the
books, clothes and household furniture of foreign artists, who come to reside
in the United States; an advantage already secured to them by the laws of the
Union, and which, it is, in every view, proper to continue.

VII. Drawbacks of the duties which are imposed on the materials of
manufactures.

It has already been observed as a general rule, that duties on those
materials, ought with certain exceptions to be foreborne. Of these exceptions,
three cases occur, which may serve as examples -- One, where the material is
itself an object of general or extensive consumption, and a fit and productive
source of revenue -- Another, where a manufacture of a simpler kind, the
competition of which with a like domestic article is desired to be restrained,
partakes of the nature of a raw material, from being capable, by a further
process to be converted into a manufacture of a different kind, the
introduction or growth of which is desired to be encouraged -- A third, where
the material itself is a production of the country, and in sufficient abundance
to furnish a cheap and plentiful supply to the national manufacturers.

Under the first description comes the article of molasses. It is not only a
fair object of revenue, but being a sweet, it is just that the consumers of it
should pay a duty as well as the consumers of sugar.

Cottons and linen in their white state fall under the second description -- A
duty upon such as are imported is proper to promote the domestic manufacture of
similar articles in the same state -- a drawback of that duty is proper to
encourage the printing and staining at home of those which are brought from
abroad. When the first of these manufactures has attained sufficient maturity
in a country, to furnish a full supply for the second, the utility of the
drawback ceases.

The article of hemp either now does or may be expected soon to exemplify the
third case, in the United States.

Where duties on the materials of manufactures are not laid for the purpose of
preventing a competition with some domestic production, the same reasons which
recommend, as a general rule, the exemption of those materials from duties,
would recommend as a like general rule, the allowance of drawbacks, in favor of
the manufacturer: Accordingly, such drawbacks are familiar in countries which
systematically pursue the business of manufactures; which furnishes an argument
for the observance of a similar policy in the United States; and the idea has
been adopted by the laws of the Union, in the instances of salt and molasses.
It is believed that it will be found advantageous to extend it to some other
articles.

VIII. The encouragement of now inventions and discoveries, at home, and of the
introduction into the United States of such as may have been made in other
countries; particularly those which relate to machinery.

This is among she most useful and unexceptionable of the aids which can be
given to manufactures. The usual means of that encouragement are pecuniary
rewards, and, for a time, exclusive privileges. The first must be employed,
according to the occasion, and the utility of the invention, or discovery. For
the last, so far as respects "authors and inventors," provision has been made
by law. But it is desirable in regard to improvements and secrets, of
extraordinary value, to be able to extend the same benefit to introducers, as
well as authors and inventors; a policy which has been practiced with advantage
in other countries. Here, however, as in some other cases, there is cause to
regret, that the competency of the authority of the National Government to the
good, which might be done, is not without a question. Many aids might be given
to industry; many internal improvements of primary magnitude might be promoted,
by an authority operating throughout the Union, which cannot be effected, as
well, if at all, by an authority confined within the limits of a single state.

But if the Legislature of the Union cannot do all the good that might be
wished, it is at least desirable, that all may be done which is practicable.
Means for promoting the introduction of foreign improvements, though less
efficaciously than might be accomplished with more adequate authority, will
form a part of the plan intended to be submitted in the close of this report.

It is customary with manufacturing nations to prohibit, under severe
penalties, the exportation of implements and machines, which they have either
invented or improved. There are already objects for a similar regulation in the
United States; and others may be expected to occur from time to time. The
adoption of it seems to be dictated by the principle of reciprocity. Greater
liberality, in such respects might better comport with the general spirit of
the country; but a selfish and exclusive policy in other quarters will not
always permit the free indulgence of a spirit, which would place us upon an
unequal footing. As far as prohibitions tend to prevent foreign competitors
from deriving the benefit of the improvements made at home, they tend to
increase the advantages of those by whom they may have been introduced; and
operate as an encouragement to exertion.

IX. Judicious regulations for the inspection of manufactured commodities.

This is not among the least important of the means, by which she prosperity of
manufactures may be promoted. It is indeed in many cases one of the most
essential. Contributing to prevent frauds upon consumers at home, and exporters
to foreign countries -- to improve the quality and preserve the character of
the national manufactures, it cannot fail to aid the expeditious and
advantageous sale of them, and to serve as a guard against successful
competition from other quarters. The reputation of the flour and lumber of some
states, and of the potash of others, has been established by an attention to
this point. And the like good name might be procured for those articles,
wheresoever produced, by a judicious and uniform system of inspection,
throughout the ports of the United States. A like system might also be extended
with advantage to other commodities.

X. The facilitating of pecuniary remittances from place to place --

Is a point of considerable moment to trade in general, and to manufactures in
particular; by rendering more easy the purchase of raw materials and
provisions, and the payment for manufactured supplies. A general circulation of
bank paper, which is to be expected from the institution lately established
will be a most valuable mean to this end. But much good would also accrue from
some additional provisions respecting inland bills of exchange. If those drawn
in one state payable in another were made negotiable, every where, and interest
and damages allowed in case of protest, it would greatly promote negotiations
between the citizens of different states, by rendering them more secure; and,
with it the convenience and advantage of the merchants and manufacturers of
each.

XI. The facilitating of the transportation of commodities.

Improvements favoring this object intimately concern all the domestic
interests of a community; but they may without impropriety be mentioned as
having an important relation to manufactures. There is perhaps scarcely any
thing, which has been better calculated to assist the manufactures of
Great Britain, than the ameliorations of the public roads of that kingdom, and
the great progress which has been of late made in opening canals. Of the
former, the United States stand much in need; for the latter they present
uncommon facilities.

The symptoms of attention to the improvement of inland navigation, which have
lately appeared in some quarters, must fill with pleasure every breast warmed
with a true zeal for the prosperity of the country. These examples, it is to be
hoped, will stimulate the exertions of the government and citizens of every
state. There can certainly be no object, more worthy of the cares of the local
administrations; and it were to be wished, that there was no doubt of the power
of the national government to lend its direct aid, on a comprehensive plan.
This is one of those improvements, which could be prosecuted with more efficacy
by the whole, than by any part or parts of the Union. There are cases in which
the general interest will be in danger to be sacrificed to the collision of
some supposed local interests. Jealousies, in matters of this kind, are as apt
to exist, as they are apt to be erroneous.

The following remarks are sufficiently judicious and pertinent to deserve a
literal quotation: "Good roads, canals and navigable rivers, by diminishing the
expense of carriage, put the remote parts of a country more nearly upon a level
with those in the neighborhood of the town. They are upon that account the
greatest of all improvements. They encourage the cultivation of the remote,
which must always be the most extensive circle of the country. They are
advantageous to the town by breaking down the monopoly of the country in its
neighborhood. They are advantageous even to that part of the country. Though
they introduce some rival commodities into the old market, they open many new
markets to its produce. Monopoly besides is a great enemy to good management,
which can never be universally established, but in consequence of that free and
universal competition, which forces every body to have recourse to it for the
sake of self defense. It is not more than fifty years ago that some of the
counties in the neighborhood of London petitioned the Parliament, against the
extension of the turn-pike roads, into the remoter counties. Those remoter
counties, they pretended, from the cheapness of labor, would be able to sell
their grass and corn cheaper in the London market, than themselves, and they
would thereby reduce their rents and ruin their cultivation. Their rents
however have risen, and their cultivation has been improved, since that time."

Specimens of a spirit, similar to that which governed the counties here spoken
of present themselves too frequently, to the eye of an impartial observer, and
render it a wish of patriotism that the body in this country, in whose councils
a local or partial spirit is least likely to predominate, were at liberty to
pursue and promote the general interest, in those instances, in which there
might be danger of the interference of such a spirit.

The foregoing are the principal of the means, by which the growth of
manufactures is ordinarily promoted. It is, however, not merely necessary, that
the measures of government, which have a direct view to manufactures, should be
calculated to assist and protect them, but that those which only colterally
affect them, in the general course of the administration, should be guarded
from any peculiar tendency to injure them.

There are certain species of taxes, which are apt to be oppressive to
different parts of the community, and among other ill effects have a very
unfriendly aspect toward manufactures. All poll or capitation taxes are of
this nature. They either proceed, according to a fixed rate, which operates
unequally, and injuriously to the industrious poor; or they vest a discretion
in certain officers, to make estimates and assessments which are necessarily
vague, conjectural and liable to abuse. They ought therefore to be abstained
from, in all but cases of distressing emergency.

All such taxes (including all taxes on occupations) which proceed according to
the amount of capital supposed to be employed in a business, or of profits
supposed to be made in it are unavoidably hurtful to industry. It is in vain,
that the evil may be endeavored to be mitigated by leaving it, in the first
instance, in the option of the party to be taxed, to declare the amount of his
capital or profits.

Men engaged in any trade or business have commonly weighty reasons to avoid
disclosures, which would expose, with any thing like accuracy, the real state
to avail themselves of so inconvenient a refuge. And the consequence is, that
they often suffer oppression.

When the disclosure too, if made, is not definitive, but controulable by the
discretion, or in other words, by the passions and prejudices of the revenue
officers, it is not only an ineffectual protection, but the possibility of its
being so is an additional reason for not resorting to it.

Allowing to the public officers the most equitable dispositions; yet where
they are to exercise a discretion, without certain data, they cannot fail to be
often misled by appearances. The quantity of business, which seems to be going
on, is, in a vast number of cases, a very deceitful criterion of the profits
which are made; yet it is perhaps the best they can have, and it is the one, on
which they will most naturally rely. A business therefore which may rather
require aid, from the government, than be in a capacity to be contributory to
it, may find itself crushed by the mistaken conjectures of the assessors of
taxes.

Arbitrary taxes, under which denomination are comprised all those, that leave
the quantum of the tax, to be raised on each person, to the discretion of
certain officers, are as contrary to the genius of liberty as to the maxims of
industry. In this light, they have been viewed by the most judicious observers
on government; who have bestowed upon them the severest epithets of
reprobation; as constituting one of the worst features usually to be met with
in the practice of despotic governments.

It is certain at least, that such taxes are particularly inimical to the
success of manufacturing industry, and ought carefully to be avoided by a
government, which desires to promote it.

The great copiousness of the subject of this report has insensibly led to a
more lengthy preliminary discussion, than was originally contemplated, or
intended. It appeared proper to investigate principles, to consider objections,
and to endeavor to establish the utility of the thing proposed to be
encouraged; previous to a specification of the objects which might occur, as
meriting or requiring encouragement, and of the measures, which might be
proper, in respect to each. The first purpose having been fulfilled, it remains
to pursue the second.

In the selection of objects, five circumstances seem entitled to particular
attention: The capacity of the country to furnish the raw material -- the
degree in which the nature of the manufacture admits of a substitute for manual
labor in machinery -- the facility of execution -- the extensiveness of the
uses, to which the article can be applied -- its subserviency to other
interests, particularly the great one of national defense. There are however
objects, to which these circumstances are little applicable, which for some
special reasons, may have a claim to encouragement.

A designation of the principal raw material of which each manufacture is
composed will serve to introduce the remarks upon it. -- As, in the first place.

IRON.
The manufactures of this article are entitled to pre-eminent rank -- None are
more essential in their kinds, nor so extensive in their uses. They constitute
in whole or in part the implements or the materials, or both, of almost every
useful occupation. Their instrumentality is every where conspicuous.

It is fortunate for the United States that they have peculiar advantages for
deriving the full benefit of this most valuable material, and they have every
motive to improve it, with systematic care. It is to be found in various parts
of the United States, in great abundance and of almost every quality; and fuel
the chief instrument in manufacturing it, is both cheap and plenty. -- This
particularly applies to charcoal; but there are productive coal mines already
in operation, and strong indications, that the material is to be found in
abundance, in a variety of other places.

The enquiries to which the subject of this report has led have been answered
with proofs that manufactories of iron, though generally understood to be
extensive, are far more so than is commonly supposed. The kinds, in which the
greatest progress has been made, have been mentioned in another place, and need
not be repeated; but there is little doubt that every other kind, with due
cultivation, will rapidly succeed. It is worthy of remark that several of the
particular trades, of which it is the basis, are capable of being carried on
without the aid of large capitals.

Iron works have very greatly increased in the United States, and are
prosecuted with much more advantages than formerly. The average price before
the revolution was about sixty-four dollars per ton, at present it is about
eighty; a rise which is chiefly to be attributed to the increase of
manufactures of the material.

The still further extension and multiplication of such manufactures will have
the double effect of promoting the extraction of the metal itself, and of
converting it to a greater number of profitable purposes.

Those manufactures too unite in a greater degree, than almost any others, the
several requisites, which have been mentioned, as proper to be consulted in the
selection of objects.

The only further encouragement of manufactories of this article, the propriety
of which may be considered as unquestionable, seems to be an increase of the
duties on foreign rival commodities.

Steel is a branch which has already made a considerable progress, and it is
ascertained that some new enterprises, on a more extensive scale, have been
lately set on foot. The facility of carrying it to an extent, which will supply
all internal demands, and furnish a considerable surplus for exportation cannot
be doubted. The duty upon the importation of this article, which is at present
seventy-five cents per cwt. may, it is conceived, be safely and advantageously
extended to 100 cents. It is desirable, by decisive arrangements, to second the
efforts, which are making in so very valuable a branch.

The United States already in a great measure supply themselves with nails and
spikes. They are able, and ought certainly to do it entirely. The first and
most laborious operation, in this manufacture, is performed by water-mills; and
of the persons afterward employed a great proportion are boys, whose early
habits of industry are of importance to the community, to the present support
of their families, and to their own future comfort. It is not less curious than
true, that in certain parts of the country, the making of nails is an
occasional family manufacture.

The expediency of an additional duty on these articles is indicated by an
important fact. About 1,800,000 pounds of them were imported into the United
States in the course of a year, ending the 30th of September, 1790. A duty of
two cents per pound would, it is presumable, speedily put an end to so
considerable an importation. And it is in every view proper that an end should
be put to it.

The manufacture of these articles, like that of some others, suffers from the
carelessness and dishonesty of a part of those who carry it on. An inspection
in certain cases might tend to correct the evil. It will deserve consideration
whether a regulation of this sort cannot be applied, without inconvenience, to
the exportation of the articles either to foreign countries, or from one state
to another.

The implements of husbandry are made in several states in great abundance. In
many places it is done by the common blacksmiths. And there is no doubt that an
ample supply for the whole country can with great ease be procured among
ourselves.

Various kinds of edged tools for the use of mechanics are also made; and a
considerable quantity of hollow wares; though the business of castings has not
yet attained the perfection which might be wished. It is however improving, and
as there are respectable capitals in good hands, embarked in the prosecution of
those branches of iron manufactories, which are yet in their infancy, they may
all be contemplated as objects not difficult to be acquired.

To ensure the end, it seems equally safe and prudent to extend the duty
advalorem upon all manufactures of iron, or of which iron is the article of
chief value, to ten per cent.

Fire arms and other military weapons may it is conceived, be placed without
inconvenience in the class of articles rated at fifteen per cent. There exist
already manufactories of these articles, which only require the stimulus of a
certain demand to render them adequate to the supply of the United States.

It would also be a material aid to manufactories of this nature, as well as a
mean of public security, if provision should be made for an annual purchase of
military weapons, of home manufacture to a certain determinate extent, in order
to the formation of arsenals; and to replace from time to time such as should
be withdrawn for use, so as always to have in store the quantity of each kind,
which should be deemed a competent supply.

But it may hereafter deserve legislative consideration, whether manufactories
of all the necessary weapons of war ought not to be established, on account of
government itself. Such establishments are agreeable to the usual practice of
nations, and that practice seems founded on sufficient reason.

There appears to be an improvidence, in leaving these essential instruments of
national defense to the casual speculations of individual adventure; a resource
which can less be relied upon, in this case than in most others; the articles
in question not being objects of ordinary and indispensable private consumption
or use. As a general rule, manufactories on the immediate account of government
are to be avoided; but this seems to be one of the few exceptions, which that
rule admits, depending on very special reasons.

Manufactures of steel, generally, or of which steel is the article of chief
value, may with advantage be placed in the class of goods rated at seven and an
half per cent. As manufactures of this kind have not yet made any considerable
progress, it is a reason for not rating them as high as those of iron; but as
this material is the basis of them, and as their extension is not less
practicable, than important, it is desirable to promote it by a somewhat higher
duty than the present.

A question arises, how far it might be expedient to permit the importation o^
iron in pigs and bars free from duty. It would certainly be favorable to
manufacturers of the article; but the doubt is whether it might not interfere
with its production.

Two circumstances, however, abate if they do not remove apprehension, on this
score; one is, the considerable increase of price, which has been already
remarked, and which renders it probable that the free admission of foreign iron
would not be inconsistent with an adequate profit to the proprietors of iron
works; the other is, the augmentation of demand, which would be likely to
attend the increase of manufactures of the article, in consequence of the
additional encouragements proposed to be given. But caution nevertheless in a
matter of this kind is most advisable. The measure suggested ought perhaps
rather to be contemplated, subject to the lights of further experience, than
immediately adopted.

COPPER.
The manufactures of which this article is susceptible are also of great extent
and utility. Under this description, those of brass, of which it is the
principal ingredient, are intended to be included.

The material is a natural production of the country. Mines of copper have
actually been wrought, and with profit to the undertakers, thought it is not
known, that any are now in this condition. And nothing is easier, than the
introduction of it, from other countries, on moderate terms, and in great
plenty.

Coppersmiths and brass founders, particularly the former, are numerous in the
United States; some of whom carry on business to a respectable extent.

To multiply and extend manufactories of the materials in question is worthy of
attention and effort. In order to this, it is desirable to facilitate a
plentiful supply of the materials. And a proper mean to this end is to place
them in the class of free articles. Copper in plates and brass are already in
this predicament; but copper in pigs and bars is not; neither is lapis
calaminaris, which together with copper and charcoal, constitute the component
ingredients of brass. The exemption from duty, by parity of reason, ought to
embrace all such of these articles, as are objects of importation.

An additional duty, on brass wares, will tend to the general end in view.
These now stand at five per cent. while those of tin, pewter and copper are
rated at seven and an half. There appears to be a propriety in every view in
placing brass wares upon the same level with them; and it merits consideration
whether the duty upon all of them ought not to be raised to ten per cent.

LEAD.
There are numerous proofs, that this material abounds in the United States,
and requires little to unfold it to an extent, more than equal to every
domestic occasion. A prolific mine of it has long been open in the
south-western parts of Virginia, and under a public administration, during the
late war, yielded a considerable supply for military use. This is now in the
hands of individuals, who not only carry it on with spirit, but have
established manufactories of it, at Richmond, in the same state.

The duties, already laid upon the importation of this article, either in its
unmanufactured, or manufactured state, ensure it a decisive advantage in the
home market -- which amounts to considerable encouragement. If the duty on
pewter wares should be raised, it would afford a further encouragement. Nothing
else occurs as proper to be added.

FOSSIL COAL.
This, as an important instrument of manufactures, may without impropriety be
mentioned among the subjects of this report.

A copious supply of it would be of great consequence to the iron branch: As an
article of household fuel also it is an interesting production; the utility of
which must increase in proportion to the decrease of wood, by the progress of
settlement and cultivation. And its importance to navigation, as an immense
article of transportation coast-wise, is signally exemplified in Great Britain.

It is known, that there are several coal mines in Virginia, now worked, and
appearances of their existence are familiar in a number of places.

The expediency of a bounty on all this species of coal of home production, and
of premiums, on the opening of new mines, under certain qualifications, appears
to be worthy of particular examination. The great importance of the article
will amply justify a reasonable expense in this way, if it shall appear to be
necessary to, and shall be thought likely to answer, the end.

WOOD.
Several manufactures of this article flourish in the United States. Ships are
no where built in greater perfection, and cabinet wares, generally, are made
little if at all inferior to those of Europe. Their extent is such as to have
admitted of considerable exportation.

An exemption from duty of the several kinds of wood ordinarily used in these
manufactures seems to be all, that is requisite, by way of encouragement. It is
recommended by the consideration of a similar policy being pursued in other
countries, and by the expediency of giving equal advantages to our own workmen
in wood. The abundance of timber proper for ship building in the United States
does not appear to be any objection to it. The increasing scarcity and the
growing importance of that article, in the European countries, admonish the
United States to commence, and systematically to pursue, measures for the
preservation of their stock. Whatever may promote the regular establishment of
magazines of ship timber, is in various views desirable.

SKINS.
There are scarcely any manufactories of greater importance, than of this
article. Their direct and very happy influence upon agriculture, by promoting
the raising of cattle of different kinds, is a very material recommendation.

It is pleasing too, to observe the extensive progress they have made in their
principal branches; which are so far matured as almost to defy foreign
competition. Tanneries in particular are not only carried on as a regular
business, in numerous instances and in various parts of the country; but they
constitute in some places a valuable item of incidental family manufactures.

Representations however have been made, importing the expediency of further
encouragement to the leather branch in two ways; one by increasing the duty on
the manufactures of it, which are imported; the other by prohibiting the
exportation of bark. In support of the latter it is alleged, that the price of
bark, chiefly in consequence of large exportations, has risen within a few
years from about three dollars to four dollars and a half per cord.

These suggestions are submitted rather as intimations, which merit
considerations, than as matters, the propriety of which is manifest. It is not
clear, that an increase of duty is necessary; and in regard to the prohibition
desired, there is no evidence of any considerable exportation hitherto; and it
is most probable, that whatever augmentation of price may have taken place, is
to be attributed to an extension of the home demand from the increase of
manufactures, and to a decrease of the supply in consequence of the progress of
settlement, rather than to the quantities which have been exported.

It is mentioned, however, as an additional reason for the prohibition, that
one species of the bark usually exported is in some sort peculiar to the
country, and the material of a very valuable dye, of great use in some other
manufactures, in which the United States have begun a competition.

There may also be this argument in favor of an increase of duty. The object is
of importance enough to claim decisive encouragement, and the progress which
has been made, leaves no room to apprehend any inconvenience on the score of
supply from such an increase.

It would be of benefit to this branch, if glue, which is now rated at five per
cent. were made the object of an excluding duty. It is already made in large
quantities at various tanneries; and, like paper, is an entire economy of
materials, which, if not manufactured, would be left to perish, It may be
placed with advantage in the class of articles paying fifteen per cent.

GRAIN.
Manufactures of the several species of this article have a title to peculiar
favor; not only because they are most of them immediately connected with the
subsistence of the citizens, but because they enlarge the demand for the most
precious products of the soil.

Though flour may with propriety be noticed as a manufacture of grain, it were
useless to do it, but for the purpose of submitting the expediency of a general
system of inspection, throughout the ports of the United States; which, if
established upon proper principles, would be likely to improve the quality of
our flour every where, and to raise its reputation in foreign markets. There
are however considerations which stand in the way of such an arrangement.

Ardent spirits and malt liquors are, next to flour, the two principal
manufactures of grain. The first has made a very extensive, the last a
considerable progress in the United States. In respect to both, an exclusive
possession of the home market ought to be secured to the domestic
manufacturers, as fast as circumstances will admit. Nothing is more practicable
and nothing more desirable.

The existing laws of the United States have done much toward attaining this
valuable objects; but some additions to the present duties, on foreign
distilled spirits, and foreign malt liquors, and perhaps an abatement of those
on home made spirits, would more effectually secure it; and there does not
occur any very weighty objection to either.

An augmentation of the duties on imported spirits would favor, as well the
distillation of spirits from molasses, as that from grain. And to secure to the
nation the benefit of a manufacture, even of foreign materials, is always of
great, though perhaps o^ secondary importance.

A strong impression prevails in the minds of those concerned in distilleries
(including too the most candid and enlightened) that greater differences in the
rates of duty on foreign and domestic spirits are necessary, completely to
secure the successful manufacture of the latter; and there are facts which
entitle this impression to attention.

It is known, that the price of molasses for some years past, has been
successively rising in the West India markets, owing partly to a competition
which did not formerly exist, and partly to an extension of demand in this
country; and it is evident, that the late disturbances in those Islands, from
which we draw our principal supply, must so far interfere with the production
of the article, as to occasion a material enhancement of price. The destruction
and devastation attendant on the insurrection in Hispaniola, in particular,
must not only contribute very much to that effect, but may be expected to give
it some duration. These circumstances, and the duty of three cents per gallon
on molasses, may render it difficult for the distillers of that material to
maintain, with adequate profit, a competition, with the rum brought from the
West Indies, the quality of which is so considerably superior.

The consumption of Geneva or gin in this country is extensive. It is not long
since distilleries of it have grown up among us, to any importance. They are
now becoming of consequence, but being still in their infancy, they require
protection.

It is represented, that the price of some of the materials is greater here,
than in Holland, from which place large quantities are brought -- the price of
labor considerably greater -- the capitals engaged in the business there much
larger, than those which are employed here -- the rate of profits, at which the
undertakers can afford to carry it on, much less -- the prejudices, in favor of
imported gin, strong. These circumstances are alleged to outweigh the charges,
which attend the bringing of the article from Europe to the United States, and
the present difference of duty, so as to obstruct the prosecution of the
manufacture, with due advantage.

Experiment could perhaps alone decide with certainty the justness of the
suggestions, which are made; but in relation to branches of manufacture so
important, it would seem inexpedient to hazard an unfavorable issue, and better
to err on the side of too great, than of too small a difference, in the
particular in question.

It is therefore submitted, that an addition of two cents per gallon be made to
the duty on imported spirits of the first class of proof, with a proportionable
increase on those of higher proof; and that a deduction of one cent per gallon
be made from the duty on spirits distilled within the United States, beginning
with the first class of proof, and a proportionable deduction from the duty on
those of higher proof.

It is ascertained, that by far the greatest part of the malt liquors consumed
in the United States are the produce of domestic breweries. It is desirable,
and, in all likelihood, attainable, that the whole consumption should be
supplied by ourselves.

The malt liquors, made at home, though inferior to the best, are equal to a
great part of those, which have been usually imported. The progress already
made is an earnest of what may be accomplished. The growing competition is an
assurance of improvement. This will be accelerated by measures, tending to
invite a greater capital into this channel of employment.

To render the encouragement of domestic breweries decisive, it may be
advisable to substitute to the present rates of duty eight cents per gallon
generally; and it will deserve to be considered as a guard against invasions,
whether there ought not to be a prohibition of their importation, except in
casks of considerable capacity. It is to be hoped, that such a duty would
banish from the market, foreign malt liquors of inferior quality; and that the
best kind only would continue to be imported till it should be supplanted, by
the efforts of equal skill or care at home.

Till that period, the importation so qualified would be an useful stimulous to
improvement: And in the mean time, the payment of the increased price, for the
enjoyment of a luxury, in order to the encouragement of a most useful branch of
domestic industry, could not reasonably be deemed a hardship.

As a further aid to manufactures of grain, though upon a smaller scale, the
articles of starch, hair powder and wafers, may with great propriety be placed
among those, which are rated at fifteen per cent. No manufactures are more
simple, nor more completely within the reach of a full supply, from domestic
sources; and it is a policy, as common as it is obvious, to make them the
objects either of prohibitory duties, or of express prohibition.

FLAX AND HEMP.
Manufactures of these articles have so much affinity to each other, and they
are so often blended, that they may with advantage be considered in
conjunction. The importance of the linen branch to agriculture -- its precious
effects upon household industry -- the ease, with which the materials can be
produced at home to any requisite extent -- the great advances, which have been
already made, in the coarser fabrics of them, especially in the family way,
constitute claims, of peculiar force, to the patronage of government.

This patronage may be afforded in various ways; by promoting the growth of the
materials; by increasing the impediments to an advantageous competition of
rival foreign articles; by direct bounties or premiums upon the home
manufacture.

First. As to promoting the growth of the materials.

In respect to hemp, something has been already done by the high duty upon
foreign hemp. If the facilities for domestic production were not unusually
great, the policy of the duty, on the foreign raw material, would be highly
questionable, as interfering with the growth of manufactures of it. But making
the proper allowances for those facilities, and with an eye to the future and
natural progress, of the country, the measure does not appear, upon the whole,
exceptionable.

A strong wish naturally suggests itself, that some method could be devised of
affording a more direct encouragement to the growth both of flax and hemp; such
as would be effectual, and at the same time not attended with too great
inconveniences. To this end, bounties and premiums offer themselves to
consideration; but no modification of them has yet occurred, which would not
either hazard too much expense, or operate unequally in reference to the
circumstances of different parts of the Union; and which would not be attended
with very great difficulties in the execution.

Secondly. As to increasing the impediments to an advantageous competition of
rival foreign articles.

To this purpose, an augmentation of the duties on importation is the obvious
expedient; which, in regard to certain articles, appears to be recommended by
sufficient reasons.

The principal of these articles is sail-cloth; one intimately connected with
navigation and defense; and of which a flourishing manufactory is established
at Boston, and very promising ones at several other places.

It is presumed to be both safe and advisable to place this in the class of
articles rated at 10 per cent. A strong reason for it results from the
consideration that a bounty of two pence sterling per ell is allowed, in
Great Britain, upon the exportation of the sail-cloth manufactured in that
kingdom.

It would likewise appear to be good policy to raise the duty to 7 per cent. on
the following articles. Drillings, osnaburghs, ticklenburghs, dowlas, canvas,
brown rolls, bagging, and upon all other linens the first cost of which at the
place of exportation does not exceed 35 cents per yard. A bounty of 12 per
cent. upon an average, on the exportation of such or similar linens from
Great Britain, encourages the manufacture of them in that country, and
increases the obstacles to a successful competition, in the countries to which
they are sent.

The quantities of tow and other household linens manufactured in different
parts of the United States, and the expectations, which are derived from some
late experiments, of being able to extend the use of labour-saving machines, in
the coarser fabrics of linen, obviate the danger of inconvenience, from an
increase of the duty upon such articles, and authorize a hope of speedy and
complete success to the endeavors, which may be used for procuring an internal
supply.

Thirdly. As to direct bounties, or premiums upon the manufactured articles.

To afford more effectual encouragement to the manufacture, and at the same
time to promote the cheapness of the article for the benefit of navigation, it
will be of great use to allow a bounty of two cents per yard on all sail-cloth
which is made in the United States, from materials of their own growth. This
would also assist the culture of those materials. An encouragement of this
kind, if adopted, ought to be established for a moderate term of years, to
invite to new undertakings, and to an extension of the old. This is an article
of importance enough to warrant the employment of extraordinary means in its
favor.

COTTON.
There is something in the texture of this material, which adapts it in a
peculiar degree to the application of machines. The signal utility of the mill
for spinning of cotton, not long since invented in England, has been noticed in
another place; but there are other machines scarcely inferior in utility,
which, in the different manufactories of this article are employed either
exclusively, or with more than ordinary effect. This very important
circumstance recommends the fabrics of cotton, in a more particular manner, to
a country in which a defect of hands constitutes the greatest obstacle to
success.

The variety and extent of the uses to which the manufactures of this article
are applicable, is another powerful argument in their favor.

And the faculty of the United States to produce the raw material in abundance,
and of a quality, which though alleged to be inferior to some that is produced
in other quarters, is nevertheless capable of being used with advantage, in
many fabrics, and is probably susceptible of being carried, by a more
experienced culture, to much greater perfection, suggests an additional and a
very cogent inducement to the vigorous pursuit of the cotton branch, in its
several subdivisions.

How much has been already done has been stated in a preceding part of this
report.

In addition to this, it may be announced, that a society is forming with a
capital which is expected to be extended to at least half a million of dollars;
on behalf of which measures are already in train for prosecuting on a large
scale, the making and printing of cotton goods.

These circumstances conspire to indicate the expediency of removing any
obstructions which may happen to exist, to the advantageous prosecution of the
manufactories in question, and of adding such encouragements as may appear
necessary and proper.

The present duty of three cents per lb. on the foreign raw material, is
undoubtedly a very serious impediment to the progress of those manufactories.

The injurious tendency of similar duties, either prior to the establishment,
or in the infancy of the domestic manufacture of the article, as it regards the
manufacture, and their worse than inutility, in relation to the home production
of the material itself, have been anticipated, particularly in discussing the
subject of pecuniary bounties.

Cotton has not the same pretensions, with hemp, to form an exception to the
general rule.

Not being, like hemp an universal production of the country, it affords less
assurance of an adequate internal supply; but the chief objection arises from
the doubts, which are entertained concerning the quality of the national
cotton. It is alleged, that the fiber of it is considerably shorter and
weaker, than that of some other places; and it has been observed as a general
rule, that the nearer the place of growth to the equator, the better the
quality of the cotton. That which comes from Cayenne, Surrinam and Demarara is
said to be preferable, even at a material difference of price, to the cotton of
the Islands.

While a hope may reasonably be indulged, that with due care and attention the
national cotton may be made to approach nearer than it now does to that of
regions, somewhat more favored by climate, and while facts authorize an
opinion, that very great use may be made of it, and that it is a resource which
gives greater security to the cotton fabrics of this country, than can be
enjoyed by any which depends wholly on external supply, it will certainly be
wise, in every view, to let our infant manufactures have the full benefit of
the best materials on the cheapest terms. It is obvious that the necessity of
having such materials is proportioned to the unskilfulness and inexperience of
the workmen employed, who, if inexpert, will not fail to commit great waste,
where the materials they are to work with are of an indifferent kind.

To secure to the national manufacturers so essential an advantage, a repeal of
the present duty on imported cotton is indispensable.

A substitute for this, far more encouraging to domestic production, will be to
grant a bounty on the national cotton, when wrought at a home manufactory; to
which a bounty on the exportation of it may be added. Either or both would do
much more toward promoting the growth of the article, than the merely nominal
encouragement, which it is proposed to abolish. The first would also have a
direct influence in encouraging the manufacture.

The bounty, which has been mentioned as existing in Great Britain, upon the
exportation of coarse linens not exceeding a certain value, applies also to
certain descriptions of cotton goods of similar value.

This furnishes an additional argument for allowing to the national
manufacturers the species of encouragement just suggested, and indeed for
adding some other aid.

One cent per yard, not less than of a given width, on all goods of cotton, or
of cotton and linen mixed, which are manufactured in the United States, with
the addition of one cent per lb. weight of the material, if made of national
cotton, would amount to an aid of considerable importance, both to the
production and to the manufacture of that valuable article. And it is
conceived, that the expense would be well justified by the magnitude of the
object.

The printing and staining of cotton goods is known to be a distinct business
from the fabrication of them. It is one easily accomplished, and which, as it
adds materially to the value of the article in its white state, and prepares it
for a variety of new uses, is of importance to be promoted.

As imported cottons, equally with those which are made at home, may be the
objects of this manufacture, it will merit consideration, whether the whole, or
a part of the duty, on the white goods, ought not to be allowed to be drawn
back in favor of those, who print or stain them. This measure would certainly
operate as a powerful encouragement to the business; and though it may in a
degree counteract the original fabrication of the articles, it would probably
more than compensate for this disadvantage, in the rapid growth of a collateral
branch, which is of a nature sooner to attain to maturity. When a sufficient
progress shall have been made, the drawback may be abrogated, and by that time
the domestic supply of the articles to be printed or stained will have been
extended.

If the duty of seven and an half per cent. on certain kinds of cotton goods
were extended to all goods of cotton, or of which it is the principal material,
it would probably more than counterbalance the effect of the drawback proposed,
in relation to the fabrication of the article. And no material objection occurs
to such an extension. The duty then, considering all the circumstances which
attend goods of this description could not be deemed inconveniently high; and
it may be inferred from various causes that the prices of them would still
continue moderate.

Manufactories of cotton goods, not long since established at Beverly, in
Massachusetts, and at Providence, in the state of Rhode Island, and conducted
with a perseverance corresponding with the patriotic motives which began them,
seem to have overcome the first obstacles to success; producing corduroys,
velverets, fustians, jeans and other similar articles of a quality, which will
bear a comparison with the like articles brought from Manchester. The one at
Providence has the merit of being the first in introducing into the United
States, the celebrated cotton mill; which not only furnishes materials for that
manufactory itself, but for the supply of private families for household
manufacture.

Other manufactories of the same material, as regular businesses, have also
been begun at different places in the state of Connecticut, but all upon a
smaller scale, than those above mentioned. Some essays are also making in the
printing and staining of cotton goods. There are several small establishments
of this kind already on foot.

WOOL.
In a country, the climate of which partakes of so considerable a proportion of
winter, as that of a great part of the United States, the woollen branch cannot
be regarded, as inferior to any, which relates to the clothing of the
inhabitants.

Household manufactures of this material are carried on, in different parts of
the United States, to a very interesting extent; but there is only one branch,
which, as a regular business, can be said to have acquired maturity. This is
the making of hats.

Hats of wool, and of wool mixed with fur, are made in large quantities, in
different states; and nothing seems wanting, but an adequate supply of
materials, to render the manufacture commensurate with the demand.

A promising essay, toward the fabrication of cloths, cassimires and other
woollen goods, is likewise going on at Hartford, in Connecticut. Specimens of
the different kinds which are made, in the possession of the Secretary, evince
that these fabrics have attained a very considerable degree of perfection.
Their quality certainly surpasses any thing, that could have been looked for,
in so short a time, and under so great disadvantages; and conspires with the
scantiness of the means, which have been at the command of the directors, to
form the eulogium of that public spirit, perseverance and judgment, which have
been able to accomplish so much.

To cherish and bring to maturity this precious embryo must engage the most
ardent wishes, and proportionable regret, as far as the means of doing it may
appear difficult or uncertain.

Measures, which should tend to promote an abundant supply of wool, of good
quality, would probably afford the most efficacious aid, that present
circumstances permit.

To encourage the raising and improving the breed of sheep, at home, would
certainly be the most desirable expedient, for that purpose; but it may not be
alone sufficient, especially as it is yet a problem, whether our wool be
capable of such a degree of improvement, as to render it fit for the finer
fabrics.

Premiums would probably be found the best means of promoting the domestic, and
bounties the foreign supply: The first may be within the compass of the
institution hereafter to be submitted. The last would require a specific
legislative provision. If any bounties are granted they ought of course to be
adjusted with an eye to quality as well as quantity.

A fund for this purpose may be derived from the addition of 2 per cent. to the
present rate of duty, on carpets and carpeting; an increase, to which the
nature of the articles suggests no objection, and which may at the same time
furnish a motive the more to the fabrication of them at home; toward which
some beginnings have been made.

SILK.
The production of this article is attended with great facility in most parts
of the United States. Some pleasing essays are making in Connecticut, as well
toward that, as toward the manufacture of what is produced. Stockings,
handkerchiefs, ribbons and buttons, are made, though as yet but in small
quantities.

A manufactory of lace, upon a scale not very extensive, has been long
memorable at Ipswich in the state of Massachusetts.

An exemption of the material from the duty, which it now pays on importation,
and premiums upon the production, to be dispensed under the direction of the
institution before alluded to, seem to be the only species of encouragement
advisable at so early a stage of the thing.

GLASS.
The materials for making glass are found every where. In the United States
there is no deficiency of them. The sands and stones called Tarso, which
include flinty and chrystalline substances generally, and the salts of various
plants, particularly of the sea-weed kali or kelp constitute the essential
ingredients. An extraordinary abundance of fuel is a particular advantage
enjoyed by this country for such manufactures. They, however, require large
capitals and involve much manual labor.

Different manufactories of glass are now on foot in the United States. The
present duty of 12 per cent. on all imported articles of glass amount to a
considerable encouragement to those manufactories. If any thing in addition is
judged eligible, the most proper would appear to be a direct^ (...), on window
glass and black bottles.

The first recommends itself as an object of general convenience; the last adds
to that character, the circumstance of being an important item in breweries. A
complaint is made of great deficiency in this respect.

GUN POWDER.
No small progress has been of late made in the manufacture of this very
important article: It may indeed be considered as already established; but its
high importance renders its further extension very desirable.

The encouragement, which it already enjoys, are a duty of ten per cent. on the
foreign rival article, and an exemption of saltpeter one of the principal
ingredients of which it is composed, from duty. A like exemption of sulphur,
another chief ingredient, would appear to be equally proper. No quantity of
this article has yet been produced, from internal sources. The use made of it
in finishing the bottoms of ships is an additioal inducement to placing it in
the class of free goods. Regulations for the careful inspection of the article
would have a favorable tendency.

PAPER.
Manufactories of paper are among those which are arrived at the greatest
maturity in the United States, and are most adequate to national supply. That
of paper hangings is a branch, in which respectable progress has been made.

Nothing material seems wanting to the further success of this valuable branch,
which is already protected by a competent duty on similar imported articles.

In the enumeration of the several kinds, made subject to that duty, sheathing
and cartridge paper have been omitted. These, being the most simple
manufactures of the sort, and necessary to military supply, as well as ship
building, recommend themselves equally with those of other descriptions, to
encouragement, and appear to be as fully within the compass of domestic
exertions.

PRINTED BOOKS.
The great number of presses disseminated throughout the Union, seem to afford
an assurance, that there is no need of being indebted to foreign countries for
the printing of the books which are used in the United States. A duty of ten
per cent. instead of five, which is now charged upon the article, would have a
tendency to aid the business internally.

It occurs, as an objection to this, that it may have an unfavourable aspect
toward literature, by raising the prices of books in universal use, in private
families, schools and other seminaries of learning. But the difference it is
conceived would be without effect.

As to books which usually fill the libraries of the wealthier classes and of
professional men, such an augmentation of prices, as might be occasioned by an
additional duty of five per cent. would be too little felt to be an impediment
to the acquisition.

And with regard to books which may be specially imported for the use of
particular seminaries of learning, and of public libraries, a total exemption
from duty would be advisable, which would go far toward obviating the
objection just mentioned. They are now subject to a duty of five per cent.

As to the books in most general family use, the constancy and universality of
the demand would ensure exertions to furnish them at home, and the means are
completely adequate. It may also be expected ultimately, in this as in other
cases, that the extension of the domestic manufacture would conduce to the
cheapness of the article.

It ought not to pass unremarked, that to encourage the printing of books is to
encourage the manufacture of paper.

REFINED SUGARS AND CHOCOLATE.
Are among the number of extensive and prosperous domestic manufactures.

Drawbacks of the duties upon the materials, of which they are respectively
made, in cases of exportation, would have a beneficial influence upon the
manufacture, and would conform to a precedent, which has been already
furnished, in the instance of molasses, on the exportation of distilled spirits.

Cocoa, the raw material now pays a duty of one cent per lb. while chocolate
which is a prevailing and very simple manufacture, is comprised in the mass of
articles rated at no more than five per cent.

There would appear to be a propriety in encouraging the manufacture, by a
somewhat higher duty, on its foreign rival, than is paid on the raw material.
Two cents per lb. on imported chocolate would, it is presumed, be without
inconvenience.

THE foregoing heads comprise the most important of the several kinds of
manufactures, which have occurred as requiring, and, at the same time, as most
proper for public encouragement; and such measures for affording it, as have
appeared best calculated to answer the end, have been suggested.

The observations, which have accompanied this delineation of objects,
supersede the necessity of many supplementary remarks. One or two however may
not be altogether superfluous.

Bounties are in various instances proposed as one species of encouragement.

It is a familiar objection to them, that they are difficult to be managed and
liable to frauds. -- But neither that difficulty nor this danger seems
sufficiently great to countervail the advantages of which they are productive,
when rightly applied. And it is presumed to have been shown, that they are in
some cases, particularly in the infancy of new enterprises, indispensable.

It will however be necessary to guard with extraordinary circumspection, the
manner of dispensing them. The requisite precautions have been thought of; but
to enter into the detail would swell this report, already voluminous, to a size
too inconvenient.

If the principle shall not be deemed inadmissible, the means of avoiding an
abuse of it will not be likely to present insurmountable obstacles. There are
useful guides from practice in other quarters.

It shall therefore only be remarked here, in relation to this point, that any
bounty, which may be applied to the manufacture of an article, cannot with
safety extend beyond those manufactories, at which the making of the article is
a regular trade. It would be impossible to annex adequate precautions to a
benefit of that nature, if extended to every private family, in which the
manufacture was incidentally carried on, and its being a merely incidental
occupation which engages a portion of time that would otherwise be lost, it can
be advantageously carried on, without so special an aid.

The possibility of a diminution of the revenue may also present itself, as an
objection to the arrangements, which have been submitted.

But there is no truth which may be more firmly relied upon, than that the
interests of the revenue are promoted, by whatever promotes an increase of
national industry and wealth.

In proportion to the degree of these, is the capacity of every country to
contribute to the public treasury; and where the capacity to pay is increased,
or even is not decreased, the only consequence of measures, which diminish any
particular resource, is a change of the object. If by encouraging the
manufacture of an article at home, the revenue, which has been wont to accrue
from its importation, should be lessened, an indemnification can easily be
found, either out of the manufacture itself, or from some other object, which
may be deemed more convenient.

The measures however which have been submitted, taken aggregately, will for a
long time to come, rather augment than decrease the public revenue.

There is little room to hope, that the progress of manufactures will so
equally keep pace with the progress of population, as to prevent, even a
gradual augmentation of the product of the duties on imported articles.

As, nevertheless, an abolition in some instances, and a reduction in others of
duties, which have been pledged for the public debt, is proposed, it is
essential, that it should be accompanied with a competent substitute. In order
to this, it is requisite, that all the additional duties which shall be laid,
be appropriated in the first instance, to replace all defalcations, which may
proceed from any such abolition or diminution. It is evident, at first glance,
that they will not only be adequate to this, but will yield a considerable
surplus. This surplus will serve,

First. To constitute a fund for paying the bounties which shall have been
decreed.

Secondly. To constitute a fund for the operations of a board, to be
established, for promoting arts, agriculture, manufactures and commerce. Of
this institution, different intimations have been given, in the course of this
report. An outline of a plan for it shall now be submitted.

Let a certain annual sum, be set apart, and placed under the management of
commissioners, not less than three, to consist of certain officers of the
government and their successors in office.

Let these commissioners be empowered to apply the fund confided to them, to
defray the expenses of the emigration of artists, and manufacturers in
particular branches of extraordinary importance -- to induce the prosecution
and introduction of useful discoveries, inventions and improvements, by
proportionate rewards, judiciously held out and applied -- to encourage by
premiums, both honorable and lucrative, the exertions of individuals, and of
classes, in relation to the several objects, they are charged with promoting --
and to afford such other aids to those objects, as may be generally designated
by law.

The commissioners to render to the legislature an annual account of their
transactions and disbursements; and all such sums as shall not have been
applied to the purposes of their trust, at the end of every three years, to
revert to the treasury. It may also be enjoined upon them, not to draw out the
money, but for the purpose of some specific disbursement.

It may moreover be of use, to authorize them to receive voluntary
contributions; making it their duty to apply them to the particular objects for
which they may have been made, if any shall have been designated by the donors.

There is reason to believe, that the progress of particular manufactures has
been much retarded by the want of skilful workmen. And it often happens that
the capitals employed are not equal to the purposes of bringing from abroad
workmen of a superior kind. Here, in cases, worthy of it, the auxiliary agency
of government would in all probability be useful. There are also valuable
workmen, in every branch, who are prevented from emigrating solely by the want
of means. Occasional aids to such persons, properly administered, might be a
source of valuable acquisitions to the country.

The propriety of stimulating by rewards, the invention and introduction of
useful improvements, is admitted without difficulty. But the success of
attempts in this way must evidently depend much on the manner of conducting
them. It is probable, that the placing of the dispensation of those rewards
under some proper discretionary direction, where they may be accompanied by
collateral expedients, will serve to give them the surest efficacy. It seems
impracticable to apportion, by general rules, specific compensations for
discoveries of unknown and disproportionate utility.

The great use which may be made of a fund of this nature to procure and import
foreign improvements is particularly obvious. Among these, the article of
machines would form a most important item.

The operation and utility of premiums have been adverted to; together with the
advantages which have resulted from their dispensation, under the direction of
certain public and private societies. Of this, some experience has been had in
the instance of the Pennsylvania society, for the promotion of manufactures and
useful arts; but the funds of that association have been too contracted to
produce more than a very small portion of the good to which the principles of
it would have led. It may confidently be affirmed that there is scarcely any
thing, which has been devised. Better calculated to excite a general spirit of
improvement than the institutions of this nature. They are truly invaluable.

In countries where there is great private wealth much may be effected by the
voluntary contributions of patriotic individuals; but in a community situated
like that of the United States, the public purse must supply the deficiency of
private resource. In what can it be so useful as in prompting and improving the
efforts of industry?

All which is humbly submitted. Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury.


