EXPLANATORY NOTES UPON THE NEW TESTAMENT.

BY John WESLEY, M. A. Late Fellow of Lincoln-College, OXFORD. VOLUME THE FIRST.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK: SOLD BY JOHN DICKINS, NO. 43,
FOURTH-STREET, NEAR THE CORNER OF RACE-STREET. MDCCXCI.

PREFACE.
1. FOR many Years I have had a Desire of s^tting down and laying together,
wh^t has occured to my Mind, either in Reading, ^hinking, or Conversation,
which might assist serious Persons, who have not the Advantage of Learning, in
understanding the New Testament. But I have been continually deterred from
attempting any Thing of this Kind, by a deep Sense of my own Inability: Of my
Want not only of Learning for such a Work, but much more of Experience and
Wisdom. This has often occasioned my laying aside the Thought. And when by much
Importunity I have been prevailed upon to resume it, still I determined to
delay it as long as possible, that (if it should please GOD) I might finish my
Work and my Life together.

2. But having lately had a loud Call from GOD, to arise and go hence, I am
convinced that, if I attempt any Thing of this Kind at all, I must not delay
any longer. My Day is far spent, and (even in a natural Way) the Shadows of the
Evening come on apace. And I am the rather induced to do what little I can in
this Way, because I can do nothing else: Being prevented by my present
Weakness, from either Traveling or Preaching. But, blessed be GOD, I can still
read, and write, and think. O that it may be to his Glory!

3. It will be easily discerned, even from what I have said already, and much
more from the Notes themselves, that they were not principally designed for Men
of Learning; who are provided with many other Helps: And much less for Men of
long and deep Experience in the Ways and Word of GOD. I desire to sit at their
Feet, and to learn of them. But I write chiefly for plain, unlettered Men, who
understand only their Mother Tongue, and yet reverence and love the Word of
GOD, and have a Desire to save their Souls.

4. In order to assist these in such a Measure as I am able, I design first to
set down the Text itself, for the most Part, in the common English Translation,
which is in general (so far as I can judge) abundantly the best that I have
seen. Yet I do not say it is incapable of being brought in several Places
nearer to the Original. Neither will I affirm, That the Greek Copies from which
this Translation was made, are always the most correct. And therefore I shall
take the Liberty, as Occasion may require, to make here and there a small
Alteration.

5. I am very sensible this will be liable to Objections: Nay, to Objections of
quite opposite Kinds. Some will probably think, the Text is altered too much;
and others, that it is altered too little. To the former I would observe, That
I have never knowingly, so much as in one Place, altered it, for Altering's
Sake: But there, and there only, where, First, The Sense was made better,
stronger, clearer, or more consistent with the Context: Secondly, Where the
Sense being equally good, the Phrase was better or nearer the Original. To the
latter, who think the Alterations too few, and that the Translation might have
been nearer still, I answer, This is true; I acknowledge it might. But what
valuable End would it have answered, to multiply such trivial Alterations, as
add neither Clearness nor Strength to the Text? This I could not prevail upon
myself to do: So much the less, because there is, to my Apprehension, I know
not what, peculiarly solemn and venerable in the Old Language of our
Translation. And suppose this to be a mistaken Apprehension, and an Instance of
human Infirmity; yet is it not an excusable Infirmity, to be unwilling to part
with what we have been long accustomed to, and to love the very Words, by which
GOD has often conveyed Strength or Comfort to our Souls?

6. I have endeavored to make the Notes as short as possible, that the Comment
may not obscure or swallow up the Text: And as plain as possible, in Pursuance
of my main Design, To assist the unlearned Reader: For this Reason I have
studiously avoided, not only all curious and critical Enquiries, and all Use of
the learned Languages, but all such Methods of Reasoning and Modes of
Expression, as People in common Life are unacquainted with: For the same
Reason, as I rather endeavor to obviate than to propose and answer Objections,
so I purposely decline going deep into many Difficulties, lest I should leave
the ordinary Reader behind me.

7. I once designed to write down, barely what occurred to my own Mind,
consulting none but the inspired Writers. But no sooner was I acquainted with
that great Light of the Christian World (lately gone to his Reward) Bengelius,
than I entirely changed my Design, being thoroughly convinced, it might be of
more Service to the Cause of Religion, were I barely to translate his Gnomon
Novi Testamenti, than to write many Volumes upon it. Many of his excellent
Notes I have therefore translated. Many more I have abridged; omitting that
Part which was purely critical, and giving the Substance of the rest. Those
various Readings likewise which he has showed to have a vast Majority of
ancient Copies and Translations on their Side, I have without Scruple
incorporated with the Text: Which after his Manner I have divided all along
(though not omitting the common Division into Chapters and Verses, which is of
Use on various Accounts) according to the Matter it contains, making a larger
or smaller Pause, just as the Sense requires. And even this is such an Help in
many Places, as one who has not tried it can scarcely conceive.

8. I am likewise indebted for some useful Observations, to Dr. Heylin's
Theological Lectures: And for many more to Dr. Guyse, and to the Family
Expositor of the late pious and learned Dr. Doddridge. It was a Doubt with me
for some Time, whether I should not subjoin to every Note I received from them,
the Name of the Author from whom it was taken; especially considering I had
transcribed some, and abridged many more, almost in the Words of the Author.
But upon farther Consideration, I resolved to name none, that nothing might
divert the Mind of the Reader from keeping close to the Point in View, and
receiving what was spoke, only according to its own intrinsic Value.

9. I cannot flatter myself so far (to use the Words of one of the abovenamed
Writers) as to imagine that I have fallen into no Mistakes, in a Work of so
great Difficulty. But my own Conscience acquits me of having designedly
misrepresented any single Passage of Scripture, or of having written one Line,
with a Purpose of inflaming the Hearts of Christians against each other. GOD
forbid that I should make the Words of the most gentle and benevolent JESUS, a
Vehicle to convey such Poison. Would to GOD that all the Party Names, and
unscriptural Phrases and Forms, which have divided the Christian World, were
forgot: And that we might all agree to sit down together, as humble, loving
Disciples, at the Feet of our common Master, to hear his Word, to imbibe his
Spirit, and to transcribe his Life in our own!

10. Concerning the Scriptures in general, it may be observed, the Word of the
Living GOD, which directed the first Patriarchs also, was, in the Time of
Moses, committed to Writing. To this were added, in several succeeding
Generations, the inspired Writings of the other Prophets. Afterward, what the
Son of GOD preached, and the HOLY GHOST spoke by the Apostles, the Apostles and
Evangelists wrote. This is what we now style the Holy Scripture: This is that
Word of GOD which remains for ever: Of which, though Heaven and Earth pass
away, one Jot or Tittle shall not pass away. The Scripture therefore of the Old
and New Testament, is a most solid and precious System of Divine Truth. Every
Part thereof is worthy of GOD; and all together are one entire Body, wherein is
no Defect, no Excess. It is the Fountain of heavenly Wisdom, which they who are
able to taste, prefer to all Writings of Men, however wise, or learned, or holy.

11. An exact Knowledge of the Truth was accompanied in the inspired Writers
with an exactly regular Series of Arguments, a precise Expression of their
Meaning, and a genuine Vigor of suitable Affections. The Chain of Argument in
each Book is briefly exhibited in the Table presixt to it, which contains also
the Sum thereof, and may be of more Use, than prefixing the Argument to each
Chapter; the Division of the New Testament into Chapters, having been made in
the dark Ages, and very incorrectly; often separating Things that are closely
joined, and joining those that are entirely distinct from each other.

12. In the Language of the Sacred Writings, we may observe the utmost Depth,
together with the utmost Ease. All the Elegancies of human Composures sink into
nothing before it: GOD speaks not as Man, but as GOD. His Thoughts are very
deep; and thence his Words are of inexhaustible Virtue. And the Language of his
Messengers also is exact in the hignest Degree: For the Words which were given
them, accurately answered the Impression made upon their Minds: and hence
Luther says, Divinity is nothing but a Grammar of the Language of the Holy
Ghost. To understand this thoroughly, we should observe the Emphasis which lies
on every Word; the holy Affections expressed thereby, and the Tempers shown by
every Writer. But how little are these, the latter especially, regarded? Though
they are wonderfully diffused through the whole New Testament, and are in Truth a
continued Commendation of Him, who acts, or speaks, or writes.

13. The New Testament is, all those Sacred Writings in which the New Testament
or Covenant is deseribed. The former Part of this contains the Writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles: The latter, the Revelation of JESUS CHRIST. In the
former is, first, the History of JESUS CHRIST, from his Coming in the Flesh, to
his Ascension into Heaven; then, the Institution and History of the Christian
Church, from the Time of his Ascension. The Revelation delivers what is to be,
with regard to CHRIST, the Church, and the Universe, till the Consummation of
all Things.

BRISTOL HOT-WELLS, January 4, 1754.
NOTES ON THE Gospel according to St. MATTHEW.
THE Gospel (that is, Good Tidings) means a Book containing the Good Tidings of
our Salvation by Jesus Christ.

St. Mark in his Gospel presupposes that of St. Matthew, and supplies what is
omitted therein. St. Luke supplies what is omitted by both the former: St. John
what is omitted by all the three.

St. Matthew particularly points out the fulfilling of the Prophecies for the
Conviction of the Jews. St. Mark wrote a short Compendium, and yet added many
remarkable Circumstances omitted by St. Matthew, particularly with regard to
the Apostles, immediately after they were called. St. Luke treated principally
of the Office of Christ, and mostly in an historical Manner. St. John refuted
those who denied his Godhead: ^^^h choosing to treat more largely on those
Things, which most suited the Time when, and the Persons to whom he wrote.

The Gospel according to St. Matthew contains,
I. The Birth of Christ, and what presently followed it: a. His Genealogy, C.i.
1 -- 17 b. His Birth, 18 -- 25 c. The Coming of the wise Men, C.ii. 1 -- 12 d.
His Flight into Egypt and Return, 13 -- 23
II. The Introduction: a. John the Baptist, C.iii. 1 -- 12 b. The Baptism of
Christ, 13 -- 17 c. His Temptation and Victory, C.iv. 1 -- 11
III. The Actions and Words by which Jesus proved He was the Christ: a. At
Capernaum, 12 -- 16 Where we may observe, 1. His Preaching, 17 2. Calling
Andrew, and Peter, James, and John, 18 -- 22 3. Preaching and Healing, with a
great Concourse of People, 23 -- 25 4. Sermon on the Mount, C. v.vi. vii. 5.
Healing the Lep^r, viii. 1 -- 4 6. Healing The Centurion's Servant, 5 -- 13 7.
Healing Peter's Mother-in-law, 14 -- 15 8. Healing n^^^y that were sick, 16 --
17
b. In his Journ^y; (wherein he admonished two that offered ^o follow Him over
the Sea: Here, we may observe, 1. His Dominion over the Winds and Seas, 18 --
27 2. The Devils passing from the Men into the Swine, 28 -- 34
c. At Capernaum again. Here, C. ix. 1. He cures the Paralytic, 1-8 2. Calls
Matthew, and defends his conversing with Publicans and Sinners, 9-13 3. Answers
concerning Fasting, 14 -- 17 4. Raises Jairus' Daughter (after curing the Issue
of Blood) 18 -- 26 5. Gives Sight to two blind Men, 27 -- 31 6. Dispossesses
the Demoniac, 32 -- 34 7. Goes through the Cities, and directs to pray for
Laborers, 35 -- 38 8. Sends and instructs Laborers, and preaches Himself,
C.x. 1. xi. 1. 9. Answers the Message of John, 2 -- 6 10. Commends John,
reproves the unbelieving Cities, invites the Weary, 7 -- 30 11. Defends the
Disciples' plucking the Corn, C.xii. 1 -- 8 12. Heals the withered Hand, 9 --
13 13. Retires from the Pharisees lying in wait, 14 -- 21 14. Cures the
Demoniac, while the People wonder, and the Pharisees blaspheming are refuted,
22 -- 37 15. Reproves them that require a Sign, 38 -- 45 16. Declares who are
his Relations, and 46 -- 50 17. Teaches by Parables, C.xiii. 1 -- 52
d. At Nazareth: 53 -- 58 e. In other Places. 1. Herod having killed John,
doubts concerning Jesus. Jesus retiring, is sought for by the People, C.xiv. 1
-- 13 2. He heals the Sick, and feeds five thousand, 14 -- 21 3. His Voyage and
Miracles in the Land of Gennesa^^, 22 -- 30 4. Unwashen Hands, C.xv. 1 -- 20 5.
The Woman of Canaan, 21 -- 28 6. Many Sick healed, 29 -- 31 7. Four thousand
^ed, 32 -- 38 8. Those who require a Sign reproved, C.xv. 39. xvi. 1 -- 4 9.
The Leaven of the Pharisees, 5 -- 12

IV. Predictions of his Death and Resurrection: a. The First Prediction. 1.
Preparation for it by a Confirmation that He is the Christ, 13 -- 20 2. The
Prediction itself, and Reproof of Peter, 21 -- 28
b. The Second Prediction. 1. The Tra^^^^guration, and Silence enjoined, C.
xvii. 1 -- 13 2. The L^^^se healed 14 -- 21 3. The (...) ^^self, 22 -- 23 4.
The Tr^^^^ p^d 24 -- 27 5. Who is (...) in Christ Kingdom, C.xviii. 1 -- 20 6.
The Day of ^^^^ving ^ur brother, 21 -- 35
c. The Third (...). 1. Jesus departs out of Galilee, C.xix. 1 -- 2 2. Of
Divorce, and Celibacy, 3 -- 12 3. His Tenderness to little Children, 13 -- 15
4. The rich Man drawing back, and hence 16 -- 22 of the Salvation of the Rich,
23 -- 26 of the Reward of following Christ, 27 -- 30 of the last and the first,
C.xx. 1 -- 16
5. The Prediction itself, 17 -- 19 6. The Request of James and John; Humility
enjoined, 20 -- 28 7. The two blind Men cured, 29 -- 34

V. Transactions at Jerusalem before his Passion: a. Sunday His royal Entry
into Jerusalem, C.xxi. 1 -- 11 His purging the Temple, 12 -- 17
b. Monday, The barren Fig Tree, 18 -- 22
c. Tuesday, Transactions, In the Temple: 1. The chief Priests and Elders
consuted, By a Question concerning John's Baptism, 23 -- 27 By the Parables, of
the two Sons, 28 -- 32 of the Vineyard: 33 -- 44

2. Seek to lay Hands on Him, 45 -- 46 3 The Parable of the Marriage Feast
C.xxii. 1 -- 14 4. He is questioned, concerning paying Tribute, 15 -- 22 the
Resurrection, 28 -- 33 the great Commandment, 34 -- 40
5. Christ's Question concerning David's Lord, 41 -- 46 Caution, concerning the
Scribes and Pharisees, C.xxiii. 1 -- 12 Severe Reproof of them, 13 -- 36 and of
Jerusalem, 37 -- 39


Out of the Temple: 1. His Discourse of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the
End of the World, C.xxiv. 1 -- 51 2. The ten Virgins; the Talents; the last
Judgment, C.xxv. 1 -- 46

VI. H^s Passion and Resurrection, A. H^^ Passion, Death, and Burial, C.xxvi. 1
-- 2 a. Wednesday, His Prediction, C.xxvi. 1 -- 2. The Consultation of the
chief Priests and Elders, 3 -- 5 Judas bargains to betray Him, 6 -- 16
b. Thursday, 1. In the Daytime, The Passover prepared, 17 -- 19
2. In the Evening, The Traitor discovered, 20 -- 25 The Lord's Supper, 26 -- 29
3 In the Night, 1. Jesus foretells the Cowardice of the Apostles, 33 -- 35 2.
Is in an Agony, 36 -- 46 3. Is apprehended, reproves Peter and the Multitude;
is forsaken of all, 47 -- 56 4. Is led to Caiaphas, falsely accused, owns
Himself the Son of GOD, is condemned, derided, 57 -- 68 5. Peter denies Him and
weeps, 69 -- 75

c. Friday, 1. The Height of his Passion: In the Morning, 1. Jesus is delivered
to Pilate, C.xxvii. 1 -- 2 2. The Death of Judas, 3 -- 10 3. Jesus' Kingdom and
Silence, 11 -- 14 4. Pilate, though warned by his Wife, condemns Him, 15 -- 26 5.
He is mocked and led forth, 27 -- 32 The Third Hour, The Vinegar and Gall; the
Crucifixion; his Garments divided; the Inscription on the Cross; the two
Robbers; Blasphemies; 33 -- 44 From the Sixth to the Ninth Hour, The Darkness,
his last Agony 45 -- 49

2. His Death, 50 The Veil rent, and a great Earthquake, 51 -- 53 The Centurion
wonders; the Women behold, 54 -- 56
3. His Burial, 57 -- 61
d. Saturday, The Sepulcher secured: 62 -- 66

B. His Resurrection, 1. Testified to the Women by an Angel, C.xxviii. 1 -- 8
By our Lord Himself, 9 -- 10
2. Denied by his Adversaries, 11 -- 15 3. Proved to his Apostles, 16 -- 20




St. MATTHEW.
I.
THE Luke iii. 3^
book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abraham.
begat Judah and his Brethren;

wife of Uriah; And Solomon begat Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, an^
Abijah begat Asa; Josiah;

are fourteen generations: and from David to the carrying away to Babylon are
fourteen generations, and from the carrying away to Babylon to Christ are
fourteen generations.

thou son of David, fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife; for that which is
begotten in her is of the Holy Ghost. Isaiah vii. 14
Behold the virgin shall be with child, and bring forth a Son, and they shall
call his name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, God with us.) Luke ii. 7.
brought forth her Son, the firstborn. And and he called his name Jesus.

V. 1. The book of the Generation of Jesus Christ -- That is, strictly
speaking, the Account of his Birth and Genealogy. This Title therefore properly
relates to the Verses that immediately follow: But as it sometimes signifies
the History of a Person, in that Sense it may belong to the whole Book. If
there were any Difficulties in this Genealogy, or that given by St. Luke, which
could not easily be removed, they would rather affect the Jewish Tables, than
the Credit of the Evangel^sts: For they act only as Hist^rians setting down
these Genealogies, as they stood in those public and allowed Records. Therefore
they were to take them as they found them. Nor was it needful they should
correct the Mistakes, if there were any. For these Accounts sufficiently answer
the End for which they are recited. They unquestionably prove the grand Point
^n View, That Jesus was of the Family from which the promised Seed was to come.
And they had more weight with the Jews for this Purpose than if Alterations had
been made ^y Inspiration itself. For such Alterations would have occasioned
endless Disputes between them and the Disciples of our LORD. The son of David,
the son of Abraham -- He is so called, because to these He was more peculiarly
promised; and of these it was often foretold the Messiah should spring.

V. 3. Of Thamar -- St. Matthew adds the Names of those Women also, that were
remarkable in the Sacred Hi^tory.

V. 4. Naasson -- Who was Prince of the Tribe of Judah, when the Israelites
entered into Canaan.

V. 5. Obed begat Jesse -- The Providence of GOD was peculiarly shown in this,
That Salmon, Boaz, and Obed, must each of them have been near 100 Years old, at
the Birth of his Son here re^orded.

V. 6. David the King -- Particularly mentioned under this Character, because
his Throne is given to the Messiah.

V. 8. Jehoram begat Uzziah -- Jehoahaz, Joash, and Am^ziah coming between. So
that he begat him mediately, as Christ is mediately the Son of David and of
Abraham So the Progeny of Hezekiah, after many Generations, are called The sons
that should issue from him, which he should beget, Isaiah xxxix. 7.

V. 11. Josiah begat Jeconiah -- Mediately, Jehoialim coming between. And his
Brethren -- That is, his Uncles. The Jews term all Kinsmen Brethren. About the
time they were carried away -- Which was a little after the Birth of Jeconiah.

V. 16. The husband of Mary -- Jesus was generally believed to be the Son of
Joseph. It was needful for all who believed this, to know that Joseph was
sprung from David. Otherwise they would not allow Jesus to be the Christ.
Jesus, who is called Christ -- The Name Jesus respects chiefly the Promise of
Blessing made to Abraham: The Name Christ, the Promise of the Messiah's
Kingdom, which was made to David.

It may be farther observed, That the Word Christ in Greek, and Messiah in
Hebrew signify Anointed, and imply the prophetic, priestly, and royal
Characters, which were to meet in the Messiah. Among the Jews, Anointing was
the Ceremony whereby Prophets, Priests, and Kings, were initiated into those
Offices. And if we look into ourselves, we shall find a Want of Christ in all
these Respects. We are by Nature at a Distance from GOD, alienated from Him,
and incapable of a free Access to Him. Hence we want a Mediator, an
Intercessor, in a Word, a Christ, in his priestly Office. This regards our
State with Respect to GOD. And with Respect to ourselves, we find a total
Darkness, Blindness, Ignorance of GOD, and the Things of GOD. Now here we want
Christ in his prophetic Office, to enlighten our Minds and teach us the whole
Will of GOD. We find also within us a strange Misrule of Appetites and
Passions. For these we want Christ in his royal Character, to reign in our
Hearts, and subdue all Things to Himself.

V. 17. So all the generations -- Observe, in order to complete the three
Fourteens, David ends the first Fourteen, and begins the second (which reaches
to the Captivity) and Jesus ends the third Fourteen.

When we survey such a Series of Generations, it is a natural and obvious
Reflection. how like the leaves of a tree ou^ passes away, and another comes!
Yet the earth still abides. And with (...) the Goodness of the LORD, which
runs on from Generation to Generation, the common Hope of Parents and Children.

Of those who formerly lived upon Earth, and perhaps made the most conspicuous
Figure, how many are there whose Names are perished with them? How many, of
whom only the Names are remaining? Thus are we likewise passing away! And thus
shall we shortly be forgotten! Happy are we, if, while we are forgotten by Men,
we are remembered by GOD! If our Names, lost on Earth, are at length found
written in the Book of Life!

V. 19. A just Man -- A strict Observer of the Law: therefore not thinking it
right to keep her.

V. 21. Jesus -- That is, a Savior. It is the same Name with Jos^^a (who was a
Type of Him) which properly signifies, The Lord, Salvation. His people --
Israel. And all the Israel of GOD.

V. 23. They shall call his name Emmanuel -- To be called, only means,
according to the Hebrew Manner of speaking, That the Person spoken of shall
really and effectually be what he is called, and actually fulfill that Title.
Thus, Unto us a child is born -- and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty GOD, the Prince of peace -- that is, He shall be all
these, though not so much nominally, as really, and in effect. And thus was he
called Emmanuel: which was no common Name of Christ, but points out his Nature
and Office: As He is GOD incarnate, and dwells by his Spirit, in the Heart, of
his People.

It is observable, the Words in Isaiah are, Thou (namely his Mother) shal^^^^l;
but here, They -- that is, all his People, shall call -- shall acknowledge him
to be Emmanuel, GOD with us. Which being interpreted -- This is a clear Proof,
that St. Matthew wrote his Gospel in Greek, and not in Hebrew.

V. 25 He knew her not, till after she baa brought forth -- It cannot be
inferred from hence, that he knew her afterward: No more than it can be
inferred from that Expression (2 Samuel vi. 23.) Michal had no Child till the day
of her Death, that she had Children afterward. Nor do the Words that follow,
the firstborn Son, alter the Case. For there are Abundance of Places, wherein
the Term firstborn is used, though there were no subsequent Children.

II.
Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king,
behold wise men came from the East to Jerusalem, saying, these things, he was
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Micah V. 2.
And thou, Bethlehem in the land of Judah; art in no wise the least among the
princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come forth a Governor, who shall rule
my people Israel. him, bring me word again, that I also may come and do him
homage. house, they saw the young child, with Mary his mother; and falling
down, they did him homage. And opening their treasures, they presented to him
gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh.

Hosea xi^.1.
Out of Egypt have I called my son. spoken by Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
Jer. xxxi. 15.
In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning,
Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are
not.

V. 1. Bethlehem of Judea -- There was another Bethlehem in the Tribe of
Z^bulon. In the days of Herod -- Commonly called Herod the great, born at
Asealon. The Scepter was now on the Point of departing from Judah. Among his
Sons were Ar^helaus, mentioned ver. 22. Herod Antipes mentioned chapter xiv. and
Philip, mentioned Luke iii. Herod Agrippa, mentioned Acts xii. was his
Grandson. Wise men -- The first Fruits of the Gentiles: Probably they were
Gentile Philosophers, who, through the divine Assistance, had improved their
Knowledge of Nature, as a Means of leading to the Knowledge of the One, true
GOD. Nor is it unreasonable to suppose, that GOD had favored them with some
extraordinary Revelations of himself, as He did Mel^^isedec, Job, and several
others, who were not of the Family of Abraham; to which he never intended
absolutely to confine his Favors. The Title given them in the Original, was
anciently given to all Philosophers, or Men of Learning; those particularly who
were curious in examining the Works of Nature, and observing the Motions of the
heavenly Bodies.

From the East -- So Arabia is frequently called in Scripture. It lay to the
East of Judea, and was famous for Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh. We have seen
his star -- Undoubtedly they had before heard Bal^^am's Prophecy. And probably
when they saw this unusual Star, it was revealed to them that this Prophecy was
fulsilled. In the (...) -- That is, while we were in the East.

V. 2. To do him homage -- To pay him that Honor, by bowing to the Earth
before him, which the Eastern Nations used to pay to their Mo^archs.

V. 4. The chief Priests -- That is, not only the High Priest and his Deputy,
with those who formerly had borne that Office; but also the chief Man in each
of those twenty-four Courses, into which the Body of Priests were divided, 1 Chronicles. xxiv. 10. The s^ribes were those whose peculiar Business it was, to
explain the Scriptures to the People. They were the public Preachers, or
Expounders of the Law of Moses: Whence the chief of them were called Doctors of
the Law.

V. 6. Thou art in no wise the least among the princes of Judah -- That is,
among the Cities belonging to the princes or Heads of Thousands in Judah. When
this and several other Quotations from the Old Testament are compared with the
Original, it plainly appears, the Apostles did not always think it necessary,
exactly to transcribe the Passages they cited, but contented themselves with
giving the general Sense, though with some Diversity of Language. The Words of
Micah which we render, Though thou be little, may be rendered, Art thou little?
And then the Difference which seems to be here between the Prophet and the
Evangelist vanishes away.

V. 8. And if ye find him, bring me word -- Probably, Herod did not believe He
was born: Otherwise would not so suspicious a Prince have tried to make sure
Work at once?

V. 10. Seeing the star -- standing over where the Child was.

V. 11. They presented to him gifts -- It was customary to offer some Present,
to any eminent Person whom they visited. And so it is, as Travelers observe,
in the Eastern Countries to this Day. Gold, frankincense, and myrrh -- Probably
these were the best Things their Country afforded; and the Presents ordinarily
made to great Persons. This was a most seasonable providential Assistance, for
a long and expensive Journey into Egypt, a Country where they were entirely
Strangers, and were to stay for a considerable Time.

V. 15. That it might be fulfilled -- that is, whereby was fulfilled. The
original Word frequently signifies, not the Design of an Action, but barely the
Consequence or Event of it. Which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet -- on
another Occasion: Out of Egypt have I called my Son -- which was now fulfilled
as it were anew; Christ being in a far higher Sense the Son of GOD, than
Israel, of whom the Words were originally spoken.

V. 16. Then Herod, seeing that he was deluded by the wise men -- So did his
Pride teach him to regard this Action, as if it were intended to expose him to
the Derision of his Subjects. Sending forth -- A Party of Soldiers: In all the
confines thereof -- In all the neighboring Places, of which Rama was one.

V. 17. Then was fulfilled -- A Passage of Scripture, whether prophetic,
historical or poetical, is in the Language of the New Testament fulfilled, when
an Event happens to which it may with great Propriety be accommodated.

V. 18. Rachel weeping for her children -- The Benjamites, who inhabited Rama,
sprung from her. She was buried (...) this Place; and is here beautifully
represented, risen, as it (...) out of her Grave, and bewailing her lost
Children. Because they are not -- that is, are dead. The Preservation of Jesus
from this Destruction, may be considered as a Figure of GOD'S Care over his
Children in their greatest Danger. GOD does not often, as He casily could, cut
off their Persecutors at a Stroke: But He provides a Hiding Place for his
People, and by Methods not less effectual, though less pompous, preserves them
from being swept away, even when the Enemy comes in like a Flood.

V. 22. He was afraid to go thither -- into Judea; and so turned aside into the
region of Galilee -- a Part of the Land of Israel not under the Jurisdiction of
Ar^helaus.

V. 23. He came and dwelt in Nazareth -- (where he had dwelt before he went to
Bethlehem) a Place contemptible to a Proverb. So that hereby was fulfilled what
had been spoken in effect, by several of the Prophets (though by none of them in
express Words) He shall be called a Nazarene -- that is, He shall be despised
and rejected, shall be a Mark of public Contempt and Reproach.

III.
Mark i. 1. Luke iii. 1.
In those days comes John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea,
Isa. xl. 3.
The Voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight.

lies at the root of the trees; therefore every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly cleanse his floor, and gather the wheat into the garner, but will
burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.

Mark i. 9. Luke iii. 21.
Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan upto John, to be baptized by him. it
now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him.
a dove, and coming upon him.

V. 1. In those days -- that is, while Jesus dwelt there. In the wilderness of
Judea -- This was a Wilderness properly so called, a wild, barren, desolate
Place, as was that also where our LORD wa^ tempted. But generally speaking, a
Wilderness in the New Testament, means only a Common, or less cultivated Place,
in Opposition to Pasture and Arable Land.

V. 2. The kingdom of heaven, and the kingdom of GOD, are but two Phrases for
the same Thing. They mean, not barely a future happy State in Heaven, but a
State to be enjoyed on Earth: The proper Disposition for the Glory of Heaven,
rather than the Possession of it. Is at band -- As if he had said, GOD is about
to erect that Kingdom, spoken of by Daniel (C. ii. 44. and vii. 13, 14.) the
Kingdom of the GOD of Heaven. It properly signifies here, The Gospel
Dispensation, in which Subjects were to be gathered to GOD by his Son, and a
Society to be formed, which was to subsist first on Earth, and afterward with
GOD in Glory. In some Places of Scripture, the Phrase more particularly denotes
the State of it on Earth: In others, it signifies only the State of Glory: But
it generally includes both. The Jews understood it of a temporal Kingdom, the
Seat of which they supposed would be Jerusalem; and the expected Sovereign of
this Kingdom, they learned from Daniel to call the Son of Man.

Both John the Baptist and Christ, took up that Phrase, the Kingdom of Heaven,
as they found it, and gradually taught the Jews (though greatly unwilling to
learn) to understand it right. The very Demand of Repentance, as previous to
it, showed it was a spiritual Kingdom, and that no wicked Man, how politic,
brave, or learned soever, could possibly be a Subject of it.

V. 3. The way of the Lord -- Of Christ. Make his paths straight -- By removing
every thing which might prove an Hind ance to his gracious Appearance.

V. 4. John had his raiment of camels' hair -- Coarse and rough, suiting his
Character and Doctrine. A leathern girdle -- Like El^jah, in whose Spirit and
Power he came. His food was locusts and wild honey -- Locusts are ranked among
clean Meats, Lev. xi. 22. But these were not always to be had. So in Default of
those, he fed on wild Honey.

V. 6. Confessing their sins -- Of their own Accord; freely and openly.

Such prodigious Numbers could hardly be baptized by immerging their whole
Bodies under Water: Nor can we think they were provided with Change of Raiment
for it, which was scarce practicable for such vast Multitudes. And yet they
could not be immerged naked with Modesty, nor in their wearing Apparel with
Safety. It seems therefore, that they stood in Ranks on the Edge of the River,
and that John passing along before them, cast Water on their Heads or Faces, by
which Means he might baptize many Thousands in a Day. And this Way most
naturally signified Christ's baptizing them with the Holy Ghost and with Fire,
which John spoke of, as prefigured by his baptizing with Water, and which was
eminently fulfilled, when the Holy Ghost sat upon the Disciples in the
Appearance of Tongues, or Flames of Fire.

V. 7. The Pharisees were a very ancient Sect among the Jews. They took their
Name from an Hebrew Word, which signifies to separate, because they separated
themselves from all other Men. They were outwardly strict Observers of the Law,
fasted often, made long Prayers, rigorously kept the Sabbath, and paid all
Tithe, even of Mint, Anise, and Cummin. Hence they were in high Esteem among
the People. But inwardly, they were full of Pride and Hypocrisy.

The Sadducees were another Sect among the Jews, only not so considerable as
the Pharisees. They denied the Existence of Angels, and the Immortality of the
Soul, and by Consequence the Resurrection of the Dead. Ye brood of vipers -- In
like Manner, the crafty Herod is styled a Fox, and Persons of insidious,
ravenous, profane, or sensual Dispositions, are named respectively by Him who
saw their Hearts, Serpents, dogs, wolves, and swine. Terms, which are not the
random Language of Passion, but a judicious Designation of the Persons meant by
them. For it was fitting such Men should be marked out, either for a Caution to
others, or a Warning to themselves.

V. 8. Repentance is of two Sorts; that which is termed legal, and that which
is styled evangelicat Repentance. The former (which is the same that is spoken
of here) is, A thorough Conviction of Sin. The latter is, A Change of Heart
(and consequently of Life) from all Sin to all Holiness.

V. 9. And say not confidently -- The Word in the Original, vulgarly rendered,
Think not, seems here, and in many Places, not to diminish, but rather add to
the Force of the Word with which it is joined. We have Abraham to our Father --
It is almost incredible, how great the Presumption of the Jews was, on this
their Relation to Abraham. One of their famous Sayings was, Abraham sits near
the Gates of Hell, and suffers no Israelite to go down into it I say unto you
-- This Preface always denotes the Importance of what follows. Of these stones
-- Probably pointing to those which lay before them.

V. 10. But the ax also already lies -- That is, There is no Room for such
idle Pretenses. Speedy Execution is determined against all that do not repent.
The Comparison seems to be taken from a Woodman that has laid down his Ax, to
put off his Coat, and then immediately goes to work to cut down the Tree. This
refers to the wrath to come in the 7th Verse. Is b^wn down -- Instantly,
without farther Delay.

V. 11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire -- He shall f^ll
you with the Holy Ghost, inflaming your Hearts with that Fire of Love, which
many Waters cannot quench. And this was done, ^ven with a visi^le Appearance as
of Fire, on the Day of Pentecost.

V. 12. Whose fan -- That is, the Word of the Gospel. His floor -- That is, his
Church, which is now covered with a Mixture of Wheat and Chaff He will gather
the wheat into the garner -- Will lay up those who are truly good, in Heaven.

V. 15. It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness -- It becomes every
Messenger of GOD, to observe all his righteous Ordinances. But the particular
Meaning of our LORD seems to be, That it becomes us to do (me to receive
Baptism, and you to administer it) in order to fulfill, that is, that I may
fully perform every Part of the righteous Law of GOD, and the Commission He
has given me.

V. 16. And Jesus being baptized -- Let our LORD's submitting to Baptism, teach
us an holy Exactness, in the Observance of those Institutions which owe their
Obligation merely to a Divine Command. Surely thus it becomes all his
Followers to fulfill all Righteousness.

Jesus had no Sin to wash away. And yet He was baptized. And GOD owned his
Ordinance, so as to make it the Season of pouring forth the Holy Spirit upon
Him. And where can we expect this sacred Effusion, but in an humble Attendance
on Divine Appointments? Lo the heavens were opened, and he saw the spirit of
GOD -- St Luke adds, in a bodily form -- Probably in a glorious Appearance of
Fire, perhap^ in the Shape of a Dove, descending with a hovering Motion, till
it rested upon him. This was a visible Token of those secret Operations of the
Blessed Spirit, by which he was anointed in a peculiar Manner; and abundantly
fitted for his public Work.

V. 17. And lo a voice -- We have here a glorious Manifestation of the ever
blessed Trinity: The Father speaking from Heaven, the Son spoken to, the Holy
Ghost descending upon Him. In whom I delight -- What an Encomium is this! How
poor to this are all other Kinds of Praise! To be the Pleasure, the Delight of
GOD, this is Praise indeed: This is true Glory: This is the highest, the
brightest Light, that Virtue can appear in.

IV.
Then Mark i. 12. Luke iv. 1.
was Jesus led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
Deuteronomy. viii. 3.
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth God. of the temple, Ps. xci. 11 12.
He shall charge his Angels concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear
thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Deuteronomy. vi. 16.
^hou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. vi. 13.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Mark i. 14.
But when he heard, that John was cast into prison, he retired into Galilee.
Isa^ab ix. 1, 2.
of Zebulon and the land of Naphthali, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan,
Galilee of the Gentiles.

Mar^ i. 16. Luke (...). 1.
And walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two Brethren, Simon called Peter and
Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishers. son of
Zebedee and John his brother, in the vessel with Zebedee their father mending
their nets; and he called them.

diseases and tormenting pains; and demoniacs, and lunatics, and paralytics;
and he healed them. from beyond Jordan.

V. 1. Then -- After this glorious Evidence of his Father's Love, He was
completely armed for the Combat. Thus after the clearest Light and the
strongest Consolation, let us expect the sharpest Temptations. By the spirit --
Probably through a strong inward Impulse.

V. 2. Having fasted -- Whereby doubtless He received more abundant spiritual
Strength from GOD. Forty days and forty nights -- As did Moses, the Giver of
the Law, and Elijah, the great Restorer of it. He was afterward hungry -- And
so prepared for the first Temptation.

V. 3. Coming to him -- In a visible Form; probably in a human Shape, as one
that desired to inquire farther into the Evidences of his being the M^ssiah.

V. 4. It is written -- Thus Christ answered, and thus we may answer all the
Suggestions of the Devil. By every word that proceed^th out of the mouth of GOD
-- That is, by whatever GOD commands to sustain him. Therefore it is not
needful I should work a Miracle to procure Bread, without any Intimation of my
Father's Will.

V. 5. The holy city -- So Jerusalem was commonly called, being the Place GOD
had peculiarly chosen for Himself. On the battlement of the temple -- Probably
over the King's Gallery, which was of such a prodigious Height, that no one
could look down from the Top of it, without making himself giddy.

V. 6. In their hands -- That is, with great Care.

V. 7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God -- By requiring farther Evidence,
of what he ha^h already made sufficiently plain.

V. 8. Shows him all the kingdoms of the world -- In a Kind of visionary
Representation.

V. 9. If thou will fall down and worship me -- Here Satan clearly shows who he
was. Accordingly Christ answering this Suggestion, calls him by his own Name,
which he had not done before.

V. 10. Get thee hence, Satan -- Not, get thee behind me, that is, into thy
proper Place; as He said on a quite different Occasion to Peter, speaking what
was not expedient.

V. 11. Angels came and wait^d upon him -- Both to supply him with Food, and to
congratulate his Victory.

V. 12. He retired into Galilee -- This Journey was not immediately after his
Temptation. He first went from Judea into Galilee, J^hn i. 43. chapter ii. 1. Then
into Judea again, and celebrated the Passover at Jerusalem, John ii. 13. He
bapti^ed in Judea while John was baptizing at Enon, John iii. 22, 23. All this
Time John was at Liberty, ver. 24. But the Pharisees being offended, ch^iv.
ver. 1. and John put in Prison, He then took this Journey into Calilee.

V. 13. Leaving Nazareth -- Namely, when they had wholly rejected his Word, and
even attempted to kill him, Luke iv. 29.

V. 15. Galilee of the Gentiles -- That Part of Galilee which lay beyond Jordan
was so called, because it was in great Measure inhabited by Gentiles, that is,
Heathens.

V. 16. Here is a beautiful Gradation, first, they walked, then they sat in
darkness and lastly, in the region of the shadow of death.

V. 17. From that time Jesus began to pre^ch -- He had preached before both to
Jews and Samaritans, John iv. 41, 45. But from this Time began his solemn,
stated Preaching. Repen^ for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. -- Although it
is the peculiar Business of Christ, to establish the Kingdom of Heaven in the
Hearts of Men, yet it is observable, He begins his Preaching in the same Words
with John the Baptist: Because the Repentance which John taught, still was, and
ever will be the necessary Preparation for that inward Kingdom. But that Phrase
is not only used with regard to Individuals, in whom it is to be established,
but also with regard to the Christian Church, the whole Body of Believers. In
the former Sense it is opposed to Repentance; in the latter, to the Mosaic
Dispensation.

V. 23. The gospel of the kingdom -- The Gospel, that is, the j^yous Message,
is the proper Name of our Religion: As will be amply verified in all who
earnestly and perseveringly embrace it.

V. 24. Through all Syria -- The whole Province of which the Jewish Country was
only a small Part. And demoniacs -- Men possessed with Devils; and lunatics, and
paralytics -- Men ill of the ^^^sy, whose Cases were, of all others, most
deplorable and most helpless.

V. 25. Decapolis -- A Tract of Land on the East Side of the Sea of Galil^e. in
which were ten Cities near each other.

V.
And seeing the Multitudes, he went up into the Mountain; and when he was sat
down his Disciples came to him. Luke vi. 20.
Happy are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. are they
that mourn; for they shall be comforted. are the meek; for they shall inherit
the earth. are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall
be satisfied. are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. are the pure in
heart; for they shall see God. are the peacemakers; for they shall be called
the children of God. are they who are persecuted for righteousness sake; for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Mark ix. 50. Luke xiii. 34.
Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith
shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and
to be trodden under foot of men. Mark iv. 21. Luke viii. 16. xi. 33.
Neither do they light a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house.

Luke xvi. 17. xxi. 33.
For I verily say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all things be effected. them, he
shall be great in the kingdom of heaven. the righteousness of the scribes and
pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. Exodus xx. 13.
Thou shall do no murder, and whosoever shall do murder, shall be liable to the
judgment. shall be liable to hellfire. Luke xii. 58.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with him, lest
at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee
to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.

Exodus xx. 14.
Thou shall not commit adultery. has already committed adultery with her in
his heart. Chapter xviii. 8. Mark ix. 43.
But if thy right eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. it from thee; for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell.

Deuteronomy. xxiv. 1. Matt. xix. 7. Mark (...). 2. Luke xvi. 18.
Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorce.

Exodus xx. 7.
Thou shall not forswear thyself, but shall persorm thine oaths unto the Lord.
or black. is more than these, is of the evil one.

Deuteronomy. xix. 21.
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. Luke vi. 30.
Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not
away.

Lev. xix. 18.
Thou shall love thine neighbor, and hate thine Enemy. Luke vi. 27, 35.
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you: than others? Do
not even the heathens so?

V. 1. And seeing the multitudes -- At some Distance, as they were coming to
him from every Quarter. He went up into the mountain -- Which was near: Where
there was room for them all. His Disciples -- Not only his twelve Disciples,
but all who desired to learn of Him.

V. 2. And he opened his mouth -- A Phrase which always denotes a set and
solemn Discourse; and taught them -- To bless Men, to make Men happy, was the
great Business, for which our LORD came into the World And accordingly He here
pronounces eight Blessings together, annexing them to so many Steps in
Christianity. Knowing that Happiness is our common Aim, and that an innate
instinct continually urges us to the Pursuit of it, he in the kindest Manner
applies to that Instinct, and directs it to its proper Object.

Though all Men desire^ yet few attain Happiness, because they seek it where it
is not to be found. Our LORD therefore begins his Divine Institution which is
the complete Art of Happiness, by laying down before all that have Ears to
hear, the true and only true Method of acquiring it.

Observe the benevolent Condescension of our LORD. He seems, as it were, to lay
aside his supreme Authority as our Legislator, that He may the better act the
Part of our Friend and Savior. Instead of using the lofty Style, in positive
Commands, He in a more gentle and engaging Way, insinuates his Will and our
Duty, by pronouncing those happy who comply with it.

V. 3. Happy are the poor -- In the following Discourse there is, 1. A sweet
Invitation to true Holiness and Happiness, ver. 3 -- 12: 2. A Persuasive to
impart it to others, ver. 13 -- 16: 3. A Description of true. Christian
Holiness, ver. 17 -- chapter vii 12: (in which it is easy to observe, the latter
Part exactly answers the former:) 4. The Conclusion: Giving a sure Mark of the
true Way, Warning against false Prophets. Exhorting to follow after Holiness.
The poor in spirit -- They who are unfeignedly penitent, they who are truly
convinced of Sin; who see and feel the State they are in by Nature, being
deeply sensible of their Sinfulness. Guiltiness Helplessness. For theirs is the
kingdom of heaven -- The present inward Kingdom: Righteousness and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost, as well as the eternal Kingdom if they endure to the End.

V. 4. They that mourn -- Either for their own Sins, or for other Men's, and
are steadily and habitually serious. They shall be comforted -- More solidly
and deeply even in this World, and eternally, in Heaven.

V. 5. Happy are the meek -- They that hold all their Passions and Affections
evenly balanced. They shall inherit the earth -- They shall have all Things
really n^cessary for Life and Godliness. They shall enjoy whatever Portion GOD
has given them here, and shall hereafter possess the New Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness.

V. 6. They that hunger and thirst after righteousness -- After the Holiness
here described. They shall be satisfied with it

V. 7. The merciful -- The tenderhearted: They who love all Men as themselves:
They shall obtain mercy -- Whatever Merey therefore we desire from GOD, the
same let us show to our Brethren. He will repay us a thousand sold, the Love we
bear to any for his Sake.

V. 8. The pure in heart -- The Sanctified: They who love GOD with all their
Hearts. They shall see God -- In all Things here; hereafter in Glory.

V. 9. The peacemakers -- They that out of Love to GOD and Man do all possible
good to all Men. Pe^e in the Scripture Sense implies all Blessings, temporal
and eternal. They shall be called the children of God -- Shall be acknowledged
such by GOD and Men. One would imagine a Person of this amiable Temper and
Behavior would be the Darling of Mankind. But our LORD well knew it would not
be so, as long as Satan was the Prince of this World. He therefore warns them
before of the Treatment all were to expect, who were determined thus to tread
in his Steps, by imat^diately subjoining, Happy are they who are persecu^ed for
righteousness sake.

Through this whole Discourse, we cannot but observe, the most exact Method which
can possibly be conceived Every Paragraph, every Sentence is closely connected
both with that which precedes and that which follows it. And is not this the
Pattern for every Christian Preacher? If any then are able to follow it,
without any Premeditation, well: If not, let them not dare to preach without
it. No Rhapsody, no Incoherency, whether the Things spoken be true or false,
comes of the Spirit of Christ

V. 10. For righteousness sake -- That is, because they have, or follow after
the Righteousness here described. He that is truly a righteous Man, he that
mourns, and he that is pure in heart, yea, all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy iii. 12. The World will always say,
Away with such Fellows from the Earth. They are made to reprove our thoughts.
They are gri^vous to us even to behold. Their lives are not like other mens'
their ways are of another fashion, Wisd. ii. 14, 15.

V. 11. Revile -- When present: Say all evil -- When you are absent.

V. 12. Your reward -- Even over and above the Happiness that naturally and
directly results from Holiness.

V. 13. Ye -- Not the Apostles, not Ministers only; but all ye who are thus
holy, are the salt of the earth -- Are to season others.

V. 14. Ye are the light of the world -- If ye are thus holy, you can no more
be hid than the Sun in the Firmament: No more than a city or a mountain --
Probably pointing to that on the Brow of the opposite Hill.

V. 15. Nay, the very Design of GOD in giving you this Light, was that it might
shine.

V. 16. That they may see -- and glorify -- That is, That seeing your good
Works, they may be moved to love and serve GOD likewise.

V. 17. Think not -- Do not imagine, fear, hope, that I am come -- Like your
Teachers, to destroy the law or the prophets. I am not come to destroy -- The
Moral Law, but to fulfill -- To establish, illustrate, and explain its highest
Meaning, both by my Life and Doctrine.

V. 18. Till all things shall be effected -- Which it either requires or
foretells. For the Law has its Effect, when the Rewards are given, and the
Punishments annexed to it inflicted, as well as when its Precepts are obeyed.

V. 19. One of the least -- So accounted by Men: And shall teach -- Either by
Word or Example; shall be the least -- That is, shall have no Part therein.

V. 20 The righteousness of the scribes and pharisees -- Described in the
Sequel of this Discourse.

V. 21. Ye have heard -- From the Scribes, reciting the Law; Thou shall do no
murder -- And they interpreted this, as all the other Commandments, barely of
the outward Act. The judgment -- The Jews had in every City a Court of
twenty-three Men, who could sentence a Criminal to be strangled. But the
Sanhedrim only (the great Council which sat at Jerusalem, consisting of
seventy-two Men) could sentence to the more terrible Death of Stoning. That was
called the Judgment, This the Council.

V. 22. But I say unto you -- Which of the Prophets ever spoke thus! Their
Language is, Thus says the LORD. Who has Authority to use this Language, but
the one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy? Whosoever is angry with
his brother -- Some Copies add. Without a cause: But this is utterly foreign to
the whole Scope and Tenor of our LORD's Discourse. If he had only forbidden,
the being angry without a Cause, there was no manner of need of that solemn
Declaration, I say unto you; for the Scribes and Pharisees themselves said as
much as this. Even they taught, Men ought not to be angry without a Cause. So
that this Righteousness does not exceed theirs. But Christ teaches, That we
ought not for any cause to be so angry, as to call any Man Raca, or Fool. We
ought not for any Cause to be angry at the Person of the Sinner, but at his Sin
only. Happy World! Were this plain and necessary Distinction thoroughly
understood, remembered, practiced. Raca means, a silly Man, a Trifler.
Whosoever shall say, thou fool -- Shall revile or seriously reproach any Man.
Our LORD specified three Degrees of Murder, each liable to a sorer Punishment
than the other: Not indeed from Men, but from GOD. Hellfire -- In the Valley
of Hinnom (whence the Word in the Original is taken) the children were used to
be burnt alive to Molocb. It was afterward made a Receptacle for the Filth of
the City, where continual Fires were kept to consume it. And it is probable, if
any Criminals were burnt alive, it was in this accursed and horrible Place.
Therefore both as to its former and latter State, it was a fit Emblem of Hell.
It must here signify a Degree of future Punishment, as much more dreadful than
those incurred in the two former Cases, as Burning alive is more dreadful than
either Strangling or Stoning.

V. 23. Thy brother has ought against thee -- On any of the preceding
Accounts: For any unkind Thought or Word; any that did not spring from Love.

V. 24. Leaving thy gift, go -- For neither thy Gift nor thy Prayer will atone
for thy Want of Love: But this will make them both an Abomination before GOD.

V. 25. Agree with thine adversary -- With any against whom thou have thus
offended; while thou art in the way -- Instantly, on the Spot; before you part.
Lest the adversary deliver thee to the judge -- Lest he commit his Cause to
GOD. Till thou have paid the last Farthing -- That is, for ever, since thou
can never do this.

What has been hitherto said refers to Meekness: What follows, to Purity of
Heart.

V. 27 Thou shall not commit adultery -- And this, as well as the sixth
Commandment, the Scribes and Pharisees interpreted barely of the outward Act.

V. 29, 30. If a Person as dear as a Right-eye, or as useful as a Right-hund,
cause thee thus to offend, though but in Heart.

Perhaps here may be an Instance of a kind of Transposition, which is
frequently found in the sacred Writings: So that the 29th Verse may refer to
27, 28; and the 30th to Ver. 21, 22. As if He had said, Part with any thing,
however dear to you, or otherwise useful, if you cannot avoid Sin while you
keep it. Even cut off your Right Hand, if you are of so passionate a Temper,
that you cannot otherwise be restrained from hurting your Brother. Pull out
your Eyes, if you can no otherwise be restrained from lusting after Women.

V. 31. Let him give her a writing of divorce -- Which the Scribes and
Phatisees allowed Men to do, on any trifling Occasion.

V. 32. Causes her to commit adultery -- If she marry again.

V. 33. Our LORD here refers to the Promise made to the pure in heart, of
seeing GOD in all things, and points out a false Doctrine of the Scribes, which
arose from their not thus seeing GOD.

What he forbids is, The Swearing at all, 1. By any creature, 2. In our
ordinary Conversation: Both of which the Scribes and Pharisees taught to be
perfectly innocent.


V. 36. For thou can not make one hair white or black -- Whereby it appears,
that this also is not thine but GOD's.

V. 37. Let your conversation be yea, yea; nay, nay -- That is, in your common
Discourse, barely affirm or deny.

V. 38. Ye have heard -- Our LORD proceeds to enforce such Meekness and Love on
those who are persecuted for Righteousness Sake (which He pursues to the End of
the Chapter) as were utterly unknown to the Scribes and Pharisees. It has bern
said -- In the Law, as a Direction to Judges, in case of violent and barbarous
Assaults, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth -- And this has been
interpreted, as encouraging bitter and rigorous Revenge.

V. 39. But I say unto you, that you resist not the evil man -- Thus; the Greek
Word translated resist, signifies standing in battle array, striving for
victory. If a man smite thee on the right-cheek -- Return not Evil for Evil:
Yea, turn to him the other -- Rather than revenge thyself.

V. 40, 41. Where the Damage is not great, choose rather to suffer it, though
possibly it may on that account be repeated, than to demand an eye for an eye,
to enter into a rigorous Prosecution of the Offender. The Meaning of the whole
Passage seems to be, Rather than return Evil for Evil when the Wrong is purely
personal, submit to one bodily Wrong after another, give up one Part of your
Goods after another, submit to one Instance of Compulsion after another. That
the Words are not literally to be understood, appears from the Behavior of our
LORD himself, John xviii. 22, 23.

V. 42. Thus much for your Behavior toward the Violent. As for those who use
milder Methods, Give to him that asks thee -- Give and lend to any so far
(but no farther, for GOD never contradicts Himself) as is consistent with thy
Engagements to thy Creditors, thy Family and the Household of Faith.

V. 43. Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thy enemy -- GOD spoke the
former Part; the Scribes added the latter.

V. 44. Bless them that curse you -- Speak all the Good you can to and of them,
who speak all Evil to and of you. Repay Love in Thought, Word, and Deed, to
those who hate you, and show it both in Word and Deed.

V. 45. That ye may be the children -- That is, that ye may continue and appear
such before Men and Angels. For be makes his sun to rise -- He gives them such
Blessings as they will receive at his Hands. Spiritual Blessings they will not
receive.

V. 46. The Publicans -- were Officers of the Revenue, Farmers, or Receivers of
the public Money: Men employed by the Romans to gather the Taxes and Customs,
which they exacted of the Nations they had conquered. These were generally
odious for their Extortion and Oppression, and were reckoned by the Jews as the
very Scum of the Earth.

V. 47. And if ye salute your friends only -- Our LORD probably glances at
those Prejudices, which different Sects had against each other, and intimates,
that he would not have his Followers imbibe that narrow spirit. Would to GOD
this had been more attended to, among the unhappy Divisions and Subdivisions,
into which his Church has been crumbled! And that we might at least advance so
far, as cordially to embrace our Brethren in Christ, of whatever Party or
Denomination they are!

V. 48. Therefore ye shall be perfect, as your Father who is in heaven is
perfect -- So the Original runs, referring to all that Holiness, which is
described in the foregoing Verses, which our LORD in the Beginning of the
Chapter recommends as Happiness, and in the Close of it as Perfection.

And how wise and gracious is this, To sum up, and as it were, seal all his
Commandments with a Promise! Even the proper Promise of the Gospel, That He
will put those Laws in our Minds, and writs them in our Hearts! He well knew,
how ready our Unbelief would be, to cry out, This is impossible! And therefore
stakes upon it all the Power. Truth, and Faithfulness of Him, to whom all
Things are possible.

VI.
Take heed that ye practice not your righteousness before men, to be seen of
them: Otherwise ye have no reward from your Father who is in heaven. Therefore
when thou do alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do,
in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. have
their reward. Luke xi. 2.
Thus therefore pray ye, Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. it
is in heaven. but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, and the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Mark xi. 25.
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you.

Luke xii. 33.
Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust consume, and
where thieves break through and steal: treasures in heaven, where neither moth
nor rust does consume, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. Luke xi.
34.
The eye is the lamp of the Body: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light. is that darkness? Luke xvi. 13.
No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one and love the
other, or he will cleave to the one and neglect the other. Ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. Luke xii. 22.
Therefore I say unto you, Take not thought for your life, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink, nor for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the
life more than meat, and the body than ^^iment? they spin: will he not much
more clothe you, O ye of little faith? therefore thought for the morrow: for
the morrow shall take thought for itself: sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof.

V. 1. In the foregoing Chapter our LORD particularly described the Nature of
inward Holiness. In this he describes that Purity of Intention without which
none of our outward Actions are holy. This Chapter contains four Parts, 1. The
right Intention and Manner in giving Alms, Ver. 1 -- 4. 2. The right Intention,
Manner, Form, and Pre-requisites of Prayer, Ver. 5 -- 15. 3. The right
Intention and Manner of Fasting, Ver. 16 -- 18. 4. The Necessity of a pure
Intention in all Things, unmixed either with the Desire of Riches, or worldly
Care and Fear of Want, Ver. 19 -- 34.


This Verse is a general Cantion against Vainglory, in any of our good Works:
All these are here summed up together, in the comprehensive Word Righteousness.
This general Caution our LORD applies in the Sequel to the three principal
Branches of it, relating to our Neighbor, Ver. 2 -- 4: to GOD, Ver. 5 -- 6:
and to ourselves Ver. 16 -- 18.

To be seen -- Barely the being seen, while we are doing any of these Things,
is a Circumstance purely indifferent. But the doing them with this View, to be
seen and admired, this is what our LORD condemns.

V. 2. As the hypocrites do -- Many of the Scribes and Pharisees did this,
under a Pretense of calling the Poor together. They have their reward -- All
they will have; for they shall have none from GOD.

V. 3. Let not thy lest-hand know what thy right hand does -- A proverbial
Expression for doing a Thing secretly. Do it as secretly as is consistent, 1.
With the doing it at all. 2. With the doing it in the most effectual Manner.


V. 5. The syn^gogues -- These were properly the Places where the People
assembled for public Prayer, and hearing the Scriptures read and expounded.
They were in every City from the Time of the Balylonish Captivity, and had
Service in them thrice a Day on three Days in the Week. In every Synagogue was
a Council of grave and wise Persons, over whom was a President called the Ruler
of the Synagogue. But the Word here, as well as in many other Texts,
signinisies, any Places of public Concourse.

V. 6. Enter into thy closet -- That is, do it with as much Secrecy as thou
can.

V. 7. Use not vain repetitions -- To repeat any Words without meaning them, is
certainly a vain Repetition. Therefore we should be extremely careful in all
our Prayers to mean what we say; and to say only what we mean from the Bottom
of our Hearts. The vain and heathenish Repetitions which we are here warned
against, are most dangerous, and yet very common; which is a principal Cause
why so many who still profess Religion, are a Disgrace to it. Indeed all the
Words in the World are not equivalent to one holy Desire. And the very best
Prayers are but vain Repetitions, if they are not the Language of the Heart.

V. 8. Your Father knows wh^t things ye have need of -- We do not pray to
inform GOD of our Wants. Omniscient as He is, He cannot be informed of any
Thing which He knew not before: And He is always willing to relieve them. The
chief Thing wanting is, a fit Disposition on our Part to receive his Grace and
Blessing Consequently, one great Office of Prayer is, to produce such a
Disposition in us: To exercise our Dependence on GOD; to increase our Desire of
the Things we ask for; to make us so sensible of our Wants, that we may never
cease wrestling till we have prevailed for the Blessing.

V. 9. Thus therefore pray ye -- He who best kn^w what we ought to pray for;
and how we ought to pray; what Matter of Desire, what Manner of Address would
most please Himself, would best become us, has here dictated to us a most
perfect and universal Form of Prayer, comprehending all our real Wants,
expressing all our lawful Desires; a complete Directory and full Exercise of
all our Devotions.

Thus -- For these Things; sometimes, in these Words, at least in this Manner,
short, close, full.

This Prayer consists of three Parts, the Preface, the Petitions, and the
Conclusion. The Preface, Our Father who art in heaven -- I^^ ye a general
Foundation for Prayer, comprising what we must first know of GOD before we can
pray in Confidence of being heard. It likewise points out to us that Faith,
Humility. Love of GOD and Man, with which we are to approach GOD in Prayer.

I. Our Father -- Who art good and gracious to all, our Creator, our Preserver:
The Father of our LORD, and of us in Him, thy Children by Adoption and Grace:
Not my Father only, who now cry unto Thee, but the Father of the Universe, of
Angels and Men: Who art in heaven -- Beholding all Things, both in Heaven and
Earth; knowing every Creature, and all the Works of every Creature, and every
possible Event from Everlasting to Everlasting: The Almighty LORD and Ruler of
all, superintending and disposing all Things: In heaven -- Eminently there, but
not there alone, seeing Thou fillest Heaven and Earth. II. 1. Hallowed be thy
name -- May Thou, O Father, be truly known by all intelligent Beings, and
with Affections suitable to that Knowledge: May Thou be duly honored, loved,
feared, by all in Heaven and in Earth, by all Angels and all Men. 2 Thy kingdom
come -- May thy Kingdom of Grace come quickly, and swallow up all the Kingdoms
of the Earth: May all Mankind, receiving Thee, O Christ, for their King, truly
believing in thy Name, be (...) with Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy; with
Holiness and Happiness, till they are removed hence into thy Kingdom of Glory,
to reign with Thee for ever and ever. 3. Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven -- May all the Inhabitants of the Earth do thy Will as willingly as the
holy Angels: May these do it continually even as they, without any Interruption
of their willing Service; yea, and perfectly as they: May Thou, O Spirit of
Grace, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make them perfect in
every good Work to do thy Will, and work in them all that is well-pleasing in
thy Sight. 4. Give us -- O Father (for we claim nothing of Right, but only of
thy free Mercy) this Day -- (for we take no Thought for the Morrow) our daily
bread -- All Things needful for our Souls and Bodies: Not only the Meat that
perishes, but the Sacramental Bread, and thy Grace, the Food which end reth to
everlasting Life. 5. And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors
-- Give us, O LORD, Redemption in thy Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins: as
Thou enablest us freely and fully to forgive every Man, so do Thou forgive all
our Trespasses. 6. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil --
Whenever we are tempted, O Thou that helpest our Infirmities, suffer us not to
enter into temptation; to be ov^rcome or suffer Loss thereby; but make a Way
for us to escape, so that we may be more than Conquerors through thy Love, over
Sin and all the Consequences of it. Now the principal Desire of a Christian's
Heart being the Glory of GOD (Ver. 9, 10.) and all he wants for himself or his
Brethren, being the daily Bread of Soul and Body (or the Support of Life,
animal and spiritual) Pardon of Sin, and Deliverance from the Power of it and
of the Devil; (Ver. 11, 12, 13.) There is nothing besides that a Christian can
wish for; therefore this Prayer comprehends all his Desires. Eternal Life is
the certain Consequence, or rather Completion of Holiness.
III. For thine is the kingdom -- The sovereign Right of all Things that are or
ever were created: The power -- The executive Power, whereby thou governest all
Things in thy everlasting Kingdom: And the glory -- The Praise due from every
Creature, for thy Power, and all thy wondrous Works, and the Mightiness of thy
Kingdom, which endures through all Ages, even for ever and ever. It is
observable, that though the Doxology, as well as the Petitions of this Prayer, is
threefold, and is directed to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost distinctly, yet
is the whole fully applicable both to every Person, and to the ever-blessed and
undivided Trinity.
V. 16. When ye fast -- Our LORD does not enjoin either Fasting. Alms-deeds, or
Prayer: all these being Duties which were before fully established in the
Church of GOD. Disfigure -- By the Dust and Ashes which they put upon their
Head, as was usual at the Times of solemn Humiliation.

V. 17. Anoint thy head -- So the Jews frequently did. Dress thyself as usual.

V. 19. Lay not up for yourselves -- Our LORD here makes a Transition from
religious to common Actions, and warns us of another Snare, the Love of Money,
as inconsistent with Purity of Intention, as the Love of Praise. Where rust and
moth consume -- Where all Things are perishable and transient.

He may likewise have a farther View in these Words, even to guard us against
making any Thing on Earth our Treasure. For then a Thing properly becomes our
Treasure, when we set our Affections upon it.

V. 22. The eye is the lamp of the body -- And what the eye is to the Body, the
Intention is to the Soul. We may observe with what exact Propriety our LORD
places Purity of Intention, between worldly Desires and worldly Cares, either
of which directly tend to destroy it. If thine eye be single -- Singly fixed on
GOD and Heaven, thy whole Soul will be full of Holiness and Happiness. If thy
eye be evil -- Not single, aming at any Thing else.

V. 24. Mammon -- Riches, Money; any Thing loved or sought, without reference
to GOD.

V. 25. And if you serve GOD, you need be careful for nothing. Therefore take
not thought -- That is, be not anxiously careful. Beware of worldly cares; for
these are as inconsistent with the true Service of GOD as worldly Desires. Is
not the Life more than meat? -- And if GOD give the greater Gift, will He deny
the smaller?

V. 27. And which of you -- If you are ever so careful, can even add a Moment
to your own Life thereby? This seems by far the most easy and natural Sense of
the Words.

V. 29. Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these -- Not in
Garments of so pure a white. The Eastern Monarchs were often clothed in white
Robes.

V. 30. The grass of the field -- Is a general Expression including both Herbs
and Flowers. Into the still -- This is the natural Sense of the Passage. For it
can hardly be supposed that Grass or Flowers should be thrown into the Oven the
Day after they were cut down. Neither is it the Custom, in the hottest
Countries, where they dry fastest, to heat. Ovens with them. If God so clothe
-- The Word properly implies the putting on a complete Dress, that surrounds
the Body on all Sides; and beautifully expresses that external Membrane, which
(like the Skin in an human Body) at once adorns the tender Fabric of the
Vegetable, and guards it from the Injuries of the Weather. Every Miscroscope in
which a Flower is viewed, gives a lively Comment on this Text.

V. 31. Therefore take not thought -- How kind are these Precepts! The
Substance of which is only this, Do thyself no Harm! Let us not be so
ungrateful to Him, nor so injurious to ourselves, as to harrass and oppress our
Minds with that Burden of Anxiety, which He has so graciously taken off. Every
Verse speaks at once to the Understanding, and to the Heart. We will not
therefore indulge these unnecessary, these useless, these mischievous Cares. We
will not borrow the Anxieties and Distresses of the Morrow, to aggravate those
of the present Day. Rather we will cheerfully repose ourselves on that heavenly
Father, who knows we have Need of these Things; who has given us the Life,
which is more than Meat, and the Body, which is more than Raiment. And thus
instructed in the Philosophy of our heavenly Master, we will learn a Lesson of
Faith and Cheerfulness, from every Bird of the Air, and every Flower of the
Field.

V. 33. Seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness -- Singly aim at this,
That GOD reigning in your Heart, may fill it with the Righteousness above
described. And indeed whoever seeks this first, will soon come, to seek this
only.

V. 34. The morrow shall take thought for itself -- That is, Be careful for the
Morrow, when it comes. The evil thereof -- Speaking after the Manner of Men:
But all Trouble is, upon the whole, a real Good. It is good Physic which GOD
dispenses daily to his Children, according to the Need, and the Strength of
each.

Chapter vii. Our LORD now proceeds to warn us against the chief Hindrances of
Holiness. And how wisely does he begin with Judging? Wherein all young Converts
are so apt to spend that Zeal which is given them for better Purposes.

VII.
Luke vi. 37.
Judge not, that ye be not judged. Luke vi. 41.
And why beholdest thou the mote in thy brother's eye, but observest not the
beam in thine own eye? is in thine own eye? and turning, rend you. Luke xi. 9.
Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall be
opened to you. Luke vi. 31.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them; for this is the law and the prophets.

Luke xiii. 24.
Enter ye in through the straight gate: for wide is the gate and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many there are that go in through it: is the
gate and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there are that find
it. are ravenous wolves. Luke vi. 43, 44.
By their fruits ye shall know them. can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

Luke vi. 46.
Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father who is in heaven. many wonderful
works? Luke xiii. 27.
And then will I declare to them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that
work iniquity. Luke vi. 47.
Therefore whosoever hears these my sayings, and does them, I will liken him
to a wise man, who built his house on the rock.

V. 1. Judge not -- any Man without full, clear, certain Knowledge, without
absolute Necessity, without tender Love.

V. 2. With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you -- Awful Words!
So we may, as it were, choose for ourselves, whether GOD shall be severe or
merciful to us. GOD and Man will favor the Candid and Benevolent: But they
must expect judgment without mercy, who have showed no mercy.

V. 3. In particular, why do you open your Eyes to any Fault of your Brother,
while you yourself are guilty of a much greater? The mote -- The Word properly
signifies a Splinter or Shiver of Wood. This and a beam, its Opposite, were
proverbially used by the Jews to denote, the one, small Infirmities, the other,
gross, palpable Faults.

V. 4. How say thou -- With what Face?

V. 5. Thou hypocrite -- It is mere Hypocrisy, to pretend Zeal for the
Amendment of others while we have none for our own. Then -- When that which
obstructed thy Sight is removed.

V. 6. Here is another Instance of that Transposition, where, of the two Things
proposed, the latter is first treated of. Give not -- to d^^s -- l^st turning
they rend you: Cast not -- to swine -- left they trample them under scot.

Yet even then, when the le^m is cast out of thine own eye, Give not -- That
is, Talk not of the deep things of God, to those whom you know to be wallowing
in Sin; neither declare the great things GOD has done for your Soul, to the
profane, furious, persecuting Wretches. Talk not of Perfection, for Instance,
to the former; not of your own Experience, to the latter. But our LORD does in
no wife forbid us to reprove, as Occasion is, both the one and the other.

V. 7. But ask -- Pray for them, as well as for yourselves: In this there can
be no such Danger. Seek -- Add your own diligent Endeavors to your asking; and
knock -- Persevere importunately in that Diligence.

V. 8. For every one that asks, receives -- Provided he ask aright, and ask
what is agreeable to GOD's Will.

V. 11. To them that ask him -- But on this Condition, that ye follow the
Example of his Goodness, by doing to all as ye would they should do to you. For
this is the law and the prophets -- This is the Sum of all, exactly answering
chapter v. 17. The whole is compriz^d in one Word, Imitate the GOD of Love.

Thus far proceeds the Doctrinal Part of the Sermon. In the next Verse begins
the Exhortation to practice it.

V. 13. The straight gate -- The Holiness described in the foregoing Chapters.
And this is the narrow way. Wide is the gate, and many there are that go in
through it -- They need not seek for this; they come to it of course. Many go in
through it because straight is the other gate -- Therefore they do not care for
it; they like a wider Gate.

V. 15. Beware of false prophets -- Who in their Preaching describe a broad Way
to Heaven: It is their prophesying, their teaching the broad Way, rather than
their walking in it themselves, that is ^^re chiefly spoken of. All those are
false prophets, who teach any other Way than that our LORD has here marked
out. In sheep's clothing -- With Outside Religion and fair Professions of
Love: Wolves -- Not feeding, but destroying Souls.

V. 16. By their fruits ye shall know them -- A short, plain, easy Rule,
whereby to know true from false Prophets: And one that may be applied by People
of the meanest Capacity, who are not accustomed to deep Reasoning. True
Prophets convert sinners to GOD, or at least confirm and strengthen those that
are converted. False Prophets do not. They also are false Prophets, who though
speaking the very Truth, yet are not sent by the Spirit of GOD, but come in
their own name, to declare it: Their Grand MARK is, "Not turning Men from the
power of Satan to God."

V. 18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither a corrupt tree good
fruit -- But it is certain, the Goodness or Badness here mentioned, respects
the Doctrine, rather than the personal Character: For a bad Man preaching the
good Doctrine here delivered, is sometimes an Instrument of converting Sinners
to GOD. Yet I do not aver, That all are True Prophets, who speak the Truth, and
thereby convert Sinners. I only affirm, That none are such who do not.

V. 19. Every tree that brings not so the ^^od fruit, is hewn ^own and cast
into the fire -- How dreadful then is the Condition of that Teacher who has
brought no Sinners to GOD!

V. 21. Not every one -- That is, no one, that says Lord, Lord -- That ma^es a
mere Profession of Me and my Religion, shall enter -- Whatever their false
Teachers may assure them to the contrary: He th^^ d^^h the will of my Father --
As I have now declared it. Observe: Every thing short of this, is only saying
Lord, Lord.

V. 22. We have prophesied -- We have declared the Mysteries of thy Kingdom;
wrote Books; preached excellent Sermons: In thy name done many wonderful work^
-- So that even the working of Miracles is no Proof that a Man has ^aving Faith.

V. 23. I never know you -- There never was a Time that I approved of you. So
that as many Souls as they had saved, they were themselv^^ ^^ver saved from
their Sins. LORD, is it my Case?

V. 29. H^ t^ught them -- The Multitudes, as o^^ having Authority -- With a
Dignity and Majesty peculiar to Himself as the Great Lawgiver, and with the
Demonstration and Power of the Spirit: And not as the s^ribes -- Who only
expounded the Law of another; and that in a lifeless, ineffectual Manner.

VIII.
And when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
Mark i. 40. Luke v. 12.
behold a leper came and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me clean. And Jesus stretching forth his hand, touched him, saying, I
will; Be thou made clean. to the priest, and offer the gift that Lev. xiv. 2.
Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.

Luke vii. 1.
And when he was entered into Capernaum, there came to him a Centurion,
beseeching him, and saying, it. it, he marvelled, and said to them that
followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel. Luke xiii. 29.
And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Matt. xiii.
42, 50. xxii. 13. xxiv. 51. xxv. 30.
there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.

Mark i. 29. Luke iv. 38.
And Jesus coming to Peter's house, saw his wife's mother lying and sick of a
fever.

Mark i. 32. Luke iv. 40.
When it was evening they brought to him many demoniacs; and he cast out the
spirits with a word, and healed all that were ill: Isaiah liii. 4.
Himself took our infirmities and bare our diseases.

Luke ix. 57.
And a certain scribe came and said to him, Master, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou go. have nests; but the son of man has not where to lay
his head. Mark iv. 35. Luke viii. 22.
And when he was come into the vessel, his disciples followed lowed him.

Mark. v. 1. Luke viii. 26.
And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes,
there met him two demoniacs, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that
no one could pass by that way.

V. 2. A leper come -- Leprosies in those Countries were seldom curable by
natural Means, any more than Palsies or Lunacy. Probably this Leper. though he
might not mix with the People, had heard our LORD at a Distance.

V. 4. See thou tell no man -- Perhaps our LORD only meant here, Not till thou
have showed thyself to the Priest who was appointed to inquire into the Case of
Leprosy. But many others He commanded, Absolutely to tell none, of the Miracles
He had wrought upon them. And this He seems to have done, chiefly for one or
more of these Reasons: 1. To prevent the Multitude from thronging Him, in the
Manner related, Mark i. 45.2. To fulfill the prophecy ( Isaiah xlii. 1.) That he
would not be vain or ostentatious: This Reason St. Matthew assigns, chapter xii.
17, etc. 3. To avoid the being taken by Force and made a King, John vi. 15.
And, 4. That He might not enrage the Chief Priests. Scribes, and Pharisees, who
were the most bitter against Him, any more than was unavoidable, Matt. xvi. 20,
21. For a testimony -- That I am the M^ssiah; to them -- The Priests, who
otherwise might have pleaded Want of Evidence.

V. 5. There came to him a Centurion -- A Captain of an hundred Roman Soldiers.
Probably he came a little Way toward Him, and then went back. He thought
himself not worthy to come in Person, and therefore spoke the Words that follow
by his Messengers. As it is not unusual in all Languages, so in the Hebrew it
is peculiarly frequent, to ascribe to a Person himself the Thing which is done,
and the Words which are spoken by his Order. And accordingly St. Matthew
relates as said by the Centurion himself, what others said by Order from him.
An Instance of the same Kind we have, in the Case of Zebedee's Children. From
St. Matthew (xx. 20.) we learn, it was their Mother that spoke those Words,
which, Mark x. 35, 37, themselves are said to speak; because she was only their
Mouth.

Yet from ver. 13, Go thy way home, it appears, he at Length come in Person;
probably on hearing that Jesus was nearer to his House than he apprehended when
he sent the second Message by his Friends.

V. 8. The Centurion answered -- By his second Messengers.

V. 9. For I am a man under authority -- I am only an inferior Officer: And
what I command, is done even in my Absence: How much more what Thou command,
who art LORD of All?

V. 10. I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel -- For the Centurion
was not an Isra^lite.

V. 11. Many from the farthest Parts of the Earth, shall embrace the Terms and
enjoy the Rewards of the Gospel Covenant established with Abraham. But the
Jews, who have the first Title to them, shall be shut out from the Feast; from
Grace here, and hereafter from Glory.

V. 12. The outer darkness -- Our LORD here alludes to the Custom the Ancients
had of making their Feasts in the Nightime. Probably ^hile he was speaking
this, the Centurion came in Person.

V. 14. Peter's wife's mother -- St. Peter was then a young Man, as were all
the Apostles.

V. 17. Whereby was fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah -- He spoke
it in a more exalted Sense. The Evangelist here only alludes to those Words, as
being capable of this lower Meaning also. Such Instances are frequent in the
Sacred Writings, and are Elegancies rather than Imperfections. He fulfilled
these Words in the highest Sense, by hearing our sins in ^is own Body on the
tree: In a lower Sense, by sympathizing with us in our Sorrows, and healing us
of the Diseases which were the Fruit of Sin.

V. 18. He commanded to go to the other side -- That both himself and the
People might have a little Rest.

V. 20. The son of man -- The Expression is borrowed from Dan. vii. 13. and is
the Appellation which CHRIST commonly gives himself: Which he seems to do out
of Humility, as having some relation to his mean Appearance in this World. Has
not where to lay his head -- Therefore do not follow me, from any View of
temporal Advantage.

V. 21. Another said -- I will follow Thee without any such View; but I must
mind my Business first. It is not certain, that his Father was already dead.
Perhaps his Son desired to stay with him, being very old, till his Death.

V. 22. But Jesus said -- When GOD calls, leave the Business of the World, to
them who are dead to GOD.

V. 24. The ship was covered -- So Man's Extremity is GOD'S Opportunity.

V. 26. Why are ye fearful -- Then He rebuked the winds -- First, He composed
their Spirits, and then the Sea.

V. 28. The country of Gergesenes -- Or of the Gadarenes. Gergesa and Gadara
were Towns near each other. Hence the Country between them took its Name,
sometimes from the one, sometimes from the other. There met him two demoniacs
-- St. Mark and St. Luke mention only one, who was probably the fiercer of the
two, and the Person who spoke to our LORD first. But this is no way
inconsistent with the Account which St. Matthew gives. The tombs -- Doubtless
those malevolent Spirits love such Tokens of Death and Destruction. Tombs were
usually in those Days in desert Places, at a Distance from Towns, and were
often made in the Sides of Caves, in the Rocks and Mountains. No one could pass
-- Safely.

V. 29. What have we to do with thee -- This is an Hebrew Phrase which
signifies, Why do you concern yourself about us? 2. Sam. xvi. 16. Before the
Time -- The Great Day.

V. 30. There was a herd of many swine -- Which it was not lawful for the Jews
to keep. Therefore our LORD both justly and mercifully permitted them to be
destroyed.

V. 31. He said, Go -- A Word of Permission only, not Command.

V. 34. They besought him to depart out of their coast -- They loved their
Swine so much better than their Souls! How many are of the same Mind?

IX.
And Mark v. 18. Luke viii. 37.
going into the vessel, he passed over and came to his own city. Mark ii. 3.
Luke v. 18.
And behold they brought to him a paralytic, lying on a couch; and Jesus seeing
their faith, said to the paralytic, Son, Take courage: thy sins are forgiven
thee. Thy sins are forgiven thee? Or to say, Arise and walk? it, marvelled and
glorified God, who had given such power to men.

Mark ii. 14. Luke v. 27.
And as Jesus passed along from thence, he saw a man named Matthew, sitting at
the receipt of custom, and says to him, Follow me. And he arose and followed
him. it, said to his disciples, Why eats your master with publicans and
sinners? it, said to them, They that are whole need not a physician, but they
that are sick. Hosea vi. 6.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice; for I am not come to call the righteous,
but sinners.

Mark ii. 18. Luke v. 33.
Then come to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees
fast often, but thy disciples fast not?

Mark v. 22. Luke viii. 41.
While he spoke these things to them, behold a certain ruler coming worshipped
him, saying, My daughter is just dead: but come and lay thi^^ hand on her, and
she shall live. so did his disciples. Jesus turning and seeing her, said,
Daughter, take courage; thy faith has made thee whole. And the woman was made
whole from that hour.)

it.

Luke xi. 14.
As they were going out, behold they brought a dumb demoniac to him. even in
Israel.

Luke x. 2.
Then says he to his disciples, The harvest truly is great, but the laborers
are few.

V. 1 His own city -- Copernaum,, chapter iv. 13

V. 2. Seeing their faith -- Both that of the paralytic, and of them that
brought him: Son -- A Title of Tenderness and Condescension.

V. 3. -- This man blasphemeth -- Attributing to himself a power (that of
forgiving Sins) which belongs to GOD only.

V. 5. Which is easier -- Do not both of them argue a divine Power? Therefore
if I can heal his Disease, I can forgive his Sins: Especially as his Disease is
the Consequence of his Sins. Therefore these must be taken away, if that is.

V. 6. On Earth -- Even in my State of Humiliation.

V. 8. So what was to the Scribes an Occasion of blaspheming, was to the People
an Incitement to praise GOD.

V. 9. He saw a man namea Matthew -- Modestly so called by himself. The other
Evangelists call him by his more honorable Name Levi. Sitting -- In the very
Height of his Business, at the receipt of custom. -- The Custom-House, or Place
where the Customs were received.

V. 10. As Jesus sat at table in the house -- Of Matthew, who having invited
many of his old Companions, made him a f^^st (Mark ii. 15.) and that a great
^ne, though he does not himself mention it. The Publicans, or Collectors of the
Taxes which the Jews paid the Romans, were infamous for their illegal
Exactions: Sinners -- Open, notorious Sinners.

V. 11. The Pharisees said to his disciples, Why eats your M^ster -- Thus
they commonly ask our LORD, Why do thy Disciples this? And his Disciples, Why
does your Master?

V. 13. Go ye and learn -- Ye that take upon you to teach others. I will have
mercy and not sacrifice -- That is, I will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice. I
love Acts of Mercy better than Sacrifice itself.

V. 14. Then -- While he was at Table.

V. 15. The children of the bride-chamber -- The Companions of the Bridegroom.
Mourn -- Mourning and Fasting usually go together. As if He had said, While I
am with them, it is a Festival Time, a Season of Rejoicing, not Mourning. But
after I am gone, all my Disciples likewise shall be in fastings often.

V. 16. This is one Reason. It is not a proper Time for them to fast. Another
is, they are not ripe for it. New cloth -- The Words in the Original properly
signify, Cloth that has not passed through the Fuller's Hands, and which is
consequently much harsher, than what has been washed and worn; and therefore
yielding less than that, will tear away the Edges to which it is sewed.

V. 17. New -- Fermenting wine will soon burst those bottles, the Leather of
which is almost worn out. The Word properly means Vessels made of Goats Skins,
wherein they formerly put Wine (and do in some Countries to this Day) to convey
it from Place to Place. Put new wine into new bottles -- Give harsh Doctrines
to such as have Strength to receive them.

V. 18. Just dead -- He had left her at the point of Death, Mark v. 23.
Probably a Messenger had now informed him, She was dead.

V. 20. Coming behind -- Out of Bashfulness and Humility.

V. 22. Take courage -- Probably she was struck with Fear, when he turned and
looked upon her ( Mark v. 33. Luke viii. 47.) left she should have offended
him, by touching his Garment privately; and the more so, because she was
unclean, according to the Law, R^v. xv. 25.

V. 23. The minstrels -- The Musicians. The original Word means Mute players.
Musical Instruments were used by the Jews as well as the Heathens, in their
Lamentations for the Dead, to sooth the Melancholy of surviving Friends, by
soft and solemn Notes. And there were Persons who made it their Business to
perform this, while others sung to their MusiC.Flutes were used especially on
the Death of Children; louder Instruments on the Death of grown Persons.

V. 24. Withdraw -- There is no Need of you now; for the maid is not ^^^d --
Her Life is not at an end: but sleeps -- This is only a temporary Suspension
of Sense and Motion, which should rather be termed Sleep than Death.

V. 25. The maid arose -- Christ raised three dead Persons to Life. This Child,
the Widow's Son, and Lazarus: One newly departed, another on the Bier, the
third smelling in the Grave: To show us, that no Degree of Death is so
desperate as to be past his Help.

V. 33. Even in Israel -- Where so many Wonders have been seen

V. 36. Because they were faint -- In Soul rather than in Body. As sheep having
no shepherd -- And yet they had many Teachers: They had Scribes in every City.
But they had none who cared for their Souls: and none that were able, if they
had been willing, to have wrought any deliverance. They had no Pastors after
GOD'S ow^ heart.

V. 37. The harvest truly is great -- When Christ came into the World, it was
properly the Time of Harvest; till then is was the Seed-time only. But the
laborers are few -- Those whom GOD sends; who are holy and convert Sinners. Of
others there are many.

V. 38. The Lord of the Harvest -- Whose peculiar Work and Office it is, and
who alone is able to do it; that he would thrust forth -- For it is an Employ
not pleasing to Flesh and Blood; so full of Reproach, Labor, Danger,
Temptation of every Kind, that Nature may well be averse to it. Those who never
felt this, never yet knew what it is, To be Laborers in Christ's Harvest. He
sends them forth, when he calls them by his Spirit, furnishes them with Grace
and Gifts for the Work, and makes a Way for them to be employed therein.

X.
And Mark iii. 14. vi. 7. Luke vi. 13. ix. (...).
having called to him his twelve disciples, he gave them power over unclean
spirits, to cast them out and to heal every disease and every malady. Acts i.
13.
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; the first, Simon who is called
Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his Brother;
son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus; Mark vi. 7. Luke ix. 2.
Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye
have received, freely give. Luke x. 7.
Nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor yet a staff: for the
workman is worthy of his maintenance. Mark vi. 10. Luke ix. 4.
And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy,
and there abide till ye go thence.

Luke x. 3.
Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise
as serpents, and harmless as doves. Matt. xxiv. 9.
But beware of men; for they will deliver you to the councils, and scourge you
in their synagogues. Luke xii. 11.
But when they deliver you, take no thought, how or what ye shall speak; for it
shall be given you in that very hour what ye shall speak. Luke xxi. 16.
But the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the
child; and children shall rise up against their parents, and kill them. Chapter
xxiv. 13.
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that endures to
the end, the same shall be saved.

Luke vi. 40. John xv.(...)
The disciple is not above his teacher nor the servant above his lord. Chapter xii.
24.
If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of
his household? Mark iv. 22. L^k viii. 17. xii. 2.
Therefore fear them not; for there is nothing covered, which shall not be made
manifest; nor hid that shall not be known. Luke xii. 3.
What I tell you in the dark, speak ye in the light; and what ye hear in the
ear, proclaim on the house-tops. Luke xii.(...).
Yea, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Mark viii 38. Luke ix. 26.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my
Father who is in heaven. Luke xii. 51.
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I am not come to send peace,
but a sword. Micah vii. 6.
And the foes of a man shall be they of his own household. Chapter xvi. 24. Luke
xiv. 27.
And he that takes not his cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me.
Chapter xvi. 25. John xii. 25.
He that finds his life shall lose it; and he that loses his life for my
sake, shall find it. Chapter xviii. 5. Luke x. 16. John xiii. 20.
He that entertaineth you, entertaineth me; and he that entertaineth me,
entertaineth him that sent me. Ma^^ ix. 41.
And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no
wise lose his reward.

V. 1. His twelve disciples -- Hence it appears that he had already chosen out
of his Disciples, those whom he afterward termed Apostles. The Number seems to
have Relation to the twelve Patriarchs, and the twelve Tribes of Israel.

V. 2. The first, Simon -- The first who was called to a constant Attendance on
Christ; Although Andrew had seen him, before Simon.

V. 3. Lebbeus -- Commonly called Judas, the Brother of James.

V. 4. Iscariot -- So called from Iscari^th (the Place of his Birth) a Town of
the Tribe of Ephraim, near the City of Samaria.

V. 5. These twelve Jesus sent forth -- Herein exercising his supreme
Authority, as GOD over all. None but GOD can give Men Authority to preach his
Word. Go not -- Their Commission was thus confined now, because the Calling of
the Gentiles was deferred till after the more plentiful Effusion of the Holy
Ghost on the Day of Penticost. Enter not -- Not to preach; but they might to
buy what they wanted, John iv. 9.

V. 8. Cast out devils -- It is a great Relief to the Spirits of an Infidel,
sinking under a Dread, that possibly the Gospel may be true, to find it
observed by a learned Brother, that the Diseases therein ascribed to the
Operation of the Devil, have the very same Symptoms, with the natural Diseases
of Lunacy, Epilepsy, or Convulsions; whence he readily and very willingly
concludes, that the Devil had no Hand in them.

But it were well to stop and consider a little. Suppose GOD should suffer an
evil Spirit to usurp the same power over a Man's Body, as the Man himself has
naturally; and suppose him actually to exercise that Power; could we conclude
the Devil had no Hand therein, because his Body was bent in the very same
Manner, wherein the Man himself might have bent it naturally?

And suppose GOD gives an evil Spirit a greater Power, to affect immediately
the Origin of the Nerves in the Brain, by irritating them to produce violent
Motions, or so relaxing them that they can produce little or no Motion; still
the Symptoms will be those of over tense Nerves, as in Madness, Epilepsies,
Convulsions; or of relaxed Nerves, as in paralytic Cases. But could we conclude
thence, that the Devil had no Hand in them? Will any Man affirm that GOD cannot
or will not, on any Occasion whatever, give such a Power to an evil Spirit? Or
that Effects, the like of which may be produced by natural Causes, cannot
possibly be produced by preternatural? If this be possible, then he who affirm
it was so, in any particular Case, cannot be justly charged with Falsehood,
merely for affirming the Reality of a possible Thing. Yet in this Manner are
the Evangelists treated by those unhappy Men, who above all Things dread the
Truth of the Gospel, because, if it is true, they are of all Men the most
miserable.

Freely ye have received -- All Things; in particular, the Power of working
Miracles; freely give -- Exert that Power wherever you come.

V. 9. Provide not -- The Stress seems to lie on this Word: They might use what
they had ready; but they might not stay a Moment, to provide any Thing more,
neither take any Thought about it. Nor indeed were they to take any Thing with
them, more than was strictly necessary, 1. Lest it should retard them. 2.
Because they were to learn hereby to trust to GOD in all future Exigencies.

V. 10. Neither scrip -- That is, a Wallet, or Bag to hold Provisions: Nor yet
a staff -- We read, Mark vi. 8. Take nothing, save a staff only. He that had
one might take it; they that had none, might not provide any. For the workman
is worthy of his maintenance -- The Word includes all that is mentioned in the
9th and 10th Verses; all that they were forbidden to provide for themselves, so
far as it was needful for them.

V. 11. Inquire who is worthy -- That you should abide with him: who is
disposed to receive the Gospel. There abide -- In that House, till ye leave the
Town.

V. 12. Salute it -- In the usual Jewish Form, "Peace (that is, all Blessings)
be to this House."

V. 13. If the house be worthy -- Of it, GOD shall give them the Peace you wish
them. If not, He shall give you what they refuse. The same will be the Case,
when we pray for them that are not worthy.

V. 14. Shake off the dust from your feet -- The Jews thought the Land of
Israel so peculiarly holy, that when they came Home from any heathen Country,
they stopped at the Borders and shook or wiped off the Dust of it from their
Feet, that the Holy Land might not be polluted with it. Therefore the Action
here enjoined was a lively Intimation, That those Jews who had rejected the
Gospel, were holy no longer, but were on a Level with Heathens and Idolaters.

V. 17 But think not that all your Innocence and all your Wisdom will screen
you from Persecution. They will scourge you in their synagogues -- In these the
Jews held their Courts of Judicature, abo^^ both civil and ecclesiastical
Affairs.

V. 19. Take no thought -- Neither at this Time, on any sudden Call, need we be
careful, how or what to answer.

V. 22. Of all men -- That know not GOD.

V. 23. Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel -- Make what^ Haste ye
will; till the son of man be come -- To destroy their Temple^ and Nation.

V. 25. How much more -- This cannot refer to the Quantity of Reproach and
Persecution: (For in this the Servant cannot be above his Lord:) But only to
the Certainty of it.

V. 26. Therefore fear them not; For ye have only the same Usage with your
LORD. There is nothing covered -- So that however they may slander you now,
your Innocence will at Length appear.

V. 27. Even what I now tell you s^^rc^ly, is not to be kept secret long, but
declared publicly* Therefore what ye hear in the ear, pab^ish on the hous^^t p
-- Two Customs of the Jews seem to be alluded to here. Their Doctors used to
whisper in the Ear of their Disciples, what they were to pronounce aloud to
others. And as their Houses were low and flat-roo^ed, they sometimes preached
to the People from thence.

V. 28. And be not afraid of any Thing which ye may suffer for proclaiming it.
Be afraid of him who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell -- It is
remarkable, that our LORD commands those who love GOD, still to fear Him, ever
on this Account, under this Notion.

V. 29. The particular Providence of GOD is another Reason for your not fearing
Man* For this extends to the very smallest Things. And if He had such Care over
the most inconsiderable Creatures, how much more will he take Care of you
(provided you confess Him before M^n, before powerful Enemies of the Truth) and
that not only in this Life, but in the other also?

V. 30. The particular Providence of GOD is another Reason for your not fearing
Man* For this extends to the very smallest Things. And i^^^lle had such Care
over the most inconsiderable Creatures, how much more will he take Care of you
(provided you confess Him before M^n, before powerful Enemies of the Truth) and
that not only in this Life, but in the other also?

V. 32. Whosoever shall confess me -- Publicly acknowledge me for the promised
Messiah. But this Confession implies the receiving his whole Doctrine ( Mark
viii. 38.) and obeying all his Commandments.

V. 33, 34 Whosoever shall deny me before men -- To which ye will be strongly
tempted. For think not that I am come -- That is, think not that universal
Peace will be the immediate Consequence of my Coming. Just the Contrary. Both
public and private Divisions will follow, wheresoever my Gospel comes with
Power. Yet this is not the Design, though it be the Event, of his Coming, through
the Opposition of Devils and Men.

V. 36. And the foes of a man -- That loves and follows Me.

V. 37. He that loves father or mother more than me -- He that is not ready to
give up all these, when they stand in Competition with his Duty.

V. 38. He that takes not his cross -- That is, whatever Pain or Inconvenience
cannot be avoided, but by doing some Evil, or omitting some Good.

V. 39. He that finds his Life shall lose it -- He that saves his Life, by
denying me, shall lose it eternally; and he that loses his Life, by confessing
me, shall save it eternally. And as you shall be thus rewarded, so in
Proportion shall they who entertain you for my Sake.

V. 41. He that entertaineth a prophet -- That is, a Preacher of the Gospel; In
the name of a prophet -- That is, because he is such, shall share in his Reward.

V. 42. One of these little ones -- The very least Christian.

XI.
And when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he departed
thence, to teach and preach in their cities.

Luke vii. 18.
Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples, Isaiah xxix. 18. xxx^. 5.
The blind receive their sight, the lame walk; the lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear; the dead are raised, and the poor have the gospel preached to them:
Mal. iii. 1.
Behold I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before
thee. than John the Baptist; but he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is
greater than he. Luke xvi. 16.
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. him, he is Mal. iv. 5.
Elijah, who was to come. sinners; but wisdom is justified by her children.
Luke x. 13.
Woe to thee, Chorazin, woe to thee, Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which
have been done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. Luke x. 21.
At that time Jesus answering said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them to babes. sight. him. ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. is easy and my burden is light.

V. 1. In their cities -- The other Cities of Israel.

V. 2. He sent two of his disciples -- Not because he doubted himself; but to
confirm their Faith.

V. 3. He that is to come -- The Messiah.

V. 4. Go and tell John the things which ye hear and see -- Which are a
stronger Proof of my being the Messiah, than any bare Assertions can be.

V. 5. The poor have the gospel preached to them -- The greatest Mercy of all.

V. 6. Happy is he who shall not be offended at me -- Notwithstanding all these
Proofs that I am the Messiah.

V. 7. As they departer, he said concerning John -- Of whom probably He would
not have said so much, when they were present. A reed shaken by the wind? --
No; nothing could ever shake John, in the Testimony he gave to the Truth. The
Expression is proverbial.

V. 8. A man clothed in soft, delicate raiment -- An essiminate Courtier,
accustomed to Fawning and Flattery? You may expect to find Persons of such a
Character in Palaces, not in a Wilderness.

V. 9. More than a prophet -- For the Prophets only pointed me out afar off;
but John was my immediate Forerunner.

V. 11. But he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, it greater than he --
Which an ancient Author explains thus: One perfect in the Law, as John was, is
inferior to one who is baptized into the Death of Christ. For this is the
Kingdom of Heaven, even to be buried with Christ, and to be raised up together
with him, John was greater than all who had been then born of Women; but he was
cut off before the Kingdom of heaven was given. [He seems to mean, that
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, which constitute the present, inward Kingdom of
Heaven.] He was blameless, as to that Righteousness which is by the Law; but he
fell short of those who are perfected by the Spirit of Life which is in Christ.
Whosoever therefore is least in the kingdom of heaven, by Christian
Regeneration, is greater than any who has attained only the Righteousness of
the Law, because the Law makes nothing perfect. It may farther mean, The least
true Christian Believer, has a more perfect Knowledge of Jesus Christ, of his
Redemption and Kingdom, than John the Baptist had, who died before the full
Manifestation of the Gospel.

V. 12. And from the days of John -- That is, from the Time that John had
fulfilled his Ministry, Men rush into my Kingdom with a Violence like that of
those who are t^^^ing a City by Storm.

V. 13. For all the prophets and the law prophesied untit John -- For all that
is written in the Law and the Prophets only foretold as distant, what is now
fulfilled. In John the old Dispensation expired, and the new began.

V. 15. He that has ears to hear, let him hear -- A Kind of proverbial
Expression, requiring the deepest Attention to what is spoken.

V. 16. This generation -- That is, the Men of this Age. They are like those
froward Children of whom their Fellows complain, that they will be pleased no
Way.

V. 18. John came neither eating nor drinking -- In a rigorous, austere Way,
like Elijah. And they say, He has a devil -- Is melancholy, from the Influence
of an evil Spirit.

V. 19. The Son of man it come, eating and drinking -- Conversing in a free,
familiar Way. Wisdom is justified by her children -- That is, (...) Wisdom
herein is acknowledged by those who are truly wise.

V. 20. Then began he to upbraid the cities -- It is observable he had never
upbraided them before. Indeed at first they had received him with all Gladness,
Capernaum in particular.

V. 21. Woe to thee, Chorazin -- That is, miserable art thou. For these are not
Curses or Imprecations as has been commonly supposed; but a solemn,
compassionate Declaration of the Misery they were bringing on themselves.
Chorazin and Bethsaida were Cities of Galilee* standing by the Lake of
Gennesareth. Tire and Sidon were Cities of Phenic^a, lying on the Seashore.
The Inhabitants of them were Heathens.

V. 22, 24. Moreover I say to you -- Besides the general Denunciation of Woe to
those stubborn Unbelievers, the Degree of their Misery will be greater, than
even that of Tire and Sidon, yea of Sodom.

V. 23, Thou, Capernaum, who have been exalted to heaven -- That is, highly
honored by my Presence and Miracles.

V. 25. Jesus answering -- This Word does not always imply, that something had
been spoken, to which an Answer is now made. It often means no more, than the
speaking in reference to some Action or Circumstance preceding. The following
Words Christ speaks in reference to the Case of the Cities abovementioned: I
thank thee -- That is, I acknowledge and joyfully adore the Justice and Mercy
of thy Dispensations: Because thou have hid -- That is, because Thou have
suffered these Things to be hid from Men, who are in other Respects wise and
prudent, while Thou have discovered them to those of the weakest Understanding,
to them who are only wise to Godward.

V. 27. All things are delivered to me -- Our LORD here addressing Himself to
his Disciples, shows why Men wise in other Things, do not know this: Namely,
because none can know it by natural Reason; none but those to whom he reveals
it.

V. 28. Come to me -- Here He shows to whom He is pleased to reveal these
Things; to the weary and heavy laden: Ye that labor -- After Rest in GOD: And
are heavy la^en -- With the Guilt and Power of Sin: And I will give you rest --
I alone (for none else can) will freely give you (what ye cannot purchase) Rest
from the Guilt of Sin by Justification, and from the Power of Sin by
Sanctification.

V. 29. Take my Yoke upon you -- Believe in me: Receive me as your Prophet,
Priest, and King: For I am meek and lowly in heart -- Meek toward all Men,
lowly toward GOD: And ye shall find rest -- Whoever therefore does not find
Rest of Soul, ^s not meek and lowly. The Fault is not in the Yoke of Christ:
But in thee, who has not taken it upon thee. Nor is it possible for any one to
be discontented, but through Want of Meekness or Lowliness.

V. 30. For my yoke is easy -- Or rather gracious, sweet, benign, delightful:
And my burden -- Contrary to those of Men, is Ease, Liberty, and Honor.

XII.
Mark ii. 23. Luke vi. 1.
At that time Jesus went on the sabbath through the corn, and his disciples were
hungry, and plucked the ears of corn and ate. it said to him, Behold thy
disciples do what is not lawful to do on the sabbath. 1 Samuel xxi. 6.
How he entered into the house of God, and ate the shewbread, which it was not
lawful for him to eat, neither for them who were with him, but only for the
priests? M^^ ^x. 13.
And if ye had known what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye
would not have condemned the guiltless.

Mark iii. 1. Luke vi. 6.
And departing thence, he went into their synagogue. it out? to do good on the
sabbath day. it forth; and it was restored whole, as the other. it withdrew
from thence; and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all, Isai.
xlii. 1, etc.
Behold my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my Soul delights:
I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the heathens.

Luke xi. 14.
Then was brought to him a demoniac, blind and dumb; and he healed him, so that
the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. Mark iii. 22.
But the Pharisees hearing it said, This fellow casts not out devils but by
Beelzebub the prince of the devils. them out? Therefore they shall be your
judges. that I cast out devils, then the kingdom of God is come upon you. Mark
iii. 28. Luke xii. 10.
Wherefore I say to you. All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven to
men; but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven to men. Matt.
vii. 16. Luke vi. 43.
Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree corrupt and its
fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruit.

Matt. xvi. 1. Luke xi. 16, 29.
Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would
see a sign from thee. Jonah. Jonah. ii. 1.
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish,
so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
Earth.

1 Kings x. 1.
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation and
shall condemn it; for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear
the wisdom of Solomon; and behold a a greater than Solomon is here. Luke xi. 24.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, and finds none.

Mark iii. 31. Luke viii. 19.
While he yet talked to the multitude, behold his mother and his brethren stood
without, seeking to speak to him.

V. 1. His disciples plucked the ears of corn, and ate -- Just what sufficed
for present Necessity: Dried Corn was a common Food among the J^^s.

V. 3. Have ye not read what David did -- And Necessity was a sufficient Plea
for his transgressing the Law in an higher Instance.

V. 4. He entered into the House of God -- Into the Tabernacle. The Temple was
not yet built. The show bread -- So they called the B^c^^^ which the Priest,
who served that Week, put every Sabbath Day on the Golden Table that was in the
Holy Place, before the LORD. The Loaves were twelve in Number, and represented
the twelve Tribes of Israel: When the new were brought, the stale were taken
away, but were to be eaten by the Priests only.

V. 5. The priests in the temple profane the sabbath -- That is, Do their
ordinary Work on this, as on a common Day, cleaning all Things, and preparing
the Sacrifices. A greater than the temple -- If therefore the Sabbath must give
way to the Temple, much more must it give way to me.

V. 7. I will have mercy and not sacrifice -- That is, when they interfere with
each other, I always prefer Acts of Mercy, before Matter^ of positive
Institution: Yea, before all ceremonial Institutions whatever; because these
being only Means of Religion, are suspended of course, if Circumstances occur,
wherein they clash with Love, which is the End of it.

V. 8. For the Son of man -- Therefore they are guiltless, were it only on this
Account, that they act by my Authority, and attend on me in my Ministry, as the
Priests attended on GOD in the Temple: Is Lord even of the sabbath -- This
certainly implies, that the Sabbath was an Institution of great and
distinguished Importance: It may perhaps also refer to that signal Act of
Authority which Christ afterward exerted over it, in changing it from the
seventh to the first Day of the We^k. If we suppose here is a Transposition of
the 7th and 8th Verses, than the 8th Verse is a Proof of the 6th.

V. 12. It is lawful to do good on the sabbath day -- To save a Beast, ^uch
more a Man.

V. 18. He shall show judgment to the heathens -- That is, He shall publish the
merciful Gospel to them also: The Hebrew Word signifies either Mercy or Justice.

V. 19. He shall not strive, nor clamor; neither shall any man hear his voice
in the streets -- That is, He shall not be contentious, noisy, or ostentatious;
but gentle, quiet, and lowly. We may observe, each Word rises above the other,
expressing a still higher Degree of Humility and Gentleness.

V. 20. A bruised reed -- A convinced Sinner; one that is bruised with the
Weight of Sin: Smoking flax -- One that has the least good Desire, the
faintest Spark of Grace: Till he send forth judgment unto victory -- That is,
till he make Righteousness completely victorious over all its Enemies.

V. 21. In his name -- That is, in Him.

V. 22. A demoniac, blind and dumb -- Many undoubtedly supposed these Defects
to be merely natural. But the Spirit of GOD saw otherwise, and gives the true
Account both of the Disorder and the ^^are. How many other Disorders, seemingly
natural, may even now be owing to the same Cause?

V. 23. Is not this the Son of David -- That is, the Messiah.

V. 25. Jesus knowing their thoughts -- It seems, they had as yet only said it
in their Hearts.

V. 26. How shall his kingdom be established -- Does not that subtle Spirit
know, this is not the Way to establish his Kingdom?

V. 27. By whom do your children -- That is, Disciples, cast them out -- It
seems, some of them really did this; although the Sons of Sceva could not.
Therefore they shall be your judges -- Ask them, if Satan will cast out Satan:
Let even them be Judges in this Matter. And they shall convict you of Obstinacy
and Partiality, who impute that in Me to Beelzebub, which in them you impute to
GOD. Besides, how can I rob him of his Subjects, till I have conquered him? The
kingdom of God is come upon you -- Unawares; before you expected: So the Word
implies.

V. 29. How can one enter into the strong one's house, unless he first bind the
strong one -- So Christ coming into the World, which was then eminently the
strong one's, Satan's House, first bound him, and then took his Spoils.

V. 30. He that is not with me is against me -- For there are no Neuters in
this War. Every one must be either with Christ or against Him; either a loyal
Subject or a Rebel* And there are none upon Earth, who neither promote nor
obstruct his Kingdom. For he that does not gather Souls to GOD scatters them
from Him.

V. 31. The blasphemy against the Spirit -- How much Stir has been made about
this? How many Sermons, yea, Volumes have been written concerning it? And yet
there is nothing plainer in all the Bible. It is neither more nor less, than
the ascribing those Miracles to the Power of the Devil, which Christ wrought by
the Power of the Holy Ghost.

V. 32. Whosoever speaks against the Son of man -- In any other Respect: It
shall be forgiven him -- Upon his true Repentance: But whosoever speaks thus
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven, neither in this world nor in
the world to come -- This was a proverbial Expression among the Jews, for a
Thing that would never be done. It here means farther, He shall not escape the
Punishment of it, either in this World or in the World to come. The Judgment of
GOD shall overtake him, both here and hereafter.

V. 33. Either make the tree good and its fruit good: or make the tree corrupt
and its fruit corrupt -- That is, you must allow, they are both good, or both
bad. For if the Fruit is good, so is the Tree; if the Fruit is evil, so is the
Tree also. For the tree is known by its fruit -- As if he had said, Ye may
therefore know Me by fruits. -- By my converting Sinners to GOD, you may know
that GOD has sent me.

V. 34. In another Kind likewise, the tree is known by its fruit -- Namely, the
Heart by the Conversation.

V. 36. Ye may perhaps think, GOD does not so much regard your Words. But I say
to you -- That not for blasphemous and profane Words only, but for every ille
word which men seall speak -- For Want of Seriousness or Caution, for every
Discourse which is not conducive to the Glory of GOD, they shall give account
in the day of judgment.

V. 37. For by thy Words (as well as thy Tempers and Works) thou shall then be
either acquitted or condemned. Your Words as well as Actions shall be produced
in Evidence for or against you to prove whether you was a true Believer or not.
And according to that Evidence you will either be acquitted or condemned in the
great Day.

V. 38. We would see a sign -- Else we will not believe this.

V. 39. An adulterous generation -- Whose Heart wanders from GOD though they
profess Him to be their Husband. Such Adulterers are all those who love the
World, and all who seek the Friendship of it. Seeks a sign -- After all they
have had all already, which were abundantly sufficient to convince them, had
not their Hearts been estranged from GOD, and consequently averse to the Truth.
The sign of Jonah -- Who Who was herein a Type of Christ

V. 40. Three days and three nights -- It was customary with the Eastern
Nations, to reckon any Part of a natural Day of twenty-four Hours, for the
whole Day. Accordingly they used to say, A Thing was done after three or seven
Days, if it was done on the third or seventh Day, from that which was last
mentioned. Instances of this may be seen, 1 Kings xx. 29. and in many other
Places. And as the Hebrews had no Word to express a natural Day, they used
Night and Day, or Day and Night for it. So that to say, a Thing happened after
three days and three nights, was with them the very same, as to say, it
happened after three Days, or on the third Day. See Esther iv. 16. v. 1. Genesis
vii. 4, 12. F^^. xxiv. 18. xxxiv. 23.

V. 42. She came from the uttermost parts of the earth -- That Part of Arabia
from which she came, was the uttermost Part of the Earth that Way, being
bounded by the Sea.

V. 43. But how dreadful will be the Consequence of their rejecting Me? When
the unclean spirit go^^ out -- Not willingly, but being compelled by one that
is stronger than he. He walks -- Wanders up and down; through ary places --
Barren, dreary, desolate; or, Places not yet watered with the Gospel: Seeking
rest and finds none -- How can he, while he carries with him his own Hell?
And is it not the Case of his Children too? Reader, Is it thy Case?

V. 44. Whence I came out -- He speaks as if he had come out of his own Accord:
See his Pride! He finds it empty -- Of GOD, of Christ, of his Spirit: Swept
-- From Love, Lowliness, Meekness, and all the Fruits of the Spirit: And
garnished -- With Levity and Security: So that there is nothing to keep him
out, and much to invite him in.

V. 45. Seven other spirits -- That is, a great many; a certain Number being
put for an uncertain: More wicked than himself -- Whence it appears, that there
are Degrees of Wickedness among the Devils themselves: They enter in and dwell
-- For ever, in him who is forsaken of GOD. So shall it be to this wicked
generation -- Yea and to Apostates in all Ages.

V. 46. His brethren -- His Kinsmen: They were the Sons of Mary the Wife of
Cleopas or Alpheus, his Mother's Sister; and came now seeking to take him, as
one beside himself, Mark iii. 21.

V. 48. And he answering, said -- Our LORD'S knowing why they came,
sufficiently justifies his seeming Disregard of them.

V. 49, 50. See the highest Severity, and the highest Goodness! Severity to his
Natural, Goodness to his Spiritual Relations! In a Manner disclaiming the
former, who opposed the Will of his heavenly Father, and owning the latter, who
obeyed it

XIII.
Mark iv. 1. Luke viii. 4.
The same day went Jesus out of the house, and fat by the seaside. were
gathered together to him, so that he went into the vessel and sat, and all the
multitude stood on the shore. seeds fell by the highway side, and the birds
came and devoured them. places, where they had not much earth; and they sprung
up immediately, because they had not depth of earth. fold, some sixty, some
thirty. to hear let him hear. Chapter xxv. 29. Mark iv. 25. Luke viii. 18. xix. 26.
whosoever has, to him shall be given; and he shall have abundance: but
whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even what he has. Isaiah who
says, Isaiah. xi. 9. John xii. 40. Acts xxviii. 26.
Hearing ye will hear, but in no wise understand, and seeing ye will see, but
in no wise perceive. their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they
closed: lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears and understand with their hearts, and should be converted and I should
heal them. Luke x. 23.
But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears for they hear. them,
and to hear the things which ye hear, and have not heard them. it not, the
wicked one comes, and catches away what was sown in his heart. This is he who
received seed by the highway-side. places, is he that hears the word and
immediately receives it with joy. it: who also bears fruit, and brings
forth, some an hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty.

them, An enemy has done this.

Mark iv. 30. Luke xiii. 18.
The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and
sowed in his field:

Luke xiii. 20.
The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman taking, covered up in
three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

in parables, and without a parable spoke he not unto them: Psalm lxxviii. 2.
I will open my mo^th in parables; I will utter things hid from the foundation
of the world.







Mark vi. 1. Luke iv. 16, 22.
And coming into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that
they were astonished and said, Whence has HE this wisdom and these mighty
works? this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary? And his
brethren James and Joses and Simon and Jude? And his sisters are they not all
with us? John iv. 44.
And they were offended at him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not
without honor, save in his own country, and in his own house.

V. 2. He went into the vessel -- Which constantly waited upon Him, while He
was on the Seacoast.

V. 3. In parables -- The Word is here taken in its proper Sense, for apt
Similies or Comparisons. This Way of speaking extremely common in the Eastern
Countries, drew and fixed the Attention of many, and occasioned the Truths
delivered, to sink the deeper into humble and serious Hearers. At the same
Time, by an awful Mixture of Justice and Mercy, it hid them from the Proud and
Careless.

In this Chapter our LORD delivers seven Parables; directing the four former
(as being of general Concern) to all the People; the three latter to his
Disciples.

Behold the sow^^ -- How exquisitely proper is this Parable to be an
Introduction to all the rest? In this our LORD answers a very obvious and a
very important Question. The same Sower, Christ, and the same Preachers sent by
Him, always sow the same Seed: Why has it not always the same Effect? He that
has Ears to hear, let him hear!

V. 4. And while he sowed, some seeds fell by the highway-side, and the birds
came and devoured them -- It is observable, that our LORD points out the grand
Hindrances of our bearing Fruit, in the same Order as they occur. The first
Danger is, That the Birds will devour the Seed. If it escape this, there is
then another Dan^^^, namely. Lest it be scorched, and wither away. It is long
after t^^^ that the Thorns spring up and choke the good Seed.

A vast Majority of those who hear the Word of GOD, receive the Seed as by the
highway-side. Of those who do not lose it by the Birds, yet many receive it as
on stony places. Many of them who receive it in a better Soil, yet suffer the
thorns to grow up and c^oke it: So that few even of these endure to the End,
and be^^ fruit unto perfection: Yet in all these Cases, it is not the Will of
GOD that hinders, but their own voluntary Perverseness.

V. 8. Good ground -- Soft, not like that by the Highway-side; deep, not like
the stony Ground; purged, not full of Thorns.

V. 11. To you, who have, it is given to k^^w the myst^^ies of the kingdom of
^e^ven -- The deep Things, which Flesh and Blood cannot reveal, pertaining to
the inward, present Kingdom of Heaven. But to ^^^m who have not, it is not
given -- Therefore speak I i^ parables, that ye may understand, while they do
not understand

V. 12. Whosoever has -- That is, improves what he has, uses the Grace given
according to the design of the Giver; to him shall be given -- More and more,
in Proportion to that Improvement. But whosoever h^th not -- Improves it not,
from him shall be taken even what he has. Here is the grand Rule of GOD'S
dealing with the Children of Men: A Rule, fixed as the Pillars of Heaven. This
is the Key to all his providential Dispensations; as will appear to Men and
Angels in ^^^t Day.

V. 13. Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing they see not
(...) In Pursuance of this general Rule, I do not give more Knowledge (...)
this People, because they use not that which they have. ^lready: ^^aving all
the Means of seeing, hearing, and understanding, they (...) none of them; they
do not effectually see, or hear, or understand any Thing.

V. 14. Hearing ye will hear, but in no wise understand -- That is, Ye will
surely hear: All possible Means will be given you; yet they will profit you
nothing: Because your Heart is sensual, stupid, and insensible; your spiritual
Senses are shut up; yea, you have closed your eyes against the Light; as being
unwilling to understand the Things of GOD, and afraid, not desirous that He
should heal you.

V. 16. But blessed are your eyes -- For you both see and understand. You know
how to prize the Light which is given you.

V. 19. When any one hears the word and considers it n^^^^ -- The first and
most general Cause of Unfruitfulness. The wicked one comes -- Either inwardly;
filling the Mind with Thoughts of other Things: Or by his Agents. Such are all
they that introduce other Subjects, when Men should be considering what they
have heard.

V. 20. The seed sown on stony places, therefore sprung up soon, because it did
not sink deep. (ver. 5.) He receives it with joy -- Perhaps with Transport,
with Ecstasy: Struck with the Beauty of Truth, and drawn by the Preventing Grace
of GOD.

V. 21. Yet has he not root in himself -- No deep Work of Grace: no Change in
the Ground of his Heart Nay, he has no deep Conviction: And without this, good
Desires soon wither away. He (...) off aded -- He finds a thousand plausible
Pretenses for leaving so (...) row and rugged a Way.

V. 22. He that received the seed among the thorns, is he that he^^^ (...) the
word and considers it -- In spite of Satan and all his Agents: Y^^ has root
in himself, is deeply convinced, and in great Measure, inwardly changed; so
that he will not draw back, even when tribulation or persecution arises. And
yet even in him, together with the good Seed, the thor^ ^^ring up (ver. 7.
^^perhaps unperceived at first) till they gradually choke it, destroy all its
Life and Power, and it becomes unfruitful.

Cares are thorns to the Poor; Wealth to the Rich; the Desire of other Things
to All. The deceitfulness of riches -- Deceitful indeed! For they smile, and
betray: Kiss, and smite into Hell. They put out the Eyes, harden the Heart,
steal away all the Life of GOD: Fill the Soul with Pride, Anger, Love of the
World: Make Men Enemies to the whole Cross of Christ! And all the while are
eagerly desired, and vehemently pursued, even by those who believe there is a
GOD!

V. 23. Some an hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty. -- That is, in various
Proportions; some abundantly more than others.

V. 24. He proposed another parable -- In which He farther explains the (...)
of unfruitful Hearers. The kingdom of heaven (as has been observed before)
sometimes signifies eternal Glory: Sometimes the Way to it, Inward Religion:
Sometimes, as here, the Gospel Dispensation: The Phrase is likewise used for a
Person or Thing relating to any of those: So in this Place, it means, Christ
preaching the Gospel, who is like a man sowing good seed -- The Expression, is
like, both here and in several other Places, only means, That the Thing spoken
as may be illustrated by the following Similitude. Who sowed good seed in his
field -- GOD sowed nothing but Good in his whole Cre^^^ Christ sowed only the
good Seed of Truth in his Church.

V. 25. But while men slept -- They ought to have watched: The (...) of the
Field sleeps not. His enemy came and sowed darnel -- (...) like Wheat, and
commonly grows among Wheat rather (...) ^ther ^rain: But Tares or Vetches are
of the Pulse Kind, (...) no R^^^^blance to Wheat.

V. 26. When the blade was sprung up, then appeared the darnel -- It (...) not
discerned before: It seldom appears, as soon as the good ^eed is (...): A^^^
first appears to be Peace, and Love, and Joy.

V. 27. Did not thou sow good seed in thy field? Whence then has it ^^^nel^
-- Not from the Parent of Good. Even the Heathen could ^^y, "No Evil can from
Thee proceed;
"(...) is only suffered, not decreed:
"As Darkness is not from the Sun,
"(...) mount the Shades, till he is gone."


V. 28. He said, An Enemy has done this -- A plain Answer to the great
Question, concerning the Origin of Evil. GOD made Men (as he did Angels)
Intelligent Creatures, and consequently Free either to choose Good or Evil: But
he implanted no Evil in the human Soul: An Enemy (with Man's Concurrence) has
done this.

Darnel, in the Church, is, properly, outside Christians, such as have the Form
of Godliness, without the Power. Open Sinners, such as have neither the Form
nor the Power, are not so properly Darnel, as Thistles and Brambles: These
ought to be rooted up without Delay, and not suffered in the Christian
Community. Whereas should fallible Men attempt to gather up the darnel, they
would often root up the wheat with them.

V. 31. He proposed to them another parable -- The former Par^^ (...) relate
chiefly to unfruitful H^^rers; these that follow, to these (...) bear good
Fruit. The kingdom of heaven -- Both the Go^^ (...) ^^^tion, and the Inward
Kingdom.

V. 32. The least -- That is, One of the least: A Way of spe^^^ (...) extremely
common among the Jews. It becomes a tree -- In the (...) Countries it grows
exceeding large and high. So will the Christian^ Doctrine spread in the World,
and the Life of Christ in the Soul.

V. 33. Three measures -- This was the Quantity which they usually baked at
once; till the whole was leavened -- Thus will the Gospel leaven the World, and
Grace the Christian.

V. 34. Without a parable spoke he not unto them -- That is, Not at that Time;
at other Times he did.

V. 38. The good seed are the children of the kingdom -- That is, the ^^^dren
of GOD, the Righteous.

V. 41. They shall gather all things that offend -- Whatever had hin^^^ or
grieved the Children of GOD; whatever Things or Persons, (...) the good Seed
which Christ had sown from taking Root (...) ^^it. The Greek Word is, All
Scandals.

V. 44. The three following Parables are proposed not to the Mul^^^, but
peculiarly to the Apostles: The two former of them re^^^ those who receive the
Gospel; the third, both to those who receive and those who preach it. The
kingdom of heaven is like treasure hid in a field -- The Kingdom of GOD within
us, is a Treasure indeed, but a Treasure hid from the World, and from the most
wise and prudent in it. He that finds this Treasure (perhaps when he thought it
far from him) hides it deep in his Hear, and gives up all other Happiness for
it.

V. 45. The kingdom of heaven -- That is, one who earnestly feels for it: In
the 47th Verse it means, The Gospel preached, which is like a net gathering of
every Kind: Just so the Gospel wherever it is preached, gathers at first both
good and bad, who are for a Season full of Approbation and warm with good
Desires. But Christian Discipline, and strong, close Exhortation, begin that
Separation in this World, which shall be accomplished by the Angels of GOD, in
the World to come.

V. 52. Every scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven -- That is, every
duly-prepared Preacher of the Gospel, has a Treasure of divine Knowledge, out
of which he is able to bring forth all Sorts of Instructions. The Word Treasure
signifies any Collection of This whatsoever, and the Places where such
Collections are k^^^.

V. 53. He departed thence -- He crossed the Lake from (...) And came once more
into his own country -- Nazareth: But with (...) better Success than he had had
there before.

V. 54. Whence has HE -- Many Texts are not understood, for want of knowing
the proper Emphasis: And others are utterly misunderstood, by placing the
Emphasis wrong. To prevent this in some Measure, the Emphatical Words are here
printed in Capital Letters.

V. 55. The Carpenter's son -- The Greek Word means, One that works either in
Wood, Iron, or Stone. His brethren -- Or Kinsmen. They were the Sons of Mary,
Sister to the Virgin, and Wife of Cleophas or Alpheus. James -- Styled by St.
Paul, also, the Lord's Brother. Gal. i. 19. Simon -- Surnamed the Canaumte.

V. 57. They were offended at him -- They looked on Him as a mean, ignoble Man,
not worthy to be regarded.

V. 58. He wrought not many mighty works, because of their unbelief -- And the
Reason why many mighty Works are not wrought now, is not, That the Faith is
every where planted; but, That Unbelief every where prevails.

XIV.
Mark vi. 14. Luke ix. 7.
At that time Herod the Tetrarch heard the fame of Jesus, Mark vi. 17.
For Herod having apprehended John, had bound and put him in prison, for
Herodias's sake, his brother Philip's wife. daughter of Herodias danced before
them and pleased Herod. it to be given her. it to her mother. Mark vi. 32, 34.
Luke ix. 10. John vi. 1.
And Jesus hearing it, withdrew thence by ship into a desert place apart: but
when the people heard thereof, they followed him by land out of the cities.

Mark vi. 35. Luke ix. 12. John vi. 5.
And in the evening his disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place,
and the time is now past: send the multitude away, that going into the
villages, they may buy themselves victuals. need not go: give ye them to eat.
Mark vi. 45. John vi. 15.
And he constrained his disciples, to go straightway into the vessel, and go
before him to the other side, till he sent the multitude away. to sink, he
cried, Lord, save me.

Mark vi. 54.
And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all
that country round about, and brought to him all that were diseased;

V. 1. At that time -- When our LORD had spent about a Year in his public
Ministry. Tetrarch -- King of a fourth Part of his Father's Dominions.

V. 2. He is risen from the dead -- Herod was a Sadducce: And the (...)
^^^denied the Resurrection of the Dead. But Sadduceism (...) Conscience awakes.

V. 3. (...) brother Philip's wife -- Who was still alive.

V. 4. It is not lawful for thee to have her -- It was not lawful indeed for
either of them to have her. For her Father Aristobulas was their own Brother.
John's Words were rough like his Raiment. He would not break the Force of
Truth, by using soft Words even to a King.

V. 5. He would have put him to death -- In his F^ of Passion; but he was them
restrained by the Fear of the Multitude; and afterward, by the Reverence he
bore him.

V. 6. The daughter of Herodias -- Afterward infamous for a Life suitable to
this Beginning.

V. 8. Being before instructed by her mother -- Both as to the Matter and
Manner of her Petition: She said, Give me here -- Fearing if he had Time to
consider, he would not do it: John the Baptist's head in a charger -- A large
Dish or Bowl.

V. 9. And the king was sorry -- Knowing that John was a good Man: Yet for the
oath's sake -- So he murdered an innocent Man from mere Tenderness of
Conscience!

V. 10. And he sent and beheaded John in the prison, and his head was given to
the damsel -- How mysterious is the Providence, which left the Life of so holy
a Man in such infamous Hands! Which permitted it to be sacrificed to the Malice
of an abandoned Harlot, the Petulan^^ of a vain Girl, and the Rashness of a
foolish, perhaps drunken P^^^^^ who made a Prophet's Head the Reward of a Dance
^^^^t (...) sure the Almighty will repay his Servants in another Wor^ (...)
whatever they suffer in this.

V. 13. Jesus withdrew into a desert place -- 1. To avoid Herod; 2. Because of
the Multitude pressing upon him; ( Mark vi. 32.) and 3. To talk with Disciples,
newly returned from their Progress; ( Luke ix. 10.) apart -- From all but his
Disciples.

V. 15. The time is now past -- The usual Meal-time.

V. 22. He constrained his disciples -- Who were unwilling to leave him.

V. 24. In the evening -- I earned Men say the Jews reckoned Two Evenings; the
first beginning at Three in the Afternoon, the second, ^^^un set. If so, the
latter is meant here.

V. 25. The fourth w^tch -- The Jews (as well as the Romans) usu^^^ divided the
Night into four Watches, of three Hours each. The first watch began at Six, the
second at Nine, the third at Twelve, the fourth at Three in the Morning. If it
be thou -- It is the some as Since it is thou. The Particle if frequently bears
this Meaning, both in ours and in all Languages. So it means John xiii. 14 and
17. St. Peter was in no Doubt, or he would not have quitted the ^hip.

V. 30. He was afraid -- Though he had been used to the Sea, and was a skilful
Swimmer. But so it frequently is. When Grace begins to act, the natural Courage
and Strength are withdrawn.

V. 33. Thou art the son of God -- They mean, The Messiah.

XV.
Mark vii. 1.
Then came to Jesus scribes and pharisees who were at Jerusalem, saying, Why do
thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? Exodus xx. 12. xxi. 17.
Honor thy father and mother: and he that revileth father or mother, let him
die the death. It is a gift, by whatsoever thou might have been profited by
me: He shall in no wise honor his father or his mother. you, Isaiah xxix. 13.
This people draws nigh to me with their lips; but their heart is far from
me. Luke vi. 39.
Let them alone: they are blind leaders of the blind: but if the blind lead the
blind, both will fall into a ditch.

Mark vii. 24.
And Jesus going thence, retired to the coasts of Tire and Sidon. coming out of
those coasts, cried to him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of
David: my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. it to the dogs. is thy
faith: be it unto thee as thou will. And her daughter was healed from that hour.

Mark vii. 31.
And Jesus passing thence, came nigh the sea of Galilee; and going up into a
mountain, he sat down there. Mark viii. 1.
Then Jesus calling his disciples to him said, I have tender compassion on the
multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to
eat: and I am not willing to send them away fasting, lest they faint in the
way. them and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.



V. 2. The elders -- The chief Doctors or Teachers among the Jews.

V. 3. They wash not their hands when they eat bread -- Food in general is
termed Bread in Hebrew: So that to eat Bread is the same a^ to make a Meal.

V. 4. Honor thy father and mother -- Which implies all such ^^lief as they
stand in Need of.

V. 5. It is a gift by whatsoever thou might have been profited by me --
That is, I have given, or at least, purpose to give to the Treasury of the
Temple, what you might otherwise have had from me.

V. 7. Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying -- That is, The Description
which Isaiah gave of your Fathers, is exactly applicable to you. The Words
therefore which were a Description of them, are a Prophecy with Regard to you.

V. 8. Their heart is far from me -- And without this, all outward Worship is
mere Mockery of GOD.

V. 9. Teaching the commandments of men -- As equal with, nay, superior to,
those of GOD. What can be a more heinous Sin?

V. 13. Every plant -- That is, every Doctrine.

V. 14. Let them alone -- If they are indeed ^lind leaders of the blind, let
them alone; concern not yourselves about them: A plain Direction ^^w to behave,
with Regard to all such.

V. 17. Are ye also yet without understanding? How fair and candid are the
sacred Historians? Never concealing or excusing their own Blemishes.

V. 19. First evil thoughts -- then murders -- and the rest. Railings -- The
Greek Word includes all Reviling, Backbiting, and Evil-speaking.

V. 22. A woman of Canaa^ -- ^anaan was also called Syrophen^cia, as lying
between Syria properly so called, and Phenicia, by the Seaside. Cried to him
-- From afar, Thou son of David -- So she had some Knowledge of the promised
Messiah.

V. 23. He answered her not a word -- He sometimes tries our Faith in like
Manner.

V. 24. I am not sent -- Not primarily; not yet.

V. 25. Then came she -- Into the House where He now was.

V. 28. Thy faith -- Thy Reliance on the Power and Goodness of GOD.

V. 29. The sea of Galilee -- The Jews gave the Name of Seas, to all large
Lakes. This was an hundred Furlongs long, and forty broad. It was called also,
the sea of Tiberias. It lay on the Borders of Galilee, and the City of Tiberias
stood on its Western Shore. It was likewise styled, The lake of Gennesareth:
Perhaps a Corruption of Cinnereth, the Name by which it was anciently called,
Numb. xxxiv. 11.

V. 32. They continue with me now three days -- It was now the third Day, since
they came.

V. 36. He gave thanks, or blessed the Food -- That is, He praise GOD for it,
and prayed for a Blessing upon it.

XVI.
Mark viii. 11. Matt xii. 38.
Then the Pharisees and Sadduces came to him and tempting, desired him to show
them a sign from heaven. Luke xii. 54.
He answering said to them. In the evening ye say, It will be fair weather; for
the sky is red: And in the morning, It will be foul weather today; for the sky
is red and lowering. discern the signs of the times? A wicked and adulterous
generation seeks after a sign; but there shall no sign be given to it, but
the sign of the prophet Jonah.

Mark viii. 14.
And when his disciples were come on the other side, they had forgotten to take
bread. Luke xii. 1.
And Jesus said to them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees
and Sadducees. it said to them, O ye of little faith, why reason ye among
yourselves, because ye have taken no bread? them beware of the leaven of bread,
but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

Mark viii. 27. Luke ix. 18.
And Jesus coming into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, asked his disciples
saying, Whom do men say that the Son of Man is? say, John the Baptist; others
Elijah; others Jeremiah, or one of the prophets. him, Happy art thou, Simon
Barjonah; for flesh and blood have not revealed this to thee, but my Father who
is in heaven. Mat. xvii. 18.
And I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

Mark viii. 31. Luke ix. 22. C.xvii. 12. xx. 18.
From that time Jesus began to show his disciples, That he must go to Jerusalem
and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be
killed, and be raised again the third day. C.x 38.
Then said Jesus to his disciples, If any man be willing to come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. C.x. 39. Mark viii. 35.
Luke ix. 24. xvii. 33. John xii. 25.
For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his
life for my sake, shall find it. standing here, who shall not taste of death,
till they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.

V. 1. A sign from heaven -- Such they imagined Satan could not counterfeit.

V. 3. The signs of the times -- The Signs which evidently show, That this is
the Time of the Messiah.

V. 4. A wicked and adulterous generation -- Ye would seek no farther Sign, did
not your Wickedness, your Love of the World, which is Spiritual Adultery, blind
your Understanding.

V. 6. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees -- That is, of their False
Doctrine: This is elegantly so called; For it spreads in the Soul or the
Church, as Leaven does in Meal.

V. 7. They reasoned among themselves -- What must we do then for Bread, since
we have taken no Bread with us?

V. 8. Why reason ye -- Why are you troubled about this? Am I not able, if Need
so require, to supply you by a Word?

V. 11. How do ye not understand -- Besides, do you not understand, that I did
not mean Bread, by the Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?

V. 13. And Jesus coming -- There was a large Interval of Time between what has
been related, and what follows. The Passages that follow were but a short Time
before our LORD suffered

V. 14. Jeremiah or one of the prophets -- There was at that Time a current
Tradition among the Jews, That either Jeremiah or some other of the ancient
Prophets would rise again before the Messiah came.

V. 16. Peter -- Who was generally the most forward to speak.

V. 17. Flesh and blood -- That is, Thy own Reason, or any natural Power
whatsoever.

V. 18. On this rock -- Alluding to his Name, which signifies a Rock, namely
the Faith which thou have now professed; I will build my church -- But perhaps
when our LORD uttered these Words, He pointed to Himself, in like Manner as
when He said, Destroy this temple (John ii. 19.) meaning the Temple of his
Body. And it is certain, that as He is spoken of in Scripture, as the only
Foundation of the Church, so this is that which the Apostles and Evangelists
laid in their Preaching. It is in respect of laying this, that the Names of the
twelve Apostles (not of St. Peter only) were equally inscribed on the twelve
Foundations of the City of GOD, Rev. xxi. 14 The gates of bell -- As Gates and
Walls were the Strength of Cities, and as Courts of Judicature were hold in
their Gates, this Phrase properly signifies the Power and Policy of Satan and
his Instruments, Shall not prevail against it -- Not against the Church
Universal, so as to destroy it. And they never did. There has been a small
Remnant in all Ages.

v. 19. I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven -- Indeed not to him
alone for they were equally given to all the Apostles at the same Time, John
xx. 21, 22, 23.) but to him were first given the Keys both of Doctrine and
Discipline. He first after our LORD's Resurrection exercised the Apostleship,
Acts i. 15. And he first by Preaching opened the Kingdom of Heaven, both to the
Jews (Acts ii.) and to the Gentiles (Acts x.)

Under the Terms of binding and loosing are contained all those Acts of
Discipline which Peter and his Brethren performed as Apostles: And undoubtedly
what they thus performed on Earth, GOD confirmed in Heaven.

V. 20. Then charged he his disciples to tell no one that he was the Christ --
Jesus Himself had not said it expressly to his Apostles, but lest them to infer
it from his Doctrine and Miracles. Neither was it proper the Apostles should
say this openly, before that grand Proof of it his Resurrection. If they had,
they who believed them would the more earnestly have sought to take and make
Him a King; and they who did not believe them, would the more vehemently have
rejected and opposed such a Messiah.

V. 21. From that time Jesus began to tell his disciples, that he must Juffer
many things -- Perhaps this Expression, began, always implies his entering on a
set and solemn Discourse. Hitherto He had mainly taught them only one Point,
That he was the Christ. From this Time He taught them another, That Christ must
through Sufferings and Death enter into his Glory. From the elders -- The most
honorable and experienced Men; the chief priests -- Accounted the most
religious; and the scribes -- The most learned Body of Men in the Nation Would
not one have expected, That these should have been the very first to receive
Him? But not many wise, not many noble were called. Favor thyself -- The
Advice of the World, the Flesh and the Devil to every one of our LORD's
Followers.

V. 23. Get thee behind me -- Out of my Sight. It is not improbable, Peter
might step before Him, to stop Him. Satan -- Our LORD is not recorded to have
given so sharp a Reproof to any other of his Apostles, on any Occasion. He saw
it was needful for the Pride of Peter's Heart, puffed up with the Commendation
lately given him. Perhaps the Term Satan, may not barely mean, Thou art my
Enemy, while thou fanciest thyself most my Friend; but also, Thou art acting
the very Part of Satan, both by endeavoring to hinder the Redemption of
Mankind, and by giving me the most deadly Advice, that can ever spring from the
Pit of Hell. Thou savourest not -- Do not relish or desire. We may learn from
hence, 1. That whosoever says to us in such a Case, Favor thyself, is acting
the Part of the Devil: 2. That the proper Answer to such an Adviser is, Get
thee behind me: 3. That otherwise he will be an Offense to us, an Occasion of
our Stumbling, if not Falling: 4 That this Advice always proceeds from the not
relishing the Things of GOD, but the Things of Men. Yea, so far is this Advice,
Favor thyself, from being, fit for a Christian either to give or take, that if
any Man will come after Christ, his very first Step is. To deny or renounce
himself: In the Room of his own Will, to substitute the Will of GOD, as his one
Principle of Action.

V. 24. If any man be willing to come after me -- None is forced, but if any
will be a Christian it must be on these Terms, Let him deny himself and take up
his cross -- A Rule that can never be too much observed: Let him in all Things
deny his own Will, however pleasing, and do the Will of GOD, however painful.

Should we not consider all Crosses, all Things grievous to Flesh and Blood, as
what they really are, as Opportunities of embracing GOD's Will, at the Expense
of our own? And consequently as so many Steps by which we may advance toward
Perfection? We should make a swift Progress in the spiritual Life, if we were
faithful in this Practice. Crosses are so frequent, that whoever makes
Advantage of them, will soon be a great Gainer. Great Crosses are Occasions of
great Improvement: And the little ones, which come daily, and even hourly, make
up in Number, what they want in Weight. We may in these daily and hourly
Crosses, make effectual Oblations of our Will to GOD; which Oblations, so
frequently repeated, will soon mount to a great Sum. Let us remember then (what
can never be sufficiently inculcated) That GOD is the Author of all Events:
That none is so small or inconsiderable, as to escape his Notice and Direction.
Every Event therefore declares to us the Will of GOD, to which thus declared,
we should heartily submit. We should renounce our own to embrace it; we should
approve and choose what his Choice warrants as best for us. Herein should we
exercise ourselves continually; this should be our Practice all the Day long.
We should in Humility accept the little Crosses that are dispensed to us, as
those that best suit our Weakness. Let us bear these little Things, at least
for GOD's Sake, and prefer his Will to our own in Matters of so small
Importance. And his Goodness will accept these mean Oblations; for He depiseth
not the Day of small Things.

V. 25. Whosoever will save his life -- At the Expense of his Conscience:
Whosoever in the very highest Instance, that of Life itself, will not renounce
himself, shall be lost eternally. But can any Man hope, he should be able thus
to renounce himself, if he cannot do it in the smallest Instances? And
whosoever will lose his life, shall find it -- What he loses on Earth, he shall
find in Heaven.

V. 27. For the Son of Man shall come -- For there is no Way to escape the
righteous Judgment of GOD.

V. 28. And as an Emblem of this, there are some here who shall live to see the
Messiab coming to set up his Mediatorial Kingdom, with great Power and Glory,
by the Increase of his Church, and the Destruction of the Temple, City, and
Polity of the Jews.

XVII.
Mark ix. 2. Luke ix. 28.
And after six days, Jesus takes Peter and James and John his brother, and
brings them up into an high mountain apart, it, fell on their face and were
sore afraid. vision to no man, till the Son of Man be risen again from the
dead.

Mark ix. 14. Luke ix. 37.
And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a man, kneeling
down to him, and saying, Chapter xxi. 21. Luke xvii. 6.
And Jesus said to them, Because of your unbelief. For verily I say to you, If
ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Remove
hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible to
you.

Mark ix. 30. Luke ix. 44.
And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of Man is about
to be betrayed into the hands of men;

to him, Then are the sons free.

V. 1. A high mountain -- Probably Mount Tabor.

V. 2. And was transfigured -- Or transformed. The indwelling Deity darted out
its Rays through the Veil of his Flesh: And that with such transcendent
Splendour, that He no longer b^re the Form of a Servant. His Face shone with
divine Majesty, like the Sun in its Strength; and all his Body was so
irradiated by it, that his Clothes could not conceal its Glory, but became
white and glittering as the very Light, with which He covered Himself as with a
Garment.

V. 3. There appeared Moses and Elijah -- Here for the full Confirmation of
their Faith in Jesus, Moses the Giver of the Law, Elijah the most zealous of
all the Prophets, and GOD speaking from Heaven, all bore Witness to him.

V. 4. Let us make three tents -- The Words of rapturous Surprise. He says
three, not six: Because the Apostles desired to be with their Master.

V. 5. Hear ye him -- As superior even to Moses and the Prophets. See Deuteronomy.
xviii. 17.

V. 7. Be not afraid -- And doubtless the same Moment He gave them Courage and
Strength.

V. 9. Tell the vision to no man -- Not to the rest of the Disciples, lest they
should be grieved and discouraged because they were not admitted to the Sight;
nor to any other Persons, lest it should enrage some the more, and his
approaching Sufferings should make others disbelieve it; till the Son of man be
risen again -- Till the Resurrection should make it credible, and confirm their
Testimony about it.

V. 10. Why then say the Scribes, That Elijah must come first -- Before the
Messiah? If no Man is to know of his Coming? Should we not rather tell every
Man, That He is come, and that we have seen Him, witnessing to Thee as the
Messiah?

V. 11. Regulate all things -- In order to the Coming of Christ.

V. 12. Elijah is come already -- And yet when the Jews asked John, Art thou
Elijah? He said, I am not. (John i.) His Meaning was, I am not Elijah the
Tishbite, come again into the World. But he was the Person of whom Malachi
prophesied under that Name.

V. 15. He is lunatic -- This Word might with great Propriety be used, though the
Case was mostly preternatural: as the evil Spirit would undoubtedly take
Advantage of the Influence which the Changes of the Moon have on the Brain and
Nerves.

V. 17. O unbelieving and perverse generation -- Our LORD speaks prin^^pally
this to his Disciples. How long shall I be with you -- Before you steadfastly
believe?

V. 20. Because of your unbelief -- Because in this Particular they had not
Faith. If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed -- That is, the least
Measure of it. But it is certain, the Faith which is here spoken of, does not
always imply saving Faith. Many have had it who thereby cast out Devils, and
yet will at last have their Portion with them. It is only a supernatural
Persuasion given a Man, that GOD will work thus by him at that Hour. Now though I
have all this Faith, so as to remove mountains, yet if I have not the Faith
which works by Love, I am nothing.

To remove Mountains was a proverbial Phrase among the Jews, and is still
retained in their Writings, to express a Thing which is very difficult, and to
Appearance impossible.

V. 21. This kind -- of devils -- goes not out but by prayer and fasting --
What a Testimony is here of the Efficacy of Fasting, when added to fervent
Prayer? Some Kinds of Devils the Apostles had cast out before this, without
Fasting.

V. 24. When they were come to Capernaum -- Where our Lord now dwelt. This was
the Reason why they stayed till he came thither, to ask him for the Tribute.
Does not your master pay tribute -- This was a Tribute or Payment of a peculiar
Kind, being Half a Shekel (that is, about fifteen Pence) which every Master of
a Family used to pay yearly to the Service of the Temple, to buy Salt, and
little Things not otherwise provided for. It seems to have been a voluntary
Thing, which Custom rather than any Law had established.

V. 25. Jesus prevented him -- Just when St. Peter was going to ask him for it.
Of their own sons, or of strangers? -- That is, such as are not of their own
Family.

V. 26. Then are the sons free -- The Sense is, This is paid for the Use of the
House of GOD. But I am the Son of GOD. Therefore I am free from any Obligation
of paying this to my own Father.

V. 27. Yet that we may not offend them -- Even those unjust, unreasonable Men,
who claim what they have no Manner of Right to: Do not contest it with them,
but rather yield to their Demand, than violate Peace or Love. O what would not
one of a loving Spirit do for Peace? Any Thing which is not expressly forbidden
in the Word of GOD. A piece of money -- The original Word is a Stater, which
was in Value Two Shillings and Sixpence: Just the Sum that was wanted. Give
for me and thee -- Peter had a Family of his own: the (...) Apostles were the
Family of Jesus.

How illustrious a Degree of Knowledge and Power did our LORD here discover?
Knowledge, penetrating, into this Animal, though beneath the Waters: and Power,
in directing this very Fish to Peter's Hook, though he himself was at a Distance?
How must this have encouraged both him and his Brethren in a firm Dependence on
divine Providence?

XVIII.
At that time came the disciples to Jesus, saying, Who is greatest in the
kingdom of heaven? Mark ix. 36. Luke x. 47.
And Jesus calling to him a little child, set him in the midst of them, Chapter
xix. 14.
And said, Verily I say to you, except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. Chapter x. 40. Luke
x. 16. John xiii. 20.
And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me. Mark
ix. 42. Luke i. 1.
But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were
drowned in the depth of the sea. Chapter v. 29. Mark ix. 43.
Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot cause thee to offend, cut them off and cast
them from thee; it is good for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather
than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the everlasting fire. it from
thee: it is good for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having
two eyes to be cast into hellfire. you, that in heaven their angels
continually behold the face of my Father who is in heaven. Luke xix. 10.
For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost. Luke xv. 4.
What think ye? If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them go astray, does
he not leave the ninety and nine and go into the mountains and seek that which
was gone astray? sheep, than over the ninety and nine which went not astray.
Luke xvii.(...).
But if thy brother shall sin against thee, go and reprove him, between thee
and him alone: if he will hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. it to the
church; but if he will not hear the church, let him be to thee as the heathen
and the publican. Chapter (...).^i. 19.
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be-bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

with his servants. lord being wroth, delivered him to the tormenters, till he
should pay all that was due to him.

V. 1. Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? -- Which of us shall be
thy Prime Minister? They still dreamed of a temporal Kingdom.

V. 2. And Jesus calling to him a little child -- This is supposed to have been
the great Ignatius, whom Trajan, the wise, the good Emperor Trajan, condemned
to be cast to the wild Beasts at Rome!

V. 3. Except ye be converted -- The first Step toward entering into the
Kingdom of Grace, is to become as little children: Lowly in Heart, knowing
yourselves utterly ignorant and helpless, and hanging wholly on your Father who
is in Heaven, for a Supply of all your Wants. We may farther assert (though it is
doubtful, whether this Text implies so much) Except ye be turned from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan to GOD: Except ye be entirely, inwardly
changed, renewed in the Image of GOD, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Glory. Thus must every Man be converted in this Life, or he can never enter
into Life eternal. Ye shall in no wise enter -- So far from being great in it.

V. 5, 6 And all who are in this Sense little Children, are unspeakably dear to
me. Therefore help them all you can, as if it were myself in Person, and see
that ye offend them not: That is, that ye turn them not out of the right Way,
neither hinder them in it.

V. 7. Woe to the world because of offenses -- That is, unspeakable Misery will
be in the world through them* for it must needs be that offenses come -- Such is
the Nature of Things, and such the Weakness, Folly, and Wickedness of Mankind,
that it cannot be but they will come: but woe to that man -- That is, miserable
is that Man, by whom the offense comes. Offenses are, all Things whereby any
one is turned out of, or hindered in the Way of God.

V. 8, 9 If thy hand, foot, eye, cause thee to offend -- If the most dear
Enjoyment, the most beloved and useful Person, turn thee out of, or hinder thee
in the Way. Is not this an hard Saying? Yes; if thou take Counsel with Flesh
and Blood.

V. 10. See that ye despise not one of these little ones -- As if they were
beneath your Notice. Be careful to receive and not to offend, the very weakest
Believer in Christ: For as inconsiderable as some of these may appear to thee,
the very Angels of GOD have a peculiar Charge over them: Even those of the
highest Order, who continually appear at the Throne of the most High. To be^^^^
the (...) of GOD seems to signify the waiting near his Throne; and to be an
Allusion to the Office of chief Ministers in earthly Courts, who daily converse
with their Princes.

V. 11. Another, and a yet stronger Reason for your not despising them is, That
I myself came into the World to save them.

V. 14. So it is not the will of your Father -- Neither does my Father despise
the least of them. Observe the Gradation. The Angels, the Son, the Father!

v. 15. But how can we avoid giving Offense to some? Or being offended at
others? Especially suppose they are quite in the wrong? Suppose they commit a
known Sin? Our LORD here teaches us how: He says down a sure Method of avoiding
all Offenses. Whosoever closely observes this threefold Rule, will seldom
offend others, and never be offended himself. If any do any thing amiss, of
which thou art an Eye or Ear Witness thus says the LORD, If thy brother -- Any
who is a Member of the same religious Community: Si^ against thee, 1. Go and
reprove him alone -- If it may be, in Person; if that cannot so well be done,
by thy Messenger; or in Writing. Observe. Our LORD gives no Liberty to omit
this: or to exchange it for either of the following Steps. If this do not
succeed. 2. Take with thee one or two more -- Men whom he esteems or loves, who
may then confirm and enforce what thou say; and afterward if need require,
bear Witness of what was spoken. If even this does not succeed, then and not
before, 3. Tell it to the Elders of the Church -- Lay the whole Matter open
before those, who watch over yours and his Soul. If all this avail not, have no
farther Intercourse with him, only such as thou have with Heathens.


Can any Thing be plainer? Christ does here as expresely command all Christians
who so a Brother do Evil, to take this Way, not another, and to take these
Steps, in this Order, as he does to honor their Father and Mother.

But if so, in what Land do the Christians live?

If we proceed from the private Carriage of Man to Man, to Proceedings of a
more public Nature, in what Christian Nation are Church Censures conformed to
this Rule? Is this the Form in which ecclesiastical Judgments appear, in the
Popish, or even the Protestant World? Are these the Methods used even by those
who boast the most loudly of the Authority of Christ to confirm their
Sentences? Let us earnestly pray, that this Dishonor to the Christian Name may
be wiped away, and that common Humanity may not, with such solemn Mockery, be
destroyed in the name of the Lord!

Let him be to thee as the heathen -- To whom thou still owe earnest
Good Will, and all the Offices of Humanity.

V. 18. Whatsoever ye shall hind on earth -- By Excommunication, pronounced in
the Spirit and Power of Christ. Whatsoever ye shall loose -- By Absolution from
that Sentence. In the Primitive Church, Absolution meant no more than a
Discharge from Church Censure. Again I say -- And not only your Intercession
for the Penitent, but all your united Prayers shall be heard. How great then is
the Power of joint Prayer! If two of you -- Suppose a Man and his Wife.

V. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name -- That is, to
worship me. I am in the midst of them -- By my Spirit, to quicken their
Prayers, guide their Counsels, and answer their Petitions.

V. 22. Till seventy times seven -- That i^, as often as there is Occasion. A
certain Number is put for an uncertain.

v. 23. Therefore -- In this respect.

V. 24. One was brought who owed him ten thousand talents -- According to the
usual Computation, if these were Talents of Gold, this would amount to
seventy-two Millions Sterling. If they were Talents of Silver, it must have
been four Millions, four hundred thousand Pounds. Hereby our LORD intimates the
vast Number and Weight of our Offenses against GOD, and our utter Incapacity of
making Him any Satisfaction.

V. 25. As he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold -- Such was the
Power which Creditors anciently had over their insolvent Debtors in several
Countries.

V. 30. Went with him before a Magistrate, and cast him into prison, protesting
he should lie there, till he should pay the whole debt.

V. 34. His lord delivered him to the tormentors -- Imprisonment is a much
severer Punishment in the Eastern Countries than in ours State-Criminals,
especially when condemned to it, are not only confined to a very mean and
scanty Allowance, but are frequently loaded with Clogs or heavy Yokes, so that
they can neither lie nor sit at Ease: And by frequent Scourgings and sometimes
Rackings are brought to an untimely End. Till he should pay all that was due to
him -- That is, without all Hope of Release: For this he could never do.

How observable is this whole Account: as well as the great ^^ference our LORD
draws from it! 1. The Debtor was freely and ally forgiven; 2. He wilfully and
grievously offended; 3. His Pardon was retracted, the whose Debt required, and
the Offender delivered to the Tormentors for ever.
And shall we still say, But when we are (...) freely and fully forgiven, our
Pardon can never be retracted? Verily, verily I say unto you, So like wife will
my heavenly Father do to you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his
brother their trepasses.

XIX.
Mark (...)* 1.
And Jesus, when he had finished these sayings, departed from Galilee, and came
into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan. them, made them male and female from
the beginning? Genesis ii. 24.
For this cause a man shall leave father and mother and cleave to his wife, and
they twain shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no more twain but one flesh.
then did Moses Deuteronomy. xxiv. 1. Matt. v. 31. Mark. x. 2. Luke. xvi* 18.
command to give a writing of divorce, and put her away? his wife be so, it is
not expedient to marry. it, let him receive it.

Mark x. 13. Luke xviii. 15.
Then were brought to him little children, that he might lay his hands on them
and pray: but his disciples rebuked them. C. xviii. 3.
But Jesus said, Suffer the little children to come to me, and forbid them not;
for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

Mark x. 17. Luke xviii. 18.
And behold one came and said to him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do,
that I may have eternal life? There is none good but one, that is God: but if
thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. Ex. xx. 12, -- c.
Thou shall do no murder: thou shall not commit adultery; thou shall not steal;
thou shall not bear false witness; thy father and mother, and thou shall love
thy neighbor as thyself. that saying, went away sorrowful; for he had great
possessions.

it, were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved? them, said to
them, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.

or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land for my name's
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and inherit everlasting life. C. xx. 16.
Mark x. 31. Luke xiii. 30.
But many first will be last, and the last will be first.

V. 1. He departed -- And from that Time, walked no more in Galilee.

V. 2. Multitudes followed him, and he healed them there -- That is,
Wheresoever they followed him.

V. 3. The Pharisees came tempting him -- Trying to make him contradict Mases.
For every cause -- That is, for any Thing which he dislikes in her. This the
Scribes allowed.

V. 4. He said. Have he not read -- So instead of contradicting him, our LORD
confutes them by (...) very Words of Moses. He who made them, made them male
and female from the beginning -- (...) ^east from the Beginning of the Mosaic
Creation. And where do we read of any other? Does it not follow, that GOD's
making Eve was part of his Original Design, and not a Consequence of Adam's
beginning to fall? By making them One Man and One Woman, he condemned Polygamy:
By making them One F^^sh. he condemned Divorce.

V. 5. And said -- By the Mouth of Adam, who uttered the Words.

V. 7. Why did Moses command -- Christ replies, Moses permitted [not commanded]
it, because of the hardness of your hear^^ -- Because neither your Fathers not
you could bear the more excellent Way.

V. 9. And I say to you -- I revoke that Indulgence from this Day, so that from
henceforth, Whosoever, etc.

V. 11. But he said to them -- That is not universally true; it does not hold,
with regard to all Men, but with regard to those only to whom is given this
excellent Gift of GOD. Now this is given to three Sorts of Persons; to some by
Natural Constitution, without their Choice: To others by Violence against their
Choice; and to others by Grace with their Choice: Who steadily withstand their
Natural Inclinations, that they may wait upon God without Distraction.

V. 12. There are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven's sake -- Happy they! Who have abstained from Marriage (though without
condemning or despising it) that they might walk more closely with GOD! He that
is able to receive it, let him receive it -- This gracious Command (for such it
is unquestionably, since to say, Such a Man may live single is saying nothing.
Whoever doubted this?) is not designed for all Men: But only for those few who
are able to receive it. O let these receive it joyfully!

V. 13. That he should lay his hands on them -- This was a Rite which was very
early used, in praying for a Blessing on young Persons. See Genesis xlviii. 14 --
20.

The disciples rebuked them -- That is, them that brought them: Probably
thinking such an Employ beneath the Dignity of their Master.

V. 14. Of such is the kingdom of heaven -- Little children, either in a
Natural or Spiritual Sense, have a Right to enter into my Kingdom.

V. 16. And behold one came -- Many of the Poor had followed him from the
Beginning. One rich Man came at last.

V. 17. Why call thou me good? -- Whom thou supposest to be only a Man.
There is none good -- Supremely, originally, essentially, but God. If thou will
enter into life, keep the Commandments -- From a Principle of loving Faith.
Believe, and thence love and obey. And this undoubtedly is the Way to eternal
Life. Our LORD therefore does not answer ironically, which had been utterly
beneath his Character, but gives a plain, direct, serious Answer to a serious
Question.

V. 20. The young man says, All these have I kept from my childhood -- So he
imagined; and perhaps he had, as to the Letter: But not as to the Spirit, which
our LORD immediately shows.

V. 21. If thou desire to be perfect -- That is, to be a real Christian: Sell
what thou have -- He who reads the Heart, saw his Bosom-Sin was Love of the
World; and knew, He could not be saved from this, but by literally renouncing
it. To him therefore he gave this Particular Direction, which he never designed
for a General Rule. For Him this was necessary to Salvation: To us, it is not
so. To sell all was an absolute Duty to ^i^^. To many of us, it would be an
absolute Sin. The young men went away -- Not being willing to have Salvation,
at so high a Price.

V. 24. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle (a proverbial
expression) than for a rich man to go through the straight Gate: That is, humanly
speaking, it is an absolute Impossibility. Rich Man, Tremble! ^^el this
Impossibility; else thou art lost for ever!

V. 25. His disciples were amazed, saying, Who then can be saved? -- If rich
Men with all their Advantages cannot? Who? A poor 0179 Man: a Peasant: A
Beggar: ten thousand of them; sooner than one that is rich.

V. 26. Jesus looking upon them -- To compose their hurried Spirits. O what a
speaking Look was there? Said to them -- With the utmost Sweetness: With men
this is impossible -- It is observable, He does not retract what he had said;
no^ nor soften it in the least Degree, but rather strengthens it, by
representing the Salvation of a rich Man, as the utmost Effort of Omnipotence.

V. 28. In the renovation -- In the final Renovation: Ye shall sit -- In the
Beginning of the Judgment they shall stand (2 Cor. v. 10.) Then being absolved,
they shall sit with the Judge: (1 Cor. vi. 2.) On twelve thrones -- So our LORD
promised, without expressing any Condition: Yet as absolute as the Words are,
it is certain, there is a Condition implied, as in many Scriptures, where none
is expressed. In consequence of this, these twelve did not sit on those twelve
thrones: For the Throne of Judas another took, so that he never sat thereon.

V. 29. And every one -- In every Age and Country; not you my Apostles only:
That has forsaken houses, or brethren, or wife, or children -- Either by
giving any o^ them up, when they could not be retained with a clear Conscience;
or by willingly refraining from acquiring them: Shall receive an hundred fold
-- In Value, though not is Kind, even in the present World.

V. 30. But many first -- Many of those who were first called, shall be last --
Shall have the lowest Reward; those who came after them being preferred before
them: And yet possibly both the first and the last may be saved, though with
different Degrees of Glory.

XX.
For the kingdom of heaven is like an householder, who went out early in the
morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. laborers, and pay them their
hire, beginning from the last to the first. were hired about the eleventh hour,
they received every one a penny. it, they murmured against the householder,
saying.

C. xix. 30. xxii. 14.
So the last shall be first and the first last: for many are called, but few
chosen.

Mark x. 32. Luke xviii. 31.
And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart in the way,
and said to them, him; and the third day he shall rise again.

Mark x. 35.
Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children with her sons, worshipping
him and desiring a certain thing of him. it, were moved with indignation
against the two brethren. C. xxiii. 11.
It shall not be so among you; but whosoever desires to be great among you,
let him be your minister;

Mark x. 46. Luke xviii. 35.
And as they were going from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.

V. 1. That some of those who were first called may yet be last, our LORD
confirms by the following Parable: Of which the primary Scope is, to show, That
many of the Jews would be rejected, and many of the Gentiles accepted; the
Secondary, That of the Gentiles, many who were first converted, would be last
and lowest in the Kingdom of Glory, and many of those who were last converted,
would be first and highest therein. The kingdom of heaven is like -- That is,
The Manner of GOD's proceeding in his Kingdom, resembles that of an householder.
In the morning -- At Six, called by the Romans and Jews, the First Hour. From
thence reckoning on to the Evening, they called Nine, the Third Hour; Twelve,
the Sixth; Three in the Afternoon, the Ninth; and Five, the Eleventh. To hire
laborers into his vineyard -- All who profess to be Christians are in this
Sense Laborers, and are supposed during their Life, to be working in GOD's
Vineyard.

V. 2. The Roman Penny was about Seven-pence Halfpenny English. This was then
the usual Price of a Day's Labor.

V. 6. About the eleventh hour -- That is, very lace; long after the rest were
called.

V. 8. In the evening -- Of Life; or of the World.

V. 9. Who were hired about the eleventh hour -- Either the Gentiles, who were
called long after the Jews into the Vineyard, the Church of Christ; or those in
every Age, who did not hear, or at least understand the Gospel-Call, till their
Day of Life was drawing to a Period. Some Circumstances of the Parable seem
best to sait the former, some the latter of these Senses.

V. 10. The first supposed they should have received more -- Probably the first
here may mean the Jews, who supposed they should always be preferred before the
Gentiles.

V. 12. Thou have made them equal to us -- So St. Peter expressly, Acts xv. 9.
GOD -- has put no difference between us (Jews) and them (Gentiles) purifying
their hearts by faith. And those who are equally holy here, whenever they were
called, will be equally happy hereafter.

V. 14. It is my will to give to the last called among the Heathens even as to
the first called among the Jews: Yea, and to the late converted Publicans and
Sinners, even as to those who were called long before.

V. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? -- Yea,
doubtless: To give either to Jew or Gentile, a Reward infinitely greater than
he deserves. But can it be inferred from hence, That it is lawful, or possible,
for the merciful Father of Spirits, to "Consign an unborn Soul to Hell!
"Or damn him from his Mother's Womb?"
Is thine eye evil, because I am good? -- Art thou envious, because I am
gracious? Here is an evident Reference to that malignant Aspect, which is
generally the Attendant of a selfish can envious Temper.

V. 16. So the last shall be first, and the first last -- Not only with regard
to the Jews and Gentiles, but in a thousand other Instances. For many are
called -- All who hear the Gospel: but few chosen -- Only those who obey it.

V. 20. Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children -- Considering what
He had been just speaking, was ever any Thing more unseasonable? Perhaps
Zebedee himself was dead, or was not a Follower of Christ.

V. 21. In thy kingdom -- Still they expected a temporal Kingdom.

V. 22. Ye know not what is implied in being advanced in my Kingdom, and
necessarily pre-required thereto. All who share in my Kingdom, must first share
in my Sufferings. Are you able and willing to do this? Both these Expressions,
The Cup, the Baptism, are to be understood of his Sufferings and Death. The
like Expressions are common among the Jews.

V. 23. But to sit on my right hand -- Christ applies to the Glories of Heaven,
what his Disciples were so stupid as to understand of the Glories of Earth. But
he does not deny, That this is his to give. It is his to give in the strictest
Propriety, both as GOD, and as the Son of Man. He only asserts, That He gives
it to none but those for whom it is originally prepared; namely, those who
endure to the End in the Faith that works by Love.

V. 25. Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles lord it over them -- And hence
you imagine, the chief in my Kingdom will do as they: But it will be quite
otherwise.

V. 26. Your minister -- That is, your Servant.

V. 30. Behold two blind men cried out -- St. Mark and St. Luke mention only
one of them, blind Bartimens. He was far the more eminent of the t^^, and as it
seems, spoke for both.

V. 31. The multitude charged them, to hold their peace -- And so they will All
who begin to cry after the Son of David: But let those who feel their Need of
Him, cry the more; otherwise they will come short of a Cure.

XXI.
Mark xi. 1. Luke xix. 29. John xii. 12.
And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and came to Bethpage, at the mount of
Olives, then and bring them to me. Zech. ix. 9.
Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold thy king comes to thee, meek and sitting
on an ass, even a colt the foal of an ass. him thereon: them in the way. is he
that comes: Hosanna in the highest.



Mark xi. 11, 15. Luke xix. 45.
And Jesus went into the temple, and cast out all that sold and bought in the
temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seats of them
that were selling doves; Isa. lvi. 7. Jer. vii. 11.
My house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thieves. Psalm viii. 2.
Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise? Mark xi.
11, 12.
And leaving them, he went out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there.

the fig tree withered away. it marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig tree
withered away? C. xvii. 20.
Verily I say to you, if ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this
miracle of the fig tree, but also if ye say to this mountain, Be thou lifted
up, and be thou cast into the sea: it shall be done.

Mark xi. 27. Luke xx. 1.
And when he came into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the
people came to him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority do thou
these things? and who gave thee this authority? go, Sir: but went not. his
father? They say to him, The first. Jesus says to them, Verily I say to you,
the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of GOD before you. it,
repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. Mark xii.I. Luke xx. 9.
Hear another parable. There was a certain householder, who planted a vineyard,
and hedged it round about, and dug a wine press in it, and built a tower,
and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country. sent his servants to
the husbandmen to receive the fruits of it. him out of the vineyard and slew
him. Psalm cxviii. 22.
The stone which the builders rejected, is become the head of the corner? This
is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Luke xx. 18.
And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it
shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

V. 5. The daughter of Sion -- That is the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: the first
Words of the Passage are cited from. Isa. lxii. 11 the rest from Zech. ix. 9.
The ancient Jewish Doctors were wont to apply these Prophecies to the Messiah
On an ass -- The Prince of Peace did not take an Horse, a warlike Animal: But
he will ride on that by and by, Rev. xix. 11. In the patriarchal Ages,
illustrious Persons thought it no Disgrace to make Use of this Animal: But it
by no Means appears, That this Opinion prevailed or this Custom continued till
the Reign of Tiberius. Was it a mean attitude wherein our LORD then appeared?
Mean even to Contempt? I grant it: I glory in it: It is for the Comfort of my
Soul; for the Honor of his Humility, and for the utter Confusion of all
worldly Pomp and Grandeur.

V. 7. They set him thereon -- That is, on the Clothes.

V. 8. A great multitude spread their garments in the way -- A Custom which was
usual at the Creation of a King, 2 Kings ix. 13.

V. 9. The multitudes cried, saying -- Probably from a divine Impulse; for
certainly most of them understood not the Words they uttered. Hosanna -- (LORD
save us) was a solemn Word in frequent Use among the Jews. The Meaning is We
sing Hosanna to the Son of David. Blessed is He, the Messiah, of the LORD.
Save, Thou that art in the highest Heavens Our LORD restrained all public
Tokens of Honor from the People till now, lest the Envy of his Enemies should
interrupt his Preaching before the Time. But this Reason now ceasing, He
suffered their Acclamations, that they might be a public Testimony against
their Wickedness, who in four or five Days after cried out, Crucify Him,
crucify Him. The Expressions recorded by the other Evangelists are somewhat
different from these: But all of them were undoubtedly used by some or others
of the Multitude.

V. 11. This is Jesus from Nazareth -- What a Stumbling Block was this? If He
was of Nazareth, He could not be the Messiah. But they who earnestly desired to
know the Truth, would not stumble thereat: For upon Inquiry (which such would
not fail to make) they would find, He was not of Nazareth, but Bethlehem.

V* 12. He cast out all that sold and bought -- Doves and Oxen for Sacrifice.
He had cast them out three Years before ( John ii. 14.) bidding them not make
that house an house of merchandise: Upon the Repetition of the Offense, He uses
sharper Words. In the temple -- That is, in the Outer Court of it, where the
Gentiles used to worship. The money changers -- The Exchangers of foreign Money
into current Coin, which those who came from distant Parts might want to offer
for the Service of the Temple.

V. 13. A den of thieves -- A proverbial Expression, for an Harbor of wicked
Men.

V. 20. The desciples seeing it -- As they went by, the next Day.

V. 21. Jesus answering, said, If ye have faith -- Whence we may learn, That
one great End of our LORD in this Miracle, was to confirm and increase their
Faith: Another was, To warn them against Unfruitfulness.

V. 23 When he was come into the temple, the chief priests came -- Who thought
he violated their Right: And the elders of the people -- Probably, Members of
the Sanhedrim, to whom that Title most properly belonged: Which is the more
probable, as they were the Persons under whose Cognizance the late Action of
Christ, in purging the Temple, would naturally fall. These with the Chief
Priests, seem purposely to have appeared in a considerable Company, to give the
more Weight to what they said, and if Need were, to bear an united Testimony
against him. As he was teaching -- Which also they supposed he had no Authority
to do, being neither Priest, nor Levite, nor Scribe. Some of the Priests (though
not as Priests) and all the Scribes were authorized Teachers. By what authority
do thou these things? -- Publicly teach the People? And drive out those who
had our Commission to traffic in the Outer Court?

V. 24. I will ask you one thing -- Who have asked me many: The baptism, that
is, the whole Ministry, of John, was it from heaven, or from men? -- By what
Authority did he act and teach? Did Man or GOD give him that Authority? Was it
not GOD? But if so, the Consequence was clear. For John testified, that Jesus
was the Chist.

V. 25. Why did ye not believe him -- Testifying this.

V. 27. Neither tell I you -- Not again, in express Terms: He had often told
them before, and they would not believe Him.

V. 30. He answered, I go, Sir: but went not -- Just so did the Scribes and
Pharisees: They professed the greatest Readiness and Zeal in the Service of
GOD: But it was bare Profession, contradicted by all their Actions.

V. 32. John came in a way of righteousness -- Walking in it, as well as
teaching it. The publicans and harlots -- The most notorious Sinners were
reformed, though at first they said, I will not. And ye seeing the amazing Change
which was wrought in them, though at first ye said, I go, Sir, repented not
afterward -- Were no more convinced than before. O how is this Scripture
fulfilled at this Day!

V. 33. A certain householder planted a vineyard -- GOD planted the Church in
Canaan; And hedged it round about -- First with the Law, then with his peculiar
Providence: And dug a wine press -- Perhaps it may mean Jerusalem: And built
a tower -- The Temple: And went into a far country -- That is, left the Keepers
of his Vineyard, in some Measure, to behave as they should see good.

V. 34 He sent his servants -- His extraordinary Messengers, the Prophets: to
the husbandmen -- The ordinary Preachers or Ministers among the Jews.

V. 41. They say -- Perhaps some of the Bystanders, not the Chief Priests or
Pharisees; who, as St. Luke relates, said, GOD forbid (Luke xx. 16.)

V. 42. The builders -- The Scribes and Priests whose Office it was to build up
the Church. Is become the head of the corner -- Or the chief Cornerstone: He
is become the Foundation of the Church, on which the whole Building rests, and
its principal Cornerstone, for uniting the Gentiles to it, as the chief
Cornerstone of an House supports and links its two Sides together.

V. 43. Therefore -- Because ye reject this Cornerstone. The kingdom of God --
That is, the Gospel.

V. 44. Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken -- Stumbles at
Christ, shall even then receive much Hurt. He is said to fall on this Stone,
who hears the Gospel, and does not believe. But on whomsoever it shall fall --
In Vengeance, it will utterly destroy him. It will fall on every Unbeliever,
when Christ comes in the Clouds of Heaven.

XXII.
And Jesus answering, spoke to them again in parables, saying, are killed, and
all things are ready: come to the marriage. it, went one to his farm, another
to his merchandise. them shamefully and slew them. it was wroth, and sending
forth his troops, destroyed those murderers and burnt their city. to him,
Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was
speechless. him into the outer darkness: there shall be the weeping and the
gnashing of teeth. Chapter xx. 16.
For many are called but few chosen.

Mark xii. 13. Luke xx. 20.
Then went the Pharisees and consulted together there how to insuare him in his
talk. is this image and superscription? They say to him, Cesar's. it they
marvelled. And they left him and went away.

Mark xii. 18.
The same day came the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, and asked
him, Deuteronomy. xxv. 5.
If a man die having no children, his brother shall marry his wife and raise up
issue to his brother. Exodus iii. 6.
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. He is not
a God of the dead, but of the living. it, were astonished at his doctrine.

Mark xii. 28. Luke x. 25.
But the Pharisees having heard, that he had silenced the Sadducees, were
gathered together. him a question, trying him and saying, is the great
commandment in the law? Deuteronomy. vi. 5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind. Lev. xix. 18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.

Luke xx. 41.
While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, Saying, What
think ye of Christ? Psalm cx.i.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies
thy footstool.

V. 1. Jesus answering, spoke -- That is, spoke with reference to what had just
past.

V. 2. A king, who made a marriage feast for his son -- So did GOD, when He
brought his first-begotten into the World.

V. 3. Them that were invited -- Namely, the Jews.

V. 4. Fatlings -- Fatted Beasts and Fowls.

V. 5. One to his farm another to his merchandise -- One must mind what he has;
another, gain what he wants. How many perish by misusing lawful Things!

V. 7. The king sending forth his troops -- The Roman Armies, employed of GOD
for that Purpose: Destroyed those murderers -- Primarily, the Jews.

V. 9. Go into the highways -- The Word properly signifies, the Byways, or
Turnings of the Road.

V. 10. They gathered all -- By preaching every where.

V. 11. The guests -- The Members of the Visible Church.

V. 12. A wedding garment -- The Righteousness of Christ, first imputed, then
implanted. It may easily be observed, this has no Relation to the LORD's
Supper, but to GOD's Proceeding at the last Day.

V. 14. Many are called; few chosen -- Many hear; few believe. Yea, many are
Members of the Visible, but few of the Invisible Church.

V. 16. The Herodians, were a Set of Men peculiarly attached to Herod, and
consequently zealous for the Interest of the Roman Government, which was the
main Support of the Dignity and Royalty of his Family. Thou regardest not the
person of men -- Thou favourest no Man for his Riches or Greatness.

V. 17. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar? -- If He had said, Yes, the
Pharisees would have accused Him to the People, as a Betrayer of the Liberties
of his Country. If He had said, No, the Harodians would have accused Him to the
Roman Governor.

V. 18. Ye bypocrites -- Pretending a Scruple of Conscience.

V. 20. The tribute-money -- A Roman Coin, stamped with the Head of Caesar,
which was usually paid in Tribute.

V. 21. They say to him, Cesar's -- Plainly acknowledging, by their having
received his Coin, that they were under his Government. And indeed this is a
standing Rule. The current Coin of every Nation shows who is the supreme
Governor of it. Render therefore, ye Pharisees, to Caesar, the things which ye
yourselves acknowledge to be Cesar's: And, ye Herodians, while ye are zealous
for Caesar, see that ye render to GOD the things that are GOD' s.

V. 25. Now there were with us seven brethren -- This Story seems to have been
a Kind of commonplace Objection, which no doubt they brought up on all
Occasions.

V. 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures -- Which plainly assert a
Resurrection. Nor the power of GOD -- Which is well able to effect it. How many
Errors flow from the same Source?

V. 30. They are as the angels -- Incorruptible and immortal. So is the power
of GOD shown in them! So little Need have they of Marriage!

V. 31. Have ye not read -- The Sadducees had a peculiar Value for the Books of
Moses. Out of these therefore our LORD argues with them.

V. 32. I am the GOD of Abraham -- The Argument runs thus: GOD is not the GOD
of the Dead, but of the Living: (For that Expression, Thy GOD, implies both
Benefit from GOD to Man, and Duty from Man to GOD) But He is the GOD of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: Therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are not dead,
but living. Therefore, the Soul does not die with the Body. So indeed the
Sadducees supposed, and it was on this Ground that they denied the Resurrection.

V. 33. At his doctrine -- At the Clearness and Solidity of his Answers.

V. 35. A scribe ashing him a question, trying him -- Not, as it seems, with
any ill Design: but barely to make a farther Trial of that Wisdom, which he had
shown in s^^^ncing the Sadduce^s.

V. 43. How does David then by the spirit -- By Inspiration, Call him Lord? If
he be merely the Son for Deseendent) of David? If he be, as you suppose, a more
Man, the Son of a Man?

V. 44. The Lord said to my Lord: -- This his Dominion, to which David himself
was subject, shows both the heavenly Majesty of the King, and the Nature of his
Kingdom. Sit thou on my right hand: that is, Remain in the highest Authority
and Power.

V. 46. Neither durst any question him any more: -- Not by Way of insnaring or
tempting him.

XXIII.
Then spoke Jesus to the multitudes and to his disciples, saying, they bid you
observe, observe and do; but do not ye after their works; for they say and do
not. (...) ^i. 46.
For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they will not move them with their finger. (...) xii. 38.
But all their works they do, to be seen of men: they make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the fringes of their garments. even Christ. C. xx. 26.
But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant. Luke xiv. 11.
Whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be humbled, and he that shall humble
himself, shall be exalted.

Mark xii. 40. Luke xx. 47.
Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye devour widows houses, and
for a pretense make long prayers; therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation. ye say, it is nothing: but whosoever shall swear by the gift that is
upon it, is bound. is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the
gift? him that sits thereon. that ye are the sons of them who killed the
prophets. Luke xi. 49.
Wherefore behold I send to you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some
of them ye will kill and crucify, and some of them ye will scourge in your
synagogues, and persecute from city to city: between the temple and the altar.
Luke xiii. 34.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets, and stonest them who were
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
a bird gathers her young under her wings; and ye would not! Behold your house
is left unto you desolate. is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

V. 1. Then -- Leaving all Converse with his Adversaries, whom he now lest to
the Hardness of their Hearts.

V. 2. The scribes sit in the chair of Moses: -- That is, read and expound the
Law of Moses, and are their appointed Teachers.

V. 3. All things therefore -- Which they read out of the Law, and insorce
therefrom.

V. 5. Their phylacteries -- The Jews understanding those words literally, It
shall be as a token upon thy hand, and as frontlets between thine eyes (Exodus
xiii. 16.) And thou shall bind these words for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between the eyes (Deuteronomy. vi. 8.) used to wear little
scrolls of Paper or Pare ^^at, bound on their Wrist and Foreheads, on which
several T^^^ of Scripture were writ. These they supposed, as a kind of (...)
^^m, would preserve them from Danger. And hence they seem have been ca^hed
Phylacteries or Preservatives.

The gringes of their garments -- Which GOD had enjoined them to wear, to
remind them of doing all the commandments, Mumb. xv. 38. These, ^s well as
their Phylacteries, the Pharisees affected to wear broader and larger than
e^ther men.

V. 8, 9, 10 The Je^^sh Rabbis were also called Father and Master, by their
several D^s^iples, whom they required, 1. To believe implicitly what they
affirmed, without as^^ing any farther Reason; 2. To obey implicitly what they
enjoin^^, without seeking farther Authority. Our U^^d therefore by forbidding
us either to give or receive the Title of Rabbi, Master, or F^th^, for^^ds us
either to receive any such Reverence, or to pay any such, to any but GOD.


V. 12. Whosoever shall exalt himself shell be humbled, and he that shall
humble himself shall be exalted -- It is (...) s^^val (...), that no one
Sentence of o^ LORD's is so often repcated, as this. I^ ^eeurs, with scarce any
Variation, ^pan^ t^n Times in the Evangelists.

V. 13. Woe to you -- Our LORD pronounced eight Blessings upon the Mount: He
pronounces eight Woes here: Not as Imprecations, but solemn, compassionate
Declarations of the Misery, which these stubborn Sinners were bringing upon
themselves. Ye go not in -- For ye are not poor in Spirit; and ye hinder those
that would be so.

V. 16. Woe to you, ye blind guides -- Before He had styled them Hypocrites,
from their personal Character: Now He gives them another Title, respecting
their Influence upon others. Both these Appellations are severely put together,
in the 23d and 25th Verses: And this Severity rises to the Height, in the 33d
Verse. The gold of the Temple -- The Treasure kept there. He is bound -- To
keep his Oath.

V. 20. He that swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all things
thereon -- Not only by the Gift, but by the holy Fire, and the Sacrifice; and
above all, by that GOD to whom they belong; inasmuch as every Oath by a
Creature, is an implicit Appeal to GOD.

V. 23. Judgment -- That is, Justice: Faith -- The Word here means Fidelity.

V. 24. Ye blind guides, who teach others to do as you do yourselves, to strain
out a gnat -- From the Liquor you are going to drink! and swallow a camel -- It
is strange, that glaring false Print, strain at a Gnat, which quite alters the
Sense, should run through all the Editions of our English Bibles.

V. 25. Full of rapine and intemperance -- The Censure is double (taking
Intemperance in the vulgar Sense.) These miserable Men procured unjustly what
they used intemperately. No wonder Tables so furnished prove a Snare, as many
find by sad Experience. Thus Luxury punishes Fraud, while it feeds Disease with
the Fruits of Injustice. But Intemperance in the full Sense, takes in not only
all Kinds of outward Intemperance, particularly, in Eating and Drinking, but
all intemperate or immoderate Desires, whether of Honor, Gain, or sensual
Pleasure.

V. 29. Ye build the tombs of the prophets -- And that is all; for ye neither
observe their Sayings, nor imitate their Actions.

V. 30. We would not have been partakers -- So ye make fair Professions as did
your Fathers.

V. 31. Wherefore ye testify against yourselves -- By your smooth Words as well
as devilish Actions, that ye are the genuine sons of them who killed the
prophets of their own Times, while they professed the utmost Veneration for
those of past ages.

From the third to the thirtieth Verse is exposed every thing that commonly
passes in the World for Religion, whereby the Pretenders to it keep both
themselves and others from entering into the Kingdom of GOD; from attaining, or
even seeking after those Tempers, in which alone true Christianity consists.
As, 1. Punctuality in attending on public and private Prayer, ver. 4 -- 14.2.
Zeal to make Proselytes to our Opinion or Communion, though they have less of the
Spirit of Religion than before, ver. 15.3. A superstitious Reverence for
consecrated Places or Things, without any for Him to whom they are consecrated,
ver. 16 -- 22.4. A scrupulous Exactness in little Observances, though with the
Neglect of Justice, Mercy, and Faith, ver. 23, 24.5. A nice Cautiousness to
cleanse the outward Behavior, but without any Regard to inward Purity, ver.
25, 26.6. A specious Face of Virtue and Piety, covering the deepest Hypocrisy
and Villainy, ver. 27, 28.7. A professed Veneration for all good Men; except those
among whom they live.

V. 32. Fill ye up -- A Word of Permission, not of Command: As if he had said,
I contend with you no longer: I leave you to yourselves: You have conquered:
Now ye may follow the Devices of your own Hearts. The measure of your Fathers'
-- Wickedness: Ye may now be as wicked as they.

V. 33. Ye serpents -- Our LORD having now lost all Hope of reclaiming these,
speaks so as to affright others from the like Sins.

V. 34. Wherefore -- That it may appear you are the true Children of those
Murderers, and have a Right to have their Iniquities visited on you: Behold I
send -- Is not this speaking as one having Authority? Prophets -- Men with
supernatural Credentials: Wise men -- Such as have both natural Abilities and
Experience: and Scribes -- Men of Learning: But all will not avail.

V. 35. That upon you may come -- The Consequence of which will he, that upon
you will come the Vengeance of all the righteous blood shed on the earth --
Zechariah the son of Barachiah -- Termed Jehoiada, 2. Chr xxiv. 20. where the
Story is related: Ye slew -- Ye make that Murder also of your Fathers your own,
by imitating it: Between the temple -- That is, the Inner Temple, and the altar
-- Which stood in the Outer Court. Our LORD seems to refer to this Instance,
rather than any other, because he was the last of the Prophets on Record that
were slain by the Jews for reproving their Wickedness; and because GOD's
requiring this Blood, as well as that of Abel, is particularly taken Notice of
in Scripture.

V. 38. Behold your house -- The Temple, which is now your House, not GOD's: Is
left unto you -- Our LORD spoke this, as He was going out of it for the last
Time: Desolate -- Forsaken of GOD and his Christ, and sentenced to utter
Destruction.

V. 39. Ye -- Jews in general; Men of Jerusalem in particular: Shall not see me
from this time -- Which includes the short Space till his Death, till, after a
long Interval of Desolation and Misery, ye say, Blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord -- Ye receive me with joyful and thankful Hearts. This
also shall be accomplished in its Season.

XXIV.
Mark xiii. 1, Luke xxi. 5.
And Jesus going out of the temple departed: and his disciples came to him, to
show him the buildings of the temple. privately, saying, Tell us when shall
these things be? And what shall be the sign of thy coming and of the end of the
world? these things must come to pass: but the end is not yet. are the
beginning of sorrows. Matx. x. 17.
Then will they deliver you up to affliction, and will kill you; and ye shall
be hated of all nations for my name's sake. Mart. x. 22. Mark xiii. 13. Luke
xx. 17.
But he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved. Mark xiii. 10.
And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a
testimon, to all nations: and then shall the end come. Mark xiii. 14. Luke xxi.
20. Dan. ix. 27.
When therefore ye see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the
proph^^, standing in the holy place (he that reads, let him understand) Mark
xiii. 21. Luke xvii. 23.
Then if any say to you, Lo here is Christ, or there; believe it not. he is in
the secret chambers, believe it not. Luke xvii. 37.
For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
Mark xiii. 24. Luke xxi. 25.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light; and the stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.

Mark xiii. 28. Luke xxi. 29.
Learn a parable from the fig tree: when its branch is now tender and shoots
forth leaves, ye know that the summer is nigh. even at the doors. shall not
pass aw^^ (...). Luke xvii. 26.
But (...) the days of Noah, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.

shall be grinding in the mill; one is taken, and one is left.

Mark xiii. 33. Luke xii. 35. xxi. 34.
Watch therefore; for ye know not what hour your Lord comes. is that servant,
whom his lord coming shall find so doing. delayeth his coming: him not, and in
an hour that he is not aware of,

V. 2. There shall not be left one stone upon another -- This was most
punctually fulfilled: For after the Temple was burnt, Titus, the Roman General,
ordered the very Foundations of it to be dug up; after which the Ground on
which it stood was ploughed up by T^r^us Rusus.

V. 3. As he sat on the mount of Olives -- Whence they had a full View of the
Temple. When shall these things be? And what shall be the sign of thy coming,
and of the end of the world? -- The Disciples enquire confusedly, 1. Concerning
the Time of the Destruction of the Temple; 2. Concerning the Signs of Christ's
Coming, and of the End of the World, as if they imagined these two were the
same Thing.

Our LORD answers distinctly, concerning, 1. The Destruction of the Temple and
City, with the Signs preceding, ver. 4, etc. 15, etc. 2. His own coming, and
the End of the World, with the Signs thereof, ver. 29-31 3. The Time of the
Destruction of the Temple, ver. 32, etc. 4. The Time of the End of the World,
ver. 36.

V. 4. Take heed that no man deceive you -- The Caution is more particularly
designed for the succeeding Christians, whom the Apostles then represented. The
first Sign of my Coming is, the Rise of false Prophets. But it is highly
probable many of these Things refer to more important Events, which are yet to
come.

V. 5. Many shall come in my name, first, False Christ's, next false-Prophets,
ver. 11: At length both together, ver. 24. And indeed never did so many
Impostors appear in the World, as a few Years before the Destruction of
Jerusalem: Undoubtedly because that was the Time, wherein the Jews in general
expected the Messiah.

V. 6. Wars -- Near: Rumors of wars -- At a Distance. All these things must
come to pass -- As a Foundation for lasting Tranquillity. But the end --
Concerning which ye enquire, is not yet -- So far from it, that this is but the
beginning of sorrows.

V. 9. Then shall they deliver you up to assliction -- As if you were the cause
of all these Evils. And ye shall he hated of all nation -- Even of those who
tolerate all other Sects and Parties: But in no Nation will the Children of the
Devil tolerate the Children of GOD.

V. 10. Then shall many be offended -- So as utterly to make shipwreck of says
and a pure conscience. But hold ye fast Faith (ver. 11.) in spite of false
Prophets: Love, even when Iniquity and Offenses abound (ver. 12.) And Hope,
unto the End (ver. 13.) He than does so, shall be snatched out of the Burning.
The love of many will wax cold -- The Generality of those who love GOD, will
(like the Church at Ephesus, Rev. 2, 4.) Leave their first love.

V. 14. This Gospel shall be preached in all the world -- Not universally; This
is not done yet: But in general, through the several Parts of the World, and not
only in Jude^. And this was done by St. Paut and the other Apostles, before
Jerusalem was destroyed. And then shall the end come -- Of the City and Temple.

Josephus's History of the Jewish war, is the best Commentary on this Chapter.
It is a wonderful Instance of GOD's Providence that he, an Eyewitness, and one
who lived and died a Jew, should (especially in so extraordinary a Manner) be
preserved, to transmit to us a Collection of important Facts, which so exactly
illustrate this glorious Prophecy, in almost every Circumstance

V. 15. When ye see the abomination of desolation -- Daniel's Term is, The
Abomination that makes desolate (C. xi. 31.) that is, The Standards of the
desolating Legions, on which they hear the abominable Images of their Idols:
Standing in the holy place -- Not only the Temple and the Mountain on which it
stood, but the whole City of Jerusalem, and several Furlongs of Land round
about it, were accounted holy. Particularly the Mount on which our LORD now
sat, and on which the Romans afterward planted their Ensigns He that read^th
let him understand -- Whoever reads that Prophecy of Daniel, let him deeply
consider it.

V. 16. Then let them who are in Judea, s^e to the mountains -- So the
Christians did, and were preserved. It is remarkable, that after the Romans
under Cestius Gallas, made their first Advance toward Jerusalem, they suddenly
withdrew again, in a most unexpected and indeed impolitic Manner. This the
Christians took as a Signal to retire, which they did, some to Pella, and
others to Mount Libanus.

V. 17. Let not him that is on the housetop, come down to take any thing out
of his house -- It may be remembered, that their Stairs used to be on the
Outside of their Houses.

V. 19. Woe to them that are with child, and to them that give (...) -- Because
they cannot so readily make their Escape.

V. 20. Pray ye that your slight be not in the winter -- They did so; and their
flight was in the Spring: Neither on the Sabbath -- Being on many Accounts
inconvenient: Besides that many would have scrupled to travel far on that Day.
For the Jews thought it unlawful to walk about two thousand Paces (Two Miles)
on the Sabbath Day.

V. 21. Then shall be great tribulation -- Have not many Things spoken in the
Chapter, as well as in Mark 13. and Luke 21. a farther and much more Extensive
Meaning, than has been yet fulfilled?

V. 22. And unless those days were shortened. -- By the taking of Jerusalem
sooner than could be expected: No flesh, would be saved -- The whole Nation
would be destroyed: But for the cleat's sake -- That is, for the Sake of the
Christians.

V. 24. They would deceive, if possible, the very elect -- But is it not
possible, that GOD should suffer the Body of Christians to be thus deceived.

V. 27. For as the lightning goes forth -- For the next coming of Christ, will
be as quick as Lightning; so that there will not be Time for any such previous
Warning.

V. 28. For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered
together -- Our LORD gives this, as a farther Reason, why they should not
hearken to any pretended Deliverer. As if he had said, Expect not any Deliverer
of the Jewish Nation; for it is devoted to Destruction. It is already before
GOD a dead Carcass, which the Roman Eagles will soon devour.

V. 29. Immediately after the tribulation of those days -- Here our LORD begins
to speak of his last Coming. But He speaks not so much in the Language of Man
as of GOD, with whom a thousand Years are as one Day, one Moment. Many of the
primitive Christians not observing this, thought He would come immediately, in
the common Sense of the Word: A Mistake which St. Paul labors to remove, in
his second Epistle to the Thessalonians The powers of the heavens -- Probably,
the Influences of the heavenly Bodies.

V. 30. Then shall appear the Sign of the Son of man in heaven -- It seems a
little before He Himself descends. The Son, Moon, and Stars being extinguished
(probably, not those of our System only) the sign of the Son of man (perhaps
the Cross) will appear in the Glory of the LORD.

V. 31. They shall gather together his elect -- That is, All that have endured
to the End in the Faith which works by Love.

V. 32. Learn -- parable -- Our LORD having spoken of the Signs preceding the
two grand Events, concerning which the Apostles had enquired, begins here to
speak of the Time of them. And to the Question proposed ver. 3. concerning the
Time of the Destruction of Jerusalem. He answers ver. 34. Concerning the Time
of the End of the World, He answers ver. 36.

V. 34. This generation of Men now living shall not pass, till all those thing
be done -- The Expression implies that great Part of that Generation would be
passed away but not the whole. Just so it was For the City and Temple were
destroyed thirty-nine or forty Years after.

V. 36. But of that day -- The Day of Judgment: Knows no man -- Not while our
LORD was on Earth. Yet it might be afterward revealed to St. John,
consistently with this.

V. 40. One is taken -- Into GOD's immediate Protection; and one is left -- To
share the common Calamities. Our LORD speaks, as having the whole Transaction
present before his Eyes.

V. 41. Two women shall be grinding -- Which was then a common Employment of
Women.

V. 42. Ye know not what hour your Lord comes -- Either to require your Soul
of you, or to avenge Himself of this Nation.

V. 45. Who then is the faithful and wise servant -- Which of you aspires after
this Character? Wise -- Every Moment retaining the clearest Conviction, That
all he now has is only entrusted to him as a Steward: Faithful -- Thinking,
speaking, and acting continually, in a Manner suitable to that Conviction.

V. 48. But if that evil servant -- Now evil, having put away faith and a good
conscience.

V. 51. And shall allot him his portion with the hypocrites -- The worst of
Sinners, as upright and sincere as he was once!

If Ministers are the Persons here primarily intended, there is a peculiar
Propriety in the Expression. For no Hypocrisy can be baser, than to call
ourselves Ministers of Christ, while we are the Slaves of Avarice, Ambition, or
Sensuality. Wherever such are found, may GOD reform them by his Grace, or
disarm them of that Power and Influence, which they continually abuse to his
Dishonor, and to their own aggravated Damnation!

XXV.
were foolish. and slept.

Mark xiii. 34. Luke xix. 12.
For the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country, who
called his own servants, and delivered to them his goods. took his journey. had
received the two, he also gained other two. what is thine. it to him who has
ten talents. Mark xiii. 12.
For to every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but
from him that has not, shall be taken away even what he has.

the throne of his glory. thee? Or thirsty, and gave thee drink? thee in; Or
naked, and clothed thee? thee? it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye
did it to me. into the everlasting fire, which was prepared for the devil and
his angels. it not unto one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

C. xxv. This Chapter contains the last public Discourse, which our LORD
uttered before He was offered up. He had before frequently declared what would
be the Portion of all the Workers of Iniquity. But what will become of those
who do no Harm? Honest, inoffensive, good Sort of People? We have here a clear
and full Answer to this important Question.

V. 1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven -- That is, the Candidates for it, Be
like ten virgins -- The Bride Maids on the Wedding Night, were wont to go to
the House where the Bride was, with burning Lamps or Torches in their Hands, to
wait for the Bridegroom's Coming. When he drew near, they went to meet him with
their Lamps, and to conduct him to the Bride.

V. 3. The foolish took not oil with them -- No more than kept them burning
just for the present. None to supply their future Want, to recruit their Lamp's
Decay. The Lamp is Faith. A Lamp and oil with it, is Faith working by Love.

V. 4. The wise took oil in their vessels -- Love in their Hearts. And they
daily sought a fresh Supply of Spiritual Strength, till their Faith was made
perfect.

V. 5. While the bridegroom delayed -- That is, Before they were ^^lled attend
to him, they all slumbered and slept -- Were easy and quiet, the Wise enjoying
a true, the Foolish a false Peace.

V. 6. At midnight -- In an Hour quite unthought of.

V. 7. They trimmed their lamps -- They examined themselves, and prepared to
meet their GOD.

V. 8. Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out -- Our Faith is dead.
What a Time to discover this! Whether it mean the Time of Death, or of
Judgment. Unto which of the Saints will thou then turn? Who can help thee at
such a Season?

V. 9. But the wise answered, Lest there be not enough for us and you? --
Beginning the Sentence with a beautiful Abr^peness; such as showed their
Surprise at the State of those poor Wretches, who had so long deceived them, as
well as their own Souls. Lest there be not enough -- It is sure there is not;
for no Man has more than Holiness enough for himself. Go ye rather to them that
sell -- Without Money and without Price: That is, to GOD, to Christ. And buy --
If ye can. O no! The Time is past, and returns no more!

V. 13. Watch therefore -- He that watches, has not only a ^^^ning Lamp, but
likewise Oil in his Vessel. And even when he ^^^eth, his Heart waketh. He is
quiet; but not sec^re.

V. 14. Our LORD proceeds by a Parable still plainer (if that can be) to
declare the final Reward of an harmless Man. May GOD give all such, in this
their Day, Ears to hear and Hearts to understand it! The kingdom of heaven --
That is, the King of Heaven, Christ.

V. 15. To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one -- And
who knows whether (all Circumstances considered) there be a greater
Disproportion than this, in the Talents of those who have received the most,
and those who have received the sewest? According to his own ability -- The
Words may be translated more literally, according to his own mighty power. And
immediately took his journey -- To Heaven.

V. 18. He that had received one -- Made his having fewer Talents than others a
Pretense for not improving any. Went and hid his master's money -- Reader, art
thou doing the same? Art thou hiding the Talent GOD has lent thee?

V. 24. I knew that thou art an hard man -- No. Thou know Him not. He never
knew GOD, who thinks Him an hard Master. Reaping where thou have not sown --
That is, requiring more of us, than thou give us Power to perform. So does
every obstinate Sinner, in one Kind or other, lay the Blame of his own Sins on
GOD.

V. 25. And I was afraid -- Lest if I had improved my Talent, I should have had
the more to answer for. So from this Fear, one will not learn to read, another
will not hear Sermons!

V. 26. Thou know -- That I require Impossibilities! This is not an
allowing, but a strong Denial of the Charge.

V. 27. Thou ought therefore -- On that very Account, on thy own
Supposition, to have improved my Talent, as far as was ^^^^^ble.

V. 29. To every one that has shall be given -- So close does GOD keep to this
stated Rule, from the Beginning to the End of the World.

V. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness -- For what?
What had he done? It is true he had not done Good. But neither is he charged
with doing any Harm. Why, for this Reason, for barely doing no Harm, he is
consigned to outer Darkness. He is pronounced a wicked, because he was a
slothful, an unprofitable Servant. So mere Harmlessness, on which many build
their Hope of Salvation, was the Cause of his Damnation! There shall be the
weeping -- Of the careless, thoughtless Sinner; and the gnashing of teeth -- Of
the proud and stubborn.

The same great Truth, That there is no such Thing as negative Goodness, is in
this Chapter shown three Times, 1. In the Parable of the Virgins; 2. In the
still plainer Parable of the Servants, who had received the Talents; and, 3. In
a direct, unparabolical Declaration of the Manner wherein our LORD will proceed
at the last Day.
The several Parts of each of these exactly answer each other, only each rises
above the preceding.

V. 31. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels
with him -- With what Majesty and Grandeur does our LORD here speak of Himself!
Giving us one of the noblest Instances of the true Sublime. Indeed not many
Descriptions in the sacred Writings themselves, seem to equal this. Methinks we
can hardly read it, without imagining ourselves before the awful Tribunal it
describes.

V. 34. Inherit the kingdom -- Purchased by my Blood, for all who have believed
in Me, with the Faith which wrought by Love. Prepared for you -- On purpose for
you. May it not be probably inferred from hence, That Man was not created
merely to fill up the Places of the fallen Angels?

V. 35. I was hungry and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink --
All these Works of outward Mercy suppose Faith and Love, and must needs be
accompanied with Works of spiritual Mercy. But Works of this Kind the Judge
could not mention in the same Manner. He could not say, I was in Error, and ye
recalled me to the Truth; I was in Sin, and ye brought me to Repentance. In
prison -- Prisoners need to be visited above all others, as they are commonly
Solitary and forsaken by the rest of the World.

V. 37. Then shall the Righteous answer -- It cannot be, that either the
Righteous or the Wicked should answer in these very Words. What we learn
herefrom is, That neither of them have the same Estimation of their own Works
as the Judge has.

V. 40. Inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did
it to me -- What Encouragement is here, to assist the Household of Faith? But
let us likewise remember, to do good to all men.

V. 41. Depart into the everlasting fire, which was prepared for the devil and
his angels -- Not originally for you: You are Intruders into everlasting Fire.

V. 44. Then will they answer -- So the Endeavor to justify themselves, will
remain with the Wicked even to that Day!

V. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous
into life everlasting -- Either therefore the Punishment is strictly Eternal,
or the Reward is not. The very same Expression being applied, to the former as
to the latter. The Judge will speak first to the Righteous, in the Audience of
the Worked. The Wicked shall then go away into everlasting Fire, in the View of
the Righteous. Thus the Damned shall see nothing of the everlasting Life. But
the Just will see the Punishment of the Ungodly. It is not only particularly
observable here, 1. That the Punishment lasts as long as the Reward: But 2.
That this Punishment is so far from ceasing at the End of the World, that it
does not begin till th^n.


XXVI.
Mark xiv. 1. Luke xxii. 1.
And when Jesus had finished all these discourses, he said to his disciples,
after two days is the passover, and the Son of Man is betrayed to be crucified.
him.

Mark xiv. 3.
Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, it on his
head, as he sat at table. it, had indignation, saying, To what purpose is this
waste? this also which she has done shall be spoken for a memorial of her.

Mark xiv. 10. Luke xxii. 3.
Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, going to the chief priests,
Said, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him to you;

Mark xiv. 12. Luke xx^^. 7.
On the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to
him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover? And he said,
Go into the city to such a man, and say to him, The Master says, My Time is at
hand:

Mark xiv. 17. Luke xxii. 14.
When the Evening was come, he sat down with the twelve. his hand with me in
the dish, the same will betray me. said, Master, is it I? He says to him, Thou
have said.

it to his disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. it to them, saying,
Drink ye all of it.

Mark xiv. 26. Luke xxii. 39. John xviii. 1.
And when they had sung the Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives. Lech.
xiii 7.
I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered.

Mark xiv. 32. Luke xxii. 40.
Then comes Jesus with them to a place called Gethsemane, and says to the
disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. not as I will, but as thou will. is willing, but the flesh is weak. your rest:

Mark xiv. 43. Luke xxii. 47. John xviii. 2.
And while he was yet speaking, lo Judas one of the twelve came, and with him a
great multitude with swords and clubs from the chief priests and elders of the
people. on Jesus, and took him. Mark xiv. 47. Luke xxii. 49. John xviii. 10.
And behold one of them that were with Jesus, stretching out his hand, drew his
sword, and striking the servant of the high priest, cut off his ear.

Mark xiv. 48. Luke xxii. 52.
In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a
robber, with swords and clubs to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the
temple and ye apprehended me not.

Mark xiv. 53. Luke xxii. 54. John xviii.
And they that had apprehended Jesus, led him away to Caiaphas the high priest,
where the scribes and the elders were assembled. false witness came yet found
they none. At last came two false witnesses, fellow said, I am able to destroy
the temple of God, and to build it in three days. him,

maid saw him, and said to them that were there, This fellow also was with
Jesus of Nazareth. one of them; for thy speech discovers thee.

V. 1. When Jesus had finished all these discourses -- When He had spoken all
He had to speak. Till then He would not enter upon his Pa^lion: Then He would
delay it no longer.

V. 2 After two days is the passoven -- The Manner wherein this was celebrated,
gives much Light to several Circumstances that follow. The Master of the Family
began the Feast with a Cup of Wine, which having solemnly blessed, he divided
among the Guests. ( Luke xxii. 17.) Then the Supper began with the unleavened
Bread and bitter Herbs; which when they had all tasted, one of the young
Persons present (according to Ex^d. xii. 26.) asked the Reason of the
Solemnity. This introduced The Showing forth, or Declaration of it: in Allusion
to which we read of showing forth the Lord's Death (1 Cor. xi. 26.) Then the
Master rose up and took another Cup, before the Lamb was tasted. After Supper,
he took a thin Loaf or Cake, which he broke and divided to all at the Table,
and likewise the Cup, usually called the Cup of Thanksgiving, of which he drank
first, and then all the Guests. It was this Bread and this Cup, which our LORD
consecrated to be a standing Memorial of his Death.

V* 3. The chief Priests and the Scribes and the Elders of the People -- (Heads
of Families) These together constituted the Sanhedrim, or Great Council, which
had the Supreme Authority, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical Affairs.

V. 5. But they said, Not at the feast -- This was the Result of human Wisdom.
But when Judas came, they changed their Purpose. So the Counsel of GOD took
Place, and the true Paschal Lamb was offered up on the great Day of the Paschal
Solemnity.

V. 8. His disciples seeing it, had indignation, saying -- It seems several of
them were angry, and spoke, though none so warmly as Judas Iscariet

V. 11. Ye have the poor always with you -- Such is the wise and gracious
Providence of GOD, that we may have always Opportunities of relieving their
Wants, and so laying up for ourselves Treasures in Heaven.

V. 12. She has done it for my burial -- As it were for the embalming of my
Body* Indeed this was not her Design. But our LORD puts this Construction upon
it, to confirm thereby what he had before said to his Disciples, concerning his
approaching Death.

V. 13. This gospel -- That is, this Part of the Gospel History.

V. 15. They bargained with him for thirty pieces of silver -- (About three
Pounds fifteen Shillings.) The Price of a Slave, Exodus xxi. 32.

V. 17. On the first day of unleavened bread -- Being Thursday the fourteenth
Day of the first Month, Exodus xii. 6.15.

V. 18. The Master says, My time is at hand -- That is, the Time of my
Suffering.

V. 23. He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish -- which it seems Judas
was doing at that very Time. This Dish was a Vessel full of Vinegar, wherein
they dipped their bitter Herbs.

V. 24. The Son of man goes through Sufferings to Glory, as it is written of him
-- Yet this is not Excuse for him that betrayeth Him: miserable will that Man
be. It had been good for that man, if he had not been born -- May not the same
be said of every Man that finally perishes? But who can reconcile this, if it
were true of Judas alone, with the Doctrine of universal Salvation?

V. 25. Thou have said -- That is, it is as thou have said.

V. 26. Jesus to^k the bread -- The Bread, or Cake, which the Master of the
Family used to divide among them, after they had eaten the Passover. This
Custom our LORD now transferred to a nobl^r Use. This Bread is, that is,
signifies or represents my Body, according to the Style of the sacred Writers.
Thus Genesis xl 12. The three b^anches are three days. Thus Gal. iv. 24. St. Paul
speaking of Sarah and Hagar says, These are the two Covenants. Thus in the
Grand Type of our LORD, Exca. xii. 11. GOD says of the Paschal Lamb, This is
the Lord's Passover. Now Christ substituting the Holy Communion for the
Passover, follows the Style of the Old Testament, and uses the same Expressions
the Jews were wont to use in celebrating the Passover.

V. 27. And he took the cup -- Called by the Jews the Cup of Thanksgiving;
which the Master of the Family used likewise to give to each after Supper.

V. 28. This is the sign of my blood, whereby the New Testament or Covenant is
confirmed. Which is shed for many -- As many as spring from Adam

V. 29. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, till I drink it
new with you in my Father's kingdom -- That is, I shall taste no more Wine,
till I drink Wine of quite another Kind in the glorious Kingdom of my Father.
And of this you shall also partake with me.

V. 30. And when thy had sung the hymn -- Which was constantly sung at the
Close of the Passover. It consists of six Psalms from the 113th to the 118th.
The Mount of Olives -- Was over against the Temple, about two Miles from
Jerusalem.

V. 31. All ye will be offended at me -- Something will happen to me, which
will occasion your falling into Sin by forsaking me.

V. 32. But notwithstanding this, after I am risen, I will go before you (as a
Shepherd before his Sheep) into Galilee -- Though you forsake me, I will not for
this forsake you.

V. 34. Before cock-crowing thou will deny me thrice -- That is before Three in
the Morning, the usual Time of Cock-crowing: Although one Cock was heard to crow
once, after Peter's first Denial of his LORD.

V. 35. In like manner also said all the disciples -- But such was the
Tenderness of our LORD, that He would not aggravate their Sin, by making any
Reply.

V. 36. Then comes Jesus to a place called Gethsemane -- That is, the Valley
of Fatness. The Garden probably had its Name from its Soil and Situation, lying
in some little Valley between two of those many Hills, the Range of which
constitutes the Mount of Olives.

V. 37. And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee -- To be
Witnesses of all; he began to be sorrowful and in deep anguish -- Probably from
feeling the Arrows of the Almighty stick fast in his Soul, while GOD laid on
Him the Iniquities of us all. Who can tell what painful and dreadful Sensations
were then impressed on Him by the immediate Hand of GOD? The former Word in the
Original properly signifies, to be penetrated with the most exquisite Sorrow;
the latter, to be quite deprest, and almost overwhelmed with the Load.

V. 39. And going a little farther -- About a stones cast: (Luke xxii. 41.) So
that the Apostles could both see and hear him still. If it be possible, let
this cup pass from me -- And it did pass from Him quickly. When He cried unto
GOD with strong cries and tears, he was heard in that which he feared. GOD did
take away the Terror and Severity of that inward Conflict.

V. 41. The spirit -- Your Spirit: Ye yourselves. The flesh -- Your Nature. How
gentle a Rebuke was this, and how kind an Apology! Especially at a Time when
our LORD's own Mind was so weighed down with Sorrow.

V. 45. Sleep on now, if you can, and take your rest -- For any farther Service
you can be of to me.

V. 50. The heroic Behavior of the blessed Jesus, in the whole Period of his
Sufferings, will be observed by every attentive Eye, and felt by every pious
Heart: Although the sacred Historians, according to their usual but wonderful
Simplicity, make no Encomiums upon it: With what Composure does He go forth to
meet the Traitor? With what Calmness receive that malignant Kiss? With what
Dignity does He deliver Himself into the Hands of his Enemies? Yet plainly
showing his Superiority over them, and even then leading as it were Captivity
captive!

V. 51. And one of them, striking the servant of the high priest -- Probably
the Person that seized Jesus first; Cut off his ear -- Aiming, it seems, to
cleave his Head, but that by a secret Providence interposing he declined the
Blow.

V. 52. All they that take the sword -- Without GOD's giving it them; without
sufficient Authority.

V. 53. He will presently give me more than twelve legions of angels -- The
least of whom, it is probable, could overturn the Earth and d^stroy all the
Inhabitants of it.

V. 57. They led him away to Caiaphas -- From the House of Annos; the
Father-in-law of Caiaphas, to whom they had carried him first.

V. 58. But Peter followed him afar off -- Variously agitated by conflicting
Passions: Love constrained him to follow his Master; Fear made him follow afar
off. And going in sat with the servants -- Unfit Companions, as the Event
showed.

V. 60. Yet found they none -- On whose Evidence they could condemn Him to die.
At last came two false witnesses -- Such they were, although Part of what they
said was true; because our LORD did not speak some of those Words at all; nor
any of them in this Sense.

V. 64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man -- He speaks in the third Person,
modestly, and yet p^^inly; Sitting on the right hand of power -- That is, the
Right Hand of GOD: And coming upon the clouds of heaven -- As He is represented
by Daniel (chapter vii. 13, 14.) Our LORD looked very unlike that Person now! But
nothing could be more awful, more majestic and becoming, than such an
Admonition, in such Circumstances!

V. 65. Then the high priest rent his clothes -- Though the High Priest was
forbidden to rent his Clothes (that is, his upper Garment) in some Cases where
others were allowed to do it, ( Lev xxi. 10.) yet in Case of Blasphemy or any
public Calamity, it was thought allowable. Caiaphas hereby expressed in the
most artful Manner, his Horror at hearing such grievous Blasphemy.

V. 67. Then -- After he had declared, he was the Son of GOD, the Sanhedrim
doubtless ordered him to be carried out, while they were consulting what to do.
And then it was, that the Soldiers who kept him, began these Insults upon him.

V. 72. He denied with an oath -- To which possibly he was not unaccustomed,
before our LORD called him.

V. 73. Surely thou art also one of them; for thy speech discovers thee --
Malchus might have brought a stronger Proof than this. But such is the
overruling Providence of GOD, that the world, in the Height of their Zeal,
commonly catch hold of the very weakest of all Arguments against the Children
of GOD.

V. 74. Then began be to curse and to swear -- Having now quite lost the Reins,
the Government of himself.

XXVII.
Mark xv. 1. Luke xxii. 66. xxiii.i. John xviii. 28.
In the morning, all the chief priests and elders of the People consulted
together against Jesus, to put him to death. him, they led him away and
delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.

is that to us? See thou to it. And having thrown down the pieces of silver in
the temple, he withdrew and going away hanged himself. Zech. xi. 12.
And they took the thir^y pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued,
whom they of the children of Israel did value,



Mark xv. 6. Luke xxiii. 17. John xviii. 39.
Now at every feast the governor was wont to release to the people a prisoner,
whom they would. named Barabbas.

his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this
just man: see ye to it. be on us and on our children. him to be crucified.

Mark xv. 16. John xix. 2.
Then the soldiers of the governor taking Jesus into the common hall, gathered
to him the whole troop. it upon his head, and a cane in his right hand; and
kneeling before him, they mocked him, saying, Hail, king of the Jews. him.

Mark xv. 22. Luke xxiii. 33. John xix. 17.
And coming to a place called Golgotha, that is, the place of a skull, had
tasted thereof, he would not drink. Psalm xxii. 18.
They parted my garments among them, and for my vesture they cast lots. Mark
xv. 27. Luke xxiii. 32.
Then were two robbers crucified with him, one on the right hand and one on the
left.

it in three Days, save thyself. him, said, He saved others: Cannot he save
himself? Mark xv. 32. Luke xxiii. 39.
And even the robbers that were crucified with him, cast the same reproach upon
him. over all the earth, unto the ninth hour. Psalm xxii. 1.
Eli, Eli, lama sabachthanni? That is, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? it, said, He calls Elijah. John xix. 28.
And immediately one of them running and taking a sponge filled it with
vinegar, and putting it on a cane, gave him to drink.

his spirit.

was shaken and the rocks were torn asunder:





Mark xv. 42. Luke xxiii. 50. John xix. 38.
In the evening, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who also
himself was a disciple of Jesus.

day after the day of the preparation the chief priests and Pharisees were
gathered together to Pilate, it as secure as you can.

V. 1. In the morning -- As the Sanhedrim used to meet in one of the Courts of
the Temple, which was never opened in the Night, they were forced to stay till
the Morning, before they could proceed regularly, in the Resolution they had
taken to put him to Death.

V. 2. Having bound him -- They had bound Him when he was first apprehended.
But they did it now afresh, to secure Him from any Danger of an Escape, as He
passed through the Streets of Jerusalem.

V. 3. Then Judas, seeing that he was condemned -- Which probably be thought
Christ would have prevented by a Miracle.

V. 4. They said, What is that to us? -- How easily could they digest innocent
Blood! And yet they had a Conscience! It is not lawful (say they) to put it
into the treasury -- But very lawful to slay the Innocent!

V. 5. In that Part of the Temple, where the Sanhedrim met.

V. 7. They bought with them the potters field -- Well known, it seems, by that
Name. This was a small Price for a Field so near Jerusalem. But the Earth had
probable been dug for Potters Vessels, so that it was now neither fit for
Tillage, nor Pasture, and consequently of small Value. Foreigners -- Heathens
especially, of whom there were then great Numbers in Jerusalem.

V. 9. Then was fulfilled -- What was figuratively represented of old, was now
really accomplished. What was spoken by the prophet -- The Word Jeremy, which
was added to the Text in latter Copies, and thence received into many
Translations, is evidently a Mistake: For he who spoke what St. Matthew here
cites (or rather paraphrases) was not Jeremy, but Zechariah.

V. 10. As the Lord commanded me -- To write, to record.

V. 11. Art thou the king of the Jews? JESUS before Caiaphas avows Himself to
be the Christ, before Pilate to be a King; clearly showing thereby, that his
answering no more, was not owing to any Fear.

V. 15. At every feast -- Every Year, at the Feast of the Passover.

V. 18. He knew that for envy they had delivered him -- As well as from Malice
and Revenge: They envied Him, because the People magnified Him.

V. 22. They all say, Let him be crucify? -- The Punishment which Barabbas had
deserved: And this probably made them think of it. But in their Malice they
forgot with how dangerous a Precedent they furnished the Roman Governor. And
indeed within the Compass of a few Years, it turned dreadfully upon themselves.

V. 24. Then Pilate took water and washed his hands -- This was a Custom
frequently used, among the Heathens as well among the Jews, in Token of
Innocence.

V. 25. His blood be on us and our children -- As this Imprecation was
dreadfully answered in the Ruin so quickly brought on the Jewish Nation and the
Calamities which have ever since pursued that wretched People, so it was
peculiarly fulfilled by Titus the Roman General, on the Jews whom he took
during the Siege of Jerusalem. So many, after having been scourged in a
terrible Manner, were crucified all round the City, that in a while there was
not Room near the Walls for the Crosses to stand by each other. Probably this
befell some of those who now joined in this Cry, as it certainly did many of
their Children: The very Finger of GOD thus pointing out their Crime in
crucifying his Son.

V. 26. He delivered him to be crucified -- The Person crucified was nailed to
the Cross as it lay on the Ground, through each Hand extended to the utmost
Stretch, and through both the Feet together. Then the Cross was raised up, and
the Foot of it thrust with a violent Shock into an Hole in the Ground prepared
for it. This Shock disjointed the Body, whose whole Weight hung upon the Nails,
till the Person expired through mere Dint of Pain. This kind of Death was used
only by the Romans, and by them inflicted only on Slaves and the vilest
Criminals.

V. 27. The whole troop -- Or Cohort. This was a Body of Foot, commanded by the
Governor, which was appointed to prevent Disorders and Tumults, especially on
solemn Occasions.

V. 28. They put on him a scarlet role -- Such as Kings and Generals wore;
probably an old tattered one.

V. 32. Him they compelled to bear his cross -- He bore it Himself, till he
sunk under it. John 19.17.

V. 33. A place called Golgotha, that is, the place of a skull -- Golgotha in
Sirriac, signisies a Skull or Head, it was probably called so from this Time;
being an Eminence upon Mount Calvary, not far from the King's Gardens.

V. 34. They gave him vinegar mingled with gall -- Out of Derision: Which,
however nauseous, He received and tasted of. St. Mark mentions also a different
Mixture which was given Him, Wine mingled with myrrh: Such as it was customary
to give to dying Criminals, to make them less sensible of their Sufferings: But
this our LORD refused to taste, determining to bear the full Force of his Pains.

V. 35. They parted his Garments -- This was the Custom of the Romans. The
Soldiers performed the Office of Executioners, and divided among them the
Spoils of the Criminals. My vesture -- That is, my inner Garment.

V. 45. From the sixth hour, there was darkness over all the earth unto the
ninth hour -- Insomuch, that even an Heathen Philosopher seeing it, and knowing
it could not be a natural Eclipse, because it was at the Time of the Full Moon,
and continued three Hours together, cried o^^, Either the GOD of Nature
suffers, or the Frame of the World is dissolved.

By this Darkness GOD testifies his Abhorrence of the Wickedness which was
then committing. It likewise intimated Christ's fore Conflicts with the Divine
Justice, and with all the Powers of Darkness.

V. 46. About the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice -- Our LORD's great
Agony probably continued these three whole Hours, at the Conclusion of which He
thus cried out, while He suffered from GOD Himself what was unutterable. My
God, my God, why bast thou forsaken me? -- Our LORD hereby at once expresses
his Trust in GOD, and a most distressing Sense of his letting loose the Powers
of Darkness upon Him, withdrawing the comfortable Discoveries of his Presence,
and filling his Soul with a terrible Sense of the Wrath due to the Sins which
He was bearing.

V. 48. One taking a sponge, filled it with vinegar -- Vinegar and Water was
the usual Drink of the Roman Soldiers. It does not appear, that this was given
Him in Derision, but rather with a friendly Design, that He might not die
before Elijah came.

V. 50. After he had cried with a loud voice -- To show that his Life was still
whole in him. He dismissed his spirit -- So the Original Expression may be
literally translated: An Expression admirably suited to our LORD's Words, John
x. 18. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of myself. He died by a
voluntary Act of his own, and in a Way peculiar to Himself. He alone of all Men
that ever were, could have continued alive even in the greatest Tortures, as
long as He pleased, or have retired from the Body whenever He had thought sit.
And how does it illustrate that Love which He manifested in his Death? inasmuch
as He did not use his Power to quit his Body, as soon as it was fastened to the
Cross, leaving only an insensible Corpse, to the Cruelty of his Murderers: But
continued his Abode in it, with a steady Resolution, as long as it was proper.
He then retired from it, with a Majesty and Dignity, never known or to be known
in any other Death: Dying if one may so express it, like the Prince of Life.

V. 51. Immediately upon his Death, while the Sun was still darkened, the veil
of the temple, which separated the Holy of Holies from the Court of the
Priests, though made of the richest and strongest Tapestry, was rent in two from
the top to the bottom: So that while the Priest was ministering at the Golden
Altar (it being the Time of the Sacrifice) the Sacred Oracle, by an invisible
Power, was laid open to full View: GOD thereby signifying the speedy Removal of
the Veil of the Jewish Ceremonies, the casting down the Partition Wall. so that
the Jews and Gentiles were now admitted to equal Privileges, and the opening a
Way through the Veil of his Flesh for all Believers into the most Holy Place. And
the earth was shaken -- There was a general Earthquake through the whole Globe,
though chiefly near Jerusilem: GOD testifying thereby his Wrath against the
Jewish Nation, for the horrid Impiety they were committing.

V. 52. Some of the tombs were shattered and laid open by the Earthquake, and
while they continued unclosed (and they must have stood open all the Sabbath,
seeing the Law would not allow any Attempt to close them) many bodies of holy
men were raised (perhaps Simeon, Zacharias, John the Baptist, and others who
had believed in Christ, and were known to many in Jerusalem) And coming out of
the tombs after his resurrection, went into the holy city (Jerusalem) and
appeared to many -- Who had probably known them before: GOD hereby signifying,
that Christ had conquered Death, and would raise all his Saints in due Season.

V. 54. The Centurion -- The Officer who commanded the Guard: and they that
were with him feared, saying, Truly this was the Son of God -- Referring to the
Words of the Chief Priests and Scribes, ver. 43. He said, I am the Son of God.

V. 56. James -- The less: He was so called, to distinguish him from the other
James, the Brother of John; probably because he was less in Stature.

V. 57. When the evening was come -- That is, after Three o'clock; the Time
from three to six they termed the Evening.

V. 62. On the morrow, the day that followed the day of the preparation -- The
Day of Preparation was the Day before the Sabbath, whereon they were to prepare
for the Celebration of it. The next Day then was the Sabbath according to the
Jews. But the Evangelist seems to express it by this Circumlocution, to show
the Jewest Sabbath was then abolished.

V. 63. That impostor said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will
rise again -- We do not find, that He had ever said this to them, unless when
he spoke of the temple of his holy, (John ii. 19.21.) And if they here refer to
what He then said, how perverse and iniquitous was their Construction on these
Words, when He was on his Trial before the Council? C. xxvi. 61. Then they
seemed not to understand them!

V. 65. Ye have a guard -- Of your own, in the Tower of Antonia, which was
stationed there, for the Service of the Temple.

V. 66. They went and secured the sepulcher, sealing the stone, and setting a
guard -- They set Pilate's Signet, or the public Seal of the Sanhedrim upon a
Fastening which they had put on the Stone. And all this uncommon Caution was
overruled by the Providence of GOD, to give the strongest Proofs of Christ's
ensuing Resurrection; since there could be no Room for the least Suspicion of
Deceit, when it should be found, that his Body was raised out of a new Tomb,
where there was no other Corpse, and this Tomb hewn out of a Rock, the Mouth of
which was secured by a great Stone, under a Seal, and a Guard of Soldiers.

XXVIII.
Mark xvi. 1. Luke xxiv. 1. John xx. 1.
Now after the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week,
came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, to see the sepulcher. men.

things that had been done.

Mark xvi. 15.
Go ye and disciple all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

V. 2. An angel of the Lord had rolled away the stone and sat upon it -- St.
Luke and St. John speak of two Angels that appeared: But it seems as if only
one of them had appeared sitting on the Stone without the Sepulcher, and then
going into it, was seen with another Angel, sitting, one where the Head, the
other where the Feet of the Body had lain.

V. 6. Come, see the place where the Lord lay -- Probably in speaking, he rose
up, and going before the Women into the Sepulcher, said, Come, see the Place.
This clearly reconciles what St. John relates (xx. 12.) this being one of the
two Angels there mentioned.

V. 7. There shall ye see him -- In his solemn Appearance to them all together.
But their gracious LORD would not be absent so long; He appeared to them
several Times before then. Lo, I have told you -- A solemn Confirmation of what
He had said.

V. 9. Hail -- The Word in its primary Sense means, "Rejoice:" In its secondary
and more usual Meaning, "Happiness attend you."

V. 10. Go tell my brethren -- I still own them as such, though they so lately
disowned and forsook Me.

V. 13. Say. His disciples came by night, and stole him while we slept -- Is it
possible, that any Man of Sense should digest this poor, shallow Inconsistency?
If ye were awake, why did you let the Disciples steal him? If asleep, how do
you know they did?

V. 16. To the mountain where Jesus had appointed them -- This was probably
Mount Taber, where (it is commonly supposed) He had been before transfigured.
It seems to have been here also, that He appeared to above five hundred
Brethren at once.

V. 18. All power is given to me -- Even as Man. As GOD, He had all Power from
Eternity.

V. 19. Disciple all nations -- Make them my Disciples. This includes the whole
Design of Christ's Commission. Baptizing and Teaching are the two great
Branches of that General Design. And these were to be determined by the
Circumstances of Things: which made it necessary in baptizing Adult Jews or
Heathens, to teach them before they were baptized; in discipling their
Children, to baptize them before they were taught; as the Jewish Children in
all Ages, were first circumcised, and after taught to do all GOD had commanded
them.

NOTES ON THE Gospel according to St. MARK.
THIS CONTAINS,
I. THE Beginning of the Gospel: a. John prepares the Way, C. i. 1 -- 8 b.
Baptizes Jesus, who is proclaimed the Son of GOD, 9 -- 11 c. Tempted of Satan,
served by Angels, 12 -- 13
II. The Gospel itself: A. In Galilee; where we may observe three Periods: a.
After John was cast into Prison: In general: 1. The Place and Matter of his
Preaching, 14 -- 15 2. The Calling of several of the Apostles, 16 -- 20
In particular: 1. Actions not censured by his Adversaries: 1. He teaches with
Authority, 21 -- 22 2. Cures the Demoniac, 23 -- 28 3. Heals many Sick, 29 --
34 4. Prays, 35 5. Teaches every where, 36 -- 39 6. Cleanses the Leper, 40 -- 45
2. Actions censured by them: Here occur, 1. The Paralytic forgiven and healed,
C. ii. 1 -- 12 2. The Call of Levi, and eating with Publicans and Sinners, 13
-- 17 3. The Question concerning Fasting answered, 18 -- 22 4. The Ears of Corn
plucked, 23 -- 28 5. The withered Hand restored; Snares laid, C. iii. 1 -- 6
3. Our LORD's Retirement: 7 -- 12 1. At the Sea, 2. In the Mountain, where the
Apostles are called, 13 -- 19 3. In the House, where after refuting the
Blasphemy of the Pharisees, He shows who are his Mother and his Brethren, 20 --
35 4. In the Ship; various Parables, C. iv. 1 -- 34 5. On the Sea, and beyond
it, 35 -- 41 C. v. 1 -- 20 6. On this Side the Sea: Again: Jairus, and the
Woman with the Flux of Blood, 21 -- 43 7. At Nazareth: His Countrymen offended,
C. vi. 1 -- 6 8. The Apostles sent forth, 7 -- 13


b. After John was put to Death: 1. Herod's hearing of Jesus, and Judgment of
Him. 14 -- 29 2. Christ's retiring with his Apostles, now returned, 30 -- 32 3.
The Earnestness of the People; Christ's Compassion; five thousand fed, 33 -- 44
4. His walking on the Sea, 45 -- 52 5. He heals many in the Land of Gennesaret
53 -- 56 6. And teaches what defiles a Man; C. vii. 1 -- 23 7. A Devil cast out
in the Coasts of Tire and Sidon 24 -- 30 8. At the Sea of Galilee, the Deaf and
Dumb healed; four thousand fed, 31 -- 37 C. viii. 1 -- 9 9. He comes into the
Parts of Dalmanutha, and answers concerning the Sign from Heaven, 10 -- 13 10.
In the Ship, He warns them of evil Leaven, 14 -- 21 11. At Bethsaida, heals the
Sick, 22 -- 26
c. After he was acknowledged to be the Son of GOD: 1. Peter confessing Him, He
enjoins his Disciples Silence; foretells his Passion; reproves Peter; exhorts to
follow Him, 27 C. ix. 1 2. Is transfigured; casts out a Devil; foretells his
Passion, 2 -- 32 3. Reproves and instructs his Disciples, 33 -- 50

B. In Judea: a. In the Borders, C. x. 1 1. He treats of Divorce, 2 -- 12 2. Of
little Children, 13 -- 16 3. Of entering into Life, and of the Danger of
Riches, 17 -- 31
b. In his Way to the City, 1. He foretells his Passion a third Time, 32 -- 34
2. Answers James and John, and instructs them all, 35 -- 45 3. At Jericho,
gives Sight to Bartimeus, 46 -- 52 4. At Jerusalem, C. xi. 1
a. His Royal Entry, 2 -- 11 b. The Day after, the Fig Tree cursed, 12 -- 14
the Temple purged, 15 -- 19
c. The Day after that, 1. Near the Fig Tree, He shows the Power of Faith, 20
-- 26 2. In the Temple, 1. His Authority vindicated, 27 -- 33 2. The Parable of
the wicked Husbandmen, C. xii. 1 -- 12 3. Of paying Tribute to Caesar, 13 -- 17
4. Of the Resurrection, 18 -- 27 5. Of the great Commandment, 28 -- 34 6. Of
David's Lord, 35 -- 37 7. He warns the People of the Scribes, 38 -- 40 8.
Commends the poor Widow, 41 -- 44
3. On Mount Oliver, He foretells the Destruction of the City and Temple, and
the End of the World, C. xiii. 1 -- 37
d. Two Days before the Passover: His Enemies bargain with Judas, C. xiv. 1 --
11 e. On the first Day of unleavened Bread: 1. The Passover prepared, 12 -- 16
2. The LORD's Supper instituted, 17 -- 25 3. After the Hymn, the Offense of the
Disciples, and Peter's Denial foretold, 26 -- 31 4. In Gethsemane, Jesus prays;
wakes his Disciples, 32 -- 42 Is betrayed; taken; forsook of all, 43 -- 52
5. In the High-priest's Palace, He is condemned to Death, 53 -- 65 Denied by
Peter, 66 -- 72

f. Friday, What was done 1. In Pilate's Palace, C. xv. 1 -- 20 2. In the Way,
21 3. At Golgotha, 22
1. The Wine and Myrrh offered, 23 2. The Crucifixion; his Garments parted, 24,
25 3. The Title, 26 4. The two Malefactors, 27, 28 5. Revilings, 29 -- 32 6.
The Darkness; the Cry of Jesus; the Scoff; the Vinegar; his Death; the Veil
rent, 33 -- 38 7. The Saying of the Centurion; the Women looking on, 39 -- 41
4. In the Evening, the Burial, 42 -- 47
g. Sunday, Our LORD's Resurrection declared 1. By an Angel, C. xvi. 1 -- 8 2.
By Himself, To Mary Magdalene, 9 -- 11 To two going into the Country, 12, 13 To
the Eleven sitting at Meat, 14



III. The Gospel 1. Committed by Christ to his Apostles, after his
Resurrection, and 15 -- 18 2. Confirmed after his Ascension, 19 -- 20




St. MARK.
I.
THE Mat. iii. 1. Luke iii. 1.
beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God: Mal. iii. 1.
Behold I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before
thee. Isaiah xl. 3.
The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight. Mat. iii. 13. Luke iii. 21.
And in those days, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by
John at Jordan. Mat. iv. 1. Luke iv. 1.
And immediately the Spirit thrusts him out into the wilderness. tempted by
Satan, and was with the wild beasts; and the Angels served him.

Mat. iv. 12.
Now after John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the
gospel of the kingdom of God, Mat. iv. 18. Luke v.i.
And walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother,
casting a net into the sea (for they were fishermen) the son of Zebedee and
John his brother, who were also in the vessel mending their nets:

Luke iv. 31.
And they go into Capernzum. And straightway on the sabbath, he went into the
synagogue and taught. with a loud noise, came out of him. is this? For with
authority he commands even the unclean spirits and they obey him.

Mat. viii. 14. Luke iv. 38.
And coming out of the synagogue, they entered forthwith into the house of
Simon and Andrew, with James and John.

Luke iv. 42.
And in the morning, rising a great while before day, he went out and departed
into a desert place, and prayed there.

Mat. viii. 2. Luke v. 12.
And there came to him a leper beseeching him and kneeling down to him and
saying to him, If thou will, thou can make me clean. his hand, touched him,
and says to him, I will; be thou clean. it much and blazed abroad the matter,
so he could no more openly enter into the city; but he was without in desert
places: and they came to him from every quarter.

V. 1. The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ -- The Evangelist speaks
with strict Propriety: For the Beginning of the Gospel is in the Account of
John the Baptist, contained in the first Paragraph; the Gospel itself, in the
rest of the Book.

V. 4. Preaching the baptism of repentance -- That is, preaching Repentance,
and baptizing as a Sign and Means of it.

V. 7. The latchet of whose s;hoes I am not worthy to unloose -- That is, to do
Him the very meanest Service.

V. 12. And immediately the Spirit thrusts him out into the wilderness -- So
in all the Children of GOD, extraordinary Manifestations of his Favor, are
wont to be followed by extraordinary Temptations.

V. 13. And he was there forty days, tempted by Satan -- Invisibly. After this
followed the Temptation by him in a visible Shape, related by St. Matthew. And
he was with the wild beasts -- Though they had no Power to hurt Him. St. Mark not
only gives us a Compendium of St. Matthew's Gospel, but likewise several
valuable Particulars, which the other Evangelists have omitted.

V. 15. The time is fulfilled -- the time of my Kingdom, foretold by Daniel,
expected by you, is fully come.

V. 18. Straightway leaving their nets, they followed him -- From this Time
they forsook their Employ, and constantly attended Him. Happy they who follow
Christ at the first Call!

V. 26. A loud noise -- For he was forbidden to speak. Christ would neither
suffer those evil Spirits to speak in Opposition, nor yet in Favor of Him. He
needed not their Testimony, nor would encourage it, lest any should infer, that
he acted in Concert with them.

V. 32. When the sun was set -- And consequently the Sabbath was ended, which
they reckoned from Sunset to Sunset.

V. 33. And the whole city was gathered together at the door -- O what a fair
Prospect was here! Who could then have imagined that all these Blossoms would
die away without Fruit?

V. 34. He suffered not the devils to say, that they know him -- That is,
according to Dr. Mead's Hypothesis (That the Scriptural Demoniacs were only
diseased Persons) He suffered not the Diseases (...) say, that they knew him!

V. 35. Rising a great while before day -- So did he labor for us, both Day
and Night.

V. 44. See thou say nothing to any man -- But our blessed LORD gives no such
Charge to (...). If He has made us clean from our Leprosy of Sin, we are not
commanded to conceal it. On the contrary, it is our Duty to publish it abroad,
both for the Honor of our Benefactor, and that others who are sick of Sin may
be encouraged to ask and hope for the same Benefit. But go, show thyself to the
priest, and offer for thy cleansing what Moses commanded, for a testimony to
them -- The Priests seeing Him, pronouncing him clean ( Lev. xiii. 17, 23 28,
37.) and accordingly allowing him to offer as Moses commanded ( Lev. xiv. 2,
7.) was such a Proof against them, that they durst never say, The Leper was not
cleansed; which out of Envy or Malice against our Savior, they might have been
ready to say, upon his presenting Himself to be viewed, according to the Law,
if by the cleansed Person's talking much about his Cure, the Account of it had
reached their Ears, before He came in Person. This is one great reason why our
LORD commanded this Man to say nothing.

V. 45. So that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city -- It was also
to prevent this Inconvenience, that our LORD had enjoined him Silence.

II.
And again he entered into Capernaum after some days; and it was heard that he
was in the House. that there was no room for them, no, not even about the door.
Mat. ix. 2. Luke v. 18.
And they came to him, bringing a paralytic, borne of four. it up, they let
down the couch whereon the paralytic lay. man thus speak blasphemies? Thy sins
are forgiven thee! Or to say, Arise, and take up thy couch and walk?

Mat. ix. 9. Luke v. 27.
And passing by, he saw Levi, the son of Alpheus, sitting at the receipt of
custom, and says to him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him. it says to
them, They that are whole need not a physician, but they that are sick: I came
not to call the righteous, but sinners. Mat. ix. 14. Luke v. 33.
Now the disciples of John and the Pharisees used to fast: and they come and
say to him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy
disciples fast not?

Mat. xii 1. Luke vi. 1.
And he went through the corn fields on the sabbath day: and his disciples as
they went, plucked the ears of corn. 1 Samuel xxi. 6.
How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and
ate the shewbread, which is not lawful for any but the priests to eat, and
gave also to them who were with him?

V. 1. And again after having been in desert Places for some Time, He returned
privately to the City. In the house -- In Peter's House.

V. 2. And immediately many were gathered together -- Hitherto continued the
general Impression on their Hearts. Hitherto, even at Capernaum, all who heard
received the Word with Joy.

V. 4. They uncovered the roof -- Or, took up the Covering, the Lattice or
Trap-door, which was on all their Houses (being flat-roofed.) And finding it
not wide enough, broke the passage wider, to let down the Couch.

V. 6. But certain of the Scribes -- See whence the first Offense comes! As
yet not one of the plain, unlettered People were offended. They all rejoiced in
the Light, till these Men of Learning came, to put Darkness for Light, and
Light for Darkness. Woe to all such blind Guides! Good had it been for these if
they had never been born. O GOD, let me never offend one of thy simple ones!
Sooner let my tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth!

V. 12. They were all amazed -- Even the Scribes themselves for a Time.

V. 13. All the multitude came to him -- Namely, By the seaside. And he as
readily taught them there, as if they had been in a Synagogue.

V. 15. Many publicans and notorious sinners sat with Jesus -- Some of them
doubtless invited by Matthew, moved with Compassion for his old Companions in
Sin. But the next Words, For they were many and they followed him, seem to
imply, that the greater Part, encouraged by his gracious Words and the
Tenderness of his Behavior, and impatient to hear more, stayed for no
Invitation, but pressed in after Him, and kept as close to Him as they could.

V. 16. And the Scribes and the Pharisees said -- So now the wise Men being
joined by the Saints of the World, went a little farther in raising, Prejudices
against our LORD. In his Answer, He uses as yet no Harshness, but only calm,
dispassionate Reasoning.

V. 17 I come not to call the righteous -- Therefore if these were righteous, I
should not call them. But now, they are the very Persons I came to save.

V. 26. In the days of Abiathar the high priest -- Abimelech, the Father of
Abi^thar, was High Priest then; Ab^ather himself, not till some Time after.
This Phrase therefore only means, In the Time of Abiathar, who was afterward
the High Priest.

V. 27. The sabbath was made for man -- And therefore must give way to Man's
Necessity.

V. 28. Moreover the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath -- Being the
supreme Lawgiver, He has Power to dispense with his own Laws: And with this in
particular.

III.
Mat. xii. 9. Luke vi. 6.
And he entered again into the synagogue: and there was a man there who had a
withered hand. hearts, he says to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he
stretched it forth: and his hand was restored.

Luke vi. 12.
And he goes up into the mountain, and calls to him whom he would, and they
came to him. Mat. x. 2. Luke vi. 13. Acts i. 13.
And he ordained twelve, that they might be with him, and that he might he
surnamed Peter: son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James (and he surnamed
them Boanerges, that is, sons of thunder) son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and
Simon the Canaanite,

of it, came out to lay hold on him; for they said He is beside himself. Mat.
xii. 24. Luke xi. 15.
But the scribes who had come down from Jerusalem said, He has Beelzebub, and
by the prince of the devils casts he out devils. Mat. xii. 31. Luke xii. 10.
Verily I say to you, All sins shall be forgiven the sons of men and
blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme. cause they said, He has an
unclean spirit. Mat. xii. 46. Luke viii. 19.
Then come his brethren and his mother, and standing without, sent to him,
calling him.

V. 1. He entered again into the synagogue -- At Capernaum on the same Day.

V. 2. And they -- The Scribes and Pharisees, watched him, that they might
accuse him -- Pride, Anger, and Shame, after being so often put to Silence,
began now to ripen into Malice.

V. 4. Is it lawful to save life, or to kill? -- Which He knew they were
seeking Occasion to do. But they held their peace -- Being confounded, though not
convinced.

V. 5. Looking round upon them with anger, being grieved -- Angry at the Sin,
grieved at the Sinner; the true Standard of Christian Anger. But who can
separate Anger at Sin from Anger at the Sinner? None but a true Believer in
Christ.

V. 6. The Pharisees going out -- Probably leaving the Scribes to watch Him
still; took counsel with the Herodians -- As bitter as they usually were
against each other.

V. 8. From Idumea -- The Natives of which had now professed the Jewish
Religion above an hundred and fifty Years. They about Tire and Sidon -- The
Israelites who lived in those Coasts.

V. 10. Plagues, or Scourges (so the Greek Word properly means) seem to be
those very painful or afflictive Disorders which were frequently sent, or at
least permitted of GOD, as a Scourge or Punishment of Sin.

V. 12. He charged them not to make him known -- It was not the Time: Nor were
they fit Preachers.

V. 13. He calls whom he would -- With regard to the eternal States of Men,
GOD always acts as Just and Merciful. But with regard to numberless other
Things, He seems to us to act as a mere Sovereign.

V. 16. He surnamed them Sons of Thunder -- Both with respect to the Warmth and
impetuosity of their Spirit, their servant Manner of Preaching, and the Power
of their Word.

V. 20. To eat bread -- That is, to take any Subsistence.

V. 21. His relations -- His Mother and his Brethren, ver. 31. But it was some
Time before they could come near Him.

V. 22. The Scribes and Pharisees ( Mat. xii. 22.) who had come down from
Jerusalem -- Purposely, on the Devil's Errand: And not without Success. For the
common People now began to drink in the Poison, from these learned, good,
honorable Men! He has Beelzebub -- At Command; is in League with him: And by
the prince of the devils casts he out devils -- How easily may a Man of
Learning elude the strongest Proof of a Work of GOD! How readily can he account
for every Incident, without ever taking GOD into the Question!

V. 30. Because they said, He has an unclean spirit -- Is it not astonishing,
That Men who have ever read these Words, should doubt, What is the Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost? Can any Words declare more plainly, that it is, The
ascribing those Miracles to the Power of the Devil, which Christ wrought by the
Power of the Holy Ghost?"

V. 31. Then come his brethren and his mother -- Having at length made their
Way through the Crowd, so as to come to the Door. His Brethren are here named
first, as being first and most earnest in the Design of taking Him: For neither
did these of his brethren believe on him. They sent to him, calling him -- They
sent one into the House, who called Him aloud, by Name.

V. 34. Looking round on them who sat about him -- With the utmost Sweetness:
He said, Behold my mother and my brethren -- In this Preferrence of his true
Disciples even to the Virgin Mary, considered merely as his Mother after the
Flesh, He not only shows his high and tender Affection for them, but seems
designedly to guard against those excessive and idolatrous Honors, which he
foresaw would in After-ages be paid to her.

IV.
Mat. xiii. 1. Luke viii. 4.
And again he taught by the seaside, and a great multitude was gathered to
him, so that going into the vessel, he sat in the sea, and the whole multitude
was by the sea on the land. the highway-side, and the birds came and devoured
it.

their sins should be forgiven them.

of the word, they are presently offended. it, and bring forth fruit, some
thirty fold, some sixty, and some an hundred Mat. v. 15. Luke viii. 16. xi. 33.
And he said to them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel or under a
bed, and not to be set on a candlestick? Mat. x. 26. Luke viii. 17.
For there is nothing hid, which shall not be made manifest, neither was any
thing kept secret, but that it might come abroad. Mat. xiii. 12. Luke viii. 18.
For he that has, to him shall be given; and he that has not, from him shall
be taken even that which he has.

a man should cast seed into the ground,

Mat. xiii. 31. Luke xiii. 18.
And he said, Whereto shall we liken the kingdom of God? Or with what
comparison shall we compare it? It is like a grain of mustard seed, which when
it is sown in the earth, it is one of the least seeds that is in the earth.

Mat. viii. 23. Luke viii. 22.
And the same day in the evening he says to them, Let us go over to the other
side. other little vessels.

V. 2. He taught them many things by parables -- After the usual Manner of the
Eastern Nations, to make his Instructions more agreeable to them, and to
impress them the more upon attentive Hearers. A Parable signifies not only a
Simile or Comparison, and sometimes a Proverb, but any Kind of instructive
Speech, wherein spiritual Things are explained and illustrated by natural.
Prove. i. 6. To understand a proverb and the interpretation -- The Proverb is
the literal Sense, the Interpretation is the spiritual; resting in the literal
Sense kills, but the spiritual gives Life.

V. 3. Hearken -- This Word He probably spoke with a loud Voice, to stop the
Noise and Hurry of the People.

V. 10. When he was clone -- That is, retired apart from the Multitude.

V. 11. To them that are without -- So the Jews termed the Heathens; so our
LORD terms all obstinate Unbelievers: For they shall not enter into his
Kingdom; they shall abide in outer Darkness.

V. 12. So that seeing they see and do not perceive -- They would not see
before: Now they could not, GOD having given them up to the Blindness which
they had chosen.

V. 13. Know ye not this parable? -- Which is as it were the Foundation of all
those that I shall speak hereafter; and is so easy to be understood?

V. 19. The desire of other things choke the word -- A deep and important
Truth! The Desire of any Thing, otherwise that is it leads to Happiness in GOD,
directly tends to Barrenness of Soul. Entering in -- Where they were not
before. Let him therefore who has received and retained the Word, see that no
other Desire then enter in, such as perhaps till then he never knew. It
becomes unfruitful -- After the Fruit had grown almost to Perfection.

V. 21. And he said, Is a candle -- As if He had said, I explain these Things
to you, I give you this Light, not to conceal, but to impart it to others. And
if I conceal any Thing from you now, it is only that it may be more effectually
manifested hereafter.

V. 24. Take heed what ye hear -- That is, Attend to what you hear, that it may
have its due Influence upon you. With what measure ye mete -- That is,
according to the Improvement you make of what you have heard, still further
Assistances shall be given. And to you that hear -- That is, with Improvement.

V. 25. He that has -- That improves whatever he has received, to the Good of
Others, as well as. This own Soul.

V. 26. So is the kingdom of God -- The inward Kingdom is like Seed which a man
casts into the ground -- This a Preacher of the Gospel casts into the Heart.
And he sleeps and rises night and day -- That is, he has it continually in his
Thoughts. Mean time it springs and grows up be knows not how -- Even he that
sowed it, cannot explain, How it grows. For as the Earth by a curious Kind of
Mechanism, which the greatest Philosophers cannot comprehend, does as it were
spontaneously bring forth first the Blade, then the Ear, then the full Corn in
the Ear: So the Soul, in an inexplicable Manner, brings forth, first weak
Graces, then stronger, then full Holiness: And all this of itself, as a
Machine, whose Spring of Motion is within itself. Yet observe the amazing
Exactness of the Comparison. The Earth brings forth no Corn (as the Soul no
Holiness) without both the Care and Toil of Man, and the benign Influence of
Heaven.

V. 29. He puts in the sickle -- GOD cutteth down and gathers the Corn
into his Garner.

V. 33. He spoke the word as they were able to hear it -- Adapting it to the
Capacity of his Hearers, and speaking as plain as He could without offending
them. A Rule never to be forgotten by those who instruct others.

V. 36. They take him as he was in the vessel -- They carried Him immediately
in the same Vessel, from which He had been preaching to the People.

V. 38 On the pillow -- So we transtate it, for Want of a proper English
Expression, for that particular Part of the Vessel near the Rudder, on which he
lay.

V. 39. Peace -- Cease thy Tossing: Be still -- Cease thy Roaring, Literally,
Be thou gagged.

V.
Mat. viii. 28. Luke viii. 26.
And they came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.
his dwelling in the tombs, and no man could bind him, no not with chains. is
thy name? says to him, My name is Legion; for we are many. it in the city and
in the country. And they went out to see what it was that was done. it told
them how it befell the demoniac, and concerning the swine. Mat. ix. 1. Luke
viii. 37.
And as he went into the vessel, he that had been possessed with the devils,
besought him, that he might be with him.

Luke viii. 40.
And when Jesus was passed over again in the vessel to the other side, a great
multitude was gathered to him, and he was near the sea. Mat. ix. 18. Luke viii.
41.
And there comes one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, and
seeing him, falls at his feet, Mat. ix. 20. Luke viii. 43.
And a certain woman who had had a flux of blood twelve years, her body, that
she was healed of that plague. house, saying, Thy daughter is dead: why
troublest thou the Master farther? sleeps.

V. 2. There met him a man with an unclean spirit -- St. Matthew mentions Two.
Probably this, so particularly spoken of here was the most remarkably fierce
and ungovernable.

V. 9. Man me Is ^^gion; for we are many -- But all these seem to have been
under one Commander, who accordingly speaks all along, both for them and
himself.

V. 15. And they were afraid -- It is not improbable they might otherwise have
offered some Rudeness if not Violence.

V. 19. Tell them how great things the Lord has done for thee -- This was
peculiarly needful there, where Christ did not go in Person.

V. 20. He published in Decapolis -- Not only at Home, but in all that Country
where Jesus Himself did not come.

V. 22. One of the rulers of the synagogus -- To regulate the Affairs of every
Synagogue, there was a Council of grave Men. Over these was a President, who
was termed The Ruler of the Synagogue. Sometimes there was no more than one
Ruler in a Synagogue.

V. 37. John, the brother of James -- When St. Mark wrote, not long after our
LORD's Ascension, the Memory of St. James, lately beheaded, was so fresh, that
his Name was more known than that of Iobn himself.

V. 40. Them that were with him -- Peter, James, and John.

V. 43. He charged them that (...) man should know it -- That He might avoid
every Appearance of Vain glory, might prevent too great a Concourse of People,
and might not farther enrage the Scribes and Pharisees against Him; the Time
for his Death, and for the full Manifestation of his Glory, b^ing not yet come.
He commanded something should be given her to eat -- So that when either
natural or spi^^tual Life is restored, even by immediate Miracle, all proper
Means are to be used in order to preserve it.

VI.
Mat. xiii. 54. Luke iv. 16.
And he went out from thence and came into his own country, and his disciples
follow him. And on the sabbath he taught in the synagogue, and many hearing
were astonished, saying, Whence has this man these things? them.

Mat. x. 1. Luke ix. 1.
And he called to him the twelve, and sent them forth by two and two, and gave
them power over unclean spirits; Mat. x. 9. Luke ix. 3.
And commanded them to take nothing for the journey, save a staff only; no
scrip, no bread, no money in their purse; Mat. x. 11. Luke ix. 4.
And he said to them, Wheresoever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye
depart from that place. Luke ix. 6.
And they went out and preached that men should repent. James v. 14, 15.
anointed with oil many that were sick and healed them.

Mat. xiv. 1. Luke ix. 3.
And king Herod heard (for his name was spread abroad) and he said John the
Baptist is risen from the dead, and therefore these mighty powers exert
themselves in him. thereof, said, This is John whom I beheaded: he is risen
from the dead. it thee. And going out she said to her mother, What shall I ask?
yet for his oath's sake, and for the sake of his guests, he would not reject
her. it, came and took up his corpse and laid it in a tomb.

Luke ix. 10.
And the apostles gather themselves together to Jesus, and told him all things,
both what they had done and what they had taught. Mat. xiv. 13. John vi. 1.
And he said to them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a
little. For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much
as to eat. have ye? Go and see. And when they knew, they said, Five, and two
fishes. them to his disciples to set before them; and he divided the two fishes
among them all. And they all ate and were satisfied.

Mat. xiv. 22.
And straightway he constrained his disciples to go into the vessel, and go
before to the other side toward Bethsaida, Mat. xiv. 23. John vi. 15.
And having sent them away, he went to the mountain to pray. the miracle of the
loaves; for their heart was hardened.

Mat. xiv. 34. John vi. 21.
And having passed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret, and drew to
shore.

V. 3. Is not this the Carpenter? -- There can be no Doubt, but in his Youth He
wrought with his supposed Father Joseph.

V. 5. He could do no miracle there -- Not consiste^tl with his Wisdom and
Goodness: It being inconsistent with his Wisdom to work them there, where it
could not promote his great End; and with his Goodness, seeing He well knew his
Countrymen would reject whatever Evidence could be given them. And therefore to
have given them more Evidence, would only have increased their Damnation.

V. 6. He marvelled -- As Man. As he was GOD, nothing was strange to him.

V. 8. He commands them to take nothing for the journey -- That they might be
always unin^umbered, free, ready for Motion. Save a staff only -- He that had
one, might take it; but he that had not, was not to provide one, Mat. x. 9.

V. 9. Be sh^^ with sandals -- As you usually are. Sandals were Pieces of
strong Leather or Wood, tied under the Sole of the Foot by Strings, something
resembling modern Clogs. The Shoes which they are in St. M^^t^^w forbidden to
take, were a Kind of short Boots, reaching a little above the Mid-leg, which
were then commonly used in Journeys. Our LORD intended by this Mission, to
initiate them into their apostolic Work. And it was doubtless an Encouragement
to them all their Life after to recollect the Care which GOD took of them, when
they had left all they had, and went out quite unfurnished for such an
Expedition. In this View our LORD Himself leads them to consider it, Luke xxii.
35. When I sent you forth without Purse or Scrip, lacked ye any thing?

V. 13. They anointed with oil many that were sick -- Which St. James gives as
a general Direction (chapter v. 11, 15.) adding those peremptory Words, And the
Lord shall heal him. He shall be restored to Health: Not by the natural
Efficacy of the Oil, but by the supernatural Blessing of GOD. And it seems this
was the great, standing Means of healing desperate Diseases in the Christian
Church, long before Extreme Unction was used or heard of which bears scarce any
Resemblance to it: The former being used only as a Means of Health; the latter,
only when Life is despaired of.

V. 15. A prophet, as one of the prophets -- Not inferior to one of the ancient
Prophets.

V. 16. But Herod hearing thereof -- Of their various Judgments concerning him,
still said, It is John.

V. 20. And preserved him -- Against all the Malice and Contrivances of
Herodias. And when he heard him -- Probably sending for him, at Times during
his Imprisonment, which continued a Year and a half. He heard him gladly --
Delusive Joy! While Herodias lay in his Bosom.

V. 21. A convenient day -- Convenient for her Purpose. His lords, captains,
and principal men of Galilee -- The great Men of the Court, the Army, and the
Province.

V. 23. To the half of my kingdom -- A proverbial Expression.

V. 26. Yet for his oath's sake and for the sake of his guests -- Herod's
Honor was like the Conscience of the chief Priests ( Mat. xxvii. 6.) To shed
innocent Blood wounded neither one nor the other!

V. 32. They departed -- Across a Creek or Corner of the Lake.

V. 34. Coming out -- Of the Vessel.

V. 40. They sat down in ranks -- The Word properly signifies a Parterre or Bed
in a Garden; by a Metaphor, a Company of Men ranged in Order, by hundreds and
by fifties -- That is, fifty in a Rank and an hundred in File. So an hundred
multiplied by fifty, made just five thousand.

V. 43. Fall of the fragments -- Of the Bread.

V. 45. He constrained his disciples -- Who did not care to go without Him.

V. 48. And he saw them -- For the Darkness could veil nothing from Him. And
would have passed by them -- That is, walked, as if He was passing by.

V. 52. Their heart was hardened -- And yet they were not Reprobates. It means
only, They were slow and dull of Apprehension.

VII.
Mat. xv. 1.
Then assembled together to him the Pharisees and certain of the Scribes,
coming from Jerusalem, their hands to the wrist, eat not, holding the tradition
of the elders. coming from the market, unless they wash, they eat not: and many
other things there are which they have received to hold, the washing of cups
and pots and brazen vessels and couches. Isaiah xxix. 13.
This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
washings of pots and cups: and many other such like things ye do. Exodus xx. 12.
Honor thy father and thy mother, and, Chapter xxi. 17.
Whosoever revileth father or mother, he shall surely die. It is Corban, that is a
gift, by whatsoever thou might have been prosited by me; he shall be free.
speaking, pride, foolishness.

Mat. xv. 21.
And he arose and went thence into the borders of Tire and Sidon. And entering
into (...) house he would have had no man know it; but he. could not be hid. it
to the dogs. Mat. xv. 29.
And departing again from the borders of Tire and Sidon, he came to the sea of
Galilee, through the midst of the country of Decapolis. and says to him,
Ephphatha, that is Be opened. it.

V. 1. Coming from Jerusalem -- Probably on purpose to find Occasion against
Him.

V. 4. Washings of cups and pots and brazen vessels and couches -- The Greek
Word (Baptisms) means indifferent either Washing or Sprinkling. The Cups, Pots,
and Vessels were washed; the Couches sprinkled.

V. 5. The tradition of the elders -- The Rule delivered down from your
Forefathers.

V. 15. There is nothing entering into a man from without which can desile him
-- Though it is very true, a Man may bring Guilt, which is moral Defilement,
upon himself, by eating what hurts his Health, or by Excess either in Meat or
Drink; yet even here the Pollution arises from the Wickedness of the Heart, and
is just proportionable to it. And this is all that our LORD asserts.

V. 19. Purging all meats -- Probably the Scat was usually placed (...) running
Water.

V. 22. Wickedness -- The Word means Ill Nature, Cruelty, Inhumanity, and all
malevolent Affections. Foolishness -- Directly contrary to Sobriety of Thought
and Discourse: All kind of wild Imaginations and extravagant Passions.

V. 26. The woman was a Greek, (that is a Gentile, not a Jew) a Syrophenician,
or Canaanite. Canaan was also called Syrophenica, as lying between Syria,
properly so called, and Phenicia.

V. 33. He put his fingers into his cars -- Perhaps intending to teach us, That
we are not to prescribe to Him (as they who brought this Man attempted to do)
but to expect his Blessing by whatsoever Means He pleases: Even though there
should be no Proportion or Resemblance between the Means used, and the Benefit
to be conveyed thereby.

V. 34. Ephphatha -- This was a Word of SOVEREIGN AUTHORITY, not an Address to
GOD for Power to heal, Such an Address was needless; for Christ had a perpetual
Fund of l'ower residing in Himself, to work all Miracles whenever He pleased,
even to the raising the Dead, John v. 21, 26.

V. 36. Them -- The blind Man and those that brought him.

VIII.
Mat. xv. 32.
In those days, the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat,
calling to him his disciples he says to them, them: and they did set them
before the people. them, he commanded, to set them also before them.



Mat. xvi. 1.
And the Pharisees came forth and questioned with him, seeking of him a sign
from heaven, tempting him. Mat. xvi.(...).
And he left them and going into the vessel again, went to the other side.

it said to them, Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? Perceive ye not yet,
neither consider?

him out of the town, and having spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him,
he asked him, If he saw aught? it to any in the town.

Mat. xvi. 13. Luke ix. 18.
And Jesus went out and his disciples into the towns of Cesarea Phillippi. And
in the way he asked his disciples, saying to them, Whom do men say that I am?
say Elijah; and others one of the prophets.

Mat. xvi. 21. Luke ix. 22.
And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many things, and
be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and
after three days rise again.



Mat. xvi. 25. Luke ix. 24. xvii. 33. John xii. 25.
For whosoever desires to save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall
lose his life, for my sake and the gospel's, shall save it. Mat. x. 32. Luke
ix. 26. xii. 8.
For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his Father, with the holy angels.

V. 8. So they did eat -- This Miracle was intended to demonstrate, that Christ
was the true Bread which comes down from Heaven; for He who was Almighty to
create Bread without Means to support natural Life, could not want Power to
create Bread without Means to support spiritual Life. And this heavenly Bread
we stand so much in need of every Moment, that we ought to be always praying,
LORD, evermore give us this Bread.

V. 11. Tempting him -- That is, trying to ensnare Him.

V. 12. Why does this generation (that is, these Scribes and Pharisees) seek a
sign? -- Not out of Sincerity, but out of Hypocrisy.

V. 15. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod, or of the
Sudducees: Two opposite Extremes.

V. 17, 18. Our LORD here affirms of all the Apostles (for the Question is
equivalent to an Affirmation) That their hearts were hardened; that having eyes
they saw not, having ears they heard not; that they did not consider, neither
understand: The very same Expressions that occur in the 13th of St. Matthew.
And yet it is certain, they were not judicially hardened. Therefore all these
strong Expressions, do not necessarily import any thing more, than the present
Want of spiritual Understanding.

V. 23. He led him out of the town -- It was in just Displeasure against the
Inhabitants of Bethsaida for their obstinate Infidelity, that our LORD would
work no more Miracles among them, nor even suffer the Person He had cured,
either to go into the Town, or to tell it to any therein,

V. 24. I see men as trees walking -- He distinguished Men from Trees only by
their Motion.

V. 30. He enjoined them Silence for the present, 1. That He might not
encourage the People to set Him up for a temporal King; 2. That He might not
provoke the Scribes and Pharisees to destroy Him before the Time; and 3. That
He might not forestall the brighter Evidence which was to be given of his
divine Character after his Resurrection.

V. 32. He spoke that saying openly -- Or in express Terms: Till now He had
only intimated it to them. And Peter taking hold of him -- Perhaps by the Arm
or Clothes.

V. 33. Looking on his disciples -- That they might the more observe what He
said to Peter.

V. 34. And when he had called the people -- To hear a Truth of the last
Importance, and one that equally concerned them all. Let him deny himself --
His own Will, in all Things, small and great, however pleasing, and that
continually: And take up his cross -- Embrace the Will of GOD, however painful,
daily, hourly, continually. Thus only can he follow me in Holiness, to Glory.

V. 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my Word -- That is, of avowing
whatever I have said (particularly of Self-denial and the daily Cross) both by
Word and Action.

IX.
And he said to them, Verily I say unto you, there are some of them that stand
here, who shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God coming
with power.

Mat. xvii. 1. Luke ix. 28.
And after six days Jesus takes with him Peter and James and John, and
carries them up into an high mountain, by themselves apart, and was
transfigured before them. became shining, exceeding white, as snow, such as no
fuller on earth can whiten.

Mat. xvii. 14. Luke ix. 37.
And coming to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and scribes
questioning with them. seeing him, were greatly amazed, and running to him,
saluted him. are possible to him that believes. rebuked the unclean spirit,
saying to him, Thou deaf and dumb spirit, I command thee, come out of him, and
enter no more into him.



Mat. xvii. 22. Luke ix. 44.
And departing thence, they passed through Galilee, and he was not willing that
any should know it.

Luke ix. 46.
And he came to Capernaum. And being in the house, he asked them, What was it
ye disputed among yourselves by the way? should be greatest? Mat. xviii. 2.
Luke ix. 47.
And taking a little child, he set him in the midst of them, and taking him up
in his arms, he said to them, only me, but him that sent me.

Luke ix. 49.
And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy
name, who follows not us, and we forbad him, because he follows not us.
Mat. x. 42.
For whosoever shall give you a cup of cold water to drink, in my name, because
ye belong to Christ, verily I say to you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

Mat. xviii. 6. Luke xvii. 1.
And whosoever shall offend one of the little ones that believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast
into the sea. Mat. v. 29. xviii. 8.
And if thy hand cause thee to offend, cut it off: it is good for thee to enter
into life maimed, rather than having two hands, to go into hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched: Isaiah lxvi. 24.
Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Mat. v. 13. Luke
xiv. 34.
Salt is good: but if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will ye season
it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another.

V. 1. Till they see the kingdom of God coming with power -- So it began to do,
at the Day of Pentecost, when three thousand were converted to GOD at once.

V. 2. By themselves -- That is, separate from the Multitude: Apart -- From the
other Apostles: And was transfigured -- The Greek Word seems to refer to the
Form of GOD, and the Form of a Servant (mentioned by St. Paul, Phil. ii. 6, 7.)
and may intimate, That the Divine Rays, which the indwelling GOD let out on
this Occasion, made the glorious Change from one of these Forms into the other.

V. 3. White as snow, such as no fuller can whiten -- Such as could not be
equalled either by Nature or Art.

V. 4. Elijah, whom they expocted: Moses, whom they did not.

V. 7. There come a (bright, luminous) cloud, overshadowing them -- This seems
to have been such a Cloud of Glory, as accompanied Israel in the Wilderness,
which, as the Jewish Writers observe, departed at the Death of Moses. But it
now appeared again, in Honor of our LORD, as the Great Prophet of the Church,
who was prefigured by Moses. Hear ye him -- Even preferably to Moses and Elijah.

V. 12. Elijah verily coming first restores all things: and, how it is written
-- That is, And He told them, how it is written -- As if He had said, Elijah's
Coming is not inconsistent with my Suffering. He is come: Yet I shall suffer.
The first Part of the Verse answers their Question concerning Elijah; the
second refutes their Error concerning the Messiah's continuing for ever.

V. 15. All the multitude seeing him were greatly amazed -- At his coming so
suddenly, so seasonably, so unexpectedly: Perhaps also at some unusual Rays of
Majesty and Glory, which yet remained on his Countenance.

V. 17. And one of the multitude answering -- The Scribes gave no Answer to our
LORD's Question. They did not care to repeat what they had said to his
Disciples. A dumb spirit -- A Spirit that takes his Speech from him.

V. 20. When he saw him -- When the Child saw Christ; when his Deliverance was
at hand. Immediately the spirit tore him -- Made his last grand Effort to
destroy him. Is it not generally so, before Satan is cast out of a Soul, of
which he has long had Possession?

V. 22. If thou can do any thing -- In so desperate a Case: Have compassion
on us -- Me as well as him.

V. 23. If thou can believe -- As if He had said, The Thing does not turn on
my Power, but on thy Faith. I can do all Things: Can thou believe?

V. 24. Help thou mine unbelief -- Although my Faith be so small, that it might
rather be termed Unbelief, yet help me.

V. 25. Thou draf and dumb spirit -- So termed, because he made the Child so.
When JESUS spoke, the Devil heard, though the Child could not. I command thee --
I myself now; not my Disciples.

V. 26. Having rent him sore -- So does even the Body sometimes suffer, when
GOD comes to deliver the Soul from Satan.

V. 30. They passed through Galilee -- Though not through the Cities, but by them, in
the most private ways. He was not willing that any should know it: For he
taught his disciples -- He wanted to be alone with them some Time, in order to
instruct them fully concerning his Sufferings. The Son of man is delivered --
It is as sure, as if it were done already.

V. 32. They understood not the word -- They did not understand, how to
reconcile the Death of our Savior (nor consequently his Resurrection, which
supposed his Death) with their Notions of his temporal Kingdom.

V. 34. Who should be greatest -- Prime Minister in his Kingdom.

V. 35. Let him be the last of all -- Let him abase himself the ruost.

V. 37. Ore such little child -- Either in Years, or in Heart.

V. 38. And John answered him. -- As if he had said, But ought we to receive
those who follow not us? Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name --
Probably this was one of John the Baptist's Disciples, who believed in Jesus,
though he did not yet associate with our LORD's Disciples. And we forbad him,
because be follows not us -- How often is the same Temper sound in us? How
readily do we also lust to Envy. But how does that Spirit become a Disciple,
much more a Minister of the benevolent Jesus! St. Paul had learnt a better
Temper, when he rejoiced that Christ was preached, even by those who were his
personal Enemies. But to confine Religion to them that follow us, is a
Narrowness of Spirit which we should avoid and abhor.

V. 39. Jesus said -- Christ here gives us a lovely Example of Candor and
Moderation. He was willing to put the best Construction on doubtful Cases, and
to treat as Friends those who were not avowed Enemies Perhaps in this Instance
it was a Means of conquering the Remainder of Prejudice, and perfecting what
was wanting in the Faith and Obedience of these Persons. Forbid him not --
Neither directly nor indirectly discourage or hinder any Man, who brings
Sinners from the Power of Satan to GOD, because he follows not us, in
Opinions, Modes of Worship, or any thing else which does not affect the Essence
of Religion.

V. 40. For be that is not against you, is for you -- Our LORD had formerly
said, He that is not with me, is against me: thereby admonishing his Hearers,
that the War between Him and Satan admitted of no Neutrality, and that those
who were indifferent to Him now, would finally be treated as Enemies. But here,
in another View, he uses a very different Proverb; directing his Followers to
judge of Men's Characters in the most candid Manner; and charitably to hope
that those who did not oppose his Cause wished well to it. Upon the whole, we
are to be rigorous in judging ourselves, and candid in judging each other.

V. 41. For whosoever shall give you a cup -- Having answered St. John, our
LORD here resumes the Discourse which was broken off at the 37th Verse.

V. 42. On the contrary, whosoever shall offend the very least Christian.

V. 43. And if a Person cause thee to offend -- (The Discourse passes from the
Case of offending, to that of being offended) if one who is as useful or dear
to thee as an hand or eye, hinder or slacken thee in the Ways of GOD, renounce
all Intercourse with him. This primarily relates to Persons, secondarily to
Things.

V. 44. Where their worm -- That gnaweth the Soul (Pride, Self-will, Desire,
Malice, Envy, Shame, Sorrow, Despair) dies not -- No more than the Soul
itself: And the sire (either material, or infinitely worse!) that tormenteth
the Body, is not quenched for ever.

V. 49. Every one -- Who does not cut off the offending Member, and
consequently is cast into Hell, shall be, as it were salted with fire,
preserved, not consumed thereby; whereas every acceptable sacrifice shall be
salted with another Kind of Salt, even that of divine Grace, which purifies the
Soul, (though frequently with Pain) and preserves it from Corruption.

V. 50. Such Salt is good indeed; highly beneficial to the World, in respect of
which I have termed you the Salt of the earth. But if the salt which should
season others, have lost its own saltness, wherewith will ye season it? --
Beware of this: See that ye retain your Savor; and as a Proof of it, have
peace one with another.

More largely this obscure Text might be paraphrased thus:

As every Burnt-offering was salted with Salt, in order to its being cast into
the Fire of the Altar, so every one who will not part with his Hand or Eye,
shall fall a Sacrifice to divine Justice, and be cast into Hellfire, which
will not consume, but preserve him from a Cessation of Being. And on the other
Hand, every one who denying himself and taking up his Cross, offers up himself
as a living Sacrifice to GOD, shall be seasoned with Grace, which like Salt
will make him savoury, and preserve him from Destruction for ever.

As Salt is good for preserving Meats, and making them savoury, so it is good
that ye be seasoned with Grace, for the purifying your Hearts and Lives, and
for spreading the Savor of my Knowledge, both in your own Souls, and wherever
ye go. But as Salt if it loses its Saltness is fit for nothing, so ye, if ye
lose your Faith and Love, are fit for nothing but to be utterly destroyed. See
therefore that Grace abide in you, and that ye no more contend, Who shall be
greatest?

X.
Mat. xix. 1.
And he arose and comes thence into the coasts of Judea, through the country
beyond Jordan: and the multitudes resort to him again, and as he was wont, he
taught them again. Mat. v. 31. xix. 7. Luke xvi. 18.
And the Pharisees coming, asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his
wife? Tempting him. Deuteronomy. xxiv. 1.
Moses suffered to write a bill of divorce, and to put her away. and female.
Genesis ii. 24.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife

Mat. xix. 13.
And they brought little children to him that he might touch them; but the
disciples rebuked those that brought them. it, was much displeased, and said to
them, Suffer the little children to come to me, and forbid them not: for of
such is the kingdom of God.

Mat. xix. 16. Luke xviii. 18.
And as he was going out into the way, one running and kneeling to him, asked
him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? There is
none good but one, that is God. my childhood. it is impossible, but not with
God, for with God all things are possible. receive an hundred fold now in this
time, houses and brethren and sisters and mothers and children and lands with
persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life. that are first shall be
last, and the last first.

^at. xx. 20.
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus went before them.
And they were amazed, and as they followed, they were afraid. And taking the
twelve again, he told them what things were to befall him:

the cup that I drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with. it were much displeased concerning James and John.

Mat. xx. 29. Luke xviii. 35.
And they come to Jericho. And as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and
a great multitude, blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, sat by the way-side
begging.

V. 1. He comes thence -- From Gal lee.

V. 6. From the beginning of the creation -- Therefore Moses in the first of
Genesis gives us an Account of Things from the beginning of the creation. Does
it not clearly follow, That there was no Creation previous to that which Mosee
describes? God made them male and female -- Therefore Adam did not at first
contain both Sexes in himself: But GOD made Adam, when first created, male
only; and Eve female only. And this Man and Woman He joined together, in a
State of Innocence, as Husband and Wife.

V. 11, 12. All Polygamy is here totally condemned.

V. 14. Jesus seeing it, was much displeased -- At their blaming those who were
not blameworthy: and endeavoring to hinder the Children from receiving a
Blessing. Of such is the kingdom of God -- The Members of the Kingdom which I
am come to set up in the World are such as these, as well as grown Persons of a
childlike Temper.

V. 15. Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child -- As
totally disclaiming all Worthiness and Pitness, as if he were but a Week old.

V. 20. He answ^ring, said to him, Master -- He stands reproved now, and drops
the Epithet Good.

V. 21. Jesus looking upon him -- And looking into his Heart, loved him --
Doubtless for the Dawnings of Good which he saw in him: And said to him -- Out
of tender Love One thing thou lackest -- The Love of GOD, without which all
Religion is a dead Carcass. In order to this, throw away what is to thee the
grand Hinderance of it. Give up thy great Idol Riches. Go, s^ll whatsoever thou
have.

V. 24. Jesus says to them, Children -- See how He softens the harsh Truth, by
the Manner of delivering it! And yet without retracting or abating one Tittle:
How bard is it for them that trust in rich: -- Either for Defense, or
Happiness, or Deliverance from the thousand Dangers that Life is continually
exposed to. That these cannot enter into GOD's glorious Kingdom, is clear and
undeniable: But it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a
Man to have Riches, and not trust in them. Therefore, it is easier for a camel
to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom.

V. 28. Lo we have left all -- Though the young Man would not.

V. 30. He shall receive an hundred fold, house, etc. -- Not in the same Kind;
for it will generally be with persecutions: But in Value: An ^^nd^ed fold more
Happiness than any or all of these did or (...) ^fford. But let it be observed,
None is entitled to this Hap^^^^^^ but he that will accept of it with
persecutions.

32. They were in the way to Jerusalem, and Jesus went before (...) and they
were amazed -- At his Courage and Intrepidity, con^ the Treatment which He had
Himself told them He should (...) ^^th there: and as they followed, they were
afraid -- Both for (...) themselves: Nevertheless He judged it best to prepare
(...) telling them more particularly what was to ensue.

(...) Saying. -- By their Mother. It was she, not they that (...) ^^e Words.

(...) Ye know not that ye a^^ -- Ye know not that ye are ask^^ (...)
^^^^erings, which must needs pave the Way to Glory. The (...) ^^ward; the
baptism -- Of outward Sufferings. Our LORD (...) ^^th Sufferings within (...)
^^^^red with them without.

V. 40. Save to them for whom it is prepared -- Them who by patient Continuance
in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality. For these only
eternal Life is prepared. To these only He will give it in that Day; and to
every Man his own Reward, according to his own Labor.

V. 45. A ransom for many -- Even for as many Souls as needed such a Ransom, 2
Cor. v. 15.

V. 50. Casting away his garment -- Through Joy and Eagerness.

XI.
Mat. xxi. 1. Luke xix. 29. John xii. 12.
And when they were come nigh to Jerusalem to Bethphage and Bethany, at the
mount of Olives, he sends two of his disciples, them in the way. is he that
comes. be the kingdom of our father David that comes: Hosanna in the highest.
Mat. xxi. 10.17.
And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple, and having looked round
about upon all things, it being now evening, he went out to Bethany with the
twelve.

Mat. xxi. 18.
And on the morrow, as they were coming from Bethany, he was hungry. might find
any thing thereon: and coming to it, he found nothing but leaves: for it was
not a season of figs. Mat. xxi. 12. Luke xix. 45.
And they come to Jerusalem. And Jesus going into the temple, drove out them
that bought and sold in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the
money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves, Isaiah. lvi. 7. Jer.
vii. 11.
My house shall be called of all nations an house of prayer? But ye have made
it a den of thieves. it and sought how they might destroy him: for they feared
him, because the whole multitude was astonished at his teaching.

Mat. xxi. 20.
And when evening was come he went out of the city. God. them. Mat. vi. 14.
But when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any, that your
Father who is in heaven may forgive you also your trespasses

Mat. xxi. 23. Luke xx. 1.
And they come again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the Temple, the
chief priests and the scribes and the elders come to him and say to him, By
what authority do thou these things?

V. 1. To Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives -- The Limits of
Bethany reached to the Mount of Olives and joined to those of Bethphage.
Bethphage was Part of the Suburbs of Jerusalem, and reached from the Mount of
Olives to the Walls of the City. Our LORD was now come to the Place where the
Boundaries of Bethany and Bethphage met.

V. 13. For it was not a season of figs -- It was not (as we say) a good year
for Figs; at least not for that early Sort, which alone was ripe so soon in the
Spring.

If we render the Words, It was not the season of figs, that is, the Time of
gathering them in, it may mean, The season was not yet: And so (enclosing the
Words in a Parenthesis, And coming to it, he found nothing but leaves) it may
refer to the former Part of the Sentence, and may be considered as the Reason
of Christ's going to see, Whether there were any Figs on this Tree. Some who
also read that Clause in a Parenthesis, translate the following Words, For
where he was, it was the season of figs. And it is certain, this Meaning of the
Words suits best with the great Design of the Parable, which was to reprove the
Jewish Church for its Unfruitfulness at that very Season, when Fruit might best
be expected from them.

If we render the Words, It was not the season of figs, that is, the Time of
gathering them in, it may mean, The season was not yet: And so (enclosing the
Words in a Parenthesis, And coming to it, he found nothing but leaves) it may
refer to the former Part of the Sentence, and may be considered as the Reason
of Christ's going to see, Whether there were any Figs on this Tree. Some who
also read that Clause in a Parenthesis, translate the following Words, For
where he was, it was the season of figs. And it is certain, this Meaning of the
Words suits best with the great Design of the Parable, which was to reprove the
Jewish Church for its Unfruitfulness at that very Season, when Fruit might best
be expected from them.

V. 16. He suffered not that any should carry a vessel through the temple -- So
strong Notions had our LORD, of even relative Holiness! And of the Regard due
to those Places (as well as Times) that are peculiarly dedicated to GOD.

V. 18. They feared him -- That is, they were afraid to take Him by Violence,
left it should raise a Tumult: because all the people was astonished at his
teaching -- Both at the Excellence of his Doctrine, and at the Majesty and
Authority with which He taught.

V. 22. Have faith in God -- And who could find Fault, if the Creator and
Proprietor of all Things, were to destroy by a single Word of his Mouth, a
thousand of his inanimate Creatures, were it only to imprint this important
Lesson more, deeply, on one immortal Spirit?

V. 25. When ye stand praying -- Standing was their usual Posture when they
prayed. Forgive -- And on this Condition, ye shall have whatever you ask,
without wrath or doubting.

XII.
Mat. xxi. 33. Luke xx. 9.
And he said to them in parables, A man planted a vineyard, and set an hedge
about it, and dug a wine-fat, and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went into a far country. him, and sent him away empty. him in
the head, and sent him away shamefully handled. him, and cast him out of the
vineyard. Psalm cxviii. 22.
The stone which the builders rejected this is become the head of the corner?

Mat. xxii. 15. Luke xx. 20.
And they send to him certain of the Pharisees, and of the Herodians, to catch
him in his discourse. And they coming say to him, Master, we know that thou art
true, and carest for no man; for thou regardest not the person of men, but
teach the way of God in truth. it; and they brought it. is this image and
inscription? They say to him, Cesar's. things that are Cesar's, and to God the
things that are God's. And they marvelled at him.

Mat. xxii. 23. Luke xx. 27.
Then come to him the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, and they
asked him, saying, Deuteronomy. xxv. 5.
If a man's brother die, and leave a wife, and leave no children, that his
brother should take his wife, and raise up issue to his brother. Exodus iii. 6.
how in the bush God spoke to him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?

Mat. xxii. 34. Luke x. 25.
And one of the scribes coming to him, having heard them disputing together,
and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, Which is the first
commandment of all? is, Deuteronomy. vi. 4.
Hear, O Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord. is the first commandment. is
like unto it, Lev. xix. 18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. There is no other commandment
greater than these.

Mat. xxii. 41. Luke xx. 41.
And Jesus answering, as he taught in the temple, said, How say the scribe^,
that Christ is the Son of David? Psalm cx. 1.
The Lord says to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool.

Mat. xxiii. 5. Luke xx. 46.
And he said to them in his teaching, Beware of the Scribes, who love to walk
in long robes, and to be saluted in the marketplaces,

Luke xxi. 1.
And Jesus sitting over against the treasury, beheld how the people cast money
into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much.

V. 12. They feared the multitude -- How wonderful is the Providence of GOD,
using all Things for the Good of his Children! Generally, the Multitude is
restrained from tearing them in Pieces, only by the Fear of their Rulers. And
here the Rulers themselves are restrained, through Fear of the Multitude!

V. 17. They marvelled at him -- At the Wisdom of his Answer.

V. 25. When they rise from the dead, neither Men marry nor Women are given in
marriage.

V. 27. He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living -- That is,
(if the Argument be propsed at length) Since the Character of his being the GOD
of any Persons, plainly intimates a Relation to them, not as dead, but as
living; and since He cannot be said to be at present their GOD at all, if they
are utterly dead; nor to be the GOD of human Persons, such as Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, consisting of Souls and Bodies, if their Bodies were to abide in
everlasting Death: there must needs be a suture State of Blessedness, and a
Resurrection of the Body to share with the Soul in it.

V. 28. Which is the first commandment? -- The principal, and most necessary to
be observed.

V. 29. The Lord our God is one Lord -- This is the Foundation of the First
Commandment, yea of all the Commandments. The LORD our GOD, the LORD, the GOD
of all Men, is One GOD, essentially, though three Persons. From this Unity of GOD
it follows, That we owe all our Love to Him alone.

V. 30. With all thy strength -- That is, the whole Strength and Capacity of
^^y Understanding, Will and Affections.

V. 31. The second is like unto it -- Of a like comprehensive Nature:
comprising our whole Duty to God. There is no other Moral, much less Ceremonial
Commandment greater than these.

V. 33. To love him with all the heart -- To love and serve him, with all the
united Powers of the Soul in their utmost Vigor; and to love his neighbor as
himself -- To maintain the same equitable and charitable Temper and Behavior
toward all Men, as we, in like Circumstances, would wish for from them toward
ourselves, is a more necessary and important Duty, than the offering the most
noble and costly Sacrifices.

V. 34. Jesus said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God -- Reader,
Art not thou? Then go on: Be a real Christian; else it had been better for thee
to have been afar off.

V. 38. Beware of the scribes -- There was an absolute Necessity for these
repeated Cautions. For considering their inveterate Prejudices against Christ,
it could never be supposed the common People would receive the Gospel, till
these incorrigible Blasphemers of it, were brought to just Disgrace.

Yet he delayed speaking in this Manner till a little before his Passion, as
knowing what Effect it would quickly produce. Nor is this any Precedent for Us:
We are not invested with the same Authority.

V. 41. He beheld how people cast money into the treasury -- This Treasury
received the voluntary Contributions of the Worshippers who came up to the
Feast; which were given to buy Wood for the Altar and other Necessaries not
provided for in any other Way.

V. 43. I say to you, that this poor widow has cast in more than they all --
See what Judgment is cast on the most specious, outward Actions by the Judge of
all! And how acceptable to Him is the smallest, which springs from Self-denying
Love!

XIII.
Mat. xxiv. 1. Luke xxi. 5.
And as he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples says to him,
Master, see what manner of stones, and what manner of buildings! And Jesus
answering said to him, See thou these great buildings? shall be the sign when
all these things shall be fulfilled? He, and will deceive many. it must be; but
the end is not yet. are the beginning of sorrows. Luke xxi. 12.
But take heed to yourselves, for they will deliver you to councils, and ye
shall be beaten in synagogues, and shall stand before rulers and kings for my
sake, for a testimony to them. Mat. xxiv. 14.
And the gospel must first be published among all nations. you up, take no
thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but
whatsoever shall be given you in that hour that speak; for it is not ye that
speak, but the Holy Ghost.

Mat. xxiv. 15. Luke xxi. 20. Dan. ix. 27.
But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the
prophet standing where it ought not, (let him that reads understand) then let
them that are in Judea flee to the mountains: Mat. xxiv. 23.
Then if any man say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or lo, he is there, believe it
not.



Mat. xxiv. 32. Luke xxi. 28.
Now learn a parable from the fig tree. When its branch is now tender and
puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh. even at the door.



Mat. xxiv. 42. Luke xxi. 34.
Take heed; watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. For the Son of
man is Mat. xxv. 14. Luke xix. 12.
as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his
servants, and to each his work, and commanded the porter to watch.

V. 4. Two Questions are here asked; the one, concerning the Destruction of
Jerusalem; the other concerning the End of the World.

V. 11. The Holy Ghost will help you. But do not depend on any other Help. For
all the nearest Ties will be broken.

V. 14. Where it ought not -- That Place being set apart for sacred Uses.

V. 19. In those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning
of the creation -- May it not be doubted, whether this be yet fully
accomplished? Is not much of this Affliction still to come?

V. 20. The elect -- The Christians: Whom he has chosen -- That is, has taken
out of, or separated from the World, through sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the truth. He has shortened -- That is, will surely shorten.

V. 24. But in those days -- Which immediately precede the End of the World;
after that tribulation -- Above described.

V. 29. He is nigh -- The Son of Man.

V. 30. All these things -- Relating to the Temple and the City.

V. 32. Of that day -- The Day of Judgment is often in the Scriptures
emphatically called That Day. Neither the Son -- Not as Man: As Man He was no
more Omniscient than Omnipresent. But as GOD He knows all the Circumstances of
it.

V. 34. The Son of Man is as a man taking a far journey -- Being about to leave
this World and go to the Father, He appoints the Services that are to be
performed by all his Servants, in their several Stations. This seems chiefly to
respect Ministers at the Day of Judgment: But it may be applied to all Men, and
to the Time of Death.

XIV.
Mat. xxvi. 1. Luke xxii. 1.
And after two days was the feast of the passover and of unleavened bread; and
the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might apprehend him by
subtilty, and put him to death. Mat. xxvi. 6.
And he being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at table,
there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment, of spikenard, very
costly; and shaking the box, she poured it on his head.

Mat. xxvi. 14. Luke xxii. 3.
And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests, to betray
him unto them. it they were glad and promised to give him money. And he sought
how he might conveniently betray him.

Mat. xxvi. 17. Luke xxii. 7.
And on the first day of unleavened Bread, when they killed the passover, his
disciples say to him, Where will thou that we go and prepare, that thou may
eat the passover? went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said
to them. And they made ready the passover.

Mat. xxvi. 20. Luke xxii. 14.
And in the evening he comes with the twelve. It is one of the twelve, that
dippeth with me in the dish.

it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body.

Mat. xxvi. 30. Luke xxii. 39. John xviii. 1.
And having sung the hymn, they went out toward the mount of Olives. Zeh. xiii.
7.
I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. will not I.

Mat. xxvi. 36.
And they come to a place named Gethsemane; and he says to his disciples, Sit
here while I shall pray. even to death; tarry ye here and watch. are possible
to thee: take away this cup from me: yet not what I will, but what thou will.
is willing, but the flesh is weak. your rest. It is enough. The hour is come:
behold the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

Mat. xxvi. 47. Luke xxii. 47. John xviii 2.
And immediately, while he yet spoke, comes up Judas, one of the twelve, and
with him a great multitude, with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, and
the scribes, and the elders. Mat. xxvi. 51. Luk^ xxii. 49. John xviii. 10.
And one of them that stood by, drawing a sword, smote the servant of the high
priest, and cut off his ear.

Mat. xxii. 57. Luke xxii. 54. John xviii. 12.
And they led Jesus away to the high priest, and with him assembled all the
chief priests, and the elders and the scribes. Mat. xxvi. 59.
Then the chief priests and all the council sought for evidence against Jesus,
to put him to death, and found none. Mat. xxvi. 63. Luke xxii. 67.
But he held his peace and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him
and said to him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?

Mat. xxvi. 69. Luke xxii. 56. John xxiii. 25.
And as Peter was in the hall below, there comes one of the maids of the high
priest. I what thou meanest. And he went out into the porch, and the cock crew.
one of them. one of them; for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agrees
thereto. his head and wept.

V. 4. Some had indignation -- Being incited thereto by Judas; and said --
Probably to the Woman.

V. 10. Judas went to the chief Priests -- Immediately after this Reproof,
having Anger now added to his Covetousness.

V. 13. Go into the city, and there shall meet you a man -- It was highly
seasonable for our LORD, to give them this additional Proof both of his knowing
all Things, and of his Influence over the Minds of Men.

V. 15. Furnished -- The Word properly means, Spread with Carpets.

V. 24. This is my blood of the New Testament -- That is, This I appoint to be
a perpetual Sign and Memorial of my Blood, as shed for establishing the New
Covenant, that all who shall believe in me, may receive all its gracious
Promises.

V. 25. I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, till I drink it new in
the kingdom of God -- That is, I shall drink no more before I die^ the next
Wine I drink, will not be earthly, but heavenly.

V. 27. This night -- The Jews in reckoning their Days began with the Evening,
according to the Mosaic Computation, which called the Evening and the Morning
the First Day, Genesis i. 5. And so that which after Sunset is here called this
night, is, ver. 30. called today. The Expression there is peculiarly
significant. Verily I say to thee, That thou thyself, confident as thou art,
today, even within four and twenty Hours; yea, this night, or ever the Sun be
risen; nay, before the cock crow twice, before three in the Morning, wilt deny
me thrice. Our LORD doubtless spoke so determinately, as knowing a cock world
crow o^^^, before the usual time of cock-crowing. By C. xiii. 35. it appears,
that the third Watch of the Night, ending at three in the Morning, was commonly
styled the cock-crowing.

V. 33. So^e amaze^ -- The Original Word imports the most shocking Amazement
mingled with Grief: And that Word in the next Verse which we render sorrowful,
intimates. That he was surrounded with sorrow on every Side, breaking in upon
him with such Violence, as was ready to separate his Soul from his Body.

V. 36. Abba, Father -- St. Mark seems to add the Word Father, by way of
Explication.

V. 37. Says to Peter -- The zealous, the consident Peter!

V. 44. Whomsoever I shall kiss -- Probably our LORD in great Condescension,
Christ's had used (according to the Jewish Custom) to permit his Disciples to
do this after they had been some Time absent.

V. 51. A young man -- It does not appear, that he was one of Christ's
Disciples. Probably hearing an unusual Noise, he started up out of his Bed, not
far from the Garden, and ran out with only the Sheet about him, to see what was
the Matter. And the young men laid hold on him -- Who was only suspected to be
Christ's Disciple; but could not touch them who really were so!

V. 55. All the council sought for witness and found none -- What an amazing
Proof of the overruling Providence of GOD, considering both their Authority,
and the Reward, they could offer, that no two consident Witnesses could be
procured, to charge him with any gross Crime.

V. 56. Their evidences were not sufficient -- The Greek Words literally
rendered are, Were not equal: Not equal to the Charge of a capital Crime: It is
the same Word in the 59th Verse

V. 58. We heard him say -- It is observable, that the Words which they thus
misrepresented, were spoken by Christ at least three Years. before, ( John ii.
19) Their going back so far to find Matter for the Charge, was a glorious, though
silent Attestation, of the unexceptionable Manner wherein he had behaved, through
the whole Course of his public Ministry.

XV.
Mat. xxvii. 1, 2. Luke xxii. 66. xxiii. 1. John xviii. 28.
And straightway in the morning the chief priests having consulted with the
elders and scribes, and the whole council, having bound Jesus, carried him
away, and delivered him to Pilate. it. Mat. xxvii. 12.
And the chief priests accused him of many things. one named Barabbas, who lay
bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder
in the insurrection. him to do as he had ever done for them. Pilate answered
them saying, Will ye that I release to you the king of the Jews? to ask, that
he would rather release Barabbas to them. to him whom ye call the king of the
Jews? And they cried out again, Crucify him. him to be crucified.

Mat. xxvii. 27. John xix. 2.
And the soldiers led him away into the hall called Pretorium, and call
together the whole troop. head. Mat. xxvii. 31. John xix. 16.
And when they had mocked him, they took the purple robe from him, and put his
own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.

Mat. xxvii. 33. Luke xxiii. 33. John xix. 17.
And they bring him to the place, Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the
place of a skull. it not. had crucified them, they part his garments, casting
lots upon them, what every man should take. Isaiah liii. 12.
And he was numbered with the transgressors. Mat. xxvii. 39.
And they that passed by, reviled him, wagging their heads and saying, Ah, thou
that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, Mat. xxvii. 45. Luke
xxiii. 44.
And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over all the earth until
the ninth hour. it said, Behold, he calls Elijah. it on a cane, and gave him
to drink, saying, Let alone; Let us see if Elijah will come to take him down.

Mat. xxvii. 50. Luke xxiii. 46. John xix. 30.
And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and expired.

Son of God.

Mat. xxvii. 57. Luke xxiii. 50. John xix. 38.
And the evening being now come (because it was the preparation, that is, the
day before the it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. him in the
linen, and laid him in a sepulcher, which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a
stone to the door of the sepulcher.

V. 72. And he covered his head -- Which was an usual Custom with Mourners, and
was fitly expressive both of Grief and Shame.

V. 7. Insurrection -- A Crime which the Roman Governors, and Pilate in
particular, were more especially concerned and careful to punish.

V. 9. Will ye that I release to you the king of the Jews -- Which does this
wretched Man discover most? Want of Justice, or Courage, or common Sense? The
poor C^ward sacristees Justice to popular Clamor, and enrages those whom he
seeks to appease, by so unseasonably repeating that Title, The king of the
Jews, which he could not but know was so highly offensive to them.

V. 16. Pretorium -- The inner Hall, where the Praetor, a Roman Magistrate, used
to give Judgment. But St. John calls the whole Palace by this Name.

V. 17. Purple -- As royal Robes were usually purple and scarlet, St. Mark and
John term this a purple Robe, St. Matthew a scarlet one. The Tyrian purple is
said not to have been very different from scarlet.

V. 21. The father of Alexander and Rufus -- These were afterward two eminent
Christians, and must have been well known when St. Mark wrote.

V. 24. 25. St. Mark seems to intimate, that they first nailed Him to the
Cross, then parted his Garments, and afterward reared up the Cross.

V. 34. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me -- Thereby claiming GOD as
his GOD; and yet lamenting his Father's withdrawing the Tokens of his Love, and
treating Him as an Enemy, while He bare our Sins.

V. 41. Who served him -- Provided him with Necessaries.

V. 42. Because it was the day before the sabbath -- And the Bodies might not
hang on the Sabbath Day: therefore they were in Haste to have them taken down.

V. 43. Honorable -- A Man of Character and Reputation; A Counselor -- A
Member of the Sanhedrim. Who waited for the kingdom of God -- Who expected to
see it set up on Earth.

V. 46. He rolled a stone -- By his Servants. It was too large for him to roll
himself.

XVI.
Mat. xxviii. 1. Luke xxiv. 1. John xx. 1.
And when the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James
and Salome, had bought spices, that they might come and embalm him. at the
rising of the sun. John xx. 11.
Now when Jesus was risen early, the first day of the week, he appeared first
to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils. Luke xxiv. 9. John xx.
18.
She went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept. Luke
xxiv. 13.
After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they were walking,
going into the country. it to the rest, neither believed they them. Luke xxiv.
36. John xx. 19.
Afterward he appeared to the eleven, sitting at meat, and upbraided them with
their unbelief and hardness of Heart, because they believed not them who had
seen him when he was risen.

Mat. xxviii. 18.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

Luke xxiv. 50.
So then the Lord, after he had spoken to them, was received up into heaven,
and sat on the right hand of God.

V. 2. At the rising of the sun -- They set out while it was yet dark, and came
within Sight of the Sepulcher, for the first Time, just as it grew light enough
to discern that the Stone was rolled away. ( Mat. xxviii. 1. Luke xxiv. 1. John
xx. 1.) But by the Time Mary had called Peter and John, and they had viewed the
Sepulcher, the Sun was rising.

V. 3. Who shall roll us away the stone -- This seems to have been the only
Difficulty they apprehended. So they knew nothing of Pilate's having sealed the
Stone, and Placed a Guard of Soldiers there.

V. 7. And Peter -- Though he so ost denied his LORD. What amazing Goodness was
this?

V. 13. Neither believed they them -- They were moved a little by the Testimony
of these, added to that of St. Peter. (Luke xxiv. 34.) But they did not yet
fully believe it.

V. 15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature Our
LORD speaks without any Limitation or Restriction. If therefore every Creature
in every Age has not heard it, either those who should have preached, or those
who should have heard it, or both, made void the council of GOD herein.

V. 16. And is baptized -- In Token thereof. Every one that believed was
baptized. But he that believes not -- Whether baptized or unbaptized, shall
perish everlastingly.

V. 17. And these signs shall follow them that believe -- An eminent Author
subjoins, That believe with that very Faith mentioned in the preceding Verse.
(Though it is certain, that a Man may work Miracles, and not have saving Faith,
Mat. vii. 22, 23.) It was not one Faith by which St. Paul was saved; another,
by which he wrought Miracles. Even at this Day in every Believer Faith has a
latent miraculous Power: (Every Effect of Prayer being really miraculous:)
Although in many, both because of their own Littleness of Faith, and because the
World is unworthy, that Power is not exerted. Miracles in the beginning were
Helps to Faith; now also they ^e the Object of it. At Leonberg, in the Memory
of our Fathers, a Cripple that could hardly move with Crutches, while the Dean
was preaching on this very Text, was in a Moment made whole. Shall fellow --
The Word and Faith must go before. In my name -- By my Authority committed to
them. Raising the Dead is not mentioned. So our LORD performed even more than
He promised.

V. 18. If they drink any deadly thing -- But not by their own Choice. GOD
never calls us to try any ^^^h Experiments.

V. 19. The Lord -- How seasonable is He called by this Title! After he had
spoken to them -- For forty Days.

V. 20. They preached every where -- At the Time St. Mark wrote, the Apostles
had already gone into all the known World. ( Romans x. 18.) And each of them was
there known where he preached: The Name of Christ only was known throughout the
World.

NOTES ON THE Gospel according to St. LUKE.
I.
FOrasmuch as many have undertaken to compose a narrative of the facts which
have been fully confirmed among us, them to us:

was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth. him was troubled,
and fear fell upon him. ready a people prepared for the Lord. and hid herself
five months, saying,

was Mary. is with thee: blessed art thou among women. him, was troubled at his
saying, and reasoned, what manner of salutation this should be. of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. is this to me,
that the mother of my Lord should come to me? is she that believed; for there
shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord. is
his name. their thrones, and exalted them of low degree. his mercy, As he spoke
to our fathers, to Abraham and to his seed for ever.

loosed, and he spoke, blessing God. them, laid them up in their hearts,
saying, What manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with
him. have been since the world began: promised to our fathers, and to remember
his holy covenant,

V. 1-4. This short, weighty, artless, candid Dedication, belongs to the Acts,
as well as the Gospel of St. Luke.

Many have undertaken -- He does not mean St. Mat^hew or Mark; and St. John did
not write so early. For these were eyewitnesses themselves, and ministers of
the word.

V. 3. To write in order -- St. Luke describes in Order of Time, first, The
acts of Christ: His Conception, Birth, Childhood, Baptism, Miracles, Preaching,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension: Then The Acts of the Apostles. But in many
smaller Circumstances he does not observe the Order of Time. Most excellent
Theophilus -- This was the Appellation usually given to Roman Governors.
Theophilus (as the Ancients inform us) was a Person of eminent Quality at
Alexandria. In Acts i. 1. St. Luke does not give him this Title. He was then
probably a private Man.

After the Preface St. Luke gives us the History of Christ, from his Coming
into the World to his Ascension into Heaven.

Herein we may observe,
I. THE Beginning; and therein, 1. The Conception of John, C. i. 5 -- 25 2. The
Conception of Christ, 26 -- 56 3. The Birth and Circumcision of John; the Hymn
of Zacharias; the Youth of John, 57 -- 80 4. Christ's Birth, C. ii. 1 -- 20
Christ's Circumcision and Name, 21 Presentation in the Temple, 22 -- 38 Country
and Growth, 39 -- 40

II. The Middle, when he was twelve Years old and upward, 41 -- 52 III. The
Course of the History. A. The Introduction, wherein are described John the
Baptist; Christ's Baptism; and Temptation, C. iii. iv. 1 -- 13 B. The
acceptable Year in Galilee; a. Proposed at Nazareth, 14 -- 30 b. Actually
exhibited,
I. At Capernaum, and near it: Here we may observe, I. Actions not censured,
while Jesus, 1. Teaches with Authority, 31 -- 32 2. Casts out a Devil, 33 -- 37
3. Heals many Sick, 38 -- 41 4. Teaches every where, 42 -- 44 5. Calls Peter;
then James and John, C. v. 1 -- 11 6. Cleanses the Leper, 12 -- 16
2. Actions censured, more and more severally: Here occur, 1. The Healing the
Paralytic, 17 -- 26 2. The Calling of Levi; eating with Publicans and Sinners,
27 -- 32 3. The Question concerning Fasting, 33 -- 39 4. The plucking the Ears
of Corn, C. vi. 1 -- 5 5. The withered Hand restored; Snares laid, 6 -- 11
3. Actions having various Effects on various Persons, 1. Upon the Apostles, 12
-- 16 2. Upon other Hearers, 17 -- 49 3. Upon the Centurion, C. vii. 1 -- 10 4.
Upon the Disciples of John, The Occasion: the young Man raised, 11 -- 17 The
Message and Answer, 18 -- 23 The Reproof of them that believed not John, 24 --
35
5. Upon Simon and the peni^^nt Sinner, 36 -- 50 6. Upon the Women that
ministered to Him, C. viii. 1 -- 3 7. Upon the People, 4 -- 18 8. Upon his
Mother and Brethren, 19 -- 21

II. On the Sea, and 22 -- 26 Beyond it, 27 -- 39 III. On this Side again; 1.
Jairus and the Flux of Blood, 40 -- 56 2. The Apostles sent, C. ix. 1 -- 6 3.
Herod's Doubting, 7 -- 9 4. The Relation of the Apostles, 10 5. The Earnestness
of the People; our LORD's Benignity; five thousand sed, 11 -- 17
C. The Preparation for his Passion: a. A Recapitulation of the Doctrine
concerning his Person; his Passion foretold, 18 -- 27 b. His Transfiguration;
the Lunatic healed; his Passion again foretold; Humility enjoined, 28 -- 50 c.
His great Journey to Jerusalem, which we may divide into eighteen Intervals: 1.
The inhospitable Samaritans borne with, 51 -- 57 2. In the Way, improper
Followers repelled, Proper ones pressed forward, 57 -- 62 3. Afterward, the
Seventy sent; and received again, C. x. 1 -- 24 And the Scribe taught to love
his Neighbor, by the Example of the Good Samaritan, 25 -- 37 4. In Bethany,
Mary preferred before Martha, 38 -- 42 5. In a certain P^^^^, the Disciples
taught to pray, C. xi. 1 -- 13 A Devil (...), and the Action defended, 14 -- 26
The Accia^^ation of the Woman corrected, 27 -- 28 Those who desire a Sign
reproved, 29 -- 36
6. In a certain House, the Scribes and Pharisees censured, 37 -- 54 7. Our
LORD's Discourse to his Disciples, C. xii. 1 -- 12 To one that interrupts Him,
13 -- 21 To his Disciples again, 22 -- 40 To Peter, 41 -- 53 To the People, 54
-- 59
8. The Necessity of Repentance shown, C. xiii. 1 -- 9 A Woman healed on the
Sabbath, 10 -- 21 9. The Fewness of them that are saved, 22 -- 30 10. Herod
termed a Fox; Jerusalem reproved, 31 -- 35 11. In the Pharisee's House, He
cures the Dropsy on the Sabbath; and C. xiv. 1 -- 6 Teaches Humility, 7 -- 11
Hospitality, 12 -- 14 The Nature of the Great Supper, 15 -- 24 The Necessity of
Self-Denial, 25 -- 35
12. Joy over repenting Sinners defended, and C. xv. 1 -- 10 Illustrated by the
Story of the Prodigal son, 11 -- 32 The unjust Steward, wise in his Generation,
C. xvi. 1 -- 13 The Pharisees reproved; and warned by the Story or 14 -- 18 the
rich Man and Lazarus, 19 -- 31 Cautions against Scandals, C. xvii. 1 -- 4 The
Faith of the Apostles increased, 5 -- 10
13. In the Confines of Samaria and Calilee, He heals ten Lepers, 11 -- 19 14.
Answers the Question, concerning the Time when the Kingdom of GOD should come,
20 -- 37 Commends constant Prayer, C. xviii. 1 -- 8 Recommends Humility by the
Story of the Pharisee and Publican, 9 -- 14
15. Blesses little Children, 15 -- 17 Answers the rich young Man, 18 -- 27 And
Peter, asking what he should have, 28 -- 30
16. Foretells his Passion a third Time, 31 -- 34 17. Near Jericho, cures a
blind Man, 35 -- 43 18. In Jericho, brings Salvation to Zaecheus C. xix. 1 --
10 Answers touching the sudden Appearance of his Kingdom, 11 -- 28

D. Transactions at Jerusalem. a. The four first Days of the great Week; 1. His
royal Entry, 29 -- 44 2. The Abuse of the Temple corrected, 45 -- 46 Its Use
restored, and 47 -- 48 Vindicated, C. xx. 1 -- 8
3. His Discourses in the Temple: 1. The Parable of the husbandmen, 9 -- 19 2.
The Answer concerning paying Tribute, 20 -- 26 And the Resurrection, 27 -- 40
3. The Question concerning the Son of David, 41 -- 44 4. The Disciples
admonished, 45 -- 47 5. The poor Widow's Offering commended, C. xxi. 1 -- 6
4. His Prediction of the End of the Temple, the City, and the World, 5 -- 38
5. Judas's Agreement with the chief Priests, C. xxii. 1 -- 6

b. Thursday: 1. Peter and John prepare the Passover, 7 -- 13 2. The LORD's
Supper; Discourse after it, 14 -- 23 3. The Dispute, which of them was
greatest, 24 -- 30 4. Peter, and the other Apostles warned, 31 -- 38 5. On the
Mount of Olives, 1. Jesus prays; is in an Agony; s^^^^nened by an Angel; wakes
his Disciples, 39 -- 46 2. Is betrayed; unseasonably d^^^^^^d, 47 -- 53 3.
Carried to the High-Priest's House, 54 Denied by Peter, 55 -- 62 Mocked, 63 --
63

c. Friday: 1. His Passion and Death: Transactions, 1. In the Council, 66 -- 71
2. With Pilate, C. xxiii. 1 -- 5 3. With Herod, 6 -- 12 4. With Pilate again,
13 -- 25 5. In the Way, 26 -- 32 6. At Golgotha, where The Crucifixion itself,
and Jesus' Prayer, 33 -- 34 His Garments parted, 34 Scoffs; the Inscription on
the Cross, 35 -- 39 The penitent Thief, 40 -- 43 The Prodigies, and the Death
of Jesus, 44 -- 46 The Beholders of it, 47 -- 49

2. His Burial, 50 -- 53
d. Friday Evening and Saturday, 54 -- 56 e. His Resurrection, made known, 1.
To the Women, C. xxiv. 1 -- 12 2. To the Two going into the Country, and to
Simon, 13 -- 35 3. To the other Apostles, 36 -- 45
f. The Instructions given his Apostles; his Ascension, 46 -- 53

V. 5. The course of Abia -- The Priests were divided into twentyfour Courses,
of which that of Abia was the eighth, 1 Chronicles. xxiv. 10. Each Course ministered
in its Turn, for seven Days, from Sabbath to Sabbath. And each Priest of the
Course or Set in waiting, had his Part in the Temple-Service assigned him by
Lot.

V. 6. Walking in all the moral Commandments, and ceremonial Ordinances,
blameless -- How admirable a Character! May our Behavior be thus unblameable,
and our Obedience thus sincere and universal!

V. 10. The people were praying without, at the time of the incense -- So the
pious Jews constantly did. And this was the Foundation of that elegant Figure,
by which Prayer is in Script are so often compared to Incense. Perhaps one
Reason of ordaining Incense might be, to intimate the Acceptableness of the
Prayer that accompanied it; as well as to remind the Worshippers of that
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, which was once to be offered to GOD for
them, and of that Incense, which is continually offered with the prayers of the
saints, upon be golden altar that is before the throne, ReV. viii. 3.4.

V. 12. Zacharias was troubled -- Although he was accustomed to converse with
GOD, yet we see he was thrown into a great Consternation, at the Appearance of
his angelic Messenger, Nature not being able to sustain the Sight. Is it not
then an Instance of the Goodness, as well as of the Wisdom of GOD, that the
Services, which these heavenly Spirits render us, are generally invisible?

V. 13. Thy prayer is heard -- Let us observe with Pleasure, that the Prayers
of pious Worshippers come up with Acceptance before GOD; to whom no costly
Perfume is so sweet, as the Fragrancy of an upright Heart. An Answer of Peace
was here returned, when the Case seemed to be most helpless. Let us wait
patiently for the LORD, and leave to his own Wisdom the Time and Manner wherein
He will appear for us. Thou shall call his name John -- John signifies the
Grace or Favor of Jehovah. A Name well suiting the Person, who was afterward
so hightly in Favor with GOD, and endued with Abundance of Grace; and who
opened a Way to the most glorious Dispensation of Grace in the Messiah's
Kingdom. And so Zacharias' former Prayers for a Child, and the Prayer which he,
as the Representative of the People, was probably offering at this very Time,
for the Appearing of the Messiah, were remarkably answered in the Birth of his
Forerunner.

V. 15. He shall be great before the Lord -- GOD the Father. Of the Holy Ghost
and the Son of GOD mention is made immediately after. And shall drink neither
wine nor strong drink -- Shall be exemplary for Abstermiousness and Self-denial;
and so much the more filled with the Holy Ghost.

V. 16. And many of the children of Israel shall he turn -- None therefore need
be ashamed of "preaching like John the Baptist." To the Lord their God -- To
Christ.

V. 17. He shall go before him, Christ, in the power and spirit of Elijah --
With the same Integrity, Courage, Austerity, and Fervor, and the same Power of
GOD attending his Word: To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children -- To
reconcile those that are at Variance, to put an End to the most bitter
Quarrels, such as are very frequently those between the nearest Relations: And
the hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just -- And the most
obstinate Sinners to true Wisdom, which is only sound among them that are
righteous before GOD.

V. 18. Zacharias said, Whereby shall I know this? -- In how different a
Spirit, did the blessed Virgin say, How shall this be? Zacharias disbelieved
the fact: Mary had no doubt of the Thing; but only enquired concerning the
Manner of it.

V. 19. I am Gabriel that stana in the presence of God -- Seven Angels thus
stand before GOD, ( Rev. viii. 2.) who seem the highest of all. There seems to
be a remarkable Gradation in the Words, inhancing the Guilt of Zachariah's
Unbelief. As it he had said, I am Gabriel, an holy Angel of GOD; yea, One of
the highest Order. Not only so, but am now peculiarly sent from GOD; and that
with a Message to thee in particular. Nay, and to show thee glad tidings, such
as ought to be received with the greatest Joy and Readiness.

V. 20. Thou shall be dumb -- The Greek Word signifies deaf, as well as dumb:
And it seems plain, that he was as unable to hear, as he was to speak; for his
Friends were obliged to make Signs to him, that he might understand them, ver.
62.

V. 21. The people were waiting -- For him to come and dismiss them (as usual)
with the Blessing.

V. 24. Hid herself -- She retired from Company, that she might have the more
Leisure to rejoice and bless GOD, for his wonderful Mercy.

V. 25. He looked upon me to take away my reproach -- Barrenness was a great
Reproach among the Jews. Because Fruitfulness was promised to the Righteous.

V. 26. In the sixth month -- After Elisabeth had conceived.

V. 27. Espoused -- It was customary among the Jews, for Persons that married,
to contract before Witnesses some time before. And as Christ was to be be b^^^
of a pure Virgin, so the Wisdom of GOD ordered it to be of one espoused, that
to prevent Reproach He might have a reputed Father, according to the Flesh.

V. 28. Hail, thou highly favored: the Lord it with thee; blessed art thou
among women -- Hail is the Salutation used by our LORD, to the Women after his
Resurrection: Thou art highly favored, or, have found favor with GOD, ver.
30. is no more than was said of Noah, Moses and David. The Lord is with t^ce,
was said to Gideon, (Judge. vi. 12.) and blessed shall she be above women, of
Jael, (Judge. v. 24.) This Salutation gives no Room for any Pretense of paying
Adoration to the Virgin; as having no Appearance of a Prayer, or of Worship
offered to her.

V. 32. He shall be called the Son of the Highest -- In this Respect also: And
that in a more eminent Sense, than any, either Man or Angel can be called so.
The Lord shall give him the throne of his father David -- That is, the
Spiritual Kingdom, of which David's was a Type.

V. 33. He shall reign over the house of Jacob -- In which all true Believers
are included.

V. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee -- The Power of GOD was put forth by the Holy Ghost, as the
immediate Divine Agent in this Work: And so He exerted the Power of the Highest
as his own Power, who together with the Father and the Son is the Most High
GOD. Therefore also -- Not only as He is GOD from Eternity, but on this Account
likewise He shall be called the Son of God.

V. 36. And behold thy cousin Elisabeth -- Though Elisabeth was of the House of
Aaron, and Mary of the House of David, by the Father's Side, they might be
related by their Mother's. For the Law only forbad Heiresses marrying into
another Tribe. And so other Persons continually intermarried: Particularly, the
Families of David and of Levi.

V. 38. And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord -- It is not improbable,
that this Time of the Virgin's humble Faith, Consent, and Expectation, might be
the very Time of her conceiving.

V. 39. A city of Judah -- Probably Hebron, which was situated in the
Hill-country of Judea, and belonged to the House of Aar^^.

V. 41. When Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary -- The Di^^^urse with which
she saluted her, giving an Account of what the Angel had said, the Joy of her
Soul so affected her Body, that the very Child in her Womb was moved in an
uncommon Manner, as if it leaped for Joy.

V. 45. Happy is she that believed -- Probably she had in her Mind the Unbelief
of Zacharias.

V. 46. And Mary said -- Under a prophetic Impulse, several Things, which
perhaps she herself did not then fully understand.

V. 47. My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior -- She seems to turn her
Thoughts here to Christ Himself, who was to be born of her, as the Angel had
told her, He should be the Son of the Highest, whose Name should be Jesus, the
Savior. And she rejoiced in Hope of Salvation through Faith in Him, which is a
Blessing common to all true Believers, more than in being his Mother after the
Flesh, which was an Honor peculiar to her. And certainly she had the same
Reason to Rejoice in GOD her Savior that we have: Because He had regarded the
low estate of his handmaid -- In like Manner as He regarded our low estate; and
vouchsafed to come and save her and us, when we were reduced to the lowest
Estate of Sin and Misery.

V. 51. He has wrought strength with his arm -- That is, He has shown the
exceeding Greatness of his Power. She speaks prophetically of those Things as
already done, which GOD was about to do by the Messiah. He has scattered the
proud -- Visible and invisible.

V. 52. He has put down the mighty -- Both Angels and Men.

V. 54. He has helped his servant Israel -- By sending the Messiah.

V. 55. To his seed -- His spiritual Seed; all true Believers.

V. 56. Mary returned to her own house -- And thence soon after to Bethlehem.

V. 60. His mother said -- Doubtless by Revelation, or a particular Impulse
from GOD.

V. 66. The hand of the Lord -- The peculiar Power and Blessing of GOD.

V. 67. And Zacharias prophesied -- Of Things immediately to follow. But it is
observable, he speaks of Christ chiefly; of John only, as it were, incidentally.

V. 69. An horn -- signifies Honor, Plenty, and Strength. An horn of salvation
-- That is, a glorious and mighty Savior.

V. 70. His prophets, who have been since the world began -- F^^^ th^^e were
Prophets from the very Beginning.

V. 74. To serve him without fear -- Without any slavish Fear. Here is the
Substance of the Great Promise, That we shall be always holy, always happy:
That being delivered from Satan and Sin, from every uneasy and unholy Temper,
we shall joyfully love and serve GOD, in every Thought, Word, and Work.

V. 76. And thou child -- He now speaks to John; yet not as a Parent, but as a
Prophet

V. 77. To give knowledge of salvation, by the remission of sins -- The
Knowledge of the Remission of our Sins, being the grand Instrument of present
and eternal Salvation, Heb. viii. 11, 12. But the immediate Sense of the Words
seems to be, To preach to them the Gospel Doctrine of Salvation by the
Remission of their Sins.

V. 78. The dayspring -- Or the rising Sun; that is Christ.

II.
And in those days there went out a decree from Augustus Caesar, that all the
world should be enrolled. Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of
Nazareth into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem (because
he was of the family and household of David) Mat. i. 25.
And she brought forth her son, the firstborn, and swathed him, and laid him
in the manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.

shall be a sign to you; ye shall find the babe, wrapped in swaddling-clothes,
lying in a manger.

it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this
child.



Exodus xiii. 2.
Every male that opens the womb shall be holy to the Lev. xii. 8.
A pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons.

was Simeon, and this man was just and devout, waiting for the Consolation of
Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him.

one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher: she
was far advanced in years, having lived with an husband seven years from her
virginity. was a widow of about fourscore and four years, who departed not from
the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers, night and day.

mother knew it not, But supposing him to be in the company, they went a day's
journey; their kinsfolk and among their acquaintance.

V. 1. That all the world should be enrolled -- That all the Inhabitants, Male
and Female of every Town in the Roman Empire, with their Families and Estates
should be registered.

V. 2. When Cyrenius was governor of Syria -- When Publius Sulpicius Quirinus
governed the Province of Syria, in which Judea was then included.

V. 6. And while they were there, the days were fulfilled the (...) should be
delivered -- Mary seems not to have known that the (...) must have been born in
Bethlehem, agreeably to the Prophecys (...) the Providence of GOD took Care for
it.

V. 7. She laid him in the manger -- Perhaps it might rather (...) translated
in the stall. They were lodged in the O^-stall, sitted (...) on Occasion of the
great Concourse, for poor Guests. There was no room for them in the inn -- Now
also, there is seldom Room for Christ in an Inn.

V. 11. To you -- Shepherds; Israel; Mankind.

V. 14. Glory be to God in the highest; on earth peace; good will toward men --
The Shouts of the Multitude are generally broken into short Sentences. This
rejoicing Acclamation strongly represents the Piety and Benevolence of these
heavenly Spirits: As if they ha^^ (...), Glory be to God in the highest
Heavens: Let all the Angelic Lo^^^^ resound his Praises. For with the
Redeemer's Birth, Peace and all Kind of Happiness come down to dwell on Earth^
(...) the (...) ^^flowings of Divine Good Will and Favor, are now ^^^^ffed
toward Men.

V. 20. For all the things that they had heard -- From Mary: as it was told
them -- By the Angels.

V. 21. To circumcise the child -- That he might visibly be made under the law
by a sacred Rite, which obliged him to keep the whole Law; as also that he
might be owned to be the Seed of Abraham, and might put an Honor on the solemn
Dedication of Children to GOD.

V. 22. The days -- The forty Days prescribed, Lev. xii. 2, 4.

V. 24. A pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons -- This Offering sufficed
for the Poor.

V. 25. The Consolation of Israel -- A common Phrase for the Messiah, who was
to be the everlasting Consolation of the Israel of GOD. The Holy Ghost was upon
him -- That is, He was a Prophet.

V. 27. By the spirit -- By a particular Revelation or Impulse from Him.

V. 30. Thy Salvation -- Thy Christ, thy Savior.

V. 32. And the glory of thy people Israel -- For after the Gentiles a^^
enlightened, all Israel shall be saved.

V. 33. Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken --
For they did not yet thoroughly understand them.

V. 34. Simeon blessed them -- Joseph and Mary. This child is set for the fall
and rising again of many -- That is, He will be a savor of death to some, to
Unbelievers; a savor of life to others, to Believers: And for a sign which
shall be spoken against -- A Sign from GOD, yet rejected of Men: But the Time
for declaring this at large, was not yet come: That the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed -- The Event will be, that by Means of that Contradiction, the
inmost Thoughts of many, whether good or bad, will be made manifest.

V. 35. A sword shall pierce through thy own soul -- So it did, when He suffered;
particularly at his Crucifixion.

V. 37. Fourscore and four years -- These were the Years of her Life, not her
Widowhood only. Who departed not from the temple -- Who attended there at all
the stated Hours of Prayer. But served God with fastings and prayers -- Even at
that Age. Night and day -- That is, spending therein a considerable Part of the
Night, as well as of the Day.

v. 38. To all that were waiting for redemption -- The Scepter now appeared to
be departing from Judah, though it was not actually gone: Daniel's Weeks were
plainly near their Period. And the Revival of the Spirit of Prophecy, together
with the memorable Occurrences relating to the Birth of John the Baptist, and
of Jesus, could not but encourage and quicken the Expectation of pious Persons
at this Time.

Let the Example of these aged Saints animate those, whose hoary ^^ads, like
theirs, are a crown of glory, being found in the way of righteousness. Let
those venerable Lips, so soon to be silent in the Grave, be now employed in the
Praises of their Redeemer. Let them labor to leave those behind, to whom
Christ will be as precious as he has been to them; and who will be waiting for
GOD's Salvation, when they are gone to enjoy it.

V. 40. And the child grew -- In bodily Strength and Stature; and waxed strong
in spirit -- The powers of his human Mind daily improved; filled with wisdom --
By the Light of the indwelling Spirit, which gradually opened itself in his
Soul; and the grace of God was upon him -- That is, The peculiar Favor of GOD
rested upon Him, even as M^n.

V. 43. The child Jesus -- St. Luke describes in order Jesus the fruit of the
womb, C. i. 42. an infant, C. ii. 12. a little child, ver. 40. a child here,
and afterward a man. So our LORD passed through and sanctified every Stage of
human Life. Old Age only did not become Him.

V. 44. Supposing him to have been in the company -- As the Men and Women
usually trave^^d in distinct Companies.

V. 46. After three days -- The first Day was spent in their Journey; the
second, in their Return to Jerusalem; and the third, in searching for him
there: They found him in the temple -- In an Apartment of it: Sitting in the
midst of the doctors -- Not one Word is said of his disputing with them, but
only of his asking and answering Questions, which was a very usual Thing in
these Assemblies, and indeed the very (...) of them. And if He was, with
others, at the Feet of these Teac^ (...) (where Learners generally sat) He
might be said to be in the mi^^^ (...) them, as they sat on Benches of a
semi-circular Form, raised above their Hearers and Disciples.

V. 49. Why sought ye me? -- He does not blame them for losing, butfor thinking
it needful to seek Him; and intimates, That He could not be lost, nor found any
where, but doing the Will of an higher Parent.

V. 50. It is observable, that Joseph is not mentioned after this Time, whence
it is probable, the did not live long after.

V. 52. Jesus increased in wisdom -- As to his human Nature, and in favor with
God -- In Proportion to that Increase. It plainly follows, that though a Man were
pure, even as Christ was pure, still he would have Room to increase in
Holiness, and in Consequence thereof, (...) increase in the Favor, as well as
in the Love of GOD.

III.
Mat. iii.x. Mark i.(...).
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being
governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip
tetrarch of Iturea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of
Isaiah xl. 2.
The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight. to our father; for I say to you, that God is
able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.



any falsely; and be content with your pay.

is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will gather the
wheat into his garner, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable sire. his
exhortation preached he to the people.

Mat. iii. 13. Mark i. 9.
Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being
baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened,

his ministry, being, as was supposed, the son of Joseph, who was the son of
Heli, The son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Janna,
the son of Joseph, The son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum,
the son of Esli, the son of Nagge, The son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the
son of Shimei, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah, The son of Johanan, the son
of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Salathiel, the son of Neri, The son
of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of
Er, The son of Jose, the son of Eleazar, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat,
the son of Levi, The son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the
son of Johanan, the son of Eliakim, The son of Melea, the son of Menan, the son
of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David, The son of Jesse, the son of
Obed, the son of Booz, the son of Salmon, the son of Naasson, The son of
Aminadab, the son of Aaron, the son of Esrom, the son of Phares, the son of
Judah, The son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of
Terah, the son of Nahor, The son of Saruch, the son of Ragau, the son of
Phalec, the son of Heber, the son of Sala, the son of Cainan, the son of
Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, The son of
Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jareh, the son of Maleleel, the son of
Cainan, The son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.

V. 1. The fifteenth year of Tiberius Reckoning from the Time when Augustus
made him his Colleague in the Empire. Herod being ^^^^^ch of Galilee -- The
Dominions of Herod the Great were, after his D^^^h, divided into four Parts or
Tetrarchies. This Herod his Son was ^^^^rch of Galilee, reigning over that
fourth Part of his Dominions. (...) Brother reigned over two other fourth
Parts, the Region of ^urea, and that of Trachonitis (that Tract of Land on the
other ^^de Jordan, which had formerly belonged to the Tribe of Manasseba) And
Lysanias (probably desconded from a Prince of that Name, who was some Years
before Governor of that Country) was Tetrarch of the remaining Part, Abilene,
which was a large City of Syria, whose Territori^^ reached to Lebanon and
Damasous, and contained great Numbers of Jews.

V. 2. Annas being high priest and Caiaphas -- There could be but one
High Priest, strictly speaking, at once, Annas was the High Priest at that
Time, and Caiaphas his Sagan or Deputy.

V. 5. Every valley shall be filled, etc. -- That is, every Hinderanes ^^^ll be
removed.

V. 6. The Salvation of God -- The Savior, the Messiah.

V. 8. Say not within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father -- That is,
trust not in your being Members of the visible Church, or in any external
Privileges whatsoever; for GOD now require a Change of Heart; and that without
Delay.

V. 10. He answers -- It is not properly John, but the Holy Ghost, who
teaches us in the following Answers, How to come ourselves, and how to instruct
other penitent Sinners to come to Christ, that He, may give them Rest. The Sum
of all is, Cease to do evil, learn to do will -- These are the fruits worthy of
repentance.

V. 20. He shut up John -- This Circumstance, though it happened after, is here
mentioned before our LORD's Baptism, that his History (that of John being
concluded) may then follow without any Interruption.

V. 21. Jesus praying, the heaven was opened -- It is observable, that the
three Voices from Heaven (see Luke ix. 29, 35. John xii. 28.) by which the
Father bore Witness to Christ, were pronounced either while He was praying, or
quickly after it.

V. 23. And Jesus was -- John's Beginning was computed by the Years of Princes:
Our Savior's, by the Years of his own Life, as a more august A^ra. About
thirty years of age -- He did not now enter upon his thirtieth Year (as the
common Translation would induce one to think) but He now entered on his public
Ministry: Being of such an Age, as the Mesaic Law required. Our great Master
attained not, as it seems, to the Conclusion of his thirty-fourth Year. Yet
what glorious Achievements did He accomplish, within those narrow Limits of
Time! Happy that Servant, who, with any proportionable Zeal, dispatches the
great Business of Life! And so much the more happy, if his Sun go down at Noon.
For the Space that is taken from the Labors of Time, shall be added to the
Rewards of Eternity. The son of Holy -- That is the Son in-law; for Heli was
the Father of Mary. So St. Matthew writes the Genealogy of Joseph, descended
from David by Solomon; St. Luke that of Mary; descended from David by Nathan.
In the Genealogy of Joseph (recited by St. Matthew) that of Mary is implied,
the Jews being accustomed to marry into their own Families.

V. 38. Adam the son of God -- That is, whatever the Sons of Adam receive from
their human Parents, Adam received immediately from GOD, except Sin and Misery.

IV.
Mat. iv. 1. Mark i. 12.
And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was led by
the spirit into the wilderness, Being forty days tempted by the devil. Deuteronomy.
viii. 3.
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God. for it is
delivered to me, and I give it to whomsoever I will. Deuteronomy. vi. 13.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Psalm xci.
11.
He shall charge his angels concerning thee, to keep thee: Deuteronomy. vi. 16.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Mat. xiii. 54. Mark vi. 1.
And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up; and as his custom was, he
went into the synagogue on the sabbath, and stood up to read. Isaiah lxi. 1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to proclaim
deliverance to the captives, and recovery of sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruised, to publish the acceptable year of the Lord. it
again to the servant, and sat down. to you, No prophet is acceptable in his own
country. 1 Kings xvii. 19. xviii. 44.
when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, while a great famine
was through all the land. a city of Sidon, to a widow. 2 Kings v. 14.
Naaman the Syrian.

Mark i. 21.
And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the
sabbath days.

Let us alone: What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth?

Mat. viii. 14. Mark i. 29.
And rising up out of the synagogue, he entered into Simon's house. And Simon's
wife's mother was ill of a great fever, and they besought him for her. (...)
16. Mark i.(...).
Now when the sun was se^, all that had any sick of diverse diseases brought
them to him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them. Mark
i. 35. Lev. xiV.(...) ix.(...). Mark ii. 3.
And when it was day, going out he went into a desert place: and the multitude
sought him, and came to him, and detained him, that he might not depart from
them. to other cities also, for therefore am I sent.

V. 1. The wilderness -- Supposed by some to have been in Judea; by others to
have been that great Desert of Horeb or Sinai, where the Children of Israel
were tried for forty Years, and Moses and Elijah fasted forty Days.

V. 6. I give it to whomsoever I will -- Not so, Satan. It is GOD, not thou,
that puts down one, and sets up another: Although sometimes Satan, by
GOD's Permission, may occasion great Revolutions in the World.

V. 13. A convenient season -- In the Garden of Gethsemane, Luke xxii. 53.

V. 14. Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit -- Being more abundantly
strengthened after his Conflict.

V. 15. Being glorified of all -- So GOD usually gives strong Cordials after
strong Temptations. But neither their Approbation continued long, nor the
outward Calm which He now enjoyed.

V. 16. He stood up -- Showing thereby, that He had a Desire to read the
Scripture to the Congregation. On which the Book was given to Him. It was the
Jewish Custom to read standing, but to preach sitting.

V. 17. He found -- It seems, opening upon it, by the particular Providence of
GOD.

V. 18. He has anointed me -- With the Spirit. He has by the Power of his
Spirit which dwells in me, set me apart for these Offices. To preach the
gospel to the poor -- Literally and spiritually.

How is the Doctrine of the ever-blessed Trinity interwoven, even in those
Scriptures where one would least expect it? How clear a Declaration of the
great Three-One is there in those very Words, The Spirit -- of the Lord -- is
upon Me! To proclaim deliverance to the captives, and recovery of sight to the
blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised -- Here is a beautiful
Gradation, in comparing the spiritual State of Men, to the miserable State of
those Captives, who were not only cast into Prison, but, like Zedekiah, had
their Eyes put out, and were laden and bruised with Chains of Iron.

V. 19 The acceptable year -- Plainly alluding to the Year of Jubilee, when all
both Debtors and Servants were set free.

V. 21. To day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears -- By what you hear me
speak.

V. 22. The gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth -- A Person of
spiritual Discernment may find in all the Discourses of our LORD a peculiar
Sweetness, Gravity, and Becomingness, such as is not to be found in the same
Degree, not even in those of the Apostles.

V. 23. Ye will surely say -- That is, your Approbation now outweighs your
Prejudices. But it will not be so long. You will soon ask, Why my Love does not
begin at Home? Why I do not work Miracles here, rather than at Capernaum? It is
because of your Unbelief. Nor is it any new Thing for me to be despised in my
own Country. So were both Elijah and Elisha, and thereby driven to work
Miracles among Heathens, rather than in Israel.

V. 24. No prophet is acceptable in his own country -- That is, in his own
Neighborhood. It generally holds, that a Teacher sent from GOD, is not so
acceptable to his Neighbors, as he is to Strangers. The Meanness of his
Family, or Lowness of his Circumstances, bring his Office into Contempt: Nor
can they suffer that he, who was before equal with or below themselves, should
now bear a superior Character.

V. 25. When the heaven was shut up three years and six months -- Such a Proof
had they, that GOD had sent him. In 1 Kings xviii. 1. it is said, The word of
the Lord come to Elijah in the third year: Namely, reckoning not from the
Beginning of the Drought, but from the Time when he began to sojourn with the
Widow of Sarepta. A Year of Drought had preceded this, while he dwelt at the
Brook Cherith. So that the whole Time of the Drought was (as St. James likewise
observes) three Years and six Months.

V. 28. And all in the synagogue were filled with fury -- Perceiving the
Purport of his Discourse, namely, that the Blessing which they despised, would
be offered to and accepted by the Gentiles. So changeable are the Hearts of
wicked Men! So little are their Starts of Love to be depended on! So unable are
they to bear the clo^^ Application, even of a Discourse which they most admire!

V. 30. Passing through the midst of them -- Perhaps invisibly; or perhaps they
were overawed; so that though they saw, they could not touch Him.

V. 31. He came down to Capernaum -- And dwelt there, entirely quitting his
Abode at Nazareth.

V. 34. What have we to do with thee -- Thy present Business is with Men, not
with Devils. I know thee who thou art -- But surely he did not know a little
before, that He was GOD over all, blessed for ever: Or he would not have dared
to tell Him, All this power is delivered to me, and I give it to whomsoever I
will. The Holy one of God -- Either this Confession was ext^^ted from him by
Terror (for the Devils believe and tremble) or he made it with a Design (...)
render the Character of Christ suspected. Possibly it was from hence the
Pharisees took Occasion to say, He casts out devils by the prime of the
dev^ls.

V. 40. When the sun was set -- And consequently the Sabbath ended, which they
reckoned from Sunset to Sunset.

V.
* And as the multitude pressed on him to hear the word of God, he stood by the
lake of Gennesareth, their nets. it, fell down at Jesus's knees, saying, Depart
from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

Mat. viii. 2. (...).
And when he was in a certain city, behold a man full of leprosy, who seeing
Jesus fell on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me clean. his ^^^^d he touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean.
And immediately the leprosy departed from him. Lev. xiv. 2.
as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.

out of Judea and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was present to heal
them. Mat. ix. 2. Mark ii. 3.
And behold men bringing on a couch a man that was ill of the palsy; and they
sought to bring him in, and lay him before him. his couch into the midst,
before Jesus. on earth to forgive sins (he said to the paralytic), I say to
thee, Arise, take up thy couch, and go to thine house.

Mat. ix. 9. Mark ii. 14.
And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named Levi, sitting
at the receipt of custom, and said to him, Follow me. Mat. ix. 14. Mark ii. 18.
And they said to him, Why do the disciples of John, and likewise of the
Pharisees, fast often and make prayers; but thine eat and drink? puts new
wine into old leathern bottles: else the new wine will burst the bottles, and
be spilled, and the bottles will perish.

V. 6. (...) net brake -- Began to tear.

V. 8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man -- And therefore not worthy to be
in thy Presence.

V. 11. They forsook all, and followed him -- They had followed Him before; (
John i. 43.) but not so as to forsake all. Till now, they wrought at their
ordinary Calling.

V. 16. He withdrew -- The Expression in the Original implies, that He did so
frequently.

V. 17. Sitting by -- As being more honorable than the Bulk of the
Congregation who stood. And the power of the Lord was present to heal them --
To heal the Sickness of their Souls, as well as all bodily Diseases.

V. 19. Not being able to bring him in through the multitude, they went round
about by a back Passage, and going up the Stairs on the outside, they, came
upon the flat-roofed House, and let him down through the Trap^door, such as was
on the Top of most of the Jewish Houses: Doubtless, with such Circumspection,
as the Circumstancea plainly required.

V. 26. We have seen strange things today -- Sins forgiven, Miracles wrought.

V. 28. Leaving all -- His Business and Gain.

V. 29. And Levi made him a great entertainment -- It was necessarily great,
because of the great Number of Guests.

V. 33. Make prayers -- Long and solemn Prayers.

V. 34. Can ye make -- That is, is it proper to make Men fast and mourn, during
a Festival Solemnity?

V. 36. He spoke also a parable -- Taken from Clothes and Wine; therefore
peculiarly proper at a Feast.

V. 39. And no man having drunk old wine -- And besides, Men are not wont to be
immediately freed from old Prejudices.

VI.
Mat. xii. 1. Mark ii. 23.
And on the first sabbath after the second day of unleavened bread, he went
through the cornfieldsd, and his disciples plucked the cars of corn, and ate,
rubbing them in their hands. 1 Samuel xxi. 6.
How he went into the house of God, and took and ate the shewbread, and gave
also to them that were with him, which it is not lawful to eat, but for the
priests only?

Mat. xii. 9. Mark iii. 1.
And on another sabbath also he went into the synagogue and taught. you, Which
is lawful on the sabbath, To do good, or to do evil?

Mark iii. 13.
And in those days he went out into the mountain to pray, and continued all
night in the prayer of God. Mat. x. 2. Mark iii. 14. Acts i. 13.
And when it was day, he called to him his disciples, and chose twelve of them,
whom also he named Apostles: son of Alpheus, and Simon called Zelotes, Jude the
brother of James,

Mat. v. 3.
And lifting up his eyes on his disciples he said, Happy are ye poor: for
yours is the kingdom of God. are ye that hunger now; for ye shall be
satisfied: happy are ye that weep now; for ye shall laugh. are ye when men
shall hate you, and shall separate you from their company, and shall revile
you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. is great in
heaven; for in like manner did their fathers to the prophets. to you, when all
men shall speak well of you; for so did their fathers to the false prophets.

Mat. v. 44.
But I say to you that hear, Love your enemies; do good to them that hate you.

Mat. v. 39.
And to him that smites thee on the cheek, offer also the other: and him that
takes away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also. Mat. v. 42.
Give to every man that asks thee, and of him that takes away thy goods, ask
them not again. Mat. vii. 12.
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. Mat.
vii. 1.
Judge not, and ye shall not be judged; condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned; forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: Give, and it shall be given to
you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall
they give into your bosom. Mat. xv. 14.
Can the blind lead the blind? Will they not both fall into the ditch? Mat. x.
24. John xv. 20.
The disciple is not above his master, but every one that is perfected, shall
be as his master. Mat. vii. 3.
And why beholdest. thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but perceivest
not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how can thou say to thy brother,
Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, thou thyself not seeing
the beam that is in thine own eye. Mat. vii. 21.
And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Mat. vii. 24.
Whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings, and does them, I will show you
to whom he is like.

V. 1. The first Sabbath -- So the Jews reckoned their Sabbaths, from the
Passover to Pentecost; the first, second, third, and so on, till the seventh
Sabbath (after the second Day.) This immediately preceded Pentecost, which was
the fiftieth Day after the second Day of unleavened Bread.

V. 2. Why do ye -- St. Matthew and Mark represent the Pharisees as proposing
the Question to our LORD Himself. It was afterward, probably, they proposed it
to his Disciples.

V. 9. To save life, or to kill -- He just then probably saw the Design to kill
him, rising in their Hearts.

V. 12. In the prayer of God -- The Phrase is singular and emphatical, to imply
an extraordinary and sublime Devotion.

V. 15. Simon called Zelotes -- Full of Zeal; otherwise called Simon the
Canaanate.

V. 17. On a plain -- At the Foot of the Mountain.

V. 20. In the following Verses our LORD in the Audience of his newly-chosen
Disciples, and of the Multitude, repeats, standing on the Plain, many
remarkable Passages of the Sermon he had before delivered sitting on the Mount.

He here again pronounces the poor, and the hungry, the mourners, and the
persecuted, happy: and represents as miserable those who are rich, and full,
and joyous, and applauded: Because generally Prosperity is a sweet Poison, and
Affliction a healing, though bitter Medicine. Let the Thought reconcile us to
Adversity, and awaken our Caution when the World smiles upon us; when a
plentiful Table is spread before us, and our Cup is running over; when our
Spirits are gay; and we hear (what Nature loves) our own Praise from Men. Happy
are ye poor -- The Word seems here to be taken literally: Ye who have left all
for me.

V. 24. Miserable are ye rich -- If ye have received or sought your Consolation
or Happiness therein.

V. 25. Full -- Of Meat, and Drink, and worldly Goods. That laugh -- That are
of a light, trifling Spirit.

V. 26. Woe to you, when all men shall speak well of you -- But who will believe
this?

V. 27. But I say to you that hear -- Hitherto our LORD had spoken only to
particular Sorts of Persons; now He begins speaking to all in general.

V. 29. To him that smites thee on the cheek -- Takes away thy cloak -- These
seem to be proverbial Expressions, to signify an Invasion of the tenderest
Points of Honor and Property. Offer the other -- Forbid not thy coat -- That
is, rather yield to his repeating the Affront or Injury, than gratify
Resentment in righting yourself, in any Method not becoming Christian Love.

V. 30. Give to every one -- Friend or Enemy, what thou can spare; and he
really wants: And of him that takes away thy goods -- By borrowing, if he be
insolvent, ask them not again.

V. 32. It is greatly observable, our LORD has so little Regard for one of the
highest Instances of natural Virtue, namely, the returning Love for Love, that
He does not account it even to deserve Thanks. For even sinners, says He, do
the same: Men who do not regard GOD at all. Therefore he may do this, who has
not taken one Step in Christianity.

V. 38. Into your bosom -- Alluding to the Mantles the Jews wore, into which a
large Quantity of Corn might be received. With the same measure that ye mete
with, it shall be measured to you again -- Amazing Goodness! So we are
permitted even to carve for ourselves! We ourselves are, as it were, to tell
GOD, How much Mercy He shall show us! And can we be content with less than the
very larges^ measure? Give then to Man, what thou designest to receive of GOD.

V. 39. He spoke a parable -- Our LORD sometimes used Parables, when He knew
plain and open Declarations would too much inflame the Passions of his Hearers.
It is for this Reason that He uses this Parable. Can the blind lead the blind?
-- Can the Scribes teach this Way, which they know not themselves? Will not
they and their Scholars perish together? Can they make their Disciples any
better than themselves? But as for those who will be my Disciples, they shall
be all taught of GOD; who will enable them to come to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of their master. Be not ye like their Disciples,
censuring others, and not amending yourselves.

V. 46. And why call ye me Lord, Lord -- What will fair Professions avail,
without a Life answerable thereto?

VII.
Mat. viii. 5.
Now when he had ended all his sayings in the hearing of the people, he entered
into Capernaum.

speak: and he delivered him to his mother.

Mat. xi. 2.
And the disciples of John informed him of all these things. them to Jesus,
saying, Art thou he that is to come, or look we for another? Mat. iii. 1.
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before
thee. him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of
John.

down to table. him weeping, watered his feet with a shower of tears, and wiped
them, with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with
the ointment. it, spoke within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet,
would have known, who and what manner of woman this is that touches him; for
she is a sinner. them with the hairs of her head.

V. 3. Hearing of Jesus -- Of his Miracles, and of his Arrival at Capernaum.

V. 22. To the poor the gospel is preached -- Which is the greatest Mercy, and
the greatest Miracle of all.

V. 24. When the Messengers were departed -- He did not speak the following
Things, in the Hearing of John's Disciples, lest He should seem to flatter
John, or to compliment him into an Adherence to his former Testimony. To avoid
all Suspicion of this Kind, he deserted his Commendation of him, till the
Messengers were gone; and then delivered it to the People, to prevent all
Imaginations, as if John were wavering in his Judgment, and had sent the two
Disciples for his own, rather than their Satisfaction.

V. 28. There is not a greater prophet than John -- A greater Teacher. But he
that is least in the kingdom of GOD -- The least Teacher whom I send forth.

V. 29. And all the people -- Our LORD continues his Discourse: Justified God
-- Owned his Wisdom and Mercy, in thus calling them to Repentance, and
preparing them for Him that was to come.

V. 30. But the Pharisees and Scribes -- The good, learned, honorable Men;
made void the counsel, the gracious Design, of God toward them -- They
disappointed all these Methods of his Love, and would receive no Benefit from
them.

V. 32. They are like children sitting in the marketplace -- So froward and
perverse, that no Contrivance can be found to please them. It is plain, our
LORD means, that they were like the Children complained of, not like those that
made the Complaint.

V. 35. But wisdom is justified by all her children -- The Children of Wisdom
are, those who are truly wise, wise unto Salvation. The Wisdom of GOD in all
these Dispensations, these various Methods of calling Sinners to Repentance, is
owned and heartily approved by all these.

V. 36. And one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him -- Let the Candor
with which our LORD accepted this ^ivitation, and his Gentleness and Prudence
at this ensuaring Entertainment, teach us to mingle the Wisdom of the Serpent,
with the Innocence and Sweetness of the Dove. Let us neither absolutely refuse
all Favors nor resent all Neglects, from those whose Friendship is at best
very doubtful, and their Intimacy by no means safe.

V. 37. A woman -- Not the same with Mary of Bethany, who anointed Him six Days
before his last Passover.

V. 40. And Jesus said, Simon, I have somewhat to say to thee -- So tender and
courteous an Address does our LORD use even to a proud, censorious Pharisee!

V. 43. Which of them will love him most? -- Neither of them will love him at
all, before he has forgiven them. An insolvent Debtor, till he is forgiven,
does not love, but fly his Creditor.

V. 44. Thou gave me no water -- It was customary, with the Jews to show
Respect and Kindness to their welcome Guests, by saluting them with a Kiss, by
washing their Feet, and anointing their Heads with Oil, or some (...) Ointment.

V. 47. Those many sins of here is are forgiven; therefore she loves much -- The
Fruit of her having had much forgiven It should be carefully observed here,
That her Love is mentioned as the Effect and Evidence, not the Cause of her
Pardon. She knew that much had been forgiven her; and therefore she loved much.

V. 50. Thy faith has saved thee -- Not thy Love. Love is Salvation.

VIII.
And afterward he went through every city and village preaching and publishing
the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him, And
certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and Infirmities, Mary called
Magdalene, out of whom had gone seven devils,

Mat. xiii. 1. Mark iv. 1.
And a great multitude being gathered together, coming to him out of every
city, he spoke by a parable, parables, so that seeing they do not see, and
hearing they do not understand. are they, who when they hear, receive the word
with joy. this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. Mat. v. 15. Mark iv. 21.
c. xi. 33.
No man having lighted a candle, covers it with a vessel, or puts it under
a bed; but sets it on a candlestick, that they who come in may see the
light. Mat. x. 26. Mark iv. 22. c. xii. 2.
For there is nothing hid that shall not be discovered, neither any thing
concealed, that shall not be known and come to light. Mat. xiii. 12. Mark iv.
25. C. xix. 26.
Take heed therefore how ye hear; for whosoever has, to him shall be given;
and whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even what he most
assuredly has.

Mat. xii. 46. Mark iii. 31.
Then came toward him his mother and his brethren, but could not come to him
for the crowd. by some who said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to speak with thee. mother and my brethren are these who hear the word
of God and do it.

Mat. viii. 23. Mark iv. 35.
And on a certain day he went into a vessel with his disciples: and he said to
them, Let us go over to the other side of the lake. And they put to sea. with
water, and were in danger.

Mat. viii. 28. Mat. v. 1.
And they sailed to the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against
Galilee. that he would suffer them to enter into them: And he suffered them. it
in the city and in the country. it related to them, How he that was possessed
by the devils was healed. Mat. ix. 1. Mark v. 18.
Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about, besought
him to depart from them; for they were taken with great fear, and he went into
the vessel and returned.

Mark v. 21.
And when Jesus returned, the multitude gladly received him; for they were all
waiting for him. and they that were with him said, Master, the multitude throng
thee and press thee, and say thou, Who is it that touched me? it,
answered-him, saying, Fear not; only believe, and she shall be made whole.

V. 2. Mary Magdalene -- Or Mary of Magdala, a Town in Galilte: Probably the
Person mentioned in the last Chapter.

V. 15. Who -- keep it -- Not like the Highway-side: And bring forth fruit --
Not like the thorny Ground: With perseverance -- Not like the Stony.

V. 16. No man having lighted a candle -- As if he had said, And let your good
fruit appear openly.

V. 17. For nothing is hid -- Strive not to conccal it at all; for you can
conccal nothing long.

V. 18. The word commonly translated see^eth, wherever it occurs, does not
weaken, but greatly strengthen the Sense.

V. 29. For many times it had caught him -- Therefore our compassionate LORD
made the more Haste to cast him out.

V. 31. The ab^ss -- That is, the bottomless Pit.

V. 32. To enter into the swine -- Not that they were any easier in the Swine,
than out of them. Had it been so, they would not so soon have dislodged
themselves, by destroying the Herd.

V. 52. She is not dead but sleeps -- Her Soul is not separated finally from
the Body; and this short Separation is rather to be called Sleep than Deuth.

IX.
Mat. x. 1. Mark vi. 7.
And calling together the twelve, he gave them power and authority over all
devils and to cure diseases.



Matt. xiv. 1. Mark vi. 14.
Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all the things that were done by him.

Mark vi. 30.
And the apostles returning told him whatsoever they had done. And he took them
and went aside privately into the desert of Bethsaida. it, they followed him,
and he received them, and spoke to them of the kingdom of God, and healed them
that had need of healing. Mat. xiv. 15. Mark vi. 35. John vi. 3.
And the day began to decline: And the twelve coming to him said, send the
multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about, and
lodge and find victuals: for we are here in a desert place.

Mat. xvi. 13. Mark viii. 27.
And as he was praying apart, his disciples were with him. And he asked them
saying, whom say the people that I am? say, Elijah; and others, that one of the
old prophets is risen again.

man be willing to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up. his cross
daily, and follow me. Mat. xvi. 25. Mark viii. 35. John xii. 25.
For whosoever desires to save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake, he shall save it: in his father's, and that of the
holy angels.

Mat. xvii. 1. Mark ix. 2.
And about eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James,
and went up into the mountain to pray.

Mat. xvii. 14. Mark ix. 14.
And the next day, as they came down from the mountain, a great multitude met
him. him: and Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and
delivered him again to his father. Mat. xvii. 22. Mark ix. 30.
for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men. Mat. xviii. 2.
Mark ix. 37.
And Jesus seeing the reasoning of their heart, took a little child, and set
him by him, Mark ix. 38.
And John answering, said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name,
and we forbad him; because he follows not us. him not, for he that is not
against you is for you.

James and John seeing it, said, Lord, will thou that we bid fire come down
from heaven and consume them, even as Elijah did? them.

Mat. viii. 19.
And as they went in the way, one said to him, Lord, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou go. have nests: but the Son of man has not where to lay
his head.

V. 4. There abide and thence depart -- That is, stay in that House till ye
leave the City.

V. 7. It was said by some -- And soon after by Herod, himself.

V. 8. That Elijah bad appeared -- He could not rise again, because he did not
die.

V. 18. Apart -- From the Multitude. And he asked them -- When He had done
praying during which they probably staid at a Distance.

V. 22. Saying -- Ye must prepare for a Scene far different from this.

V. 23. Let him deny himself, and take up his cross -- The Necessity of this
Duty has been shown in many Places: the Extent of it is specified here, daily
-- Therefore that Day is lost wherein no Cross is taken up.

V. 31. In glory -- Like Christ with whom they talked.

V. 32. They saw his Glory -- The very same Expression in which it is described
by St. John, chapter i. 14; and by St. Peter, 2 Ep. i. 16.

V. 34. A cloud came and overshadowed them all. And they, the Apostles, feared,
while they (Moses and Elijah) entered into the cloud, which took them away.

V. 44. Let these Sayings sink down into your ears -- That is, consider them
deeply. In Joy remember the Cross. So wisely does our LORD balance Praise with
Sufferings.

V. 46. And there arose a reasoning among them -- This Kind of Reasoning always
arose at the most improper Times that could be imagined.

V. 48. And said to them. -- If ye would be truly great, humble yourselves to
the meanest Offices. He that is least in his own Eyes shall be great indeed.

V. 51. The days are fulfilled, that he should be received up -- That is, the
Time of his Passion was now at Hand. St. (...) looks through this, to the Glory
which was to follow. He steadfastly set his face -- Without Fear of his Enemies,
or Shame of the Cross. Heb. xii. 2.

V. 52. He sent messengers to make ready -- A Lodging and needful Entertainment
for Him and those with him.

V. 53. His face was as though he would go to Jerusalem -- It plainly appeared,
He was going to worship at the Temple, and thereby, is Effect, to condemn the
Samaritan Worship at Mount Gorixim.

V. 54. As Elijah did -- At or near this very Place, which might put it into
the Minds of the Apostles to make the Motion now, rather than at any other Time
or Place, where Christ had received the like Affront.

V. 55. Ye know not what manner of Spirit -- The Spirit of Christianity is. It
is not a Spirit of Wrath and Vengeance, but of Peace, and Gentleness, and Love.

V. 58. But Jesus said to him -- First, understand the Terms: Consider, on what
Conditions thou art to follow me.

V. 61. Suffer me first to bid them farewell that are in my house -- As Elisha
did, after Elijah had called him from his Plow, 1 Kings xix. 19. to which our
LORD's Answer seems to allude.

V. 62. Is fit for the kingdom of God -- Either to propagate or to receive it.

X.
After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two by
two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself intended to
come. Mat. ix. 37.
The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few: pray ye therefore
the Lord of the harvest, that he would thurst forth laborers into his harvest,
Mat. x. 16.
Go: behold I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves. be to this house.
Mat. xi. 11.
And remain in the same house eating and drinking such things as they have; for
the labourer is worthy of his hire: remove not from house to house. Mat. xi. 21.
Woe to thee, Chorazin, woe to thee, Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which
have been done in you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they would have
repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. Mat. x. 40. John xiii. 20.
said to them, I beheld Satan falling as lightning from heaven. Mat. xi. 25.
In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them to babes; even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. he to whom the Son is pleased to reveal him.

Mat. xiii. 16.
And turning to the disciples apart, he said, Blessed are the eyes which see
the things that ye see. them, and to hear the things which ye hear, and have
not heard them.

Mat. xxii. 35. Mark xii. 28.
And behold a certain scribe stood up, and trying him, said, Master, what shall
I do to inherit eternal life? Deuteronomy. vi. 5. Lev. xix. 18.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with neighbor as thyself. Lev. xviii. 5.
this do and thou shall live. him, departed, leaving him half dead. passed by
on the other side. them to the host, and said to him, Take care of him; and
whatsoever thou spendest more, as I come back I will repay thee.

with much serving; and coming to him she said, Lord do thou not care, that
my sister has left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore help me.

V. 2. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust forth laborers --
For GOD alone can do this; He alone can qualify and commission Men for this
Work.

V. 4. Salute no man by the way -- The Salutations usual among the Jews took up
much Time. But these had so much Work to do in so short a Space, that they had
not a Moment to spare.

V. 6. A son of peace -- That is, one worthy of it.

V. 11. The kingdom of God is at (...) -- Though ye will not receive it.

V. 13. Woe to thee, Chorazin -- The same Declaration Christ had made some time
before. By repeating it now, He warns the seventy, not to lose Time by going to
those Ci^^^.

V. 18. I beheld Satan -- That is, when ye went forth I saw the Kingdom of
Satan, which was highly exalted, swiftly and suddenly cast down.

V. 19. I give you power -- That is, I continue it to you: And nothing shall
hurt you -- Neither the Power nor the Subtilty of Satan.

V. 20. Rejoice not so much, that the devils are subject to you, as that your
names are written in heaven. Reader, so is thine, if thou art a true Believer.
GOD grant it may never be blotted out!

V. 21. Lord of heaven and earth -- In both of which thy Kingdom stands, and
that of Satan is destroyed. That thou have hid these things -- He rejoiced not
in the Destruction of the Wise and Prudent, but in the Display of the Riches of
GOD's Grace to others, in such a Manner as reserves to Him the entire Glory of
our Salvation, and hides Pride from Man.

V. 22. Who the Son is -- Essentially One with the Father: Who the Father is --
How great, how wise, how good!

V. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God -- That is, thou shall unite all the
Faculties of thy Soul to render him the most intelligent and sincere, the most
affectionate and resolute Service. We may safely rest in this general Sense of
these important Words, if we are not able to six the particular Meaning of
every single Word. If we desire to do this, perhaps the Heart, which is a
general Expression, may be explained by the three following, With all thy soul,
with the warniest Affection, with all thy strength, the most vigorous Efforts
of thy Will, and with all thy mind, or Understanding, in the most wise and
reasonable Manner thou can, thy Understanding guiding thy Will and Affections.

V. 28. Thou have answered right; this do, and thou shall live -- Here is no
Irony, but a deep and weighty Truth. He, and he alone, shall live for ever, who
thus loves GOD and his Neighbor in the present Life.

V. 29. To justify himself -- That is, to show he had done this.

V. 30. From Jerusalem to Jericho -- The Road from Jerusalem to Jericho (about
eighteen Miles from it) lay through desert and rocky Places: So many Robberies
and Murders were committed therein, that it was called The bloody Way. Jericho
was situated in a Valley: Hence the Phrase of going down to it. About twelve
thousand Priests and Levites dwelt there, who all attended the Service of the
Themple.

V. 31. The common Translation is, By chance -- Which is full of gross
Improprieties. For if we speak strictly, there is no such Thing in the Universe
as either Chance or Fortune. A certain priest came down that way, and passed by
on the other side -- And both he and the Levite, no Doubt, could find an Excuse
for passing over on the other Side, and might perhaps gravely thank GOD for
their own Deliverance, while they left their Brother bleeding to Death. Is it
not an Emblem of many living Characters, perhaps of some who bear the sacred
Office? O House of Levi and of Aaron, is not the Day coming, when the Virtues
of Heathens and Samaritans will rise up in the Judgment against you?

V. 33. But a certain Samaritan came where he was -- It was admirably well
judged, to represent the Distress on the Side of the Jew, and the Mercy on that
of the Samaritan. For the Case being thus proposed, Self-interest would make
the very Scribe sensible, how amiable such a Conduct was, and would lay him
open to our LORD's Inference. Had it been put the other Way, Prejudice might
more easily have interposed, before the Heart could have been affected.

V. 34. Pouring in oil and wine -- Which, when well beaten together, are one of
the best Balsams that can be applied to a fresh Wound.

V. 36. Which of these was the neighbor to him that fell among the robbers --
Which acted the Part of a Neighbor?

V. 37. And he said, He that showed mercy on him -- He could not for Shame say
otherwise, though he thereby condemned himself, and overthrew his own false
Notion of the Neighbor to whom our Love is due. Go and do thou in like manner
-- Let us go and do likewise, regarding every Man as our Neighbor who needs
our Assistance. Let us renounce that Bigotry and Party Zeal which would
contract our Hearts, into an Insensibility for all the human Race, but a small
Number whose Sentiments and Practices are so much our own, that our Love to
them is but Self-love reflected. With an honest Openness of Mind let us always
remember the Kindred between Man and Man, and cultivate that happy Instinct
whereby in the original Constitution of our Nature, GOD has strongly bound us
to each other.

V. 40. Martha was incumbered -- The Greek Word properly signifies, To be drawn
different Ways at the same Time, and admirably expresses the Situation of a
Mind, surrounded (as Martha's then was) with so many Objects of Care, that it
hardly knows which to attend to first.

V. 41. Martha, Martha! -- There is a peculiar Spirit and Tenderness in the
Repetition of the Word: Thou art careful, inwardly, and hurried, ourwardly.

V. 42. Mary has chosen the good part -- To save her Soul. Reader, have thou?

XI.
And as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his disciples
said to him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples. Mat.
vi. 9.
And he said to them, when ye pray, say, Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. day our daily bread. Mat. vii. 7.
And I say to you, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock
and it shall be opened to you. he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a
serpent? your heavenly father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?

Mark iii. 22.
But some of them said, He casts out devils by Beelzebub the prince Mat. xii.
22.
of the devils: Mat. x.i. 38.
And others tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven. divided against a
house falls. them out? Therefore they shall be your judges. u swept and
garnished.

is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked! are they,
that hear the word of God and keep it. is here. is here.

Mat. v. 15. Mark iv. 22. Chapter viii. 16.
No man having lighted a candle, puts it in a secret place, neither under a
bushel, but on a candlestick, that they who come in may see the light. Mat. vi.
22.
The eye is the lamp of the body: therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole
body is full of light, but when thine eye is evil, thy body also is full of
darkness. be full of light, not having any park dark, the whole shall be as
full of light, as when a lamp enlighteneth thee with its bright shining.

it, marvelled, that he had not first washed himself before dinner. (...). And
the Lord said to him,
Now ye Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and dish; but your inward part
is full of rapine and wickedness. them in alms, and behold all things are clean
to you. walk over them are not aware. Mat. xxiii. 34.
Therefore also the wisdom of God has said, I will send them prophets and
apostles, and some of them they will kill, and perfecute the rest. have not
entered in yourselves; and them that were entering in, ye have hindered. him,
and to urge him to speak of many things,

V. 1. Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples -- The Jewish
Masters used to give their Followers some short Form of Prayer, as a peculiar
Badge of their Relation to them. This it is probable John the Baptist had done.
And in this Sense it seems to be, that the Disciples now asked Jesus, to teach
them to pray. Accordingly ^e here repeats that Form, which He had before given
them in his Sermon on the Mount, and likewise enlarges on the same Head, though
still speaking the same Things in Substance. And this Prayer, uttered from the
Heart, and in its true and full Meaning, is indeed the Badge of a real
Christian: For is not he such whose first and most ardent Desire, is the Glory
of GOD, and the Happiness of Man, by the coming of his Kingdom? Who asks for ^o
more of this World than his daily Bread, longing mean Time for the Bread that
came down from Heaven? And whose only Desires for himself are Forgiveness of
Sins (as he heartily forgives others) and Sanctification?

V. 2. When ye pray, say -- And what He said to them, is undoubtedly said to us
also. We are therefore here directed, not only, to imitate this in all our
Prayers, but to use this very Form of Prayer.

V. 4. Forgive us; for we forgive -- Not once, but continually. This does not
denote the meritorious Cause of our Pardon; but the, Removal of that
Hinderance, which otherwise would render it impossible.

V. 5. At midnight -- The most unseasonable Time: But no Time is unseasonable
with GOD, either for hearing or answering Prayer.

V. 13. How much more shall your heavenly Father -- How beautiful is the
Gradation? A Friend: A Father: GOD! Give the Holy Spirit -- The best of Gifts,
and that which includes every good Gift.

V. 14. It was dumb -- That is, it made the Man so.

V. 15. But some said, He casts out devils by Beelzebub -- These He answers
ver. 17. Others, to try whether it were so or no, sought a sign from heaven.
These he reproves in the 29th and following V^^ (...) Beelzebub signifies the
Lord of flies, a Title which the Heathens gave to Jupiter, whom they accounted
the chief of their GODS, and yet supposed him to b^ employed in driving away
(...) from their Temples and Sacrifices. The Ph^^sties worshipped a Deity under
this Name, as the God of Ekron: From hence the Jews took the Name, and applied
it to the chief of the Devils.

V. 17. A house -- That is (...).

V. 20. If I cast out (...) of God -- That is, by a Power manifestly (...)
Expression intiniates farther, That it was done (...): Then the kingdom of God
is come upon you -- Unwares, unexpectedly: So the Greek Word implies.

V. 21. The strong one armed -- The Devil, strong in himself, and armed with
the Pride, Obstinacy, and Security of him in whom be dwells.

V. 26. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first -- Whoever
reads the sad Account Josephus gives of the Temper and Conduct of the Jews,
after the Ascension of Christ and before their sinal Destruction by the Romans,
must acknowledge that no Emblem could have been more proper to describe them.
Their Characters were the vilest that can be conceived, and they pressed on to
their own Ruin, as if they had been possessed by Regions of Devils, and wrought
up to the last Degree of Madness. But this also is fulfilled in all who totally
and finally apostatize from true Faith.

V. 27. Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have
sucked! -- How natural was the Thought for a Woman! And how gently does our
LORD reprove her!

V. 28. Yea, rather blessed are they, that beer the word of God and keep it --
For if even she that bare Him had not done this, she would have forfeited all
her Blessedness.

V. 29. It seeks -- The Original Word implies seeking more, or over and above
what one has already.

V. 32. They repented at the preaching of Jonah -- But it was only for a
Season. Afterward they relapsed into Wickedness, till (after about forty
Years) they were destroyed. It is remarkable, that in this also the Comparison
held. GOD reprieved the Jews for about forty Years: But they still advanced in
Wickedness, till having filled up their Measure, they were destroyed with an
utter Destruction.

V. 33. The Meaning is, GOD gives you this Gospel Light, that you may repent.
Let your Eye be singly fixed on Him, alm only at pleasing GOD; and while you do
this, your whole Soul will be full of Wisdom, Holiness, and Happiness.

V. 34. But when thine eye is evil -- When thou almest at any Thing else, thou will be full of Folly, Sin, and Misery. On the contrary.

V. 36. If thy whole body be full of light -- If thou art filled with Holy
Wisdom, having no part dark, giving Way to no Sin or Folly, then that Heavenly
Principle will, like the clear Flame of a Lamp in a Room that was dark before,
shed its Light into all thy Powers and Faculties.

V. 39. Now ye Pharisees -- Probably many of them were present at a Pharisee's
House.

V. 41. Give what is in them -- The Vessels which ye clean, in alms, and all
things are clean to you. As if He had said, By Acts directly contrary to Rapine
and Wickedness, show that your Hearts are cleansed, and these outward Washings
are needless.

V. 42. Woe to you -- That is, Miserable are you. In the same Manner is the
Phrase to be understood throughout the Chapter.

V. 44. For ye are as graves which appear not -- P^, i^ speaking this our LORD
fixed his Eyes on the Scribes. As (...) appear not, being overgrown with
Grass, so that men are not aware, till they stumble upon them, and either hurt
themselves, or at least are defiled by touching them. On another Occasion
Christ compared them to whited sepulchers, fair without, but foul within, Mat.
xxiii. 27.

V. 45. One of the lawyers -- That is, Scribes; Expounders of the Law.

V. 48. Whom they killed, ye build their sepulchers -- Just like them
pretending great Reverence for the ancient Prophets, while ye destroy those
whom GOD sends to yourselves. Ye therefore bear Witness by this deep Hypocrisy
that ye are of the very same Spirit with them.

V. 49. The Wisdom of God, agreeably to this, has said -- In many Places of
Scripture, though not in these very Words. I will send them prophets -- Chiefly
under the Old Testament: And apostles -- Under the New.

V. 50. The blood of all shall be required of this generation -- That is, shall
be visibly and terribly punished upon it.

V. 51. And so it was, within forty Years, in a most astonishing Manner, by the
dreadful Destruction of the Temple, the City, and the whole Nation. Between the
temple and the altar -- In the Court of the Temple.

V. 52. Ye have taken away the key of knowledge -- Ye have obscured and
destroyed the true Knowledge of the Messiah, which is the Key of both the
present and future Kingdom of Heaven; the Kingdom of Grace and of Glory. Ye
have not entered in -- Into the present Kingdom of Heaven.

XII.
Mat. xvi. 6.
In the mean time an innumerable multitude being gathered together, so that
they trod one upon another, he said to his disciples first, Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. Mat. x. 27.
whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the light, and what
ye have whispered in closets shall be proclaimed on the house-tops. Mat. x. 30.
even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of
more value than many sparrows. Mark viii. 38. Chapter ix. 26.
And I say to you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of
man also confess before the angels of God. Mat. xii. 31.
And whosoever shall speak against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him:
but to him who blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.
Mark iii. 28. Mat. x. 19. Chapter xxi. 12.
But when they bring you to the synagogues and to magistrates and powers, take
no thought how or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say. require thy soul
of thee: and whose shall the things be that thou have provided? is he that
lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.

Mat. vi. 25.
And he said to his disciples, Therefore I say to you, Take no thought for your
life what ye shall eat, neither for the body what ye shall put on. to do even
that which is least, why take ye thought for the rest? will he clothe you, O ye
of little faith? pleasure to give you the kingdom. Mat. vi. 19.
Sell what ye have and give alms: provide yourselves purses which wax not old,
a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither
moth corrupts. them so, happy are those servants. that faithful and wise
steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give the
allowance of food in due season? him his portion with the unfaithful. stripes.
Mark x. 34.
Suppose ye that I am come to give peace upon earth? I tell you, Nay, but
rather division.

Mat. xvi. 2.
And he said to the people also, When ye see a cloud rising out of the west,
straightway ye say, There comes a heavy shower, and so it is. ye find the
south wind blowing, ye say, There will be sultry heat; and it is so. Mat. v. 25.
When thou art going with thine adversury to the magistrate, give diligence in
the way to be delivered from him, left he hale thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into prison.

V. 1. He said to his disciples first -- But afterward (ver. 54.) to all the
People.

V. 4. But I say to you, fear not -- Let not the Fear of Man make you act the
Hypocrite, or conceal any Thing which I have commissioned you to publish.

V. 5. Fear him who has power to cast into hell -- Even to his peculiar
Friends, Christ gives this Direction. Therefore the fearing of God as having
power to cast into hell, is to be pressed even on true Believers.

V. 6. Are not five sparrows -- But trust, as well as fear Him.

V. 8. And I say to you -- If you avoid all Hypocrisy, and openly avow my
Gospel: The Son of man shall confess you -- Before the angels -- At the last
Day.

V. 10. And whosoever -- As if He had said, Yet the denying me in some Degree,
may, upon true Repentance, be forgiven: But if it rise so high as that of the
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, it shall never be forgiven, neither is there
Place for Repentance.

V. 11. Take no thought -- Be not solicitous about the Matter or Manner of your
Defense; nor how to express yourselves.

V. 14. Who made me a judge? -- In worldly Things. His Kingdom is not of this
World.

V. 15. He said to them -- Perhaps to the two Brothers, and through them to the
People: A man's life -- That is, the Comfort or Happiness of it.

V. 17. What shall I do? -- The very Language of Want! Do? Why, lay up Treasure
in Heaven.

V. 20. Thou fool -- To think of satisfying thy Soul with earthly Goods! ^o
depend on living many years! Yea, one Day! They -- The Messengers of Death,
commissioned by GOD; require thy soul of thee!

V. 21. Rich toward God -- Namely, in Faith, and Love, and good Works.

V. 25. Which of you can add the least measure -- It seems, To add one cubit to
a Thing (which is the Phrase in the Original) was a Kind of proverbial
Expression, for making the least Addition to it.

V. 28. The grass -- The Greek Word means all Sorts of Herbs and Flowers.

V. 29. Neither be ye of a doubtful mind -- The Word in the Original signifies,
any Speculations or Musings in which the Mind sluctuates, or is suspended (like
Meteors in the Air) in an uneasy Hesitation.

V. 32. It is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom -- How much
more, Food and Raiment? And since ye have such an Inheritance, regard not your
earthly Possessions.

V. 33. Sell what ye have -- This is a Direction, not given to all the
Multitude; (much less is it a standing Rule for all Christians) neither to the
Apostles; for they had Nothing to sell, having left all before: But to his
other Disciples (mentioned ver. 22. and Acts i. 15.) especially to the Seventy,
that they might be free from all worldly Intanglements.

V. 35. Let your loins be girt -- An Allusion to the long Garments, worn by the
eastern Nations, which they girded or tucked up about their Loins, when they
journeyed or were employed in any Labor: As also to the Lights that Servants
used to carry at Weddings, which were generally in the Night.

V. 37. He will come and serve thee -- The Meaning is, He will show them his
Love, in the most condescending and tender Manner.

V. 38. The Jews frequently divided the Night into three Watches, to which our
LORD seems here to allude.

V. 41. Speak thou this parable to us -- Apostles and Disciples: Or to all
-- The People? Does it concern us alone? Or all Men?

V. 42. Who is that faithful and wise steward -- Our LORD's Answer manifestly
implies, that he had spoken this Parable primarily (though not Wholly) to the
Ministers of his Word: Whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household -- For
his Wisdom and Faithfulness.

V. 43. Happy is that servant -- GOD Himself pronounces him wise, faithful,
happy! Yet we see, he might fall from all, and perish for ever.

V. 46. The Lord will appoint him his portion -- His everlasting Portion; with
the unfaithful -- As faithful as he was once, GOD Himself being the Judge!

V. 47. And that servant who knew his Lord's will, shall he beaten with many
stripes -- And his having much Knowledge will increase, not lessen his
Punishment.

V. 49. I am come to send fire -- To spread the Fire of heavenly Love over all
the Earth.

V. 50. But I have a baptism to be baptized with -- I must suffer first, before
I can set up my Kingdom. And how I long to fight my Way through all!

V. 51. Suppose ye that I am come to send peace upon earth? -- That universal
Peace will be the immediate Effect of my Coming? Not so, but quite the contrary.

V. 52. There shall be five in one house, three against two, and two against
three -- There being an irreconcilable Enmity between the Spirit of Christ and
the Spirit of the World.

V. 53. The father against the son -- For those who reject me, will be
implacable toward their very nearest Relations who receive me. At this Day also
is this Scripture fulfilled. Now likewise there is no Concord between Christ
and Belial.

V. 54. And be said to the people also -- In the preceding Verses, He speaks
only to his Disciples. From the West -- In Judea, the West-wind, blowing from
the Sea, usually brought Rain: The South wind, blowing from the Deserts of
Arabia, occasioned sultry Heat.

V. 56. How do ye not discern this season -- Of the Messiah's Coming,
distinguishable by so many surer Signs.

V. 57. Why even of yourselves, without any external Sign, judge ye not what is
right? -- Why do ye not discern and acknowledge the intrinsic Excellence of my
Doctrine?

V. 58. When thou art going? -- As if He had said, And ye have not a Moment to
lose. For the Executioners of GOD's Vengeance are at Hand. And when He has
once delivered you over to them, ye are undone for ever.

V. 59. A mite was about the third Part of our Farthing.

XIII.
And there were present at that season, some that told him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. Psalm lxxx. 8, etc.


his hands on her, and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.
men ought to work: on these therefore come and be healed, and not on the
sabbath. him away to watering! these eighteen years, to be loosed from this
bond on the sabbath?

(...) xiii. 31. Mark iv. 30.
Then said he, To what is the kingdom of God like, and to what shall I resemble
it? Mat. xiii. 33.
Again he said, Whereto shall I liken the kingdom of God? three measures of
meal, till the whole was leavened.

Mat. vii. 13.
Strive to enter in through the strait gate; for many, I say to you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. Mat. vii. 23.
But he shall say, I tell you I know not whence ye are: depart from me, all ye
workers of iniquity. Mat. viii. 11.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and yourselves
thrust out. Mat. xix. 30.
But behold, there are last who shall be first, and there are first who shall
be last.

Mat. xxiii. 37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets and stonest them that are
sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together as a bird
gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not! not see me, till the
time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

V. 1. The Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrificer --
Some of the Followers of Judas Gaulonites. They absolutely refused to own the
Roman Authority. Pilate surrounded and flew them, while they were worshipping
in the Temple, at a public Feast.

V. 3. Ye shall all likewise perish -- All ye of Galilee and of Jerusalem shall
perish in the very sam^ Manner. So the Greek Word implies. And so they did.
There was a remarkable Resemblance between the Fate of these Galileans, and of
the main Body of the Jewish Nation: The Flower of which was slain at Jerusalem,
by the Roman Sword, while they were assembled at one of their great Festivals.
And many thousands of them perished in the Temple itself, and were literally
buried under its Ruins.

V. 6. A man had a sig-tree -- Either we may understand GOD the Father by him
that had the Vineyard, and Christ by him that kept it; or Christ Himself is He
that has it, and his Ministers they that keep it.

V. 7. Three years -- Christ was then in the third. Year of his Ministry. But
it may mean only, several Years; a certain Number being put for an uncertain
Why does is also camber the ground? -- That is, not only bear no Fruit itself,
but take up the Ground of another. Tree that would.

V. 11. She was bowed together and utterly unable to lift up herself -- The
evil Spirit which possessed her, afflicted her in this Manner. To many doubtless
it appeared a natural Distemper. Would not a modern Physician have termed it a
n^rvous Case?

V. 15. Thou hypocrite -- For the real Motive of his speaking was Envy, not (as
he pretended) pure Zeal for the Glory of GOD.

V. 16. And ought not this woman? -- Ought not any human Creature, which is so
far better than an Ox or an Ass? Much more, this daughter of Abraham --
Probably in a spiritual as well as natural Sense, (...) be loosed?

V. 21. Covered up -- So that, for a Time, Nothing of it appeared. (...).

V. 24. Strive to enter in -- Agonize. Strive as in an Agony. So the Word
signifies. Otherwise none shall enter in. Barely seeking will not avail.

V. 25. And even agonizing will not avail, after the Door is shut. Agonize
therefore now by Faith, Prayer, Holiness, Patience. And ye begin to stand
without -- Till then, they had not thought of it! O how new will that Sense of
their Misery be? How late? How lasting? I know not whence ye are -- I know not,
that is, I approve not of your Ways.

V. 29. They shall sit down in the kingdom of God -- Both the Kingdom of Grace
and of Glory.

V. 30. But there are last -- Many of the Gentiles who were latest called,
shall be most highly rewarded; and many of the Jews who were first called,
shall have no Reward at all.

V. 31. Herod is minded to kill thee -- Possibly they gave him the Caution out
of Good Will.

V. 32. And he said, Go and tell that fox -- With great Propriety so called,
for his Subtilty and Cowardice. The Meaning of our LORD's Answer is,
Notwithstanding all that he can do, I shall, for the short Time I have left, do
the Works of Him that sent me. When that Time is fulfilled, I shall be offered
up. Yet not here, but in the bloody City. Behold, I cast out devils -- With
what Majesty does He speak to his Enemies? With that Tenderness to his Friends!
The third day I am perfected -- On the third Day He left Galilee, and set out
for Jerusalem, to die there.

But let us carefully distinguish between those Things wherein Christ is our
Pattern, and those which were peculiar to his Office, His extraordinary Office
justified Him, in using that Saverity of Language, when speaking of wicked
Princes and corrupt Teachers, to which we have no Call; and by which we should
only bring Scandal on Religion, and Ruin on ourselves, while we irritated
rather than convinced or reformed those, whom we so indecently rebuked.

V. 33. It cannot be, that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem -- Which claims
Prescription for murdering the Messengers of GOD. Such Cruelty and Malice
cannot be found elsewhere.

V. 34. How often would I have gathered thy children together -- Three solemn
Visits He had made to Jerusalem since his Baptism, for this very Purpose.

V. 35. Your house is left to you desolate -- Is now irrevocably consigned to
Desolation and Destruction: And verily I say to you, after a very short Space,
ye shall not see me till the time come, when taught by your Calamities, ye
shall be ready and disposed to say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord. It does not imply, that they should then see Jesus at all; but only,
that they would earnestly wish for the Messiah, and in their Extremity be ready
to entertain any who should assume that Character.

XIV.
And as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees on the sabbath, to
eat bread, they were watching him. him go,

Mat. xxii. 12.
For every one that exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

thy rich neighbors, lest they also invite thee again, and a recompense be
made thee.

consent began to make excuse. The first said to him, I have bought a field,
and I must needs go and see it: I pray thee have me excused. And another said,
I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: a wife, and therefore
I cannot come. them to come in, that my house may be filled.

Mat. x. 37.
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my disciple. it, all that behold mock him, saying, sits not down first, and
consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that comes
against him with twenty thousand? Mat. v. 13. Mark ix. 50.
Salt is good: but if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be
seasoned?

V. 2. There was a certain man before him -- It does not appear, that he was
come thither with any insidious Design. Probably he came, hoping for a Cure; or
perhaps was one of the Family.

V. 3. And Jesus answering spoke -- Answering the Thoughts which He saw rising
in their Hearts.

V. 7. He spoke a parable -- The ensuing Discourse is so termed, because
several Parts are not to be understood literally. The general Scope of it is,
not only at a Marriage Feast, but on every Occasion, He that exalts himself
shall be abased, and he that abaseth himself shall be exalted.

V. 12. Call not thy friends -- That is, I do not bid thee call thy friends or
thy neighbors. Our LORD leaves these Offices of Humanity and Courtesy as they
were, and teaches an higher Duty. But is it not implied herein, that we should
be sparing in entertaining these that need it not, in order to assist those
that do need, with all that is saved from those needless Entertainments? Lest a
recompense be made -- This Fear is as much unknown to the World, as even the
Fear of Riches.

V. 14. One of them that sat at table hearing these things -- And being touched
therewith, said, Happy is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God --
Alluding to what had been just spoken. It means, he that shall have a Part in
the Resurrection of the Just.

V. 16. Then said he -- Continuing the Allusion, A certain man made a great
supper -- As if he had said, All Men are not sensible of this Happiness. Many
might have a Part in it, and will not.

V. 18. They all began to make excuse -- One of them pleads only his own Will,
I go: Another, a pretended Necessity, I must ^eeds go: The third,
Impossibility, I cannot come. All of them want the holy Hatred mentioned, ver.
26. All of them perish by Things in themselves lawful. I must needs go -- The
most urgent worldly Affairs frequently fall out just at the Time when GOD makes
the freest Offers of Salvation.

V. 21. The servant come and showed his lord these things -- So Ministers ought
to lay before the LORD in Prayer, the Obedience or Disobedience of their
Hearers.

V. 23. Compel them to come in -- With all the Violence of Love, and the Force
of GOD's Word. Such Compulsion, and such only, in Matters of Religion, was used
by Christ and his Apostles.

V. 24. For refers to Go out, ver. 23.

V. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father -- Comparatively to
Christ: Yea, so as actually to renounce his Field, Oxen, Wife, all Things, and
act as if he hated them, when they stand in Competition with Him.

V. 28. And which of you intending to build a tower -- That is, and whoever of
you intends to follow me, let him first seriously weigh these Things.

V. 31. Another king -- Does this mean, the Prince of this World? Certainly he
has greater Numbers on his Side. How numerous are his Children and Servants?

V. 33. So -- Like this Man, who being afraid to face his Enemy, sends to make
Peace with him, every one who forsakes not all that he has -- I. By
withdrawing his Affections from all the Creatures; 2. By enjoying them only in
and for GOD, only in such a Measure and Manner as leads to Him; 3. By hating
them all, in the Sense abovementioned, cannot be my disciple -- But will
furely desist from building that Tower, neither can he persevere in fighting
the good Fight of Faith.

V. 34. Salt -- Every Christian, but more eminently every Minister.

XV.
Then drew near to him all the publicans and sinners, to hear him. Mat. xviii.
12.
Who of you having an hundred sheep, and losing one of them, does not leave the
ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, till he
find it? it, he lays it on his shoulders rejoicing. And coming home, he
calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to them, Rejoice with me;
for I have found my sheep which was lost. it? her friends and neighbors
together, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which I had lost.

to me. And he divided to them his substance. it on him, and put a ring on his
hand, and shoes on his feet. it, and let us eat and be merry.

V. 1. All the publicans -- That is, all who were in that Place. It seems our
LORD was in some Town of Galilee of the Gentiles, from whence He afterward
went to Jerusalem, chapter xvii. 11.

V. 3. He spoke -- Three Parables of the same Import; for the Sheep, the Piece
of Silver, and the lost Son, all declare (in direct Contrariety to the
Pharisees and Scribes) in what Manner GOD receives Sinners.

V. 4. Leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness -- Where they used to feed:
All uncultivated Ground, like our Commons, was by the J^^^ termed Wilderness or
Desert. And go after -- In recovering a lost soul, GOD, as it were, labors.
May we not learn hence, that to let them alone who are in Sin, is both
unchristian and inhuman?

V. 7. Joy shall be -- Solemn and festal Joy, in heaven -- First in our blessed
LORD Himself, and then among the Angels and Spirits of just Men, perhaps
informed thereof by GOD Himself, or by the Angels who ministered to them. Over
one sinner -- One gross, open, notorious Sinner, that repents -- That is
thoroughly changed in Heart and Life; more than over ninety and nine just
persons -- Comparatively just, outwardly blameless, that need not such a
repentance: For they need not, cannot repent of the Sins which they never
committed.

The Sum is, as a Father peculiarly rejoices, when an extravagant Child,
supposed to be utterly lost, comes to a thorough Sense of his Duty: Or as any
other Person who has recovered what he had given up for gone, has a more
sensible Satisfaction in it, than in several other Things equally valuable, but
not in such Danger: So do the Angels in Heaven peculiarly rejoice, in the
Conversion of the most abandoned Sinners. Yea, and GOD Himself so readily
forgives and receives them, that He may be represented as having Part in the
Joy.

V. 12. Give me the part of goods that falls to me -- See the Root of all
Sin! A Desire of disposing of ourselves; of Independency on GOD!

V. 13. He took a journey into a far country -- Far from GOD: GOD was not in
all his Thoughts: And squandered away his substance -- All the Grace he had
received.

V. 14. He began to be in want -- All his worldly Pleasures failing, he grew
conscious of his Want of real Good.

V. 15. And he joined himself to a citizen of that country -- Either the Devil,
or one of his Children; the genuine Citizens of that Country, which is far from
GOD. He sent him to feed swine -- He employed him in the base Drudgery of Sin.

V. 16. He would fain have filled his belly with the husks -- He would fain
have satisfied himself with worldly Comforts. Vain, fruitless Endeavor!

V. 17. And coming to himself -- For till then he was beside himself, as all
Men are, so long as they are without GOD in the World.

V. 18. I will arise and go to my father -- How accurately are the first Steps
of true Repentance here pointed out? Against heaven -- Against GOD.

V. 20. And he arose and came to his father -- The Moment he had resolved, he
began to execute his Resolution. While he was yet a great way off, his father
saw him -- Returning, starved, naked.

V. 22. But the father said -- Interrupting him, before he had finished what he
intended to say. So does GOD frequently cut an earnest Confession short, by a
Display of his pardoning Love.

V. 23. Let us be merry -- Both here, and wherever else the Word occurs,
whether in the Old or New Testament, it implies Nothing of Levity, but a solid,
serious, religious, Heart-selt Joy: Indeed this was the ordinary Meaning of the
Word two hundred Years ago, when our Translation was made.

V. 25. The elder son seems to represent the Pharisees and Scribes, mentioned,
ver. 2.

V. 27. Thy father bath killed the fatted calf -- Perhaps he mentions this,
rather than the Robe or Ring, as having a nearer Connection with the Music and
Dancing.

V. 28. He was angry, and would not go in -- How natural to us is this Kind of
Resentment?

V. 29. Lo, so many years do I serve thee -- So he was one of the Instances
mentioned, ver. 7. How admirably therefore does this Parable confirm that
Assertion! Yet thou never gave me a kid, that I might make merry with my
friends -- Perhaps GOD does not usually give much Joy to those who never felt
the Sorrows of Repentance.

V. 31. Thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine -- This suggests a
strong Reason against murmuring at the Indulgence shown to the greatest of
Sinners As the Father's receiving the younger Son, did not cause him to
disinherit the elder; so GOD's receiving notorious Sinners, will be no Loss to
those who have always served Him: Neither will He raise these to a State of
Glory, equal to that of those who have always served Him, if they have, upon
the whole, made a greater Progress in inward as well as outward Holiness.

V. 32. This thy brother was dead and is alive -- A thousand of these delicate
Touches in the inspired Writings, escape an inattentive Reader. In the 30th
Verse the elder Son had unkindly and indecently said, This thy son. The Father
in his Reply mildly reproves him, and tenderly says, This thy brother. Amazing
Intimation, that the best of Men ought to account the worst Sinners their
Brethren still; and should especially remember this Relation, when they show
any Inclination to return.

Our LORD in this whole Parable shows, not only that the Jews had no Cause to
murmur at the Reception of the Gentiles (a Point which did not at that Time so
directly fall under Consideration) but that if the Pharisees were indeed as
good as they sancied themselves to be, still they had no Reason to murmur at
the kind Treatment of any sincere Penitent. Thus does He condemn them, even on
their own Principles, and so leaves them without Excuse.

We have in this Parable a lively Emblem of the Condition and Behavior of
Sinners in their natural State. Thus, when enriched by the Bounty of the great
common Father, do they ungratefully run from him (ver. 12.) Sensual Pleasures
are eagerly pursued, till they have squandered away all the Grace of GOD (ver.
13.) And while these continue, not a serious Thought of GOD can sind a Place in
their Minds. And even when Afflictions come upon them (ver. 14.) still they
will make hard Shifts, before they will let the Grace of GOD, concurring with
his Providence, persuade them to think of a Return (ver. 15, 16)

When they see themselves naked, indigent, and u^^one, then they recover the
Exercise of their Reason (ver. 17.) Then they remember the Blessings they have
thrown away, and attend to the Misery they have incurred. And hereupon they
resolve to return to their Father, and put the Resolution immediately in
Practice (ver. 18, 19.)

Behold with Wonder and Pleasure, the gracious Reception (...) sind, from
divine, injured Goodness! When such a Prodigal comes to his Father, He sees him
afar off (ver. 20.) He pities, meets, embraces him, and interrupts his
Acknowledgments, with the Tokens of his returning Favor (ver. 21.) He arrays
him with the Robe of a Redeemer's Righteousness, with inward and outward
Holiness, adorns him with all his sanctifying Graces, and honors him with the
Tokens of adopting Love (ver. 22.) And all this he does with unutterable
Delight, in that he who was lost is now found (ver. 23, 24.)

Let no elder Brother murmur at this Indulgence, but rather welcome the
Prodigal back into the Family. And let those who have been thus received,
wander no more, but emulate the strictest Piety of those who for many Years
have served their heavenly Father, and not transgressed his Commandments.

XVI.
And he said also to his disciples, There was a certain rich man who had a
steward: and he was accused to him as wasting his goods. than the children of
light. riches? Mat. vi. 24.
No servant can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and love
the other, or he will cleave to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve
GOD and Mammon.

Mat. xi. 13.
The law and the prophets were until John: from that time the kingdom of God is
preached, and every man forces into it. Mat. v. 18.
Yet it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than for one tittle of the law
to fail. Mat. v. 31. xix. 7.
Whosoever puts away his wife and marries another, commits adultery; and
whosoever marries her that is put away from her husband, commits adultery.
a certain beggar, named Lazarus, who was laid at his gate, full of sores; would
come to us from thence. father, that thou would send him to my father's
house:

V. 1. And he said also to his disciples -- Not only to the Scribes and
Pharisees, to whom he had hitherto been speaking, but to all the younger as
well as the elder Brethren: To the returning Prodigals who were now his
disciples. A certain rich man had a steward -- CHRIST here teaches all that are
now in Favor with GOD, particularly pardoned Penitents, to behave wifely, in
what is committed to them.

V. 3. To beg I am ashamed -- But not ashamed to cheat! This was likewise a
Sense of Honor! "By Men called Honor, but by Angels Pride."

V. 4. I know -- That is, I am resolved, what to do.

V. 8. And the lord commendea the unjust steward -- Namely, in this Respect,
Because he had used timely Precaution: So that though the Dishonesty of such a
Servant be detestable, yet his Foresight, Care, and Contrivance, about the
Interests of this Life, deserve our Imitation, with Regard to the more
important Affairs of another. The children of this world -- Those who seek no
other Portion than this World: Are wiser -- Not absolutely, for they are, one
and all, egregious Fools; but they are more consistent with themselves; they
are truer to their Principles; they more steadily pursue their End; they are
wiser in their generation -- That is, in their own Way, than the children of
light -- The Children of GOD, whose Light shines on their Hearts.

V. 9. And I say to you -- Be good Stewards even of the lowest Talents
wherewith GOD has entrusted you. Mammom means Riches or Money. It is termed
the Mammom of Unrighteousness, because of the Manner wherein it is commonly
either procured or employed. Make yourselves Friends of this, by doing all
possible Good, particularly to the Children of GOD. That when ye fail, when
your Flesh and your Heart fails, when this earthly Tabernacle is dissolved,
those of them who are gone before, may receive, may welcome you into the
everlasting Habitations.

V. 10. And whether ye have more or less, see that ye be faithful as well as
wise Stewards. He that is faithful in what is meanest of all, wordly Substance,
is also faithful in Things of an higher Nature: And he that uses these lowest
Gifts unfaithfully, is likewise unfaithful in spiritual Things.

V. 11. Who will entrust you with the true riches? -- How should GOD entrust
you with Spiritual and Eternal, which alone are true Riches?

V. 12. If ye have not been faithful in that which was another's -- None of
these temporal Things are yours: You are only Stewards of them, not
Proprietors: GOD is the Proprietor of all: He lodges them in your Hands for a
Season; but still chey are his Property. Rich Men, understand and consider
this. If your Steward uses any Part of your Estate (so called in the Language
of Men) any farther or any otherwise than you direct, he is a Knave: He has
neither Conscience nor Honor. Neither have you either one or the other, if you
use any part of that Estate, which is in Truth GOD's not yours any otherwise
than He directs. That which is your own -- Heaven, which when you have it, will
be your own for ever.

V. 13. And you cannot be faithful to GOD, if you trim between GOD and the
World; if you do not serve Him alone.

V. 15. And be said to them, Ye are they who justify yourselves before men --
The Sense of the whole Passage is, that Pride wherewith you justify yourselves,
seeds Covetousness, derides the Gospel, (ver. 14.) and destroys the Law: (ver.
18.) All which is illustrated by a terrible Example. Ye justify yourselves
before men -- Ye think yourselves righteous, and persuade others to think you
so.

V. 16. The law and the Prophets were in force until John: from that time the
Gospel takes Place: And humble, upright Men receive it with inexpressible
Earnestness.

V. 17. Not that the Gospel at all destroys the Law:

V. 18. But ye do; particularly in this notorious Instance.

V. 19. There was a certain rich man -- Very probably a Pharisee, and one that
justified himself before men -- A very honest, as well as honorable Gentleman:
Though it was not proper to mention his Name on this Occasion: Who was clothed in
purple and fine linen -- And doubtless esteemed on this Account, (perhaps, not
only by those who sold it, but by most that knew Him) as encouraging Trade, and
acting according to his Quality: And feasted splendidly every day -- And
consequently was esteemed yet more, for his Generosity and Hospitality in
keeping so good a Table.

V. 20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus (according to the Greek
Pronunciation) ^r Eleazar. By his Name it may be conjectured, he was of no mean
Family, though it was thus reduced. There was no Reason for our LORD to conceal
his Name, which probably was then well known. Theophylact observes, from the
Tradition of the Hebrews, that he lived at Jerusalem. Yea, the dogs also came
and licked his sores -- It seems, this Circumstance is recorded to show that
all his Ulcers lay bare, and were not closed or bound up.

V. 22. And the beggar -- Worn out with Hunger, and Pain, and Want of all
Things, died; and was carried by angels (amazing Change of the Scene!) into
Abraham's bosom -- So the Jews styled Paradise; the Place where the Souls of
good Men remain from Death to the Resurrection. The rich man also died, and was
buried -- Doubtless with Pomp enough, though we do not read of his lying in
State: That stupid, senseless, Pageantry, that shocking Insult on a poor,
putrefying Carcass, was reserved for our enlightened Age!

V. 23. He sees Abraham afar off -- And yet knew him at that Distance: And
shall not Abraham's Children, when they are together in Paradise, know each
other!

V. 24. Father Abraham, have mercy on me -- It cannot be denied, but here is
one Precedent in Scripture, of praying to departed Saints: But who is it that
prays, and with what Success? Will any, who considers this, be fond of copying
after him?

V. 25. But Abraham said, Son -- According to the Flesh. Is it not worthy of
Observation, that Abraham will not revile even a damned Soul? Shall living Men
revile one another? Thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things -- Thou
did choose and accept of worldly Things as thy Good, thy Happiness. And can
any be at a Loss to know why he was in Torments? This damnable Idolatry, had
there been Nothing more, was enough to sink him to the nethermost Hell.

V. 26. Besides this, there is a great gulf sined -- Reader, to which Side of
it will thou go?

V. 28. Lest they also come into this place -- He might justly fear lest their
Reproaches should add to his own Torment.

V. 31. Neither will they be persuaded -- Truly to repent: For this implies an
entire Change of Heart: But a thousand Apparitions cannot effect this. GOD only
can, applying his Word.

XVII.
Then said he to the disciples, Mat. xviii. 6. Mark ix. 42.
It is impossible but offenses will come; but woe to him through whom they come.
Mat. xviii. 15.
Take heed to yourselves: if thy brother sin, rebuke him, and if he repent,
forgive him. Mat. xvii. 20.
And the apostles said to the Lord, Increase our faith. grain of mustard seed,
ye might say to this sycamine-tree, Be thou rooted up, and be thou planted in
the sea; and it should obey you.

their voice and said, Jesus, master, have mercy on us. them, he said to them,
Go show yourselves to the priests. And as they went, they were cleansed.

his face at his feet, giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan. returning to
give Glory to God, save this stranger. And he said to him, Arise and go, thy
faith has saved thee.

it. Mat. xxiv. 23.
And when they shall say to you, See here; see there: go not, nor follow them.
part under heaven, shines to the other part under heaven, so shall the Son of
man be in his day. Mat. xxiv. 37.
And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son
of man. from heaven and destroyed them all. Luke xii. 24. John xii. 25.
Whosoever shall seek to save his life, shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose
his life, shall preserve it. Mat. xxiv. 28.
And they answering said to him, Where Lord? And he said to them, Wheresoever
the body is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

V. 1. It is impossible but offenses will come -- And they ever did, and do
come chiefly by Pharisees, that is, Men who trust in themselves that they are
righteous, and despise others.

V. 2. Little ones -- Weak Believers.

V. 3. Take heed to yourselves -- That ye neither offend others, nor be
offended by others.

V. 4. If he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
return saying, I repent -- That is, if he gives sufficient Proof, that he does
really repent, after having sinned ever so often, receive him just as if he had
never sinned against thee. But this Forgiveness is due only to real Penitents.
In a lower Sense we are to forgive all, penitent or impenitent, (so as to bear
them the sincerest Good Will, and to do them all the Good we can:) And that not
seven Times only, but seventy Times seven.

V. 5. Lord, increase our says -- That we may thus forgive, and may neither
offend, nor be offended.

V. 6. And he said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed -- If ye had the
least Measure of true Faith, no Instance of Duty would be too hard for you. Ye
would say to this sycamine tree -- This seems to have been a Kind of proverbial
Expression.

V. 7. But which of you -- But is it not meet, that you should first obey, and
then triumph? Though still with a deep Sense of your utter Unprofitableness.

V. 9. Does he thank that servant -- Does he account himself obliged to him?

V. 10. When ye have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants -- For a Man
cannot profit GOD. Happy is he who judges himself an unprofitable Servant:
Miserable is he, whom GOD pronounces such. But though we are unprofitable to Him,
our serving him is not unprofitable to us. For he is pleased to give by his
Grace a Value to our Good Works, which in Consequence of his Promise, intitles
us to an eternal Reward.

V. 20. The kingdom of God comes not with observation -- With such outward
Pomp as draws the Observation of every one.

V. 21. Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there -- This shall not be the
Language of those, who are, or shall be sent by me, to declare the Coming of my
Kingdom. For behold the kingdom of God is within or among you -- Look not for
it in distant Times or remote Places: It is now in the midst of you: It is
come: It is present in the Soul of every true Believer: It is a spiritual
Kingdom, an internal Principle. Wherever it exists, it exists in the Heart.

V. 22. Ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man -- One Day of
Mercy, or one Day wherein you might converse with me, as you do now.

V. 23. They shall say, See Christ is here, or there -- Limiting his Presence
to this or that Place.

V. 24. So shall also the Son of man be -- So swist, so wide, shall his
Appearing be: In his day -- The last Day.

V. 26. The days of the Son of man -- Those which immediately follow, that
which is eminently styled his day.

V. 31. In that day -- (Which will be the grand Type of the last Day) when ye
shall see Jerusalem encompassed with Armies.

V. 32. Remember Lot's wife -- And escape with all Speed, without ever looking
behind you.

V. 33. The Sense of this and the following Verses is, Yet as great as the
Danger will be, do not seek to save your Life by violating your Conscience; if
you do, you will surely lose it: Whereas if you should lose it for my Sake, you
shall be paid with Life everlasting. But the most probable Way of preserving it
now, is to be always ready to give it up: A peculiar Providence shall then
watch over you and put a Difference between you and other Men.

XVIII.
And he spoke a parable to them to this end, that they ought always to pray,
and not to faint, what the unjust judge says! And shall not God vindicate his
own elect, who cry aloud to him day and night, though he bear long with them? I
tell you he will vindicate them speedily.

are, rapacious, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. be humbled, and
he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

Mat. xix. 13. Mark x. 13.
And they brought to him also infants, that he might touch them; but the
disciples seeing it, rebuked them.

Mat. xix. 16. Mark x. 17.
And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? There is none good save one, that is God. Exodus (...). 12, etc.
Do not commit adultery. it said, Who then can be saved? Peter said, Lo we have
left all and followed thee.

Mat. xx. 17. Mark x. 32.
Then he took to him the twelve, and said to them, Behold we go up to
Jerusulem, and all things that are written by the prophets will be accomplished
on the Son of man. him, and put him to death: and the third day he will rise
again.

Mat. xx. 29. Mark. x. 46.
And while he was yet night to Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way-side
begging. it, gave praise to God.

V. 1. He spoke a parable to them -- This and the following Parable, warn us
against two fatal Extremes, with regard to Prayer: The former against Faintness
and Weariness, the latter against Self-considence.

V. 7. And shall not God -- The most just Judge, vindicate his own elect --
Preserve the Christians from all their Adversaries, and in particular save them
out of the general Destruction, and avenge them of the Jews? Though he bear long
with them -- Though He does not immediately put an End, either to the Wrongs of
the Wicked, or the Sufferings of good Men.

V. 8. Yet when the Son of man comes, will he find faith upon earth? -- Yet
notwithstanding all the Instances both of his Long-suffering and of his
Justice, whenever He shall remarkably appear, against their Enemies in this
Age, or in After-ages, how few true Believers will be found upon Earth?

V. 9. He spoke this parable -- Not to Hypocrites, the Pharisee here mentioned
was no Hypocrite, no more than an outward Adulterer: But he sincerely trusted
in himself, that he was righteous, and accordingly told GOD so, in the Prayer
which none but GOD heard.

V. 12. I fast twice in the week -- So did all the strict Pharisees; every
Monday and Thursday. I give tithes of all that I possess -- Many of them gave
one full Tenth of their Income in Tithes, and another Tenth in Alms. The Sum of
this Plea is, I do no Harm; I use all the Means of Grace; I do all the Good I
can.

V. 13. The publican standing afar off -- From the Holy of Holies, would not so
much as lift up his eyes to Heaven -- Touched with Shame, which is more
ingenuous than Fear.

V. 14. This man went down -- From the Hill on which the Temple stood;
justified rather than the other -- That is, And not the other.

V. 16. Calling them -- Those that brought the Children: Of such is the kingdom
of God -- Such are Subjects of the Messiah's Kingdom. And such as these it
properly belongs to.

V. 22. Yet lackest thou one thing -- Namely, To love GOD more than Mammon. Our
Savior knew his Heart, and presently put him upon a Trial which laid it open
to the Ruler himself. And to cure his Love of the World, which could not in him
be cured otherwise, Christ commanded him. To sell all that he had. But He does
not command us to do this; but to use all to the Glory of GOD.

V. 34. They understood none of these things -- The literal Meaning they could
not but understand. But as they could not reconcile this to their preconceived
Opinion of the Messiah, they were utterly at a Loss in what parabolical or
figurative Sense to take what He said concerning his Sufferings; having their
Thoughts still taken up with the temporal Kingdom.

XIX.
And he entered and passed through Jericho. it, they all murmured, saying, He
is gone in to be a guest with a sinner. him fourfold. Mat. xviii. 11.
For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

Mat. xxv. 14. Mark xiii. 34.
A certain nobleman went into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom,
and to return. am an austere man, taking up what I laid not down, and reaping
what I did not sow! Mat. xxv. 29. Luke viii. 18.
For I say unto you, To every one that has shall be given: but from him that
has not, even what he has shall be taken away from him.

Mat. xxi. 1. Mark xi. 1.
And as he drew nigh to Bethphage and Bothany, at the mount called the mount of
Olives, he you, in which entering, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man
yet sat, loose him and bring him hither. him, thus shall ye say to him, The
Lord has need of him. multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise
God with a loud voice, for all the mighty works that they had seen, be the king
that comes in the name of the Lord: Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.
that are for thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. that are in thee;
and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another: because thou knew
not the time of thy visitation.

Mat. xxi. 12. Mark xi. 11.
And going into the temple, he drove out them that sold, and them that bought
therein, Isaiah lvi. 7.
My house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.



V. 1. He passed through Jericho -- So that Zaccheus must have lived near the End
of the Town; the Tree was in the Town itself. And he was rich -- These Words
seem to refer to the Discourse in the last Chapter, ver. 24 -- 27, particularly
to ver. 27. Zuccheus is a Proof, that it is possible, by the Power of GOD, for
even a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

V. 2. The chief of the publicans -- What we would term the Commissioner of the
Customs. A very honorable as well as profitable Place.

V. 4. And running before -- With great Earnestness, He climbed up --
Notwithstanding his Quality: Desire conquering Honor and Shame.

V. 5. Jesus said, Zaccheus, make haste and come down -- What a strange Mixture
of Passions must Zaccheus have now felt, hearing one speak, as knowing both his
Name and his Heart.

V. 7. They all murmured -- All who were near: though most of them, rather out of
Surprise than Indignation.

V. 8. And Zaccheus stood -- Showing by his Posture his deliberate Purpose and
ready Mind, And said, Behold, Lord, I give -- I determine to do it immediately.

V. 9. He also is a son of Abraham -- A Jew born, and as such has a Right to
the first Offer of Salvation.

V. 11. They thought the kingdom of God -- A glorious temporal Kingdom, would
immediately appear.

V. 12. He went into a far country to receive a kingdom -- Christ went to
Heaven, to receive his sovereign Power as Man, even all Authority in Heaven and
Earth.

V. 13. Trade till I come -- To visit the Nation, to destroy Jerusalem, to
judge the World: Or, in a more particular Sense, to require thy Soul of thee.

V. 14. But his citizens -- Such were those of Jerusalem, hated him, ard sent
an embassy after him -- The Word seems to imply, their sending Ambassadors to a
superior Court, to enter their Protest against lus, being admitted to the regal
Power, (...) such a solemn Manner did the Jeus protest, as it were, before GOD,
that Christ should not reign over them. This man -- So they call him in
Contempt.

V. 15. When he was returned -- In his Glory.

V. 23. With interest -- Which does not appear to be contrary to any Law of GOD
or Man. But this is no Plea for Usury, that is, the taking such Interest as
Implies any Degree of Oppression or Extortion.

V. 25. They said -- With Admiration, not Envy.

V. 28. He went before -- The foremost of the Company, showing his Readiness to
suffer.

V. 29. He drew nigh to the Place where the Borders of Bethphage and Bothany
met, which was at the Foot of the mount of Olives.

V. 37. The whole multitude began to praise God -- Speaking at once, as it
seems, from a divine Impulse, Words which most of them did not understand.

V. 38. Peace in heaven -- GOD being reconciled to Man.

V. 39. Rebuke thy disciples -- Paying thee this immoderate Honor.

V. 40. If these should hold their peace, the stones which lie before you,
would cry out -- That is, GOD would raise up some still more unlikely
Instruments to declare his Praise. For the Power of GOD will not return empty.

V. 42. O that thou had known, at least in this thy day -- After thou have
neglected so many. Thy day -- The Day wherein GOD still offers thee his
Blessings

V. 43. Thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round --
All this was exactly performed by Titus the Roman General.

V. 44. And thy children within thee -- All the Jews were at that Time gathered
together, it being the Time of the Passover. They shall not leave one stone
upon another -- Only three Towers were left standing for a Time, to show the
former Strength and Magnificence of the Place. But these likewise were
afterward levelled with the Ground.

XX.
Mat. xxi. 23. Mark xi. 27.
And on one of those days, as he taught the people in the temple and preached
the gospel, the chief priests and the Scribes came upon him, with the elders,

Mat. xxi. 33. Mark xii. 1.
Then he spoke this parable to the people: A certain man planted a vineyard,
and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long time. him
shamefully, and sent him away empty. him out. him. But the husbandmen seeing
him, reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir: they cast him out of
the vineyard and killed him. What therefore will the Lord of the vineyard do to
them? if they said, God forbid. And he looked on them and said, What is this
then that is written, Psalm cxviii. 22.
The stone which the builders rejected, this is become the head of the corner.
Mat. xxi. 44.
Whosoever shall fall on that stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind him to powder.

Mat. xxii. 16.
And watching him, they sent forth spies, feigning themselves to be just men,
to take hold of his discourse, that they might deliver him to the power and
authority of the governor. the things which are God's.

Mat. xxii. 23. Mark xii. 18.
Then certain of the Sadducees, who deny there is any resurrection, coming to
him, asked him, saying, Deuteronomy. xxv. 5.
If a man's brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, that his
brother should take his wife, and raise up seed to his brother. Exodus iii. 6.
when he calls the Lord, The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob.

Mat. xxii. 41. Mark xii. 35.
And he said to them, How say they that Christ is David's son? Psalm cx. 1.
The Lord ^^d unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, Till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Mat. xxiii. 5.
Beware of the Scribes, who desire to walk in long robes, and love salutations
in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief places
at feasts, Mat. xxiii. 14.
Who devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers; these shall
receive greater damnation.

V. 9. A long time -- It was a long Time from the Entrance of the Israelites
into Canaan, to the Birth of Christ.

V. 16. He will destroy these husbandmen -- Probably he pointed to the Scribes,
chief Priests, and Elders: Who allowed, He will miserably destroy these wicked
men, Matthew. xxi. 41. but could not bear that this should be applied to
themselves. They might also mean, GOD forbid that we should be guilty of such a
Crime as your Parable seems to charge us with, namely, rejecting and killing
the Heir. Our Savior answers, But yet ye will do it, as is prophesied of you.

V. 17. He locked on them -- To sharpen their Attention.

V. 20. Just men -- Men of a tender Conscience. To take hold of his discourse
-- If he answered as they hoped he could.

V. 21. Thou speak -- In private, and teach -- In public.

V. 24. Show me a penny -- A Roman Penny, which was the Money that was usually
paid on that Occasion.

V. 26. They could not take hold of his words before the people -- As they did
afterward before the Sanhedrim, in the Absence of the People, chapter xxii. 67,
etc.

V. 34. The children of this world -- The Inhabitants of Earth, marry and are
given in marriage -- As being all subject to the Law of Mortality: so that the
Species is in Need of being continually repaired.

V. 35. But they who obtain that world -- Which they enter into, before the
resurrection of the dead.

V. 36. They are the children of God -- In a more eminent Sense when they rise
again.

V. 37. That the dead are raised, even Moses, as well as the other Prophets
showed, when he calls -- That is, when he recites the Words which GOD spoke
of himself, I am the God of Abraham, etc. It cannot properly be said, that GOD
is the GOD of any who are totally perished.

V. 38. He is not a God of the dead, or there is no God of the dead -- That is,
the Term GOD implies such a Relation, as cannot possibly subsist between Him
and the Dead; who, in the Sadducees' Sense are extinguished Spirits; who could
neither worship Him, nor receive Good from Him. So that all live to him -- All
who have Him for their GOD, live to and enjoy Him. This Sentence is not an
Argument for what went before; but the very Proposition which was to be proved.
And the Consequence is apparently just. For as all the Faithful are the
Children of Abraham, and the Divine Promise of being a God to him and to his
seed is intailed upon them, it implies their continued Existence and Happiness
in a future State as much as Abraham's. And as the Body is an essential Part of
Man, it implies both his Resurrection and theirs; and so overthrows the entire
Scheme of the Sadduccan Doctrine.

V. 40. They dare not ask him any question -- The Sadducees durst not. One of
the Scribes did, presently after.

XXI.
Mark xii. 41.
And looking up he saw the rich casting their gifts into the treasury. these
have (...) of God: (...) all the living tha^ (...)

Mat. xxiv. 1. Mark xiii. 1.
And as some (...) adorned with goodly (...) for these things which ye (...)
come, in which there shall n^^ (...) upon another, that shall not be th^^^
(...) they asked him, saying, Master, when (...) things be? is the sign, when
these things shall come to pass? the Christ, and the time is near. Mark xiii. 9.
But before all these things they shall lay their hands on you and persecute
you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought
before kings and rulers for my name's sake. (...) ^^^r hearts, not (...) For I
will give (...) ^^^ch all your adver^^^ (...) ^^^say or resist. Mat. x. 21.
But (...) by parents, and brethren, (...) ^riends; and some of you they (...)
put to death. Mat. xxiv. 13. Mark xiii. 13.
And ye shall be (...) men for my name's sake. But there (...) not an hair of
your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls. Mat. xxiv. 29. Mark
xiii. 24.
And there shall be signs in the sun, and moon, and stars; and upon the earth
distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea roaring and tossing:



nigh. Mat. xxiv. 42. Mark. iii. 33. Chapter xii. 35.
But take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be over-loaded with
gluttony and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares.

the mount of Olives.

V. 1. He looked up -- From those on whom his Eyes were fir^^ before.

V. 5. Goodly stones -- Such as no Engines now in Use could have brought, or
even set upon each other. Some of them (as an Eyewitness who lately measured
them writes) were forty-five Cubits long, five high, and six broad, yet brought
thither from another Country. And gifts -- Which Persons delivered from
imminent Dangers, had, in Accomplishment of their Vows, hung on the Walls and
Pillars.

The Marble of the Temple was so White, that it appeared like a Mountain of
Snow at a Distance. And the Gilding ma^^^ Parts made it, especially when the
Sun shone, a most splendid and beautiful Spectacle.

V. 8. And the time, is near -- When I will deliver you from all your Enemies.
They are the Words of the Seducers.

V. 9. Commotions -- Intestine Broils; civil Wars.

V. 11. Fear^ul sights and signs from heaven -- Of which Josephus gives a
circumstantial Account.

V. 13. It shall turn to you for a testimony -- Of your having delivered your
own Souls, and of their being without Excuse.

V. 18. Not an hair of your head -- A proverbial Expression, shall perish --
Without the special Providence of GOD. And then, (...) before the Time, nor
without a full Reward.

V. 19. In your patience possess ye your s^^^ls -- Be calm and serene, Ma^^^ of
yourselves, and ^^perior to all irrational and disquieting Passions. By keeping
the Government of your Spirits, you will both avoid much Misery, and guard the
better against all Dangers

V. 21. Let them that are in the midst of is -- Where Jerusal^^ stands (that
is, they that are in Jerusalem) depart out of it before their Retreat is cut
off, by the uniting of the Forces near the City, And let not them that are in
the adjacent Countries, by any Means enter into it.

V. 22. All things which are written -- Particularly in Daniel.

V. 24. They shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive
-- Eleven hundred thousand perished in the Siege of Jerusalem, and above ninety
thousand were sold for Slaves. So terribly was this Prophecy fulfilled. And
Jerusalem, shall be trodden by the Gentiles -- That is, inhibited. So it was
indeed. The Land was sold, and ^o Jew suffered even to come within Sight of
Jerusalem. The very Foundations of the City were ploughed up, and an heathen
Temple built where the Temple of GOD had stood. The times of the Gentiles --
That is, the Times limited for their treading the City; which shall terminate
in the full Conversion of the Gentiles.

V. 25. And there shall be -- Before the Great Day, which was typified by the
Destruction of Jerusalem: Signs -- Different from those mentioned, ver. 11, etc.

V. 28. Now when these things -- Mentioned, ver. 8. and ver. 10, etc. begin to
come to pass, look up with firm Faith, and lift up your heads with Joy; for
your redemption out of Many Troubles draws nigh, by GOD's dest^^^ing your
implacable Enemies.

V. 29. Behold the fig tree and all the trees -- Christ spoke this in the
Spring, just before the Passover; when all the Trees were budding on the Mount
of Olives, where they then were.

V. 30. Ye know of your selves -- Though none teach you.

V. 31. The kingdom of God is nigh -- The Destruction of the Jewish City,
Temple, and Religion, to make Way for the Advancement of my Kingdom.

V. 32. Till all things be fulfilled -- All that has been spoken of the
Destruction of Jerusalem, to which the Question, ver. 7. relates: And which is
treated of from the 8th to the 24th Verse.

V. 34. Take heed lest at any time your hearts be overloaded with gluttony and
drunkenness -- And was there Need to warn the Apostles themselves, against such
Sins as these? Then surely there is Need to warn even Strong Christians,
against the very grossest Sins. Neither warn even Strong Christians, against
the very grossest Sins. Neither are we wise, if we think ourselves out of the
Reach of any Sin: And so that day -- Of Judgment or of Death come upon you,
even you that are not of this World -- unawares.

V. 35. That sit -- Careless and at Ease.

V. 36. Watch ye therefore -- This is the general Conclusion of all that
precedes. That ye may be counted worthy -- This Word sometimes signifies an
Honor conserred on a Person, as when the Apostles are signifies an Honor
conserred on a Person, as when the Apostles are said, to be Counted worthy to
suffer Shame for Christ (Acts v. 41.) Sometimes meet or becoming: As when John
the Baptist exhorts, To bring fruits worthy of repentance (Luke iii. 8.) And so
to be counted worthy to escape, is, To have the Honor of it, and to be fitted
or prepared for it. To stand -- With Joy and Triumph: Not to fall before Him,
as his Enemies.

V. 37. Now by day -- In the Daytime, he was teaching in the temple -- This
shows how our LORD employed his Time, after coming to Jerusalem: But it is not
said, He was this day in the Temple, and next Morning the People came. It does
not therefore by any Means imply, That He came any more after this into the
Temple.

V. 38. And all the people came early in the morning to hear him -- How much
happier were his Disciples in these early Lectures, than the Slumbers of the
Morning could have made them on their Beds! Let us not scruple to deny
ourselves the Indulgence of unnecessary Sleep, that we may Morning after
Morning place ourselves at his Feet, receiving the Instructions of his Word and
seeking those of his Spirit.

XXII.
Mat. xxvi. 1. Mark xiv. 1.
Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover.



Mat. xxvi. 17. Mark xiv. 12.
And the first day of unleavened bread was come, when the passover was to be
killed. it. it ready?

Mat. xxvi. 20. Mark xiv. 17.
And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him.
passover with you, before I suffer. it among yourselves. it, and gave to them,
saying, This is my body which is given for you; do this in remembrance of me.
is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for you. is with me on the
table. contention among them, Which of them was greatest. shall not be so: but
he that is greatest among you, let him be as the least, and he that is chief as
he that serves. is greater, he that sits at table, or he that serves? Is
not he that sits at table? But I am in the midst of you as he that serves.
to have you, that he might sift you as wheat. for thee that thy faith fail not;
and when thou art returned, strengthen thy brethren. the time of cock-crowing
this day, before thou will thrice deny that thou know me. it, and likewise
his scrip; and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.
Isaiah liii. 12.
And he was numbered with the transgressors. For the things concerning me have
an end. are two swords. And he said to them, It is enough.

Mat. xxvi. 30.
And going out, he went, according to his custom, to the mount of Olives, and
his disciples also followed him. them about a stone's cast, and kneeling down,
he prayed,

Mat. xxvi. 51. Mark xiv. 47.
And they who were about him seeing what would follow, said to him, Lord, shall
we smite with the sword? chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the
elders, who were come to him, Are ye come out as against a robber with swords
and clubs? your hands against me: but this is your hour and the power of
darkness.

Mat. xxvi. 57. Mark xiv. 53. John xviii. 12.
Then taking him, they led him, and brought him to the high-priest's house: And
Peter followed afar off. man also was with him. man also was with him, for he
is a Galilean.



Mat. xxvi. 67. Mark xiv. 65.
And the men that held Jesus, mocked and smote him.

Mat. xxvi. 63. Mark xiv. 61.
And when it was day, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the
Scribes came together, and led him into their council, Saying, Art thou the
Christ? you, ye will not answer me, nor let me go. it: I am.

V. 3. Then entered Satan -- Who is never wanting to assist those, whose Heart
is bent upon Mischief.

V. 4. Captains -- Called Captains of the Temple, ver. 52.. They were Jewish
Officers, who presided over the Guards which kept Watch every Night in the
Temple.

V. 15. With desire have I desired -- That is, I have earnestly desired it. He
desired it, both for the Sake of his Disciples, to whom He desired to manifest
Himself farther, at this solemn Parting: And for the Sake of his whole Church,
that He might institute the grand Memorial of his Death.

V. 16. For I will not eat thereof any more -- That is, It will be the last I
shall eat with you before I die. The kingdom of God did not properly commence
till his Resurrection. Then was fulfilled what was typified by the Passover.

V. 17. And he took the cup -- That Cup which used to be brought at the
Beginning of the Paschal Solemnity, and said, Take this and divide it among
yourselves: for I will not drink -- As if He had said, Do not expect me to
drink of it: I will drink no more before I die.

V. 19. And he took bread -- Namely, some Time after, when Supper was ended,
wherein they had eaten the Paschal Lamb. This is my body -- As he had just now
celebrated the Paschal Supper, which was called the Passover, so in the like
figurative Language, He calls this Bread his Body. And this Circumstance of
itself was sufficient to prevent any Mistake, as if this Bread was his real
Body, any more than the Paschal Lamb was really the Passover.

V. 20. This cup is the New Testament -- Here is an undeniable Figure, whereby
the Cup is put for the Wine in the Cup. And this is called, The New Testament
in Christ's blood, which could not possibly mean, that it was the New Testament
itself, but only the Seal of it, and the Sign of that Blood which was shed to
confirm it.

V. 21. The hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table -- It is
evident, Christ spoke these Words, before He instituted the LORD's Supper: For
all the other Evangelists mention the Sop, immediately after receiving which he
went out: (John xiii. 30.) (Nor did he return any more, till he came into the
Garden, to betray his Master,) Now this could not be dipped or given, but while
the Meat was on the Table. But this was all removed before That Bread and Cup
were brought.

V. 24. There was also a contention among them -- It is highly probable this
was the same Dispute, which is mentioned by St. Matthew and St. Mark: And
consequently, though it is related here, it happened some Time before.

V. 25. They that exercise the most arbitrary authority over them, have from
their Flatterers the vain title of benefactors.

V. 26. But ye are to be Benefactors to Mankind, not by Governing, but by
Serving.

V. 27. For -- This He proves by his own Example. I am in the midst of you --
Just now: See with your Eyes. I take no State upon me, but sit in the midst, on
a Level with the lowest of you.

V. 28. Ye have continued with me in my temptations -- And all his Life was
nothing else, particularly from his entering on his public Ministry.

V. 29. And I -- Will preserve you in all your Temptations, till ye enter into
the Kingdom of Glory: Appoint to you -- By these very Words. Not a Primacy to
One, but a Kingdom to every one: On the same Terms: As my Father has appointed
to me -- Who have fought and conquered.

V. 30. That ye may eat and drink at my table -- That is, that ye may enjoy the
highest Happiness, as Guests, not as Servants. These Expressions seem to be
primarily applicable to the twelve Apostles, and secondarily, to all Christ's
Servants and Disciples, whose Spiritual Powers, Honors and Delights are here
represented in figurative Terms, with Respect to their Advancement both in the
Kingdom of Grace and Glory.

V. 31. Satan has desired to have you -- My Apostles, that he might sift you
as wheat -- Try you to the uttermost.

V. 32. But I have prayed for thee -- Who wilt be in the greatest Danger of
all; that thy faith fail not -- Altogether: And when thou are returned -- From
thy Flight, strengthen thy brethren -- All that are we^^ in Faith; perhaps
scandalized at thy Fall.

V. 34. It shall not be the time of cock-crowing this day -- The com^^^^ Time
of Cock-crowing (which is usually about Three in the Morning) probably did not
come, till after the Cock which Peter heard, had crowed twice if not oftener.

V. 35. When I sent you -- lached ye any thing? -- Were ye not borne above all
Want and Danger?

V. 36. But now -- You will be in quite another Situation. You will want every
Thing. He that has no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one -- It is
plain, this is not to be taken literally. It only means, This will be a Time of
extreme Danger.

V. 37. The things which are written concerning me, have an end -- Are now
drawing to a Period; are upon the Point of being accomplished.

V. 38. Here are two swords -- Many of Galilee carried them when they
traveled, to defend themselves against Robbers and Assassins, who much
infested their Roads. But did the Apostles need to seek such Defense? And he
said, It is enough -- I did not mean literally, That every one of you must have
a Sword.

V. 40. The place -- The Garden of Gethsemane.

V. 43. Strengthening him -- Lest his Body should sink and die before the Time.

V. 44. And being in an agony -- Probably just now grappling with the Powers of
Darkness; feeling the Weight of the Wrath of GOD, and at the same Time
surrounded with a mighty Host of Devils, who exercised all their Force and
Malice to persecute and distract his wounded Spirit. He prayed more earnestly
-- Even with stronger Cries and Tears: And his sweat -- As cold as the Weather
was: Was as it were great drops of blood -- Which, by the vehement Disiress of
his Soul, were forced out of the Pores, in so great a Quantity, as afterward
united in large, thick, grumous Drops, and even fell to the ground.

V. 48. Betrayest thou the Son of man -- Him whom thou know to be the Son of
Man, the Christ?

V. 49. Seeing what would follow -- That they were just going to seize Him.

V. 51. Suffer me at least to have my Hands at Liberty thus far, while I do one
more Act of Mercy.

V. 52. Jesus said to the chief priest, and captains, and the elders, who were
come -- And all these came of their own Accord: The Soldiers and Servants were
sent.

V. 53. This is your hour -- Before which ye could not take me; and the power
of darkness -- The Time when Satan has Power.

V. 58. Another man saw him, and said -- Observe here, in Order to reconcile
the four Evangelists, that diverse Persons concurred in charging Peter with
belonging to Christ. 1. The Maid that let him in, afterward seeing him at the
Fire, first put the Question to him, and then positively affirmed, that he was
with Christ. 2. Another Maid accused him to the Standers-by, and gave Occasion
to the Man here mentioned, to renew the Charge against him, which caused the
Second Denial. 3. Others of the Company took Notice of his being a Galilean,
and were seconded by the Kinsman of Malchus, who affirmed he had seen him in
the Garden. And this drew on the Third Denial.


V. 59. And about one hour after -- So he did not recollect himself in all that
Time.

V. 64. And having blindfolded him, they struck him on the face -- This is
placed by St. Matthew and Mark, after the Council's condemning Him. Probably He
was abused in the same Manner, both before and after his Condemnation.

V. 65. Many other things blasphemously spoke they against him -- The
Expression is remarkable. They charged Him with Blasphemy, because He said, He
was the Son of GOD: But the Evangelist fixes that Charge on them, because He
really was so.

V. 70. They all said, Art thou then the Son of God? -- Both these, The Son of
GOD, and the Son of Man, were known Titles of the Messiah, the one taken from
his Divine, and the other from his Human Nature.

XXIII.
Mat. xxvii. 1. Mark xv. 1. John xviii. 28.
And the whole multitude of them arose and led him to Pilate. fellow perverting
our nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is
Christ a king.

him, and arrayed him in a splendid robe, sent him back to Pilate.

him before you, have found no fault in this man, touching the things whereof
ye accuse him, Nor yet Herod; for I sent you to him; and lo, he has done
nothing worthy of death. Mat. xxvii. 15. Mark xv. 6. John xviii. 39.
For he was under a necessity of releasing one to them, at the feast. cried all
at once, saying, man, and release to us Barabbas:

Mat. xxvii. 31. Mark xv. 21. John xix. 16.
And as they led him away, they laid hold on one Simon a Cyrenian, coming out
of the country; and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear it after
Jesus. are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps that never
gave suck. Hos. x. 8.
Then shall they say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us.
men, malefactors, to be put to death with him. the place of a scull, there they
crucified him, and the two malefactors, one on the right hand, and one on the
left. him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be the Christ,
the chosen of God.

Mat. xxvii. 37. Mark xv. 26. John xix. 19.
And an inscription also was written over him in Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew
letters, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

art in the same condemnation? person has done nothing amiss.

Mat. xxvii. 45. Mark xv. 38.
And it was about the sixth hour; and there was darkness over all the earth
till the ninth hour. and the women who had followed him from Galilee, stood
afar off, beholding these things.

Mat. xxvii. 57. Mark xv. 43. John xix. 38.
And behold a man named Joseph, a counselor, a good man and a just: man going
to Pilate, asked the body of Jesus.



V. 4. Then said Pilate -- After having heard his Defense: I find no fault in
this man -- I do not find that He either asserts or attempts any Thing
seditious or injurious to Caesar.

V. 5. He stirs up the people, beginning from Galilee -- Probably they
mentioned Galilee, to alarm Pilate, because the Galileans were notorious for
Sedition and Rebellion.

V. 7. He sent him to Herod -- As his proper Judge.

V. 8. He had been long desirous to see him -- Out of more Curiosity.

V. 9. He questioned him -- Probably concerning the Miracles which were
reported to have been wrought by him.

V. 11. Herod set him at naught -- Probably judging Him to be a Fool, because
He answered nothing. In a splendid robe -- In royal Apparel; intimating that he
feared nothing from this King.

V. 15. He has done nothing worthy of death -- According to the Judgment of
Herod also.

V. 16. I will therefore chastise him -- Here Pilate began to give Ground,
which only encouraged them to press on.

V. 22. He said to them the third time, Why what evil has he done? -- As
Peter, a Disciple of Christ, dishonored Him by denying Him thrice, so Pilate,
a Heathen, honored Christ by thrice owning Him to be innocent.

V. 31. If they do these things in the green tree, what shall be done in the
dry? -- Our LORD makes Use of a proverbial Expression, frequent among the Jews,
who compare a good Man to a green Tree, and a bad Man to a dead one: As if he
had said, If an innocent Person suffer thus, what will become of the Wicked? Of
those who are as ^^dy for Destruction, as dry Wood for the Fire?

V. 34. Then said Jesus -- Our LORD passed most of the Time on the Cross in
Silence: Yet seven Sentences which He spoke thereon, are recorded by the four
Evangelists, though no one Evangelist has recorded them all. Hence it appears,
that the four Gospels are as it were four Parts, which, joined together, make
one Symphony: Sometimes one of these only, sometimes two or three, sometimes
all sound together. Father -- So He speaks both in the Beginning and at the End
of his Sufferings on the Cross: Forgive them -- How striking is this Passage!
While they are actually nailing him to the Cross, He seems to seel the Injury
they did to their own Souls, more than the Wounds they gave him; and a^ it were
to forget his own Anguish out of a Concern for their own Salvation.

And how eminently was his Prayer heard? It procured Forgiveness for all that
were penitent, and a Suspension of Vengeance even for the Impenitent.

V. 35. If thou be the Christ: v. 37. If thou be the king -- The Priests deride
the Name of Messiah; the Soldiers the Name of King.

V. 39. And one of the malefactors reviled him -- St. Matthew says, the
robbers; St. Mark, they that were crucified with him, reviled him. Either
therefore St. Matthew and Mark put the Plural for the Singular (as the best
Authors sometimes do) or both reviled Him at the first, till one of them felt
"the overwhelming Power of saying Grace."

V. 40. The other rebuked him -- What a surprising Degree was here of
Repentance, Faith, and other Graces! And what Abundance of good Works, in his
public Confession of his Sin, Reproof of his Fellow-criminal, his honorable
Testimony to Christ, and Profession of Faith in Him, while he was in so
disgraceful Circumstance, as were stumbling even to his Disciples! This shows
the Power of divine Grace. But it encourages none to put off their Repentance
to the last Hour; since, as far as appears, this was the first Time this
Criminal had an Opportunity of knowing any Thing of Christ. And his Conversion
was designed, to put a peculiar Glory on our Savior in his lowest State, while
his Enemies derided Him, and his own Disciples either denied or forsook Him.

V. 42. Remember me, when thou come -- From Heaven, in thy kingdom -- He
acknowledges Him a King, and such a King, as after He is dead, can prosit the
dead. The Apostles themselves had not then so clear Conceptions of the Kingdom
of Christ.

V. 43. In paradise -- The Place where the Souls of the Righteous remain from
Death till the Resurrection. As if he had said, I will not only remember thee
then, but this very Day.

V. 44. There was darkness over all the earth -- The Noontide Darkness,
covering the Sun, obscured all the upper Hemisphere. And the lower was equally
darkened, the Moon being in Opposition to the Sun, and so receiving no Light
from it.

V. 46. Father, into thy hands -- The Father receives the Spirit of Jesus;
Jesus Himself the Spirits of the Faithful.

V. 47. Certainly this was a righteous man -- Which implies an Approbation of
all He had done and taught.

V. 48. All the people -- Who had not been Actors therein, returned, smiting
their breasts -- In Testimony of Sorrow.

XXIV.
Mat. xxviii. 1. Mark xvi. 1. John xx. 1.
And on the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came to the
sepulcher, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain others with
them.

their face to the earth, they said to them, Why seek ye the living among the
dead? to you being yet in Galilee, the mother of James, and the other women
with them, who told these things to the apostles.

Mark xvi. 12.
And behold two of them were going that day to a village called Emmans, which
was sixty furlongs from Jerusalem. even sojourn at Jerusalem, and have not
known the things which are come to pass there in these days? have astonished
us, who were early at the sepulcher, it so as the women men had said; but him
they saw not. it, and brake and gave to them. done in the way, and how he was
known by them in the breaking of bread.

Mark xvi. 14.19. John xx. 19.
And as they spoke thus, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and says to
them, Peace be unto you. his hands and his feet. it, and ate before them.

are the words which I speak to you, being yet with you, that all things
written in the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the psalms concerning me,
must be fulfilled.



V. 1. Certain others with them -- Who had not come from Galilee.

V. 4. Behold two -- Angels in the Form of men. M^ry had seen them a little
before. They had disappeared on these Women's coming to the Sepulcher, but now
appeared again. St. Matthew and Mark mention only one of them, appearing like a
young Man.

V. 6. Remember how he spoke to you, say^ng, the Son of man must be delivered
-- This is only a Repetition of the Words which our LORD had spoken to them
before his Passion. But it is observable, He never styles Himself the Son of
man after his Resurrection.

V. 21. Today is the third day -- The Day He should have risen again, if at
all.

V. 25. O foolish -- Not understanding the Designs and Works of GOD: And slow
of hear. -- Unready to believe what the Prophets have so largely spoken.

V. 26. Ought not Christ -- If He would redeem Man, and fulfill the Prophecies
concerning him, to have suffered these things? -- These very Sufferings, which
occasion your Doubts, are the Proofs of his being the Messiah. And to enter
into his glory -- Which could be done no other Way.

V. 28. He made as though he would go farther -- Walking forward, as if He was
going on; and He would have done it, had they not pressed Him to s^^y.

V. 29. They constrained him -- By their importunate Entreaties.

V. 30. He took the bread, and blessed, and brake -- Just in the same Manner,
as when He instituted his last Supper.

V. 31. Their eyes were opened -- That is, the supernatural Cloud was removed:
And he vanished -- Went away insensibly.

V. 32. Did not our heart burn within us -- Did not we feel an unusual W^rmth
of Love?

V. 33. The same hour -- Late as it was.

V. 34. The Lord has appeared to Simon -- Before he was seen of the twelve
Apostles, 1 Cor. xv. 5. He had, in his wonderful Condescension and Grace, taken
an Opportunity on the former Part of that Day (though where, or in what Manner,
is not recorded) to show Himself to Peter, that He might early relieve his
Distresses and Fears, on Account of having so shamefully denied his Master.

V. 35. In the breaking of the bread -- The LORD'S Supper.

V. 36. Jesus stood in the midst of them -- It was just as easy to his divine
Power, to open a Door undiscernibly, as it was to come in at a Door opened by
some other Hand.

V. 40. He showed them his hands and his feet -- That they might either see or
feel the Prints of the Nails.

V. 41. While they believed not for joy -- They did in some Sense believe;
otherwise they would not have rejoiced. But their Excess of Joy prevented a
clear, rational Belief.

V. 43. He took it, and ate before them -- Not that He had any Need of Food;
but to give them still farther Evidence.

V. 44. And he said -- On the Day of his Ascension. In the law, and the
prophets, and the psalms -- The Prophecies as well as Types, relating to the
Messiah, are contained either in the Books of Moses (usually called the Law) in
the psalms, or in the Writings of the Prophets: Little being said directly
concerning Him in the historical ^ooks.

V. 45. Then opened he their understanding, to understand the scriptures -- He
had explained them before to the Two as they went to Emmaus. But still they
understood them not, till He took off the Veil from their Hearts, by the
Illumination of his Spirit.

V. 47. Beginning at Jerusalem -- This was appointed both graciously and
wisely: Graciously as it encouraged the greatest Sinners to repent when they
saw that even the Murderers of Christ were not excepted from Mercy: And wisely,
as hereby Christianity was more abundantly attested; the Facts being published
first, on the very Spot where they happened.

V. 49. Behold I serd the promise -- Emphatically so called; the Holy Ghost.

V. 50. He led them out as far as Bethany -- Not the Town, but the District: to
the Mount of Olives (Acts i. 12.) which stood within the Boundaries of Bethany.

V. 51. And while he was blessing them, He was parted from them -- It was much
more proper that our LORD should ascend into Heaven, than that He should rise
from the Dead, in the Sight of the Apostles. For his Resurrection was proved,
when they s^w him alive after his Passion: but they could not see Him in
Heaven, while they continued on Earth.

NOTES ON THE Gospel according to St. JOHN.
In this BOOK is set down the History of the Son of GOD dwelling among Men; that

I. OF the first Days, where the Apostle, premising the Sum of the Whole, C. i.
1 -- 14 Mentions the Testimony given by John, after the Baptism of CHRIST, and
the first Calling of some of the Apostles. Here is noted what fell out The
first Day, 15 -- 28 The Day after, 29 -- 34 The Day after, 35 -- 42 The Day
after, 43 -- 52 The third Day, C. ii. 1 -- 11 After this, 12
II. Of the two Years between, spent chiefly in Journeys to and from Jerusalem:
A. The first Journey, to the Passover, 13 a. Transactions in the City, 1. Zeal
for his Father's House, 14 -- 22 2. The Power and Wisdom of JESUS, 23 -- 25 3.
The Instruction of Nicodemus, C. iii. 1 -- 21
b. His Abode in Judea; the rest of John's Testimony, 22 -- 36 c. His Journey
through Samaria (where He confers with the Samaritan Woman) into Galilee, where
He heals the Nobleman's Son, C. iv. 1 -- 14
B. The second Journey to the Feast of Pentecost. Here may be observed
Transactions, a. In the City relating to the Impotent Man, healed at the Pool
of Bethsaida, C. v. 1 -- 47 b. In Galilee, before the second Passover, and
after. Here we may note. 1. His feeding the five Thousand, C. vi. 1 -- 14 2.
Walking upon the Sea, 15 -- 21 3. Discourse of Himself, as the Bread of Life,
22 -- 59 4. Reproof of those who object (...) 60 -- 65 5. Apostasy of many, and
Stea^^ (...) of the Apostles, 66 -- 71 6. His Continuance in Galilee, C. vii. 1

C. The third Journey, to the Feast of Tabernacles, 2 -- 13 Here may be
observed Transactions, a. In the City, 1. In the Middle and End of the Feast,
14 -- 53 C. viii. 1 Where note, 1. The Woman taken in Adultery, 2 -- 12 2.
Christ's preaching and vindicating his Doctrine, 13 -- 30 3. His consuting the
Jews, and Escape from them, 31 -- 59 4. His healing the Man born blind, C. ix.
1 -- 7 5. Several Discourses on that Occasion, 8 -- 41 6. Christ the Door and
the Shepherd of the Sheep, C. x. 1 -- 18 7. Different Opinions concerning Him,
19 -- 21
2. At the Feast of the Dedication: Here occur, 1. His Disputes with the Jews,
22 -- 38 2. His escaping their Fury, 39

b. Beyond Jordan, 40 -- 42
III. Of the last Days, which were, A. Before the great Week, where we may
note, a. The two Days spent out of Judea, while Lazarus was sick and died, C.
xi. 1 -- 6 b. The Journey into Judea; the raising of Lazarus; the Advice of
Caiaphas; Jesus' Abode in Ephraim; the Order given by his Adversaries. 7 -- 57
c. The sixth Day, before the Passover; the Supper at Bethany; the Ointment
poured on Jesus, C. xii. 1 -- 11
B. In the great Week, wherein was the third Passover, occur a. On the three
former Days, his royal Entry into the City; the Desire of the Greeks; the
Obstinacy of the Jews; the Testimony given to Jesus from Heaven, 12 -- 50 b. On
the fourth Day, the washing the Feet of the Disciples; the Discovery of the
Traitor, and his going out by Night, C. xiii. 1 -- 30 c. On the fifth Day, 1.
His Discourse, 1. Before the paschal Supper, 31 C. xiv. 1 -- 31 2. After it, C.
xv. and xvi.
2. His Prayer, C. xvii. 1 -- 26 3. The Beginning of his Passion, 1. In the
Garden. C. xviii. 1 -- 11 2. In Caiaphas' House, 12 -- 27

d. On the sixth Day. 1. His Passion under Pilate, 1. In the Palace of Pilate,
28 C. xix. 1 -- 16 2. On the Cross, 17 -- 30
2. His Death, 30 -- 37 3. His Burial, 38 -- 42

C. After the great Week, a. On the Day of the Resurrection, C. xx. 1 -- 25 b.
Eight Days after, 26 -- 31 c. After that. 1. He appears to his Disciples at the
Sea of Tiberias, C. xxi 1 -- 14 2. Orders Peter to seed his Sheep and Lambs, 15
-- 17 3. Foretells the Manner of Peter's Death, and checks his Curiosity about
St. John, 18 -- 23 4. The Conclusion, 24 -- 25



St. JOHN.
I.
IN the beginning existed the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God.



was John. was sent to testify of the light. This was the true light, who
lights every man that comes into the world. He was in the world, him, to
them gave he privilege to become the sons of God, to them that believe in his
name:



upon grace. but grace and truth was by Jesus Christ. him.

Isaiah xl. 3.
I am the voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness, Make straight the way of
the Lord, as said the prophet Isaiah. Christ, nor Elijah, neither the prophet?





it, and testified, that this is the Son of God.

speak, and followed him.

of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

V. 1. In the beginning -- (Referring to Genesis i. 1. and Prove. viii. 23.) When
all Things began to be made by the Word: In the Beginning of Heaven and Earth,
and this whole Frame of created Beings, the Word existed, without any
Beginning. He was when all Things began to be, Whatsoever had a Beginning. The
Word -- So termed Psalm. xxxiii. 6. and frequently by the Seventy, and in the
Chaldee Paraphrase. So that St. John did not borrow this Expression from Philo,
or any Heathen Writer. He was not yet named Jesus, or Christ. He is the Word
whom the Father begot or spoke from Eternity; by whom the Father speaking
makes all Things; who speaks the Father to us. We have, in the 18th Verse,
both a real Description of the Word, and the Reason why He is so called. He is
the only begotten Son of the Father, who is in the bosom of the Father, and
has declared him. And the Word was with God -- Therefore distinct from GOD the
Father. The Word rendered with denotes a perpetual Tendency as it were of the
Son to the Father, in Unity of Essence. He was with GOD alone; because nothing
beside GOD had then any Being. And the Word was God -- Supreme, Eternal,
Independent. There was no Creature, in respect of which He could be styled GOD
in a relative Sense. Therefore He is styled so in the absolute Sense. The
Godhead of the Messiah being clearly revealed in the Old Testament ( Jer.
xxiii. 6. Hos. i. 7. Psalm. xxiii. 1.) the other Evangelists aim at this, To
prove that Jesus, a true Man, was the Messiah. But when at length some from
hence began to doubt of his Godhead, then St. John expressly asserted it, and
wrote in this Book as it were a Supplement to the Gospels, as in the
Revelation, to the Prophets.

V. 2. The same was in the beginning with God -- This Verse repeats and
contracts into one of the three Points mentioned before. As if he had said,
This Word, who was GOD, was in the Beginning, and was with GOD.

V. 3. All things beside GOD, were made, and all Things which were made were
made by the Word. In the first and second Verse is described the State of
Things before the Creation, ver. 3. In the Creation, ver. 4. In the Time of
Man's Innocence, ver. 5. In the Time of Man's Corruption.

V. 4. In him was life. -- He was the Foundation of Life to every living Thing,
as well as of Being to all that is. And the life was the light of men -- He who
is effential Life, and the Giver of Life to all that lives, was also the Light
of Men; the Fountain of Wisdom, Holiness, and Happiness, to Man in his Original
State.

V. 5. And the Light shines in darkness -- Shines even on fallen Man; but the
darkness -- Dark, sinful Man, perceives it not.

V. 6. There was a man -- The Evangelist now proceeds to him who testified of
the Light, which he had spoken of in the five proceeding Verses.

V. 7. The same came for (that is, in order to give) a testimony -- The
Evangelist, with the most strong and tender Affection, interweaves his own
Testimony with that of John, by noble Digressions, wherein he explains the
Office of the Baptist, partly premises and partly subjoins, a farther
Explication to his short Sentences. What St. Matthew, Mark, and Luke term the
Gospel, in respect of the Promise going before, 8t. John usually terms the
testimony, intimating the certain Knowledge of the Relater: to testify of the
light -- Of Christ.

V. 9. Who lights every man -- By what is vulgarly termed natural Conscience,
pointing out at least the general Lines, of Good and Evil. And this Light, if
Man did not hinder, would shine more and more to the perfect Day.

V. 10. He was in the world -- Even from the Creation.

V. 11. He came -- In the Fullness of Time, to his own -- Country, City, Temple:
And his own -- People, received him not.

V. 12. But as many as received him -- Jews or Gentiles; that believe on his
name -- That is, on him. The Moment they believe, they are Sons; and because
they are Sons, GOD sends forth the Spirit of his Son into their hearts,
crying, Abba, Father.

V. 13. Who were born -- Who became the Sons of GOD not of blood -- Not by
Descent from Abraham, nor by the will of the flesh -- By natural Generation,
nor by the will of man -- Adopting them, but of God -- By his Spirit.

V. 14. Flesh sometimes signifies corrupt Nature; sometimes the Body;
sometimes, as here, the whole Man. We beheld his glory -- We his Apostles,
particularly Peter, James, and John, Luke ix. 32. Grace and truth -- We are all
by Nature Liars and Children of Wrath, to whom both Grace and Truth are
unknown. But we are made Partakers of them, when we are accepted through the
Beloved.

The whole Verse might be paraphrased thus: And in Order to raise us to this
Dignity and Happiness, the eternal Word, by a most amazing Condescension, was
made flesh, united Himself to our miserable Nature, with all its innocent
Infirmities. And He did not make us a transient Visit, but tabernacled among us
on Earth, displaying his Glory in a more eminent Manner, than ever of old in
the Tabernacle of Moses. And we, who are now recording these Things, beheld his
glory with so strict an Attention, that we can testify, it was in every Respect
such a Glory, as became the only begotten of the Father. For it shone forth not
only in his Transfiguration, and in his continual Miracles, but in all his
Tempers, Ministrations, and Conduct through the whole Series of his Life. In all
He appeared full of Grace and Truth: He was Himself most benevolent and
upright; made those ample Discoveries of Pardon to Sinners, which the Mosaic
Dispensation could not do: And really exhibited the most substantial Blessings,
whereas that was but a shadow of good things to come.

V. 15. John cried -- With Joy and Confidence: This is he of whom I sa^d --
J^^^ had said this, before our LORD's Paptism, although he then knew Him not in
Person, He knew Him first at his Baptism, and afterward cried. This is he of
whom I said, etc. He is preferred before me -- In his Office: for He was before
me -- In his Nature.

V. 16. An -- Here the Apostle confirm^ the Baptist's Words: As if he had said
He is indeed preferred before thee: So we have experienced: We all -- That
believe: Have received -- All that we enjoy out of his ^^^ss; and in the
particular, Grace upon grace -- One Blessing upon another, immeasurable Grace
and Love.

V. 17. The law -- Working Wrath and containing Shadows: was given -- No
Philosopher, Poet, or Orator, ever chose his Words so accurately as St. John.
The law, says he, was given by Moses: Grace was by Jesus Christ. Observe the
Reason for placing each Word thus: The Law of Moses was not his own. The Grace
of Christ was. His Grace was opposite to the Wrath, his Truth to the shadowy
Ceremonies of the Law. Jesus -- St. John having once mentioned the Incarnation
(ver. 14.) no more uses that Name The Word, in all his Book.

V. 18. No man has seen God -- With bodily Eyes: yet Believers see him with
the Eye of Faith. Who is in the bosom of the Father -- The Expression denotes
the highest Unity, and the most intimate Knowledge.

V. 19. The Jews -- Probably the Great Council sent.

V. 20. I am not the Christ -- For many supposed he was.

V. 21. Art thou Elijah? -- He was not that Elijah (the Tishbite) of whom they
spoke. Art thou the prophet -- Of whom Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. xviii. 15.

V. 23. He said -- I am that Forerunner of Christ of whom Isaiah speaks. I am
the voice -- As if he had said, Far from being Christ, or even Elijah, I am
Nothing but a Voice: A Sound that so soon as it has expressed the Thought, of
which it is the Sign, dies into Air, and is known no more.

V. 24. They who were sent were of the Pharifees -- Who were peculiarly
tenacious of old Customs, and jealous of any Innovation (except those brought
in by their own Scribes) unless the Innovator had unquestionable Proofs of
Divine Authority.

V. 25. They asked him, Why baptizest thou then? -- Without any Commission from
the Sanhedrim? And not only Heathens (who were always baptized, before they
were admitted to Circumcision) but Jews also?

V. 26. John answered, I baptize -- To prepare for the Messiah* And indeed to
show, That Jews, as well as Gentiles, must be Proselytes to Christ, and that
these, as well as those, stand in Need of being washed from their Sins.

V. 28. Where John was baptizing -- That is, used to baptize.

V. 29. He s^eth Jesus coming and says, Behold the Lamb -- Innocent; to be
offered up; prophesied of by Isaiah (chapter liii. 7.) typisied by the Paschal
Lamb, and by the daily Sacrifice: The Lamb of God -- Whom GOD gave, approves,
accepts of; who takes away -- Atoneth for; the Sin -- That is, all the Sins;
of the world -- Of all Mankind. Sin and the World are of equal Extent.

V. 31. I knew him not -- Till he came to be baptized. How surprising is this!
Considering now nearly they were related, and how remarkable the Conception and
Birth of both had been. But there was a peculiar Providence visible in our
Savior's living from his Infancy to his Baptism at Nazareth: John all the Tune
living the Life of an H^^mit in the Deserts of Judea ( Luke i. 80.) ninety or
more Miles from Nazareth. Hereby that Acquaintance was prevented, which might
have made John's Testimony of Christ suspected.

V. 34. I saw it -- That is, the Spirit so descending and abiding on Him: And
testified -- From that Time.

V. 37. They followed Jesus -- They walked after Him, but had not the Courage
to speak to Him.

V. 41. He first finds his own brother Simon -- Probably both of them sought
him: Which is, being interpreted, the Christ -- This the Evangelist adds, as
likewise those Words in the 38th Verse, that is, being interpreted, Master.

V. 42. Jesus said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonah -- As none had told our
LORD these Names, this could not but strike Peter. Cephas, which is Peter --
Meaning the same in Syriac, which Peter does in Greck, namely, a Rock.

V. 45. Jesus of Nazareth -- So Philip thought, not knowing He was born in
Bethlehem. Nathanael was probably the same with Bartholomew, that is, the Son
of Tholomew. St. Matthew joins Bartholomew with Philip (chapter x. 3.) and St. John
places Nathanael in the Midst of the Apostles, immediately after Thomas (chapter
xxi. 2.) just as Bartholomew is placed, Acts i. 13.

V. 46. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? -- How cautiously should we
g^^rd against popular Prejudices? When these had once possessed so honest an
Heart, as even that of Nathanael they led him to suspect the blessed Jesus
Himself for an Impostor, because He had been brought up at Nazareth. But his
Integrity prevailed over that foolish Blas, and laid him open to the Force of
Evidence, which a candid Enquirer will always be glad to admit, even when it
brings the most unexpected Discoveries. Can any good thing? -- That is, have we
Ground from Scripture to expect the Messiah, or any eminent Prophet, from
Nazareth? Philip says, Come and see -- The same Answer which he had received
himself from our LORD the Day before.

V. 48. Under the fig tree I saw thee -- Perhaps at Prayer.

V. 49. Nathanael answered -- Happy are they that are ready to believe, swift
to receive the Truth and Grace of GOD. Thou art the Son of God -- So he
acknowledges now, more than he had heard from Philip: The Son of God, the king
of Israel -- A Consession both of the Person and Office of Christ.

V. 51. Hereafter ye shall see -- All of these, as well as thou, who believe on
me now in my State of Humiliation, shall hereafter ^^e me come in my Glory, and
all the Angels of GOD with me. This seems the most natural Sense of the Words,
though they may also refer to his Aseension.

II
And the third day, there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of
Jesus was there.

is it to me and thee? Mine hour is not yet come. it. feast calls the
bridegroom, but thou have kept the good wine till now.

Psalm lxix. 9.
The zeal of thine house eats me up.

V. 1. And the third day -- After He had said this. In Cana of Galilee -- There
were two other Towns of the same Name, one in the Tribe of Ephraim, the other
in Caelosyria.

V. 2. Jesus and his disciples were invited to the marriage -- Christ does not
take away human Society, but sanctify it. Water might have quenched Thirst; yet
our LORD allows Wine; especially at a festival Solemnity. Such was his Facility
in drawing his Disciples at first, who were afterward to go through rougher Ways.

V. 3. And wine f^lling short -- How many Days the Solemnity had lasted, and on
which Day our Lord came, or how many Disciples might follow Him, does not
appear. His mother says to him, They have not wine -- Either she might mean,
Supply them by Miracle; or, Go away, that others may go also, before the Want
appears.

V. 4. Jesus says to her, Woman -- So our LORD speaks also, chapter xix. 26. it is
probable this was the constant Appellation which He used to her. He regarded
his Father above all, not knowing even his Mother after the f^^sh. What is it
to me and thee? A mild Reproof of her inordinate Concern and untimely
Interposal. Mine hour is not yet come -- The Time of my working this Miracle,
or of my going away.

May we not learn hence, if his Mother was rebuked for attempting to direct Him
in the Days of his Flesh, how absurd it is, to address her as if she had a
Right to command Him, on the Throne of his Glory? Likewise how indecent it is
for us to direct his supreme Wisdom, as to the Time or Manner in which He shall
appear for us, in any of the Exigencies of Life!

V. 5. His mother says to the servants -- Gathering from his Answer, that He
was about to do something extraordinary.

V. 6. The purifying of the Jews -- Who purified themselves by frequent
Washings; particularly before Eating.

V. 9. The governor of the feast -- The Bridegroom generally procured some
Friend to order all Things at the Entertainment.

V. 10. And says -- St. John barely relates the Words he spoke, which does not
imply his approving them. When they have well d^an^ -- Does not mean any more
than toward the Close of the Entertainment.

V. 11. And his disciples believed -- More steadfastly.

V. 14. Ox^n, and sheep, and doves -- Used for Sacrifice: And the changers of
money -- Those who changed foreign Money, for that which was current at
Jerusalem, for the Convenience of them that came from distant Countries.

V. 15. Having made a s^ourge of rushes -- (Which were strewed on the Ground)
he drove all out of the temple (that is, the Court of it) bot^ the sheep and
the oxen -- Though it does not appear that He struck even them: And much less,
any of the Men. But a Terror from GOD, it is evident, fell upon them.

V. 18. Them answered the Jews -- Either some of those whom he had just driven
out, or their Friends: What sign show thou? -- So they require a Miracle, to
confirm a Miracle!

V. 19. This temple -- Doubtless pointing, while He spoke, to his Body, the
Temple and Habitation of the Godhead.

V. 20. Forty and six years -- Just so many Years before the Time of this
Conversation, Herod the Great had begun his most magnificent Reparation of the
Temple (one Part after another) which he continued all his Life, and which was
now going on, and was continued thirty-six Years longer, till within six or
seven Years of the Destruction of the State, City, and Temple, by the Romans.

V. 22. They believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said --
Concerning his Resurrection.

V. 23. Many believed -- That He was a Teacher sent from GOD.

V. 24. He did not trust himself to them -- Let us learn hence, Not rashly to
put ourselves into the Power of others. Let us study a wise and happy Medium,
between universal Suspiciousness, and that Easiness which would make us the
Property of every Pretender to Kindness and Respect.

V. 25. He -- To whom all Things are naked, knew what was in man -- Namely, a
desperately deceitful Heart.

III.
Now there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
God. we have seen; yet ye receive not our testimony. Numb. xxi. 8, 9.
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be
lifted up, him.



man can receive nothing, unless it be given him from heaven. must decrease.
him the Spirit by measure. but he that obeys not the Son, shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him.

V. 1. A ruler -- One of the Great Council.

V. 2. The same came -- Through Desire; but by night -- Through Shame: We know --
Even we Rulers and Pharisees.

V. 3. Jesus answered -- That Knowledge will not avail thee, unless thou be
born again -- Otherwise thou can not see, that is, experience and enjoy,
either the inward or the glorious kingdom of God.

In this solemn Discourse our LORD shows, that no external Profession, (...)
ceremonial Ordinances or Privileges of Birth, could entitle (...) to (...) of
the Messiah's Kingdom: That an entire change (...) ^^^^ssary for that Purpose:
That this could only be wrought in Man, by the Almighty Power of GOD: That
every Man born into the World, was by Nature in a State of Sin, Condemnation,
and Misery: That the free Mercy of GOD had given his Son to deliver them from
it, and to raise them to a blessed Immortality: That all Mankind, Gen^^^s as
well as Jews, might share in these Benefits, procured by his being listed up on
the Cross, and to be received by Faith in him: But that, if they rejected Him,
their eternal, aggravated Condemnation would be the certain Consequence. Except
a man be born again -- If our LORD, by being born again, means only Reformation
of Life, iustead of making any new Discovery, he has only thrown a great Deal
of Obscurity, on what was before plain and obvious.

V. 4. When ^e is old -- As Nicodemus himself was.

V. 5. Except a man be born of water and of the spirit -- Except he experience
that great inward Change by the Spirit, and he baptized (wherever Baptism can
he had) as the outward Sign and Means of it.

V. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh -- Mere Flesh, void of the
Spirit, yea, at Enmity with it: And that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit
-- Is spiritual, heavenly, divine, like its Author.

V. 7. Ye must be born again -- To be born again, is, To be inwardly changed
from all Sinfulness to all Holiness. It is fitly so called, because as great a
Change then passes on the Soul, as passes on the Body, when it is born into the
World.

V. 8. The wind blows -- According to its own Nature, not thy Will, and thou
hear the sound thereof -- Thou art sure it does blow, but can not explain
the particular Manner of its acting. So i^ every one that is born of the Spirit
-- The Fact is plain, the Manner of his Operations inexplicable.

V. 11. We speak what we know -- I and all that believe in me.

V. 12. Earthly things -- Things done on Earth. Such as the New Birth, and the
present Privileges of the Children of GOD. Heavenly things -- Such as the
Eternity of the Son, and the Unity of the Father, Son, and Spirit.

V. 13. For no one -- For here you must rely on my single Testimony, whereas
there you have a Cloud of Witnesses: Has gone up to heaven, but he that came
down from heaven. Who is in Leaven -- Therefore He is Omnipresent; else He
could not be in Heaven and on Earth at once. This is a plain Instance of what
is usually termed the Communication of Properties between the Divine and Human
Nature; whereby what is proper to the Divine Nature is spoken concerning the
Human, and what is proper to the Human is, as here, spoken of the Divine.

V. 14. And as Moses -- And even this single Witness will soon be taken from
you; yea, and in a most ignominious Manner.

V. 15. That whosoever -- He must be lifted up, that hereby He may purchase
Salvation for all Believers: All those who look to Him by Faith recovering
spiritual Health, even as all that looked at that Serpent recovered bodily
Health.

V. 16. Yea, and this was the very Design of GOD's Love, in sending Him into
the World. Whosoever believes on him -- With that Faith which works by Love,
and hold fast the Beginning of his Confidence steadfast to the End. God so loved
the world -- That is, All Men under Heaven; even those that despise his Love,
and will for that Cause finally perish. Otherwise not to believe would be no
Sin to them. For what should they believe? Ought they to believe, that Christ
was given for them? Then He was given for them. He gave his only Son -- Truly
and seriously. And the Son of God gave himself (Gal. iv. 4.) Truly and
seriously.

V. 17. God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world -- Although
many accuse him of it.

V. 18. He that believes on him is not condemned -- Is acquitted, is justified
before GOD. The name of the only begotten Son of God -- The Name of a Person is
often put for the Person himself. But perhaps it is farther intimated in that
Expression, That the Person spoken of is great and magnificent. And therefore
it is generally used to express either GOD the Father, or the Son.

V. 19. This is the condemnation -- That is, the Cause of it. So GOD i^ clear.

V. 21. He that practices the truth (that is, true Religion) comes to the
light -- So even Nicodemus afterward did. Are wrought in God -- That is, in
the Light, Power, and Love of GOD.

V. 22. Jesus went -- From the Capital City, Jerusalem, into the land of Judea
-- That is, into the Country. There he baptized -- Not Himself; but his
Disciples by his Order, chapter iv. 2.

V. 23. John also was baptizing -- He did not repel them that offered; but he
more willingly referred them to Jesus.

V. 25. The Jew -- Those Men of Judea, who now went to be baptized by Jesus;
and John's Disciples, who were mostly of Galilee; about purifying -- That is,
Baptism. They disputed, which they should be baptized by.

V. 27. A man can receive nothing -- Neither he, nor I. Neither could he do
this, unless GOD had sent him; nor can I receive the Title of Christ, or any
Honor comparable to that which He has received from Heaven. They seem to have
spoken with Jealousy and Resentment; John answers with sweet Composure of
Spirit.

V. 29. He that has the bride is the bridegroom -- He whom the Bride follows.
But all Men now come to Jesus. Hence it is plain, He is the Bridegroom: The
friend who hears him -- Talk with the Bride; rejoiceth greatly -- So far from
envying or resenting it.

V. 30. He must increase, but I must decrease -- So they who are now, like
John, burning and shining lights, must (if not suddenly eclipsed) like him
gradually decrease, while others are increasing about them; as they, in their
Turns, grew up, amidst the Decays of the former Generation. Let us know how to
set, as well as how to rise; and let it comfort our declining Days, to trace in
those who are likely to succeed us in our Work, the Openings of yet greater
Usefulness.

V. 31. It is not improbable, that what is added, to the End of the Chapter,
are the Words of the Evangelist, not the Baptist. He that is of the earth -- A
mere Man; of earthly Original, has a Spirit and Speech answerable to it.

V. 32. No man -- None comparatively, exceeding few; receives his testimony --
With true Faith.

V. 33. Has set to his seal -- It was customary among the Jews, for the
Witness to set his Seal to the Testimony he had given. That God is true --
Whose Word the Messiah speaks.

V. 34. God gives not him the Spirit by measure -- As He did to the Prophets,
but immeasurably. Hence He speaks the Words of GOD in the most perfect Manner.

V. 36. He that bel^eveth on the Son, has everlasting life -- He has it
already. For he loves GOD. And Love is the Essence of Heaven. He that obeys
not -- A Consequence of not believing.

IV.
When therefore the Lord knew, that the Pharisees had heard, Jesus makes and
baptizeth more disciples than John living water? The woman says to him, Sir,
thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: whence then have thou
that living water? say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to
worship. in truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him. is a Spirit, and
they that worship him must worship in spirit and in truth. when he is come, he
will tell us all things. He.



for they are white already to the harvest,



Mat. xiii. 57.
That a prophet has not honor in his own country.

he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him, and
besought him to come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death.
him, saying, Thy son lives. it was at the same hour, in which Jesus had said
to him, Thy son lives. And himself believed, and his whole house.

V. 1. The Lord knew -- Though none informed Him of it.

V. 3. He left Judea -- To shun the Effects of their Resentment.

V. 4. And he must needs go through Samaria -- The Road lying directly through it.

V. 5. Sychar -- Formerly called Sichem or Shechem. Jacob gave -- On his
Deathbed, Genesis xlviii. 22.

V. 6. Jesus sat thus -- Weary as He was. It was the sixth hour -- Noon; the
Heat of the Day.

V. 7. Give me to drink -- In this one Conversation He brought her to that
Knowledge, which the Apostles were so long in attaining.

V. 8. For his disciples were gone -- Else He needed not have asked her.

V. 9. How do thou -- Her open Simplicity appears, from her very first Words.
The Jews have no dealings -- None by Way of Friendship. They would receive no
Kind of Favor from them.

V. 10. If thou had known the gift -- The living Water; And who it is -- He
who alone is able to give it; Thou would have asked of him -- On those Words
the Stress lies. Water -- In like Manner He draws the Allegory from Bread, chapter
vi. 27. and from Light, chapter viii. 12. the first, the most simple, necessary,
common, and salutary things in Nature. Living water -- The Spirit and its
Fruits. But she might the more easily mistake his Meaning, because living water
was a common Phrase among the Jews for spring water.

V. 12. Our Father Jacob -- So they fancied he was; whereas they were, in
Truth, a Mixture of many Nations, placed there by the King of Assyria, in the
room of the Israelites whom he had carried away captive. (2 Kings xvii. 24.)
Who gave us the well -- In Joseph, their supposed Forefather: And drank thereof
-- So even he had no better Water than this.

V. 14. Will never thirst -- Will never (provided he continue to drink thereof)
be miserable, dissatisfied, without Refreshment. If ever that Thirst returns,
it will be the Fault of the Man, not the Water. But the water that I shall give
him -- The Spirit of Faith working by Love, Shall become in him -- An inward,
living Principle, a fountain -- Not barely a Well, which is soon exhausted,
springing up into everlasting life -- Which is a Confluence, or rather an Ocean
of Streams arising from this Fountain.

V. 15. That I thirst not -- She takes Him still in a gross Sense.

V. 16. Jesus says to her -- He now clears the Way, that He might give her a
better Kind of Water than she asked for. Go call thy husband -- He strikes
directly at her Bosom-Sin.

V. 17. Thou have well said -- We may observe in all our LORD's Discourse, the
utmost Weightiness, and yet the utmost Courtesy.

V. 18. Thou have had five husbands -- Whether they were all dead or not, her
own Conscience now awakened would tell her.

V. 19. Sir, I perceive -- So soon was her Heart touched!

V. 20. The Instant she perceived this, she proposes what she thought the most
important of all Questions. This mountain -- Pointing to Mount Gerizim.
Sanballat, by the Permission of Alexander the Great, had built a Temple upon
Mount Gerizim, for Manass^h, who for marrying Sanballat's Daughter, had been
expelled from the Priesthood and from Jerusalem (Neh. xiii. 28.) This was the
Place where the Samaritans used to worship, in Opposition to Jerusalem. And it
was so near Sychar, that a Man's Voice might be heard from the one to the
other. Our fathers worshipped -- This plainly refers to Abraham and Iacoh (from
whom the Samaritans pretended to deduce their Genealogy) who erected Altars in
this Place: ( Genesis xii. 6, 7. and xxxiii. 18, 20.) And possibly to the whole
Congregation, who were directed, when they came into the Land of Canaan, to put
the blessing upon Mount Gerizim, Deuteronomy. xi. 29. Ye Jews say, In Jerusalem is the
place -- Namely, the Temple.

V. 21. Believe me -- Our LORD uses this Expression in this Manner but once;
and that to a Samaritan. To his own People the Jews, his usual Language is, I
say unto you. The hour comes when ye -- Both Samaritans and Jews, shall
worship neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem -- As preferable to any
other Place. True Worship shall be no longer confined to any one Place or
Nation.

V. 22. Ye worship ye know not what -- Ye Samaritans are ignorant, not only of
the Place, but of the very Object of Worship. Indeed they feared the Lord --
After a Fashion; but at the same Time, served their own gods, 2 Kings xvii. 33.
Salvation is from the Jews -- So spoke all the Prophets, that the Savior
should arise out of the Jewish Nation: And that from thence the Knowledge of
Him should spread to all Nations under Heaven.

V. 23. The true worshippers shall worship the Father -- Not here or there
only, but at all Times and in all Places.

V. 24. God is a Spirit -- Not only remote from Body, and all the Properties of
it, but likewise full of all spiritual Perfections, Power, Wisdom, Love,
Holiness. And our Worship should be suitable to his Nature. We should worship
Him with the truly spiritual Worship of Faith, Love, and Holiness, animating
all our Tempers, Thoughts, Words, and Actions.

V. 25. The woman says -- With Joy for what she had already learned, and
Desire of fuller Instruction.

V. 26. Jesus says -- Hasting to satisfy her Desire, before his Disciples
came. I am He -- Our LORD did not speak this so plainly to the Jews, who were
(...) full of the Messiah's temporal Kingdom. If He had, many would doubtless
have taken up Arms in his Favor, and others have accused him to the Roman
Governor. Yet He did in Effect declare the Thing, though he denied the particular
Title. For in a Multitude of Places He represented Himself, both as the Son of
Man, and as the Son of GOD: Both which Expressions were generally understood by
the Jews as peculiarly applicable to the Messiah.

V. 27. His disciples marvelled that he talked with a woman -- Which the Jewish
Rabbis reckoned scandalous for a Man of Distinction to do. They marvelled
likewise at his talking with a Woman of that Nation, which was so peculiarly
hateful to the Jews. Yet none said -- To the Woman. What seek thou? Or to
Christ, Why talkest thou with her?

V. 28. The woman left her water-pot -- Forgetting smaller Things.

V. 29. A man who told me all things that ever I did -- Our LORD had told her
but a few Things. But his Words awakened her Conscience, which soon told her
all the rest. Is not this the Christ? -- She does not doubt of it herself, but
incites them to make the Enquiry.

V. 31. In the mean time -- Before the People came.

V. 34. My meat -- That which satisfies the strongest Appetite of my Soul.

V. 35. The fields are white already -- As if He had said, the spiritual
Harvest is ripe already. The Samaritans ripe for the Gospel, covered the Ground
round about them.

V. 36. He that reapeth -- Whoever saves Souls, receives wages -- A peculiar
Blessing to himself, and gathers fruit -- Many Souls; that he that sows --
Christ the great Sower of the Seed, and he that reapeth may rejoice together --
In Heaven.

V. 37. That saying -- A common Proverb: One sows -- The Prophets and Christ;
Another reapeth -- The Apostles and succeeding Ministers.

V. 38. I -- The LORD of the whole Harvest, have sent you -- He had employed
them already in baptizing, ver. 2.

V. 42. We know that this is the Savior of the world -- And not of the Jews
only.

V. 43. He went into Galilee -- That is, into the Country of Galilee; but not
to Nazareth. It was at that Town only that He had no Honor. Therefore He went
to other Towns.

V. 47. To come down -- For Cana stood much higher than Capernaum.

V. 48. Unless ye see signs and wonders -- Although the Samaritans believed
without them.

V. 52. He asked the hour when he amended -- The more exactly the Works of GOD
are considered, the more Faith is increased.

V.
After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. lie,
and knowing that he had now been diseased a long time, says to him, Desire
thou to be made whole?

I work. Son: That all men may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father.
sent me.

that of John: for the works which the Father has given me to fulfill, the very
works that I do, testify of me, that the Father has sent me. not honor from
men, But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. even Moses, in
whom ye trust.

V. 1. A feast -- Penticost.

V. 2. There is in Jerusalem -- Hence it appears, that St. John wrote his
Gospel before Jerusalem was destroyed: It is supposed about thirty Years after
the Ascension. Having five porticos -- Built for the Use of the Sick. Probably
the Basin had five Sides. Bethesda signifies the house of M^r^y.

V. 4. An angel -- Yet many undoubtedly thought the whole Thing to be purely
natural. At certain times -- Perhaps at a certain hour of the Day, during this
paschal Week. Went down -- The Greek Word implies, that he had ceased going
down, before the Time of St John's writing this. GOD might design this, to
raise Expectation of the acceptable Time approaching, to add a greater Luster
to his Son's Miracles, and to show that his ancient People were not entirely
forgotten of him. The first -- Whereas the Son of GOD healed every Day not one
only, but whole Multitudes that resorted to Him.

V. 7. The sick man answered -- Giving the Reason why he was not made whole,
notwithstanding his Desire.

V. 14. Sin ^^^^o^^ -- It seems his former Illness was the Effect or Punishment
of Sin.

V. 15. The man went and told the Jews, that it was Jesus who had made him
whole -- One might have expected, that when he had published the Name of his
Benefactor, Crowds would have thronged about Jesus, to have heard the Words of
his Mouth, and to have received the Blessings of the Gospel. Instead of this,
they surround Him with an hostile Intent; they even conspire against his Life,
and for an imagined Transgression in Point of Ceremony, would have put out this
Light of Israel. Let us not wonder then, if our Good be evil spoken of; if even
Candor, Benevolence, and Usefulness, do not disarm the Enmity of those who
have been taught to prefer Sacrifice to Mercy; and who disrelishing the genuine
Gospel, naturally seek to slander and persecute the Professors, but especially
the Defenders of it.

V. 17. My Father works until now, and I work -- From the Creation till now
he has been working without Intermission. I do likewise. This is the
Proposition which is explained from ver. 19, to ver. 30, confirmed and
vindicated in the 31st and following Verses.

V. 18. His own Father -- The Greek Word means his own Father, in such a Sense
as no Creature can speak. Making himself equal with God -- It is evident all
the Hearers so understood Him, and that our LORD never contradicted, but
confirmed it.

V. 19. The Son can do nothing of himself -- This is not his Imperfection, but
his Glory, resulting from his eternal, intimate, indissoluble Unity with the
Father. Hence it is absolutely impossible, that the Son should judge, will,
testify, or teach any Thing without the Father, ver. 30, etc. chapter vi. 38. chapter
vii. 16. or that He should be known or believed on, separately from the Father.
And He here defends his doing Good every Day, without Intermission, by the
Example of his Father, from which he cannot depart: These does the Son likewise
-- All these, and only these; seeing He and the Father are One.

V. 20. The Father shows him all things that himself does -- A Proof of the
most intimate Unity. And he will show him -- By doing them. At the same Time
(not at different Times) the Father shows and does, and the Son sees and
do^^. Greater Works -- Jesus oftener terms them Works, than Signs or Wonders.
(...) they were not Wonders in his Eyes. Ye will marvel -- So they did, when He
raised Lazarus.

V. 21. For -- He declares, which are those greater Works, Raising the Dead,
and Judging the World. The Power of quickening whom he will follows from the
Power of judging. These two, Quickening and Judging, are proposed ver. 2^.22.
The Acquittal of Believers, which pre-supposes Judgment, is treated of in the
24th Verse; the Quickening some of the Dead, ver. 25; and the general
Resurrection, ver. 28.

V. 22. For neither does the Father judge -- Not without the Son: But He does
judge by that Man whom He has ordained, Acts xvii. 31.

V. 23. That all men may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father --
Either willingly, and so escaping Condemnation, by Faith; or unwillingly, when
feeling the Wrath of the Judge. This demonstrates the EQUALITY of the Son with
the Father. If our LORD were GOD only by Office or Investiture, and not in the
Unity of the divine Essence, and in all Respects equal in Godhead with the
Father, He could not be honored even as, that is, with the same Honor that
they honored the Father. He that honors not the Son -- With the same equal
Honor, greatly dishonors the Father that sent him.

V. 24. And comes not into condemnation -- Unless he make Shipwreck of the
Faith.

V. 25. The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God -- So did Jairus's
Daughter, the Widow's Son, and Lazarus.

V. 26. He has given to the Son -- By eternal Generation, to, have life in
himself -- Absolute, independent.

V. 27. Because he is the Son of man -- He is appointed to judge Mankind,
because He was made Man.

V. 28. The ^^me is coming -- When not two or three, but all shall rife.

V. 29. The resurrection of life -- That Resurrection which leads to Life
everlasting.

V. 30. I can do nothing of myself -- It is impossible I should do any Thing
separately from my Father. As I hear -- Of the Father, and see, so I judge and
do; because I am essentially united to Him. See ver. 19.

V. 31. If I testify of myself -- That is, if I alone (which indeed is
impossible) my testimony is not valid.

V. 32. There is another -- The Father, ver. 37. and I know that, even in your
Judgment, his Testimony is beyond Exception.

V. 33. He bare testimony -- That I am the Christ.

V. 34. But I have no Need to receive, etc. But these things -- Concerning
John, whom ye yourselves reverence; I say that ye may be saved -- So really and
seriously did He will their Salvation. Yet they were not saved. Most, if not
all, of them died in their Sins.

V. 35. He was a burning and a shining light -- Inwardly burning with Love and
Zeal; outwardly shining in all Holiness. And even ye were willing for a season
-- A short Time only.

V. 37. He has testified of me -- Namely, at my Baptism. I speak not of my
supposed Father Joseph. Ye are utter Strangers to Him of whom I speak.

V. 38. Ye have not his word -- All who believe have the Word of the Father
(the same with the Word of the Son) abiding in them, that is, deeply ingrasted
in their Hearts.

V. 39. Search the Scriptures -- A plain Command to all Men. In them ye are
assured ye have eternal life -- Ye know they show you the Way to eternal Life.
And these very Scriptures testify of me.

V. 40. Yet ye will not come unto me -- As they direct you.

V. 41. I receive not honor from men -- I need it not. I seek it not from you
for my own Sake.

V. 42. But I know you -- With this Ray he pierces the Hearts of the Hearers.
And this doubtless He spoke with the tenderest Compassion.

V. 43. If another shall come -- Any false Christ.

V. 44. While ye receive honor -- That is, while ye seek the Praise of Men
rather than the Praise of GOD. At the Feast of Pentecost, kept in Commemoration
of the giving the Law from Mount Sinai, their Sermons use to be full of the
Praises of the Law, and of the People to whom it was given. How mortifying then
must the following Words of our LORD be to them, while they were thus exulting
in Moses and his Law?

V. 45. There is one that a^cuseth you -- By his Writings.

V. 46. He wrote of me -- Every where; in all his Writings; particularly Dent.
xviii. 15, 18.

VI.
Mat. xiv. 13. Mark vi. 32. Luke ix. 10.
After these things, Jesus went over the sea of the sea of Tiberias, And a
great multitude followed him, because they had seen the miracles which he did
on the diseased. that each of them may take a little. them, and filled twelve
baskets with the fragments of the five barley-loaves, which remained over and
above to them that had eaten.

Mat. xiv. 22. Mark vi. 45.
In the evening, his disciples went down to the sea, And entering into the
vessel, they went over the sea toward Capernaum:

saw there was no other vessel there, save that one into which his disciples
went, and that Jesus went not into the vessel with his disciples, but that his
disciples were gone away alone:

Psalm lxxviii. 24.
He gave them bread from heaven to eat. that every one who sees the Son, and
believes on him, should have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the
last day.

Isaiah live. 13.
And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that has heard and
learned of the Father comes to me. yet died. give, is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world.

his flesh to eat? But

it, said, This is an hard saying: who can hear it? What if ye shall see the
Son of man ascend where he was before? they are spirit and they are life.

time many of his disciples went back and walked no more with him. Then said
Jesus to the twelve, the son of Simon; for he it was that would betray him,
being one of the twelve.

V. 1. After these things -- The History of between ten and eleven Months is to
be supplied here from the other Evangelists.

V. 3. Jesus went up -- Before the People overtook Him.

V. 5. Jesus says to Philip -- Perhaps he had the Care of providing Victuals
for the Family of the Apostles.

V. 15. He retired to the mountain alone -- Having ordered his Disciples to
cross over the Lake.

V. 22. Who had stood on the other side -- They were forced to stay a while,
because there were then no other Vessels; and they staid the less unwillingly,
because they saw Jesus was not embarked.

V. 26. Our LORD does not satisfy their Curiosity, but corrects the wrong
Motive they had in seeking Him: Because ye did eat -- Merely for temporal
Advantage. Hitherto Christ had been gathering Hearers: He now begins to try
their Sincerity, by a figurative Discourse concerning his Passion, and the
Fruit of it, to be received by Faith.

V. 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes -- For bodily Food: Not for
that only, not chiefly: Not at all, but in Subordination to Grace, Faith, Love,
the meat which endures to everlasting life. Labor, Work for this: for
everlasting Life: So our LORD expressly commands, Work for Life, as well as
from Life; from a Principle of Faith and Love. Him has the Father sealed -- By
this very Miracle, as well as by his whole Testimony concerning Him. See chapter
iii. 33. Sealing is a Mark of the Authenticity of a Writing.

V. 28. The works of God -- The Work most pleasing to GOD.

V. 29. This is the work of God -- The Work most pleasing to GOD, and the
Foundation of all others: That ye believe -- He expresses it first properly,
afterward siguratively.

V. 30. What sign do thou? -- Amazing, after what they had just seen!

V. 31. Our fathers ate manna -- This Sign Moses gave them. He gave them bread
from heaven -- From the lower, sublunary Heaven; to which Jesus opposes the
highest Heaven: In which Sense he says seven Time^ (ver. 32, 33, 38, 50, 58,
62.) That He Himself came down from heaven.

V. 32. Moses gave you not bread from heaven -- It was not Moses who gave the
Manna to your Fathers; but my Father, who now gives the true bread from heaven.

V. 33. He that -- gives life to the world -- Not (like the Manna) to one
People only: And that from Generation to Generation. Our LORD does not yet say,
I am that Bread; else the Jews would not have given Him so respectful an
Answer, ver. 34.

V. 34. Give us this bread -- Meaning it still, in a literal Sense: Yet they
seem now to be not far from believing.

V. 35. I am the bread of life -- Having and giving Life: He that comes -- he
that believes -- Equivalent Expressions: Shall never hunger, thirst -- Shall
be satisfied, happy, for ever.

V. 36. I have told you -- Namely, ver 26.

V. 37. All that the Father gives me -- All that seel themselves lost, and
follow the Drawings of the Father, He in a peculiar Manner gives to the Son:
Will come to me -- By Faith. And him that thus comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out -- I will give him Pardon, Holiness, and Heaven, if he endure to the
End to rejoice in his Light.

V. 39. Of all which he has already given me -- (See chapter xvii. 6, 12.) If they
endure to the End. But Judas did not.

V. 40. Here is the Sum of the three foregoing Verses. This is the will of him
that sent me -- This is the whole of what I have said: This is the eternal,
unchangeable Will of COD. Every one who truly believes, shall have everlasting
Life. Every one that sees and believes -- The Jews saw, and yet believed not.
And I will raise him up -- As this is the Will of Him that sent me, I will
perform it effectually.

V. 44. Christ having checked their Murmuring, continues what he was saying,
ver. 40. No man comes to me, unless my Father draw him -- No Man can believe in
Christ, unless GOD give him Power: He draws us first, by Good Desires: Not by
Compulsion, not by laying the Will under any Necessity; but by the strong and
sweet, yet still resistible, Motions of his heavenly Grace.

V. 45. Every man that has heard -- The secret Voice of GOD, he, and he only
believes.

V. 46. Not that any one -- Must expect him to appear in a visible Shape. He
who is from or with God -- In a more eminent Manner than any Creature.

V. 50. Not die -- Not spiritually; not eternally.

V. 51. If any eat of this bread -- That is, believe in me: He shall live for
ever -- In other Words, He that believes to the End shall be saved. My flesh
which I will give you -- This whole Discourse concerning his Flesh and Blood
refers directly to his Passion, and but remotely, if at all to the LORD'S
Supper.

V. 52. Observe the Degrees: The Jews are tried here; the Disciples, ver. 60,
66. the Apostles, ver. 67.

V. 53. Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man -- Spiritually: Unless ye
draw continual Virtue from him by Faith. Eating his flesh is only another
Expression for believing.

V. 55. Meat -- drink indeed -- With which the Soul of a Believer is as truly
sed, as his Body with Meat and Drink.

V. 57. I live by the Father -- Being one with Him. He shall live by me --
Being one with me. Amazing Union!

V. 58. This is -- That is, I am the bread -- Which is not like the Manna your
Fathers ate, who died notwithstanding.

V. 60. This is an hard saying -- Hard to the Children of the World, but sweet
to the Children of GOD. Scarce ever did our LORD speak more sublimely, even to
the Apostles in private. Who can hear -- Endure it?

V. 62. What if ye shall see the Son of man ascend where he was before? -- How
much more incredible will it then appear to you, that he should give you his
Flesh to eat?

V. 63. It is the Spirit -- The spiritual Meaning of these Words, by which GOD
gives Life. The flesh -- The bare, carnal, literal Meaning, profits nothing.
The words which I have spoken, they are spirit -- Are to be taken in a
spiritual Sense; and, when they are so understood, they are life -- That is, a
Means of spiritual Life to the Hearers.

V. 64. But there are some of you who believe not -- And so receive no Life by
them, because you take them in a gross literal Sense. For Jesus knew from the
beginning -- Of his Ministry: Who would betray him -- Therefore it is plain,
GOD does foresee future Contingencies: "But his Foreknowledge causes not the
Fault
"Which had no less proved certain unforeknown."


V. 65. Unless it be given -- And it is given to those only, who will receive
it on GOD's own Terms.

V. 66. From this time many of his disciples went back -- So our LORD now began
to purge his Floor: The Proud and Careless were driven away, and those remained
who were meet for the Master's Use.

V. 68. Thou have the words of eternal life -- Thou, and thou alone speak
the Words which show the Way to Life everlasting.

V. 69. And we -- Who have been with Thee from the Beginning, whatever others
do, have known -- Are absolutely assured, that thou art the Christ.

V. 70. Jesus answered them -- And yet even ye have not all acted suitably to
this Knowledge. Have I not chosen, or elected you twelve? -- But they might
fall from even that Election. Yet one of you -- On this gracious Warning, Judas
ought to have repented: Is a devil -- Is now influenced by one.

VII.
After these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in Judea,
because the Jews sought to kill him. there also may see the works which thou
do.

said, Nay; but he seduceth the people.



such things concerning him, and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent
officers to seize him. then I go to him that sent me. me? And where I am, ye
cannot come?

day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink. Zech. xiv. 8.
He that believes on me, out of his belly (as the scripture has said) shall
flow rivers of living water. of the Spirit, ^^^ch t^^y who believed on him were
to receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet
glorified. Micah v. 2.
Bethlehem, the town where David was? arises no prophet.

V. 1. After these things Jesus walled in Galilee -- That is, continued there,
for some Months after the Second Passover: For he would not walk -- Continue in
Judea; because the Jews -- Those of them who did not believe; and in particular
the chief Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, sought an Opportunity to kill him.

V. 2. The feast of tabernicles -- The Time, Manner, and Reason of this Feast
may be seen, Lev. xxiii. 34, etc.

V. 3. His brethren -- So called according to the Jewish Way of speaking. They
were his Cousins, the Sons of his Mother's Sister. Depart hence -- From this
obscure Place.

V. 4. For no man does any thing -- Of this Kind, in secret; but rather
desires to be of public Use. If thou really do these things -- These
Miracles which are reported; show thyself to the would -- To all Men.

V. 6. Jesus says, Your time is always ready -- This or any Time will suit you.

V. 7. The world cannot late you -- Because ye are of the World. But me it
hates -- And all that bear the same Testimony.

V. 10. He also went up to the feast -- This was his last Journey but one to
Jerusalem. The next Time He went up, he suffered.

V. 11. The Jews -- The Men of Judea, particularly of Jerusalem.

V. 12. There was much murmuring among the multilude -- Much whispering; many
private Debates with each other, among those who were come from distant Parts.

V. 13. However no man spoke openly of him -- Not in Favor of Him: for fear of
the Jews -- Those that were in Authority.

V. 14. Now at the middle of the feast -- Which lasted eight Days. It is
probable, this was on the Sabbath Day. Jesus went up into the temple --
Directly, without stopping any where esse.

V. 15. How does this man know letters, having never learned? -- How comes He
to be so well acquainted with sacred Literature as to be able thus to expound
the Scripture, with such Propriety and Gracefulness, seeing He has never learnt
this, at any Place of Education?

V. 16. My doctrine is not mine -- Acquired by any Labor of Learning; but his
that sent me -- Immediately infused by Him.

V. 17. If any man he willing to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it he of God -- This is a universal Rule, with regard to all Persons
and Doctrines. He that is thoroughly willing to do it, shall certainly know,
what the Will of GOD is.

V. 18. There is no unrighteoasness in him -- No Deceit or Falsehood.

V. 19. But ye are unrighteous; for ye violate the very Law which ye prosess so
much Zeal for.

V. 20. The people answered, Thou have a devil -- A lying Spirit. Who seeks
to kill thee? -- These, coming from distant Parts, probably did not know the
Design of the Priests and Rulers.

V. 21. I did -- At the Pool of Bethesta: One work -- Out of many: And ye all
marvel at it -- Are amazed, because I did it on the Sabbath Day.

V. 22. Moses gave you circumcision -- The Sense is, Because Moses enjoined you
Circumcision (though indeed it was far more ancient than him) you think it no
Harm to circumcise a Man on the Sabbath: And are ye angry at me (which Anger
had now continued sixteen Months) for doing so much greater a Good, for healing
a Man, Body and Soul, on the Sabbath?

V. 27. When Christ comes, none knows whence he is -- This Jewish Tradition
was true, with regard to his Divine Na^u^ In that Respect, none could declare
his generation. But it was ^ot true with regard to his Human Nature, for both
his Family and the Place of his Birth were plainly foretold.

V. 28. Then cried Jesus -- With a loud and earnest Voice. Do ye both know me,
and know whence I am? -- Ye do indeed know whence I am a Man. But ye know not
my Divine Nature, nor that I am sent from GOD.

V. 29. I am from him -- By eternal Generation: And he has sent me -- His
Mission follows from his Generation. These two Points answer those: Do ye know
me? Do ye know whence I am?

V. 30. His hour -- The Time of his Suffering.

V. 33. Then said Jesus -- Continuing his Discourse (from the 29th Verse) which
they had interrupted.

V. 34. Ye shall seek me -- Whom ye now despise. These Words are as it were the
Text, which is commented upon in this and the following Chapter. Where I am --
Christ's so frequently saying while on Earth, where I am, when He spoke of his
being in Heaven, intimates his perpetual Presence there in his Divine Nature;
though his g^ing thither was a future Thing, with regard to his Human Nature.

V. 35. Will he go to the dispersed among the Greeks -- The Jews scattered
abroad in Heathen Nations, Greece particularly. Or, Will be t^^^h the Greek^?
-- The Heathens themselves?

V. 37. On the last, (...) the great day of the feast -- On this Day there was
the greatest Concourse of People, and they were then wont to fetch Water from
the Fountain of S^^^^am, which the Priests poured out on the Great Altar,
singing one to another, With joy shall ye draw water from the wells of
salvation. On this Day likewise they commemorated GOD's miraculously giving
Water out of the Rock, and offered up solemn Prayers for seasonable Rains.

V. 38. He that believes -- This answers to let him come to me* And whosoever
does come to him by Faith, his inmost Soul shall be filled with living Water,
with Abundance of Peace, Joy, and Lov^, which shall likewise flow from Him to
others. As the scripture has said -- Not expressly, in any one particular
Place. But here is a general Reterence to all those Scriptures which speak of
the Eff^^ion of the Spirit by the Messiah, under the Similitude of pouring out
Water.

V. 39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given -- That is, those Fruits of the Spirit
were not yet given even to true believers, in that full Measure.

V. 40. The prophet -- Whom we expect to be the Forerunner of the Messiah.

V. 42. From Bethlehem -- And how could they forget, That Jesus was born there?
Had not Herod given them terrible Reason to remember it?

V. 48. Has any of the rulers -- Men of Rank or Eminence, or of the Pharisees
-- Men of Learning or Religion, believed on him?

V. 49. But this populace, who know not the law -- This ignorant Rabble; are
accursed -- Are by that Ignorance exposed to the Curse of being thus seduced.

V. 50. Nicodemus, he that came to him by night -- Having now a little more
Courage, being one of them -- Being present as a Member of the Great Council,
says to them -- Do not we ourselves act as if we know not the law, if we pass
Sentence on a Man before we hear him?

V. 52. They answered -- By personal Reflection; the Argument they could not
answer, and therefore did not attempt it. Art thou also a Galilean? -- One of
his Party? Out of Galilee arises no prophet -- They could not but know the
Contrary. They knew Jonah arose out of Gath-h^pher; and Nahum from another
Village in Galilee. Yea, and Th^she, the Town of Elijab, the Tishbite, was in
Galilee also. They might likewise have known that Jesus was not born in
Galilee, but at Bethlehem, even from the public Register there, and from the
Genealogies of the Family of David. They were conscious this poor Answer would
not bear Examination, and so took Care to prevent a Reply.

V. 53. And every man went to his own house -- So that short, plain Question of
Ni^^^^us, spoiled all their Measures, and broke up the Council! A word spoken
in season, how good is it? Especially, when GOD gives it his Blessing.

VIII.
Deuteronomy. xxii. 23.
Moses has commanded us in the law, to stone such. it, went out one by one,
beginning at the eldest; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman in the midst.

yet my testimony is valid: for I know whence I came, and whither I go: but ye
know not whence I came, or whither I go. if I judge, my judgment is valid; for
I am not alone: but I and the Father that sent me. Deuteronomy. xix. 15.
The testimony of two men is valid.

shall die in your sins. that I do nothing of myself, but as my Father has
taught me, I speak these things.

be made free. but the Son abides ever. even God. Even because ye cannot hear
my word. your father the devil, and your will is, to do the desires of your
father. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth; for
there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own; for
he is a liar, and the father of it. them not, because ye are not of God. it and
judges. also are dead. it and was glad.

V. 5. Moses has commanded us to stone such -- If they spoke accurately, this
must have been a Woman, who having been b^tr^^h^d to an H^s^and, had been
guilty of this Crime before the Marriage was completed; for such only Moses
commanded to be stoned. He commanded indeed, that other Adulteresses should be
put to Death; but the Manner of Death was not specified.

V. 6. That they might have to accuse him -- Either of usurping the Office of a
Judge, if He condemned Her; or, of being an Enemy to the Law, if He acquitted
her. Jesus stooping down, wrote with his singer on the ground -- GOD wrote once
in the Old Testament; Christ once in the New: Perhaps the Words which He
afterward spoke, when they continued asking Him. By this silent Action; He 1.
sixth their wandering, hurrying Thoughts, in order to awaken their Conscience;
and 2. signified, That He was not then to condemn, but to save the World.


V. 7. He that is without sin -- He that is not guilty (his own Conscience
being the Judge) either of the same Sin, or of some nearly resembling it. Let
him first -- As a Witness, cast the Stone at her.

V. 9. Beginning at the eldest -- Or the Elders. Jesas was left alone -- By all
those Scribes and Pharisees who proposed the Question. But many others
remained, to whom our LORD directed his Discourse presently after.

V. 10. Has no man condemned thee? -- Has no judicial Sentence been passed
upon thee?

V. 11. Neither do I condemn thee -- Neither do I take upon me to pass any such
Sentence. Let this Deliverance lead thee to Repentance.

V. 12. He that follows me shall not walk in Darkness -- In Ignorance,
Wickedness, Misery; But shall have the light of life -- He that closely,
humbly, steadily follows me, shall have the divine Light continually shining
upon him, diffusing over his Soul, Knowledge, Holiness, Joy, till he is guided
by it to Life everlasting.

V. 13. Thou testifiest of thyself: thy testimony is not valid -- They retort
upon our LORD his own Words (chapter v. 31.) If I testify of myself my testimony is
not valid. He had then added, There is another who testifies of me. To the
same Effect, he replies here (ver. 14.) Though I testify of myself, yet my
testimony is valid; for I am inseparably united to the Father. I know -- And
from firm and certain Knowledge proceeds the most unexceptionable Testimony:
Whence I came and whither I go -- To these two Heads may be referred all the
Doctrine concerning Christ. The former is treated of ver. 16, etc. the latter,
21, etc. For I know whence I came -- That is, For I came from GOD, both as GOD
and as Man. And I know it, though ye do not.

V. 15. Ye judge after the slesh -- As the Flesh, that is, corrupt Nature
dictates. I judge no man -- Not thus; not now; not at my first Coming.

V. 16. I am not alone -- No more in judging, than in testifying: But I and the
Father that sent me -- His Father is in him, and he is in the Father (chapter xiv.
10, 11.) And so the Father is no more alone without the Son, than the Son is
without the Father ( Prove. viii. 22, 23, 30.) His Father and He are not one and
another GOD, but one GOD (though distinct Persons) and so inseparable from each
other. And though the Son came from the Father, to assume Human Nature, and
perform his Office as the Messiah upon Earth, as GOD is sometimes said to come
from Heaven, for particular Manifestations of Himself; yet Christ did not leave
the Father, nor the Father leave Him, any more than GOD leaves Heaven, when He
is said to come down to the Earth.

V. 19. Then said they to him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered -- Showing
the Perverseness of their Question; and Teaching, That they ought first to know
the Son, if they would know the Father. Where the Father is -- He shows, ver.
23. Meantime He plainly intimates, that the Father and He were distinct
Persons, as they were Two Witnesses: And yet One in Essence, as the Knowledge
of Him includes the Knowledge of the Father.

V. 23. Ye are -- Again He passes over their Interruption, and proves what He
advanced, ver. 21. Of them that are beneath -- From the Earth. I am of them
that are above -- Here He directly shows whence He came, even from Heaven, and
whither He goes.

V. 24. If ye believe not that I AM -- Here (as in the 58th Verse) our LORD
claims the divine Name, I AM, Exodus iii. 14. But the Jews, as if He had stopped
short, and not finished the Sentence, answered, Who art thou?

V. 25. Even what I say to you from the beginning -- The same which I say to
you, as it were in one Discourse, with one even T^nor from the Time I first
spoke to you.

V. 26. I have many things to say and to judge of you -- I have much to say
concerning your inexcusable Unbelief: but he that sent me is true -- Whether ye
believe or no. And I speak the things which I have heard from him -- I deliver
truly what He has given me in Charge.

V. 27. They understood not -- That by Him that sent Him, He meant GOD the
Father. Therefore in the 28th and 29th verses, He speaks plainly of the Father,
and again claims the divine Name, I AM.

V. 28. When ye shall have lifted up -- On the Cross, ye shall know -- And so
many of them did, that I AM -- GOD over all; and that I do nothing of myself --
Being One with the Father.

V. 29. The Father has not left me alone -- Never from the Moment I came into
the World.

V. 32. The truth -- Written in your Hearts by the Spirit of GOD, shall make
you free -- From Guilt, Sin, Misery, Satan.

V. 33. They -- The other Jews that were by (not those that believed) as
appears by the whole Tenor of the Conversation. We were never enslaved to any
man -- A bold, notorious Untruth. At that very Time they were enslaved to the
Romans.

V. 34. Jesus answered -- Each Branch of their Objection first concerning
Freedom, then concerning their being Abraham's Offspring, ver. 37, etc. He that
commits sin, is, in fact, the slave of sin.

V. 35. And the slave abides not in the house -- All Sinners shall be cast out
of GOD's House, as the Slave was out of Abraham's: But I the Son abide therein
for ever.

V. 36. If I therefore make you free, ye -- shall partake of the same
Privilege; being made free from all Guilt and Sin, ye shall abide in the House
of GOD for ever.

V. 37. I know that ye are Abraham's Offspring -- As to the other Branch of
your Objection, I know that ye are Abraham's Offspring, after the Flesh; but
not in a spiritual Sense. Ye are not Followers of the Faith of Abraham: My Word
has no Place in your Hearts.

V. 41. Ye do the deeds of your Father -- He is not named yet. But when they
presumed to call GOD their Father, then he is expressly called the Devil, ver.
44.

V. 42. I proceeded forth -- As GOD, and come -- As Christ.

V. 43. Ye cannot -- Such is your Stubbornness and Pride, hear -- Receive,
obey, my word, Not being desirous to do my will, ye cannot understand my
Doctrine, chapter vii. 17.

V. 44. He was a murderer -- In Inclination, from the beginning -- Of his
becoming a Devil; and abode not in the truth -- Commencing Murderer and a Liar
at the same Time. And certainly He was a killer of men (as the Greek Word
properly signifies) from the beginning of the World: For from the very Creation
he designed and contrived the Ruin of Men. When be speaks a lie, be speaks
of his own -- For he is the proper Parent, and as it were, Creator of it. See
the Origin not only of Lies, but of Evil in general!

V. 45. Because I speak the truth -- Which Liars hate.

V. 46. Which of you convicteth me of sin? -- And is not my Life as
unreprovable as my Doctrine? Does not my whole Behavior confirm the Truth of
what I teach?

V. 47. He that is of God -- That either loves or fears Him, hears -- With
Joy and Reverence, God's words -- Which I preach.

V. 48. Say we not well -- Have ye not just Cause to say, thou art a Samaritan
-- An Enemy to our Church and Nation; and have a devil -- Art possessed by a
proud and lying Spirit?

V. 49. I honor my Father -- I seek his Honor only.

V. 50. I seek not my own glory -- That is, as I am the Messiah, I consult not
my own Glory. I need not. For my Father consulteth it, and will pass Sentence
on you accordingly.

V. 51. If a man keep my word -- So will my Father consult my Glory. We keep
his Doctrine by believing, his Promises by hoping his Son (...) by obeying. He
shall never see death -- That is, Death eternal. He shall live for ever. Hereby
He proves, that He was no Samaritan. For the Samaritans in general were
Sadducees.

V. 54. If I honor myself -- Referring to their Words, Whom make thou
thyself?

V. 56. He saw it -- By Faith, in Types, Figures, and Promises. As particularly
in M^lchisedic: In the Appearance of Jehovah to him in the Plains of Mamre
(Genesis xviii. 1.) And in the Promise, that in his Seed all the nations of the
earth should be blessed. Possibly he had likewise a peculiar Revelation, either
of Christ's first or second Coming.

V. 57. Thou art not yet fifty years old -- At the most. Perhaps the Gravity of
our LORD's Countenance, together with his Afflictions and Labors, might make
him appear older than He really was. Have thou seen Abraham? -- Which they
justly supposed must have been, if Abraham had seen Him.

V. 58. Before Abraham was, I AM -- Even from everlasting to everlasting. This
is a direct Answer to the Objection of the Jews, and shows how much greater He
was than Abraham.

V. 59. Then took they up stones -- To stone Him as a Blasphemer; but Jesus
concealed himself -- Probably by becoming invisible; and so passed on -- With
the same Ease as if none had been there.

IX.
And as he passed on, he saw a man blind from his birth. And his disciples
asked him, saying, Master, who sinned, this man, or his parents, that he was
born blind? through him.

but he said, I am he.

he now sees, we know not, or who has opened his eyes we know not. He is of
age: ask him; he will speak concerning himself. to be Christ, he should be put
out of the synagogue.

it again? Are ye also willing to be his disciples? fellow; but we are
disciples of Moses. fellow, whence he is. born blind.



V. 2. Who sinned, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? -- That
is, was it for his own Sins, or for the Sins of his Parents? They suppose (as
many of the Jews did, though without any Ground from Scripture) that he might
have sinned in a pre-existent State, before he came into the World.

V. 3. Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents -- It was
not the Manner of our LORD to answer any Questions that were of no Use, but to
gratify an idle Curiosity. Therefore He determines Nothing concerning this The
Scope of his Answer is, It was neither for any Sins of his own, nor of his
Parents; but that the Power of GOD might be displayed.

V. 4. The night is coming -- Christ is the Light. When the Light is withdrawn,
Night comes, When no man can work -- No Man can do any Thing toward working
out his Salvation after this Life is ended. Yet Christ can work always. But He
was to work upon Earth, only during the day, or Season which was appointed for
Him.

V. 5. I am the light of the world -- I teach Men inwardly by my Spirit, and
outwardly by my Preaching, what is the Will of GOD; and I show them, by my
Example, how they must do it.

V. 6. He anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay -- This might almost
have blinded a Man that had Sight. But what could it do toward curing the
Blind? It reminds us, That GOD is no farther from the Event, when He works
either with or without Means, and that all the Creatures are only that, which
his Almighty Operation makes them.

V. 7. Go w^sh at the pool of Siloam -- Perhaps our LORD intended to make the
Miracle more taken Notice of. For a Crowd of People would naturally gather
round him, to observe the Event of so strange a Prescription. And it is
exceeding probable, the Guide who must have led him in traversing a great Part
of the City, would mention the Errand he was going upon, and so call those who
saw him to a greater Attention.

From the Fountain of Siloam, which was without the Walls of Jerusalem, a
little Stream flowed into the City, and was received in a Kind of Basin, near
the Temple, and called the Pool of Siloam. Which is, by interpretation, Sent --
And so was a Type of the Messiah, who was sent of GOD. He want and wished, and
came seeing -- He believed, and obeyed, and found a Blessing. Had he been wise
in his own Eyes, and reasoned like Naaman, on the Impropriety of the Means, he
had justly been lest in Darkness. LORD, may our proud Hearts be subdued to the
Methods of thy recovering Grace! May we have Thee to choose, how Thou will
bestow Favors, which it is our highest Interest to receive on any Terms.

V. 11. A man called Jesus -- He seems to have been before totally ignorant of
Him.

V. 14. Anointing the eyes -- With any Kind of Medicine on the Sabbath, was
particularly forbidden by the Tradition of the Elders.

V. 16. This Man is not of God -- Not sent of GOD. How can a man that is a
sinner -- That is, one living in wilful Sin, do such miracles?

V. 17. What say thou of him, for that he has opened thine eye? -- What
Inference do thou draw herefrom?

V. 22. He should be put out of the synagogue -- That is, be excommunicated.

V. 27. Are ye also -- As well as I, at length convinced, and willing to be his
disciples?

V. 29. We know not whence he is -- By what Power and Authority he does these
Things.

V. 30. The man answered -- Utterly illiterate as he was. And with what
Strength and Clearness of Reason! So had GOD opened tho Eyes of his
Understanding, as well as his bodily Eyes. Why herein is a mavelous thing,
that ye -- The Teachers and Guides of the People, should not know, that a Man
who has wrought a Miracle, the like of which was never heard of before, must be
from Heaven, sent by GOD.

V. 31. We -- Even we of the Populace, know that God hears not sinners -- Not
impenitent Sinners, so as to answer their Prayers in this Manner. The honest
Courage of this Man in adhering to the Truth, though he knew the Consequence
(ver. 22.) gives him claim to the Title of a Confessor.

V. 33. He could no nothing -- Of this Kind; nothing miraculous.

V. 34. Born in sins -- And therefore, they supposed, born blind. They cast him
out -- Of the Synagogue; excommunicated him.

V. 35. Having found him -- For he had sought him.

V. 36. Who is he, that I may believe? -- This implies some Degree of Faith
already. He was ready to receive whatever Jesus said.

V. 37. Lord, I believe -- What an Excellent Spirit was this Man of? Of so deep
and strong an Unsterstanding: (as he had just shown to the Confusion of the
Pharisees:) And yet of so teachable a Temper?

V. 39. For judgment am I come into the world -- That is, The Consequence of my
coming, will be, that by the just Judgment of GOD, while the Blind in Body and
Soul receive their Sight, they who boast they see, will be given up to still
greater Blindness than before.

V. 41. If ye had been blind -- Invincibly ignorant; If ye had not had so many
Means of knowing; ye would have had no sin -- Comparatively to what ye have
now. But now ye say -- Ye yourselves acknowledge, ye see: therefore your sin
remains. -- Without Excuse, without Remedy.

X.
Verily, verily I say to you, he that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, he is a thief and a robber.

the sheep did not hear them. know my sheep, and am known of mine; and one
shepherd. has a devil.

them me, is greater than all; and none shall pluck them out of my Father's
hand.



Psalm lxxxii. 6.
I said ye are Gods? If he call them gods, to whom the word of God came is in
me, and I in him.

the place where John baptized at first, and there he abode.

V. 1. He that enters not by the door -- By Christ. He is the only lawful
Entrance. Into the sheepfold -- The Church. He is a thief and a robber -- In
GOD's Account. Such were all those Teachers, to whom our LORD had just been
speaking.

V. 3. To him the doorkeeper opens -- Christ is considered as the Shepherd,
ver. 11. As the door in the first and following Verses. And as it is not
unworthy of Christ, to be styled the Door, by which both the Sheep and the true
Pastor enter, so neither is it unworthy of GOD the Father, to be styled the
Doorkeeper. See Acts xiv. 27. Col. iv. 3. Rev. iii. 8. Acts xvi. 14. And the
sheep hear his voice -- The Circumstances that follow, exactly agree with the
Customs of the ancient eastern Shepherds. They called their sheep by name, w^nt
before them, and the Sheep followed them. So real Christians hear, listen to,
understand, and obey the Voice of a Shepherd whom Christ has sent. And He
counts them his own, dearer than any Friend or Brother; calls, advises,
directs each by name, and l^^deth them out, in the Paths of Righteousness,
beside the Waters of Comfort.

V. 4. He goes before them -- In all the Ways of GOD, teaching them in every
Point, by Example as well as by Precept; and the sheep follow him -- They tread
in his Steps: For they know his voice -- Having the Witness in themselves, that
his Words are the w^s^^m and the power of God. Reader, Art thou a Shepherd of
Souls? Then answer to GOD. Is it thus with thee and thy Flock?

V. 5. They will not follow a stranger -- One whom Christ has not sent, who
does not answer the preceding Description. Him they will not follow -- And who
can constrain them to it? But will see from him -- As from the Plague. For they
know not the voice of strangers -- They relish it; it is harsh and grating to
them. They find nothing of GOD therein.

V. 6. They -- The Pharisees, to whom our LORD more immediately spoke, as
appears from the Clo^^^^ the foregoing Chapter.

V. 7. I am the door -- Christ is both the Door, and the Shepherd, and all
Things.

V. 8. Whosoever are ^ome -- Independantly on me, assuming any Part of my
Character, pretending, like your Elders and Rabbis ^o a Power over the
Consciences of Men, attempting to make Laws in the Church, and to teach their
own Traditions as the Way of Salvation: All those Prophets and Expounders of
GOD's Word, that enter not by the Door of the Sheepfold, but run before I have
sent them by my Spirit. Our LORD seems in particular to speak of those that had
undertaken this Office since he began his Ministry, are thieves -- Stealing
temporal Profit to themselves, and robbers -- Plundering and murdering the
Sheep.

V. 9. If any one -- As a Sheep, enter in by me -- Through Faith, he shall be
safe -- From the Wolf, and from those murdering Shepherds. And shall go in and
out -- Shall continually attend on the Shepherds whom I have sent; and shall
find pasture -- Food for his Soul in all Circumstances.

V. 10. The thief comes not but to steal, and to kill and to destroy -- That
is, Nothing else can be the Consequence of a Shepherd's Coming, who does not
enter in by me.

V. 12. But the hireling -- It is not the bare receiving Hire, which
denominates a Man an Hireling: (For the labourer is worthy of his hire; Jesus
Christ Himself being the Judge: Yea, and the Lord has ordained, that they who
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel:) But the loving Hire; the loving
the Hire more than the Work; the working for the sake of the Hire. He is an
Hireling who would not work, were it not for the Hire; to whom this is the
Great (if not only) Motive of working. O GOD! If a Man who works only for Hire,
is such a Wretch, a mere Thief and a Robber: What is he who continually takes
the Hire, and yet does not work at all? The wolf -- Signifies any Enemy who, by
Force or Fraud, attacks the Christian's Faith, Liberty, (...) Life. So the wolf
seizes and scatters the flock -- He seizes some, and scatters the rest;
the two Ways of hurting the Flock of Christ.

V. 13. The hireling flees, because he is an hireling -- Because he loves the
Hire, not the Sheep.

V. 14. I know my sheep -- With a tender Regard and special Care: and am known
of mine -- With an holy Confidence and Affection.

V. 15. As the Father knows me, and I know the Father -- With such a
Knowledge as implies an inexpressible Union. And I lay d^wn my life -- Speaking
of the present Time. For his whole Life was only a going unto Death.

V. 16. I have also other sheep -- Whom He foreknew: which are not of this fold
-- Not of the Jewish Church or Nation, but Gentiles. I must bring them l^kewise
-- Into my Church, the General Assembly of those whose Names are written in
Heaven. And there shall be one flock -- (Not one fold, a plain false Print) no
corrupt or divided Flocks remaining. And one shepherd -- Who laid down his Life
for the Sheep, and will leave no Hireling among them. The Unity both of the
Flock and the Shepherd, shall be completed in its Season. The Shepherd shall
bring all into one Flock; and the whole Flock shall hear the one Shepherd.

V. 17. I lay down my life, that I may take it again -- I cheerfully die to
expiate the Sins of Men, to the End I may rise again for their Justification.

V. 18. I lay it down of myself -- By my own free Act and Deed. I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again -- I have an original Power and
Right of myself, both to lay it down as a Ransom, and to take it again, after
full Satisfaction is made, for the Sins of the whole World. This commission
have I received of my Father -- Which I readily execute.

He chiefly spoke of the Father, before his Suffering: Of his own Glory, after
it. Our LORD's receiving this Commission, as Mediator, is not to be considered
as the Gro^nd of his Power to lay down and resume his Life. For this He had in
Himself, a^ having an original Right to dispose thereof, antecedent to the
Father's Commission. But this Commission was the Reason why He thus used his
Power in laying down his Life. He did it in Obedience to his Father.

V. 21. These are not the words -- The Word in the Original takes in Actions
too.

V. 22. It was the feast of the dedication -- Instituted by Judas Mac^abeus (I
Macc. iv. 59) when he purged and dedicated the Altar and Temple after they had
been polluted. So our LORD observed Festivals even of human Appointment. Is it
not, at least, Innocent, for us to do the same?

V. 23. In Solomon's portico -- Josephus informs us, that when Solomon built
the Temple, he filled up a Part of the adjacent Valley, and built a Portico
over it toward the East. This was a noble Structure, supported by a Wall four
hundred Cubits high; and continued even to the time of Albinus and Agrippa,
which was several Years after the Death of Christ.

V. 26. Ye do not believe, because ye are not of my sheep -- Because ye do not,
will not follow me: because ye are proud, unholy, Lovers of Praise, Lovers of
the World, Lovers of Pleasure, not of GOD.

V. 27, 28, 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
etc. Our LORD still alludes to the Discourse he had had, before this Festival.
As if he had said, My Sheep are they who 1. Hear my voice by Faith: 2. Are
known (that is approved) by me, as loving me; and 3. Follow me, keep my
Commandments, with a believing, loving Heart. And to those who 1. Truly believe
(observe three Promises annexed to three Conditions) I give eternal Life. He
does not say, I will give, but I give, For he that believes, has everlasting
life. Those whom 2. I know truly to love me, shall never perish, provided they
abide in my love. 3. Those who follow me neither Men nor Devils can pluck out
of my Hand. My Father who has by an unchangeable Decred, given me all that
believe, love and obey, is greater than all in Heaven or Earth, and none is
able to plack them ont of his hand.

V. 30. I and the Father are one -- Not by Consent of Will only, but by Unity
of Power, and consequently of Nature. Are -- This Word confutes Sabellius,
proving the Plurality of Persons: One -- This Word confutes Arius, proving the
Unity of Nature in GOD. Never did any Prophet before, from the beginning of the
World, use any one Expression of himself, which could possibly be so
interpreted as this and other Expressions were by all that heard our LORD
speak. Therefore if He was not GOD, He must have been the vilest of Men.

V. 35. If he (GOD) called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, (that is,
to whom GOD was then speaking) And the scripture cannot be broken -- That is,
Nothing which is written therein can be censured or rejected.

V. 36. Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world
-- This Sanctification (whereby He is essentially, The Holy One of GOD) is
mentioned as prior to his Mission, and together with it implies, Christ was GOD
in the highest Sense, infinitely superior to that wherein those Judges were so
called.

V. 38. That ye may know and believe -- In some a more exact Knowledge
precedes, in others it follows Faith. I am in the Father, and the Father in me
-- I and the Father are one -- These two Sentences illustrate each other.

V. 40. To the desert place where Iehn baptized, and gave so honorable a
Testimony of Him.

V. 41. John did no miracle -- An Honor reserved for Him, whose Forerunner he
was.

XI.
Now one Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha, was sick.
that Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his Feet with her
hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick. his Sisters sent to him, saying, Lord,
behold he whom thou love is sick. it, said, This sickness is not to death,
but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified thereby.



it thee. rise again in the resurrection at the last day. it she arose quickly
and came to him. buried four days. from where the dead lay.

from that day, they consulted together to put him to death.

it, that they might apprehend him.

V. 1. One Lazarus -- It is probable, Lazarus was younger than his Sisters.
Bethany is named, the Town of Mary, and Martha, and Lazarus is mentioned after
them, ver. 5. Ecclesiastical History informs us, That Lazarus was now thirty
Years old, and that he lived thirty Years after Christ's Ascension.

V. 2. It was that Mary who afterward anointed, etc. She was more known than
her elder Sister Martha, and as such is named before her.

V. 4. This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God -- The Event of
this Sickness will not be Death, in the usual Sense of the Word. A final
Separation of his Soul and Body; but a Manifestation of the glorious Power of
GOD.

V. 7. Let us go into Judea -- From the Country East of Jordan, whither He had
retired some Time before when the Jews sought to stone Him, chapter x. 39, 40.

V. 9. Are there not twelve hours in the day? -- The Jews always divided the
Space from Sunrise to Sunset, were the Days longer or shorter, into twelve
Parts: So that the Hours of their Day were all the Year the same in Number,
though much shorter in Winter than in Summer. If any man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not -- As if He had said: So there is such a Space, a determinate
Time, which GOD has allotted me. During that Time, I slumble not, amidst all
the Snares that are laid for me. Because he sees the light of this world --
And so I see the Light of GOD surrounding me.

V. 10. But if a man walk in the night -- If he have not Light from GOD; if his
Providence does no longer protect him.

V. 11. Our Friend Lazarus sleeps -- This He spoke, just when he died.
Sleeps -- Such is the Death of Good Men in the Language of Heaven. But the
Disciples did not yet understand this Language. And the Slowness of our
Understanding makes the Scripture often descend to our barbarous Manner of
speaking.

V. 16. Thomas in Hebrew, as Didymus in Greek, signifies a Twin. With him --
With Jesus, whom he supposed the Jews would kill. It seems to be the Language
of Despair.

V. 20. Mary sat in the house -- Probably not hearing what was said.

V. 22. Whatsoever thou will ask, God will give it thee -- So that she already
believed, He could raise him from the Dead.

V. 25. I am the resurrection -- Of the Dead. And the life -- Of the Living. He
that believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live -- In Life everlasting.

V. 32. She fell at his foot -- This Martha had not done. So she makes Amends
for her Slowness in coming.

V. 33. He groaned -- So He restrained his Tears. So He stopped them soon after,
ver. 38. He troubled himself -- An Expression amazingly elegant, and full of
the highest Propriety. For the Affections of Jesus were not properly Passions,
but voluntary Emotions, which were wholly in his own Power. And this tender
Trouble which He now voluntarily sustained, was full of the highest Order and
Reason.

V. 35. Jesus wept -- Out of Sympathy with those who were in Tears all around
him, as well as from a deep Sense of the Misery Sin had brought upon human
Nature.

V. 37. Could not this person have even caused, that this man should not have
died? -- Yet they never dreamed, that He could raise him again! What a strange
Mixture of Faith and Unbelief!

V. 38. It was a cave -- So Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their Wives, except
Rachel, were buried in the Cave of Machpelab (Genesis xlix. 29, 30, 31.) These
Caves were commonly in Rocks, which abounded in that Country, either hollowed
by Nature or hewn by Art. And the Entrance was shut up with a great Stone,
which sometimes had a monumental Inscription.

V. 39. Lord by this time he s^nk^th -- Thus did Reason and Faith struggle
together.

V. 40. Said I not -- It appears by this, That Christ had said more to Martha
than is before recorded.

V. 41. Jesus lifted up his eyes -- Not as if he applied to his Father for
Assistance. There is not the least Show of this. He wrought the Miracle with an
Air of absolute Sovereignty, as the LORD of Life and Death. But it was as if He
had said, I thank Thee, that by the Disposals of thy Providence, thou have
granted my Desire, in this remarkable Opportunity, of exerting my Power, and
showing sorth thy Praise.

V. 43. He cried with a loud voice -- That all who were present might hear.
Lazarus, come forth! -- Jesus called him out of the Tomb as easily, as if he
had been not only alive, but awake also.

V. 44. And be came sorth, bouna hand and foot with grave-clothes -- Which were
wrapped round each Hand and each Foot. And his face was wrapped about with a napkin
-- If the Jews buried as the Egyptians did, the Face was not covered with it,
but it only went round the Porchead, and under the Chin; so that he might
easily see his Way.

V. 45. Many believed on him -- And so the Son of GOD was glorised. According
to what our LORD had said, ver. 4.

V. 46. But some of them went to the Pharisees -- What a dreadful Confirmation
of that weighty Truth, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead?

V. 47. What do we? -- What? Believe. Yea, but Death yields to the Power of
Christ sooner than Infidelity.

V. 48. All Men will believe -- And receive Him as the Messiah. And this will
give such Umbrage to the Ronans that they will come and subvert both our place
-- Temple; and nation -- Both our Church and State. Where they really afraid of
this? Or was it a fair Color only? Certainly it was no more. For they could
not but know, that He that raised the Dead, was able to conquer the Romans.

V. 49. That Year -- That memorable Year, in which Christ was to die. It was
the last and chief of Daniel's Seventy Weeks, the fortieth Year before the
Destruction of Jerusalem, and was celebrated for various Causes, in the Jewish
History. Therefore that Year is so peculiarly mentioned: Caiaphas was the
High Priest both before and after it. Ye know nothing -- He reproves their slow
Deliberations, in so clear a Case.

V. 50. It is expedient, that one man should die for the people -- So GOD
over-^uled his Tongue, for he spoke not of himself, by his own Spirit only, but
by the Spirit of Prophecy. And thus He gave unawares as clear a Testimony to
the Priestly, as Pilate did to the Kingly Office (...) Christ.

V. 52. That he might gather into o^e -- Church, all the children of God that
were scattered abroad -- Through all Ages and Nations.

V. 55. Many went up, to purify themselves -- That they might remove all
Hindrances to their eating the Passover.

XII.
Then Jesus, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where Lazarus was,
who had been dead, whom he had raised from the dead. he cared for the poor, but
because he was a thief and had the purse, and bare what was put therein.





Mat. xxi. 8. Mark xi. 8. Lake xix. 36.
The next day, a great multitude who were come to the feast, having heard, that
Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, Psalm cxviii. 26.
Took branches of palm trees, and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna:
blessed in the name of the Lord is he that comes, the king of Israel. Zah, ix.
9.
Fear not, daughter of Sion; behold thy king comes, sitting on an ass's colt.
that they had done these things to him.

much fruit. Mat. x. 39.
He that loves his life shall lose it; and he that hates his life in this
world, shall preserve it to life eternal.

it again. it, said, It thundered; others said, An angel spoke to him. earth,
will draw all men to me. (He spoke this, Psalm cx. 4.
out of the law, that the Christ abides for ever: and how say thou, The Son
of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man? Then Jesus said to them, Yet
a little while is the light with you.

yet they believed not on him; Isaiah liii. 1.
Lord, who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? Isaiah vi. 10. Mat. xiii. 14. Acts xxviii. 26.
He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they might not see
with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and be converted, that I
might heal them. him, because of the Pharisees, lest they should be put out of
the synagogue.



V. 1. Six days before the passover -- Namely on the Sabbath; that which was
called by the Jews, The Great Sabbath. This whole Week was anciently termed,
The great and holy Week. Jesus came -- From Ephraim, chapter xi. 54.

V. 2. It seems Martha was a Person of some Figure, from the great Respect
which was paid to her and her Sister, in Visits and Condola^^cs on Lazarus's
Death, as well as from the costly Ointment mentioned in the next Verse. And
probably it was at their House our LORD and his Disciples lodged, when He
returned ^^rn Jerusalem to Bethany, every Evening of the last Week of his Life,
upon which He was now entered.

V. 3. Then Mary taking a pound of ointment -- There ^ere two Persons, who
poured Ointment on Christ. One, toward the Beginning of his Ministry, at or
near Naia: ( Luke vii. 37, etc.) The other, six Days before his last Passover,
at Bethany; the Account of whom is given here, as well as by St. Matthew and
Mark.

V. 7. Against the day of my burial -- Which now draws nigh.

V. 10. The chief priests consulted, How to kill Lazarus also -- Here is the
plain Reason, why the other Evangelists, who wrote while Lazarus was living,
did not relate his Story.

V. 12. The next day -- On Sunday. Who were come to the feast -- So that this
Multitude consisted chiefly of Galileans, not Men of Jerusalem.

V. 15. Fear not -- For his Meekness forbids Fear, as well as the End of his
Coming.

V. 16. These things his disciples understood not at first -- The Design of
GOD's providential Dispensations, is seldom understood at first. We ought
therefore to believe, though we understand not, and to give ourselves up to the
Divine Disposal. The great Work of Faith is, To embrace those Things which we
know not now, but shall know hereafter. When he had been glorified -- At his
Ascension.

V. 17. When he called Lazarus out of the tomb -- How admirably does the
Apostle express, as well the Greatness of the Miracle, as the Facility with
which it was wrought? The Easiness of the Scripture Style on the most grand
Occurrences, is more sublime than all the Pomp of Orators.

V. 18. The multitude went to meet him, because they beard -- From those who
had seen the Miracle. So in a little Time, both joined together, to go before,
and to follow him.

V. 20. Certain Greeks -- A Pro^^de of the Gentile Church. That these were
circumcised does not appear. But they came up, on Purpose to worship the GOD of
Israel.

V. 21. These came to Philip of Bethsaida in Galilee -- Perhaps they used to
lodge there, in their Journey to Jerusalem. Or they might believe, a Galilean
would be more ready to serve them herein, than a Jew. Sir -- They spoke to him,
as to one they were little acquainted with. We would see Jesus -- A modest
Request. They could scarce expect that He would now have Time to talk with them.

V. 23. The bour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified -- With the
Father, and in the Sight of every Creature. But he must suffer first.

V. 24. Unless a grain of wheat die -- The late Resurrection of Lazarus gave
our LORD a natural Occasion of speaking on this Subject. And agreeable to his
infinite Knowledge, He singles out, from among so many thousands of Seeds,
almost the only one that dies in the Earth: And which therefore was an
exceeding proper Similitude, peculiarly adapted to the Purpose for which he
uses it. The like is not to be found in any other Grain, except Millet, and the
large Bean.

V. 25. He that loves his life -- More than the Will of GOD; shall lose it
eternally: And he that hates his life -- In Comparison of the Will of GOD,
shall preserve it.

V. 26. Let him follow me -- By hating his Life: And where I am -- In Heaven.
If any man serve me -- Thus, him will the Father honor.

V. 27. Now is my soul troubled -- He had various Foretastes of his Passion.
And what shall I say? -- Not what shall I choose? For his Heart was fixed in
choosing the Will of his Father: But he labored for Utterance. The two
following Clauses, Save me from this hour -- For this cause I came -- Into the
World; for the Sake of this hour (of Suffering;) seem to have glanced through his
Mind in one Moment. But human Language could not so express it.

V. 28. Father, glorify thy name -- Whatever I suffer. Now the Trouble was
over. I have glorified it -- By thy Entrance into this hour. And I will glorify
it -- By thy passing through it.

V. 29. The multitude who stood and heard -- A Sound, but not the distinct
Words. In the most glorious Revelations there may remain something obscure, to
exercise our Faith. Said it thundered -- Thunder did frequently attend a Voice
from Heaven. Perhaps it did so now.

V. 31. Now -- This Moment. And from this Moment Christ's thirsted more than
ever, till his Baptism was accomplished. Is the judgment of this world -- That
is, now is the Judgment given concerning it, whose it shall be. Now shall the
prince of this world -- Satan, who had gained Possession of it by Sin and
Death, be cast out -- That is, judged, condemned, cast out of his Possession,
and out of the Bounds of Christ's Kingdom.

V. 32. Listed up from the earth -- This is an Hebraism which signifies Dying.
Death in general is all that it usually imported. But our LORD made Use of this
Phrase, rather than others that were equivalent, because it so well suited the
particular Manner of his Death. I will draw all men -- Gentiles as well as
Jews. And those who follow my Drawings, Satan shall not be able to keep.

V. 34. How say thou, The Son of man must be listed up? -- How can These
things be reconciled? Very easily. He first dies, and then abides for ever:
Who is this Son of man? -- Is He the Christ?

V. 35. Then Jesus said to them -- Not answering them directly, but exhorting
them to improve what they had heard already. The light -- I and my Doctrine.

V. 36. The children of light -- The Children of GOD, wise, holy, happy.

V. 37. Though he had done so many miracles before them -- So that they could not
but see them.

V. 38. The arm of the Lord -- The Power of GOD, manifested by Christ, in his
Preaching, Miracles, and Work of Redemption.

V. 39. Therefore now they could not believe -- That is, by the just Judgment
of GOD, for their Obstinacy and wilful Resistance of the Truth, they were at
length so left to the Hardness of their Hearts, that neither the Miracles nor
Doctrine of our LORD, could make any Impression upon them.

V. 41. When he saw his glory -- Christ's, Isa. vi. 1, etc. And it is there
expressly said to be the Glory of the LORD, Jehovah, the Supreme GOD.

V. 44. Jesus said with a loud voice -- This which follows to the End of the
Chapter, is with St. John the Epilogue of our LORD'S public Discourses, and a
Kind of Recapitulation of them. Believes not on me -- Not on me alone, but
also on him that sent me: Because the Father has sent the Son, and because He
and the Father are one.

V. 45. And he that sees me -- By the Eye of Faith.

V. 47. I judge him not -- Not now. For I am not now come, to judge the world.
See! Christ came to save even them that finally perish! Even these are a Part
of that World, which he lived and died to save.

V. 50. His commandment -- Kept, is life everlasting -- That is, the Way to it,
and the Beginning of it.

XIII.
Now before the feast of the passover, Jesus knowing his hour was come, to pass
out of this world, to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world,
loved them to the end. the son of them with the towel wherewith he was girded.
my hands and my head. his feet, and is clean all over: and ye are clean; but
not all.

so I am. Psalm xli. 9.
He that eats bread with me, has lifted up his heel against me. he. Mat. x.
40.
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that receives whomsoever I send, receives
me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me.

the son of Simon.

and will shortly glorify him. Chapter vii. 34.
Whither I go ye cannot come, so now I say to you.

V. 1. Before the feast -- Namely, on Wadnesday in the paschal Week. Having
loved his own -- His Apostles, loved them to the end -- Of his Life.

V. 2. Having now -- Probably now first.

V. 3. Jesus knowing -- Though conscious of his own Greatness, thus humbled
Himself.

V. 4. Lays aside his garment -- That Part of them, which would have hindered
Him.

V. 5. Into the basin -- A large Vessel was usually placed for this very
Purpose, wherever the Jews supped.

V. 7. What I do, thou know not now; but thou shall know hereafter -- We do
not now know perfectly any of his Works, either of Creation, Providence, or
Grace. It is enough that we can love and obey now, and that we shall know
hereafter.

V. 8. If I wash thee not -- If thou do not submit to my Will, thou have no
part with me -- Thou art not my Disciple. In a more general Sense it may mean,
If I do not wash thee in my Blood, and purify thee by my Spirit, thou can
have no Communion with me, nor any Share in the Blessings of my Kingdom.

V. 9. Lord, not my feet only -- How fain would Man be wiser than GOD! Yet this
was well meant, though ignorant Earnestness.

V. 10. And so ye, having been already cleansed, need only to wash your feet --
That is, to walk holy and undefiled.

V. 14. Ye ought also to wash one another's feet -- And why did they not? Why
do we not read of any one Apostle ever washing the Feet of any other? Because
they understood their LORD better. They knew He never designed that this should
be literally taken. He designed to teach them the great Lesson of humble Love,
as well as to confer inward Purity upon them. And hereby He teaches us, 1. In
every possible Way to assist each other in attaining that Purity; 2. To wash
each other's Feet, by performing all Sorts of good Offices to each other, even
those of the lowest Kind, when Opportunity serves, and the Necessity of any
calls for them.


V. 16. The servant is not greater than his Lord -- Nor therefore ought to
think much of either doing or suffering the same Things.

V. 18. I speak not of you all -- When I call you happy. I know one of you
twelve whom I have chosen, will betray me; whereby that Scripture will be
fulfilled.

V. 20. And I put my own Honor upon you my Ambassadors.

V. 21. One of you -- The speaking thus indefinitely at first, was profitable
to them all.

V. 23. There was lying in the bosom of Jesus -- That is, sitting next to Him
at Table. This Phrase only expresses the then customary Posture at Meals, where
the Guests all leaned sideways on Couches. And each was said to lie in the
bosom of him who was placed next above him. One of the disciples whom Jesus
loved -- St. John avoids with great Care, the expressly naming himself. Perhaps
our LORD now gave him the first Proof of his peculiar Love, by disclosing this
Secret to him.

V. 24. Simon Peter -- Behind Jesus, who lay between them.

V. 25. Leaning down, and so asking him privately.

V. 26. Jesus answered -- In his Ear. So careful was He not to offend (if it
had been possible) even Judas himself. The sop -- Which He took up while he was
speaking. He gives it Judas -- And probably the other Disciples thought Judas
peculiarly happy! But when even this Instance of our LORD's Tenderness could
not move him, then Satan took full Possession.

V. 27. What thou do, do quickly -- This is not a Permission, much less a
Command. It is only as if He had said, If thou art determined to do it, why
do thou delay? Hereby showing Judas, that he could not be hid, and expressing
his own Readiness to suffer.

V. 28. None knew why he said this -- Save John and Judas.

V. 30. He went out -- To the chief Priests. But he returned afterward, and was
with them when they ate the Passover, Matt. xxvi. 20; though not at the LORD's
Supper.

V. 31. Jesus says -- Namely, the next Day; on Thursday, in the Morning. Here
the Scene, as it were, is opened, for the Discourse which is continued in the
following Chapters. Now -- While I speak this, the Son of man is glorified --
Being fully entered into his glorious Work of Redemption. This evidently
relates to the Glory which belongs to his Suffering in so holy and victorious a
Manner.

V. 33. Ye cannot come -- Not yet; being not yet ripe for it

V. 34. A new commandment -- Not new in itself; but new in the School of
Christ; for He had never before taught it them expressly. Likewise new, as to
the Degree of it, As I have loved you.

V. 36. Peter says, Lord, Whith^r go thou? -- St. Peter seems to have
thought, that Christ being rejected by the Jews, would go to some other Part of
the Earth to erect his Throne, where He might reign without Disturbance,
according to the gross Notions he had of Christ's Kingdom. Thou can not
follow me now -- But Peter would not believe Him. And he did follow Him, chapter
xviii. 15. But it was afar off. And not without great Loss.

V. 38. The cock shall not have crowed -- That is, Cock-crowing shall not be
over, till thou have denied me thrice -- His threefold Denial was thrice
foretold; first, at the Time mentioned here; secondly, at that mentioned by St.
Luke; lastly, at that recorded by St. Matthew and Mark.

XIV.
Let not your heart be troubled: believe in God: believe also in me. may be
also. am in the Father, and the Father in me? am in the Father, and the Father
in me; but if not, believe me for the sake of the works. it.

Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him.

and not to the world?

again to you. If ye loved me, ye would have rejoiced, because I go to the
Father; for the Father is greater than me.

V. 1. Let not your heart be troubled -- At my Departure. Believe -- This is
the Sum of all his Discourse, which is urged, till they did believe, chapter xvi.
30. And then our LORD prays and departs.

V. 2. In my Father's house are many mansions -- Enough to receive both the
holy Angels, and your Predecessors in the Faith, and all that now believe, and
a great Multitude which no Man can number.

V. 4. The way -- Of Faith, Holiness, Sufferings.

V. 5. Thomas says -- Taking Him in a gross Sense.

V. 6. To the Question concerning the Way, He answers I am the way -- to the
Question concerning Knowledge, He answers, I am the truth; to the Question
Whither, I am the life. The first is treated of in this verse; the second, ver.
7 -- 17; the third, ver. 18, etc.

V. 7. Ye have known -- Ye have begun to know him.

V. 10. I am in the Father -- The words that I speak, etc. -- That is, I am One
with the Father, in Essence, in Speaking, and in Acting.

V. 11. Believe me -- On my own Word, because I am -- GOD. The works -- This
respects not merely the Miracles themselves, but his Sovereign, God-like Way of
performing them.

V. 12. Greater works than these shall he do -- So one Apostle wrought Miracles
merely by his Shadow (Acts v. 15.) another by Handkerchiefs carried from his
Body (Acts xix. 12.) and all spoke with various Tongues. But the converting one
Sinner is a greater Work than all these. Because I go to my Father -- To fend
you the Holy Ghost.

V. 15. If ye love me, keep my commandments -- Immediately after Faith, He
exhorts to Love and good Works.

V. 16. And I will ask the Father -- The 21st Verse shows the Connection between
this and the preceding Verses. And he will give you another Comforter -- The
Greek Word signifies also an Advocate, Instructor, or Encourager. Another --
For Christ Himself was one. To remain with you for ever -- With you, and your
Followers in Faith to the End of the World.

V. 17. The Spirit of truth -- Who has, reveals, testifies, and defends the
Truth as it is in Jesus. Whom the world -- All who do not love or fear GOD,
cannot receive, because it sees him not -- Having no spiritual Senses, no
internal Eye to discern Him; nor consequently knows him. He shall be in you
-- As a constant Guest. Your Bodies and Souls shall be Temples of the Holy
Ghost dwelling in you.

V. 18. I will not leave you orphan^ -- A Word that is elegantly applied to
those who have lost any dea^ Friend. I come to you -- What was certainly and
speedily to be, our LORD speaks of, as if it were already.

V. 19. But ye see me -- That is ye shall certainly see me. Because I live, ye
shall live also. Be^^^^^ (...) the living One in my divine Nature, and shall
rise again (...) ^^an Nature, and live for ever in Heaven; therefore ye sh^^^
^^^e the Life of Faith and Love on Earth, and hereafter the Life of Glory.

V. 20. At that day -- When ye see me after my Resurrection; but more eminently
at the Day of Pentecost.

V. 21. He that has my commandments -- Written in his Heart. I will manifest
myself to him -- More abundantly.

V. 23. Jesus answered -- Because ye love and obey me, and they do not,
therefore I will reveal myself to you, and not to them. My Father will love him
-- The more any Man loves and obeys, the more GOD will love him. And we will
come to him, and make our abode with him -- Which implies such a large
Manifestation of the divine Presence and Love, that the former in
Justification, is as Nothing in Comparison of it.

V. 26. In my name -- For my Sake, in my Room, and as my Agent. He will teach
you all things -- Necessary for you to know. Here is a clear Promise to the
Apostles and their Successors in the Faith, that the Holy Ghost, will teach
them all that Truth, which is needful for their Salvation.

V. 27. Peace I leave with you -- Peace in general, Peace with GOD, and with
your own Consciences. My peace -- In particular: That Peace which I enjoy, and
which I create, I give -- At this Instant. Not as the world gives --
Unsatisfying unsettled, transient; but filling the Soul with constant, even
(...) ^^^^lity. LORD, evermore give us this Peace! How serenely (...) ^ss through
the most turbulent Scenes of Life, when all is qui^^ (...) harmonious within?
Thou have made Peace through the Blood of thy Cross: May we give all Diligence to
preserve the inestimable Gift inviolate, till it issue in everlasting Peace!

V. 28. GOD the Father is greater than Him -- As He was Man. As GOD, neither is
greater or less than the other.

V. 29. I have told you -- Of my Going and Return.

V. 30. The prince of this world is coming -- To make his grand Assault. But he
has nothing in me -- No Right, no Claim, or Power. There is no Guilt in me, to
give him Power over me; no Corruption to take Part with his Temptation.

V. 31. But I suffer him thus to assault me, 1. Because it is the Father's
Commission to me (chapter x. 18.) 2. To convince the World of my Love to the
Father, in being obedient unto death, Phil. ii. 8. Ar^se, let us go hence --
Into the City, to the Passover.
All that has been related from chapter xiii. 31. was done and said on Thursday
without the City, But what follows in the xv.xvi. and xviith Chapters, was said
in the City, on the very Evening of the Passover, just before He went over the
Brook Ced^on.

XV.
I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. can ye, unless ye abide
in me. are the branches. He that abides in me and I in him, he bears much
fruit; but separate from me ye can do nothing. I have heard from my Father, I
have made known to you.

it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own; but
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. Chapter xiii. 16. Mat. x. 24. Luke vi. 40.
The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they
will also persecute you: if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours
also. them, and yet hated both me and my Father. Psalm lxix. 4.
They hated me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will
send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the
Father, he shall testify of me.

V. 1. I am the true vine -- So the true bread, chapter vi. 32. that is, the most
excellent.

V. 2. Every one that bears fruit, be purifieth -- by obeying the truth, Pet.
i. 22. and by inward or outward Sufferings, Heb. xii. 10, 11. So Purity and
Fruitfulness help each other. That it may bear more fruit -- For this is one of
the noblest Rewards GOD can bestow on former Acts of Obedience, to make us yet
more holy, and sit for farther and more eminent Service.

V. 3. Ye are clean -- All of you, to whom I now speak, are purged from the
Guilt and Power of Sin; by the word -- Which applied by the Spirit, is the
grand Instrument of purifying the Soul.

V. 4. Abide in me -- Ye who are now pure by living Faith producing all
Holiness; by which alone ye can be in me.

V. 5. I am the vine; ye are the branches -- Our LORD in this whole Passage,
speaks of no branches but such as are, or at least were once, united to Him by
living Faith.

V. 6. If any one abide not in me -- By living Faith: Not by Church Communion
only. He may thus abide in Christ, and be withered all the Time, and cast into
the Fire at last. He is cast out -- Of the Vineyard, the invisible Church.
Therefore he was in it once.

V. 7. If ye abide in me, ye shall ask -- Prayers themselves are a Fruit of
Faith, and they produce more Fruit.

V. 8. So shall ye be my disciples -- Worthy of the Name. To be a Disciple of
Christ is both the Foundation and Height of Christianity.

V. 9. Abide ye in my love -- Keep your Place in my Affection. See that ye do
not forfeit that invaluable Blessing. How needless a Caution, if it were
impossible for them, Not to abide therein?

V. 10. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love -- On these
Terms, and no other, ye shall remain the Objects of my special Affection.

V. 11. That my joy might remain in you -- The same Joy which I feel, in loving
the Father, and keeping his Commandments.

V. 12. Your joy will be full, if ye so love one another.

V. 13. Greater love -- To his Friends. He here speaks of them only.

V. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you -- On this
Condition, not otherwise. A Thunderbolt for Antinomianism. Who then dares
assert, That GOD's Love does not at all depend on Man's Works?

V. 15. All things -- Which might be of Service to you.

V. 16. Ye My Apostles, have not chosen me, but I have chosen you -- As clearly
appears from the Sacred History: and appointed you, that ye may go and bear
fruit -- I have chosen and appointed you for this End, that ye may go and
convert Sinners: and that your fruit may remain -- That the Fruit of your
Labors may remain to the End of the World; yea, to Eternity: that whatsoever
ye shall ask -- The Consequence of your going and bearing Fruit will be, that
all your Prayers will be heard.

V. 19. Because ye are not of the world, therefore the world hates you --
Because your Maxims, Tempers, Actions are quite opposite to theirs. For the
very same Reason must the World in all Ages, hate those who are not of the
World.

V. 21. All these things will they do to you, because they know not him that
sent me -- And in all Ages and Nations, they who know not GOD, will for this
cause hate and persecute those that do.

V. 22. They had not had sin -- Not in this Respect.

V. 23. He that hates me -- As every Unbeliever does. For (...) the Love of
GOD is inseparable from Faith, so is the Hatred of GOD from Unbelief.

V. 26. When the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father,
the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me --
The Spirit's coming, and being sent by our LORD from the Father, to testify of
him, are personal Characters, and plainly distinguish Him from the Father and
the Son: And his Title as the Spirit of truth, together with his proceeding
from the Father, can agree to none but a Divine Person. And that he proceeds
from the Son, as well as from the Father, may be fairly argued from his being
called the Spirit of Christ (1 Pet. i. 11.) And from his being here said to be
sent by Christ from the Father, as well as sent by the Father in his Name.

XVI.
I have told you these things, that ye may not be offended. They will put you
out of the synagogues; expedient for you that I go: for if I go not, the
Comforter will not come to you; but if I depart I will send him to you.

it you. it you. see me; and again, a little while and ye shall see me, because
I go to the Father. some of his disciples said to each other, What is this that
he says to us? A little while and ye shall not see me; and again, a little
while and ye shall see me? and, Because I go to the Father? in my name, he will
give you.

But lo the hour is coming, yea, is already come, that ye shall be scattered
every one to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone: for the
Father is with me.

V. 2. The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think he does God
service -- But blessed be GOD, the Time is so far past, that those who bear the
Name of Christ, do not now generally suppose they do Him Service, by killing
each other, for a Disserence in Opinion or Mode of Worship.

V. 3. They have not known the Father nor me -- This is the true Root of
Persecution in all its Forms.

V. 4. I did not tell you these things at the beginning, because I was with you
-- To bear the chief Shock in my own Person, and to skreen you from it.

V. 5. None of you asheth me -- Now, when it is most seasonable. Peter did ask
this before, chapter xiii. 36.

V. 7. It is expedient for you -- in respect of the Comforter, ver. 7. etc. and
of me, ver. 16, etc. and of the Father, ver. 23, etc.

V. 8. He -- Observe his twofold Office, toward the World, ver, 8, etc. toward
Believers, ver. 12, etc. will convince -- All of the world -- Who do not
obstinately resist, by your Preaching and Miracles, of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment -- He who is convinced of sin, either accepts
the righteousness of Christ, or is judged with Satan. An abundant
Accomplishment of this, we find in the Acts of the Apostles.

V. 9. Of sin -- Particularly of Unbelief, which is the Confluence of all Sins,
and binds them all down upon us.

V. 10. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father -- Which the Spirit will
testify, though ye do not then see me. But I could not go to Him, if I were not
righteous.

V. 11. The prince of this world is judged -- And in Consequence therefore
dethroned, deprived of the Power he had so long usurped over Men. Yet those who
reject the Deliverance offered them, will remain Slaves of Satan still.

V. 12. I have yet many things to say -- Concerning my Passion, Death,
Resurerction, and the Consequences of it. These Things we have, not in
uncertain Traditions, but in the Acts, the Epistles, and the Revelation. But ye
cannot bear them now -- Both because of your Littleness of Faith, and your
immoderate Sorrow.

V. 13. When he is come -- It is universally allowed, that the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost dwell in all Believers. And the internal Agency of the Holy Ghost,
is generally admitted. That of the Father and the Son, as represented in this
Gospel, deserves our deepest Consideration.

V. 15. All things that the Father has are mine -- Could any Creature say this?

V. 16. A little while and ye shall not see me -- When I am buried, and again a
little while and ye shall see me -- When I am risen, because I go to my Father
-- I die and rise again, in Order to ascend to my Father.

V. 19. Jesus said to them -- Preventing their Question.

V. 20. Ye will weep and lament -- When ye see me dead; but your sorrow will be
turned into joy -- When ye see me risen.

V. 22. Ye now therefore have sorrow -- This gives us no Manner of Authority to
assert, all Believers must come into a State of Darkness. They never need lose
either their Peace or Love, or the Witness that they are the Children of GOD.
They never can lose these, but either through Sin or Ignorance, or vehement
Temptation, or bodily Disorder.

V. 23. Ye shall not question me about any thing -- Which you do not now
understand. You will not need to inquire of me; for you will know all Things
clearly. Whatsoever ye shall ask -- Knowledge, Love, on any Thing else. He will
give it. Our LORD here gives us a Chart blanch. Believer, write down what thou will. He had said chapter xiv. 13. I will do it, where the Discourse was of
glorifying the Father through the Son. Here, speaking of the Love of the Father
to Believers, He says, He will give it.

V. 24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name -- For they had asked him
directly for all they wanted.

V. 26. At that day ye shall ask -- For true Knowledge begets Prayer. And I say
not, that I will pray -- This in no wife implies, that He will not: It means
only, The Father Himself now loves you, not only because of my Intercession,
but also because of the Faith and Love which He has wrought in you.

V. 30. Thou know all things -- Even our Hearts. Although no Question is asked
thee, yet thou answerest the Thoughts of every one. By this we believe that
thou c^mest f^rth from God -- They as it were echo back the Words which He had
spoken in the 27th verse, implying, We believe in God; we believe also in thee.

Chap. xvii. In this Chapter our LORD prays, 1. For himself, ver. 1 -- 5.2. For
the Apostles ver. 6 -- 19, and again, ver. 24 -- 26.3. For all Believers, ver.
20 -- 23. And 4. For the World, ver. 21 -- 23. In this Prayer He comprises all
He had said from chapter xiii. 31, and seals as it were, all He had hitherto dene,
beholding Things past, present, and to come. This Chapter contains the casiest
Words, and the decpest Sense of any in all the Scripture: Yet is here no
incoherent Rhapsody, but the whole is closely and exactly connected.

XVII.
These things spoke Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father,
the hour is come: glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee:

they were, and thou have given them me, and they have kept thy word. Now they
know, that all things whatsoever thou have given me are of thee. them, and have
known surely, that I came forth from thee, and they have believed that thou
have sent me. are. Psalm cix. 8.
that the scripture might be fulfilled.



it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

V. 1. Father -- This Simplicity of Appellation highly became the only begotten
Son of GOD; to which a Believer then makes the nearest Approach, when he is
fullest of Love and humble Considence. The hour is come -- The appointed Time
for it; glorisy thy Son -- The Son glorified the Father, both before and after
his own Glorification. When he speaks to the Father, he does not style himself
the Son of Man.

V. 2. As thou have given him power over all flesh -- This answers to Glorify
thy Son. That he may give eternal life, etc. This answers to That thy Son may
glorify thee. To all whom thou have given him -- To all Believers. This is a
clear Proof, that Christ designed his Sacrifice should avail for all; yea, that
all flesh, every Man, should partake of everlasting Life. For as the Father had
given him power over all flesh, so He gave Himself a Ransom for all.

V. 3. To know -- By loving, holy Faith, thee the only true God -- The only
Cause and End of all Things; not excluding the Son and the Holy Ghost, no more
than the Father is excluded from being LORD, 1. Cor. viii. 6. but the false
Gods of the Heathens, and Jesus Christ -- As their Prophet, Priest, and King:
this is life eternal -- It is both the Way to, and the Essence of everlasting
Happiness.

V. 4. I have finished the work -- Thus have I glorified thee, laying the
Foundation of thy Kingdom on E^rth.

V. 5. The glory which I had -- He does not say received. He always had it,
till he emptied himself of it, in the Days of his Flesh.

V. 6. I have manifested thy name -- All thy Attributes; and in particular, thy
paternal Relation to Believers; to the men whom thou have given me -- The
Apostles. And so ver. 12, They were thine -- By Creation, and by Descent from
Abraham. And thou have given them me -- By giving them Faith in what I have
spoken. So ver. 9.

V. 7. Now they know that all things -- Which I have done and spoken; are of
thee -- And consequently right and true.

V. 8. They have received them -- By Faith.

V. 9. I pray not for the world -- Not in these Petitions, which are adapted to
the State of Believers only. (He prays for the World at the 21st and 23d
Verses, that they may believe -- that they may know God has sent him.) This no
more proves that our LORD did not pray for the World, both before and
afterward, than his praying for the Apostles alone (ver. 6 -- 19.) proves that
he did not pray for them also who shall believe through their Word (ver. 20.)

V. 10. All things that are mine are thine, and that are thine are mine --
These are very high and strong Expressions, too grand for any mere Creature to
use; as implying that all Things whatsoever, inclusive of the Divine Nature,
Perfections, and Operations, are the comman Property of the Father and the Son.
And this is the Original Ground of that peculiar Property, which both the
Father and the Son have in the Persons, who were given to Christ as Mediator;
according to what is said in the Close of the Verse, of his being glorified by
them; namely, believing in Him, and so acknowledging his Glory.

V. 11. Keep them through thy name -- Thy Power, Mercy, Wisdom, that they may be
on -- With us and with each other; one Body, separate from the World: As we are
-- By Resemblance to us, though not Equality.

V. 12. Those whom thou have given me, I have guarded, and none of them is
lost, but the son of perdition -- So one even of them whom GOD had given him is
lost. So far was even that Decree from being unchangeable! That the scripture
might be fulfilled -- That is whereby the Scripture was fulfilled. The Son of
perdition signifies, ^^e that deservedly perishes: as a Son of death (2 Samuel
xii. 5.) Children of hell (Mat. xxiii. 15.) and children of wrath (Ephesians. ii. 3.)
signify Persons justly obnoxious to Death, Hell, Wrath.

V. 13. In the world -- That is, before I leave the World. My joy -- The Joy I
feel at going to the Father.

V. 15. That thou would take them out of the world -- Not yet: But that thou
would keep them from the evil one -- Who reigns therein.

V. 17. Sanctify -- Consecrate them by the anointing of thy Spirit to their
Office, and perfect them in Holiness, by Means of thy Word.

V. 19. I sanctify myself -- I devote myself as a Victim, to be sacrificed.

V. 20. For them who will believe -- In all Ages.

V. 21. As thou art in me -- This also is to be understood, in a Way of
Similitude, and not of Sameness or Equality. That the world may believe -- Here
Christ prays for the World. Observe the Sum of his whole Prayer, 1. Receive me
into thy own and my Glory; 2. Let my Apostles share therein; 3. And all other
Believers; 4. And let all the World believe.


V. 22. The glory which thou have given me, I have given them -- The Glory of
the Only Begotten shines in all the Sons of GOD. How great is the Majestly of
Christians!

V. 24. Here He returns to the Apostles -- I will -- He asks, as having a Right
to be heard, and prays, not as a Servant, but a Son: That they may behold my
glory -- Herein is the Happiness of Heaven, 1 John iii. 2.

V. 25. Righteous Father -- The Admission of Believers to GOD through Christ,
flows even from the Justice of GOD.

V. 26. I have declared to them thy name -- Thy new, best Name of Love; that
the love wherewith thou have loved me -- and I -- That thou and thy Love, and I
and my Love, may be in them -- That they may love me with that Love.

XVIII.
Mat. xxvi. 30. Mark xiv. 26. Luke xxii. 39.
Jesus having spoken these words, went forth with his disciples over the brook
Kedron, where was a garden, into which he entered and his disciples. Mat. xxvi.
30. Mark xiv. 43. Luke xxvi. 30. Luke xxii 47.
And Judas also, who betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus had often met
there with his disciples. him, Jesus of Nazareth. he. he, they went backward,
and fell to the ground. he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go: That the Chapter
xvii. 12.
saying might be fulfilled which he had spoken, Of them whom thou have given
me, I have lost none.

Mat. xxvi. 57. Mark xiv. 53. Luke xxii. 54.
Then the soldiers, and the captain, and officers of the Jews took Jesus and
bound him. known to the high priest, went out, and spoke to her that kept the
door, and brought in Peter. one of this man's disciples? He says, I am not.



Mat. xxvii. 2. Mark xv. 1. Luke xxiii. 1.
Then they lead Jesus from Caiaphas to the governor's palace, and it was early:
and they went not into the palace themselves, that they might not be defiled,
but might eat the passover. Chapter iii. 14.
saying of Jesus was fulfilled, which he spoke, signfying what death he should
die. and for this cause came I into the world, that I might bear witness to the
truth.

V. 1. A garden -- Probably belonging to one of his Friends. He might retire to
this private Place, not only for the Advantage of secret Devotion, but also
that the People might not be alarmed at his Apprehension, nor attempt in the
first Sallies of their Zeal, to rescue him in a tumultuous Manner. Kedron was
(as the Name signifies) a dark, shady Valley, on the East Side of J^r^salem,
between the City and the Mount of Olives, through which a little Brook ran, which
took its Name from it. It was this Bro^k, which David, a Type of Christ, went
over, with the People, weeping, in his Flight from Absalom.

V. 3. A troop of soldiers -- A Cohort of Roman Foot.

V. 6. As soon at he said, I am be, they went backward, and fell to the ground
-- How amazing is it, that they should renew the Assault, after so sensible an
Experience both of his Power and Mercy! But probably the Priests among them,
might persuade themselves and their Attendants, that this also was done by
B^^lzebub; and that it was through the Providence of GOD, not the Indulgence of
Jesus, that they received no farther Damage.

V. 8. If ye seek me, let these (my Disciples) go -- It was an eminent Instance
of his Power over the Spirits of Men, that they so far obeyed this Word, as not
to seize even Peter, when he had cut off the Ear of Malchus.

V. 10. Then Simon Peter -- No other Evangelist names him. Nor could they
safely. But St. John, writing after his Death, might do it, without any such
Inconvenience.

V. 13. A^^as had been High Priest before his Son-in-law Caiaphas. And though he
had for some Time resigned that Office, yet they paid so much Regard to his Age
and Experience, that they brought Christ to Annas first. But we do not read of
any Thing remarkable, which passed at the House of Annas: For which Reason his
being carried thither, is omitted by the other Evangelists.

V. 17. Art not thou also -- As well as the other, one of this man's disciples
-- She does not appear to have asked, with any Design to hurt him.

V. 20. I spoke openly -- As to the Manner: Continually -- As to the Time: In
the synagogue and temple -- As to the Place. In secret have I said nothing --
No Point of Doctrine which I have not taught in public.

V. 21. Why ask thou me? -- Whom thou will not believe?

V. 22. Answerest thou the high priest so? -- With so little Reverence?

V. 24. Now Annas had sent him to Caiapha. -- As is implied ver. 15. Boond --
Being still bound, ver. 12.

V. 28. They went not into the palace themselves, lest they should be defiled
-- By going into an House which was not purged from Leaven, Deuteronomy. xvi. 4.

V. 31. It is not lawful for us to put any man to death -- The Power of
inflicting capital Punishment had been taken from them that very Year. So the
Skeptic was departed from Judah, and transferred to the Romans.

V. 32. Signifying what death he should die -- For Crucificion was not a
Jewish, but a Roman Punishment. So that had He not been condemned by the Roman
Governor, He could not have been crucified.

V. 36. My kingdom is not of this world -- Is not an external, but a spiritual
Kingdom; that I might not be delivered to the Jews -- Which Pilate had already
attempted to do (ver. 31.) and afterward actually did, C. xix. 16.

V. 37. Thou say -- The Truth. To this end was I born -- Speaking of his
human Origin: His divine was above Pilate's Comprehension. Yet it is intimated
in the following Words, I came into the world -- That I might witness to the
truth -- Which was both declared to the Jews, and in the Process of his
Passion, to the Princes of the Gentiles also. Every one that is of the truth --
That is, a Lover of it, hears my voice -- An universal Maxim. Every sincere
Lover of Truth will hear Him, so as to understand and practice what he says.

V. 38. What is truth? -- Said Pilate, a Courtier; perhaps meaning, What
signifies Truth? Is that a Thing worth hazarding your Life for? So he lest Him
presently, to plead with the Jews for Him, looking upon Him as an innocent, but
weak Man.

XIX
Mat. xxvii. 26. Mark xv. 15.
Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and scourged him. it on his head, and put on
him a purple robe, And said, Hail, king of the Jews. him; for I find no fault
in him. Jesus, Whence art thou? with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate
says to them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have
no king but Caesar.

Mat. xxvii. 31. Mark xv. 22. Luke xxiii. 26.
And they took Jesus and led him away. And he bearing his cross, went forth to
the place, called the place of a skull, which is called in Hebrew, Golgotha:
and Greek, and Latin. his vesture: now the vesture was without seam, woven from
the top throughout. Psalm xxii. 18.
They parted my garments among them, and cast lots for my vesture. These things
therefore the soldiers did.

the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene.

Psalm lxix. 21.
vinegar, and putting it on a stalk of hyssop, they put it to his mouth, When
Jesus had taken the vinegar, he said, his Spirit.

blood and water. it, and his testimony is true: and he knows that he says
true, that ye also may believe. Exodus xii. 46.
A bone of it shall not be broken. And again another scripture says, Zech.
xii. 10.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced.



V. 7. By our law he o^gi^t to die, because he made himself the Son of God --
Which they understood in the highest Sense, and therefore accounted Blasphemy.

V. 8. He was the more afraid -- He seems to (...) been afraid before of
shedding innocent Blood.

V. 9. Whence art thou? -- That is, whose Son art thou?

V. 11. Thou could have no power over me -- For I have done Nothing to
expose me to the Power of any Magistrate. Therefore be that delivered me to
thee, namely, Caiaphas knowing this, is more blameable than thou.

V. 13. Pilate sat down on the Judgment seat -- Which was then without the
Palace, in a place called, in Greek, the pavement, on Account of a beautiful
Piece of Mosaic Work, with which the Floor was adorned; but in Hebrew, Gabbatha
-- Or the High-Place, because it stood on an Eminence, to that the Judge,
sitting on his Throne, might be seen and heard by a considerable Number of
People.

V. 14. It was the preparation of the p^sso^^r -- For this Reason both the Jews
and Pilate were desirous to bring the Matter to a Conclusion. Every Friday was
called the Preparation (namely, for the Sabbath.) And as often as the Passover
fell on a Friday, that Day was called, the Preparation of the Passover.

V. 17. Bearing his cross -- Not the whole C^^ss (for that was too large and
heavy) but the transverse Beam of it, to which his Hands were afterward
fastened. This they used to make the Person to be executed carry.

V. 19. Jesus of Nazareth, the king of the Jews -- Undoubtedly these were the
very Words, although the other Evangelists do not express them at large.

V. 20. It was written in Latin -- For the Majesty of the Roman Empire; in
H^brew -- Because it was the Language of the Nation; and in Greek -- For the
Information of the Hellepists, who spoke that Language, and came in great
Numbers to the Feast.

V. 22. What I have written, I have written -- That shall stand.

V. 23. The vesture -- The upper Garment.

V. 24. They parted my Garments among them -- No Circumstance of David's Life
bore any Resemblance to this, or to several other Passaves in the 22d Psalm. So
that in this Scripture, as in some others, the Prophet seems to have been
thrown into a preternatural Ecstasy, wherein personating the M^ssiah, he spoke
barely what the Spirit dictated, without any regard to Himself.

V. 25. His mother's sister -- But we do not read she had any Brother. She was
her Father's Heir, and as such transmitted the Right of the Kingdom of David to
Jesus: Mary the wise of Cleopas -- Called likewise Alpheus, the Father, as Mary
was the Mother of James, and J^s^s, and Simon, and Judas.

V. 27. Behold thy mother -- To whom thou art now to perform the Part of a Son
in my Place, a peculiar Honor which Christ conferred on him. From that ho^^ --
From the Time of our LORD's Death.

V. 29. A stalk of hyss^p -- Which in those Countries grows exceeding large and
strong.

V. 30. It is finished -- My Suffering: The Purchase of Man's Redemption. He
delivered up his Spirit -- To GOD: Mat. xxvii. 50.

V. 31. Lest the bodies should r^main on the cross on the sabbath -- Which they
would have accounted a Prosanation of any Sabbath, but of that in particular.
For that sabbath was a great day -- Being not only a Sabbath, but the second
Day of the Feast of unleavened Bread (from whence they reckoned the Weeks to
Pentecost:) And also the Day for presenting and offering the Sheaf of new Corn:
So that it was a treble Solemnity.

V. 34. Forthwith there came out blood and water -- It was strange, seeing He
was dead, that Blood should come out; more strange that Water also; and most
strange of all, that both should come out immediately, at one Time, and yet
distinctly. It was pure and true Water, as well as pure and true Blood. The
Asseveration of the Beholder and Testifier of it, shows both the Truth and
Greatness of the Miracle and Mystery.

V. 35. His testimony is true -- Valid, unexceptionable. And he know^th -- And
his Conscience bears him Witness, that he testifies this, for no other End,
than that ye may believe.

V. 36. A bone of it shall not be broken -- This was originally spoken of the
paschal Lamb, an eminent Type of Christ.

V. 37. They shall look on him whom they have pierced -- He was pierced by the
Soldier's Spear. They who have occasioned his Sufferings by their Sins (and who
has not?) shall either look upon him in this World with penitential Sorrow; or
with Terror, when He comes in the Clouds of Heaven, Rev. i. 7.

V. 38. Joseph of Arimathea asked Palate -- And Nicodemus also came --
Acknowledging Christ, when even his chosen Disciples forsook Him. In that
Extremity, Joseph was no longer afraid, Nicodemus no longer ashamed.

V. 41. In the place where he was crucified -- There was a Garden in the same
Tract of Land; but the Cross did not stand in the Garden.

V. 42. Because of the preparation -- That is, they chose the rather to lay Him
in that sepul^hre, which was nigh, because it was the Day before the Sabbath,
which also was drawing to an End, so that they had no Time to carry Him far.

XX.
Mat. xxviii. 1. Mark xvi. 1. Luke xxiv. 1.
The first day of the week comes Mary Magdalene early, while it was yet dark,
to the sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the sepulcher.

Mark xvi. 9.
But Mary stood without at the sepulcher weeping. And as she wept, she stooped
down into the sepulcher, She supposing him to be the gardener, says to him,
Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will
take him away. to my God and your God.

Mark xvi. 14. Luke xxiv. 36.
The same day, the first day of the week, at evening, the doors being shut,
where the disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood
in the midst, and says to them, Peace be unto you. be unto you. has sent me,
even so send I you. And having said this, he breathed on them, and says to
them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost.



be unto you. are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.



V. 3. Peter went out -- Of the City.

V. 6. Peter sees the linen clothes lie -- and the napkin folded up -- The
Angels who ministered to Him when he rose, undoubtedly folded up the Napkin and
Linen Clothes.

V. 8. He saw -- That the Body was not there, and believed -- That they had
taken it away, as Mary said.

V. 9. For as yet -- They had no Thought of his rising again.

V. 10. They went home -- Not seeing what they could do farther.

V. 11. But Mary stood -- With more Constancy.

V. 16. Jesus says to her, Mary? -- With his usual Voice and Accent.

V. 17. Touch me not -- Or rather, Do not cling to me (for she held Him by the
Feet, Mat. xxviii. 9.) De^ain me not now. You will have other Opportunities of
conversing with me. For I am not ascended to my Father -- I have not yet left
the World. But go immediately to my brethren -- Thus does He intimate in the
strongest Manner the Forgiveness of their Fault, even without ever mentioning
it. These exquisite Touches, which everywhere abound in the evangelical
Writings, show how perfectly Christ knew our Frame. I ascend -- He anticipates
it in his Thoughts, and so speaks of it a a Thing already present. To my Father
and your Father, my God and your God -- This uncommon Expression shows, that
the only begotten Son has all Kind of Fellowship with GOD. And a Fellowship
with GOD the Father. some Way resembling his own, He bestows upon his Brethren.
Yet He does not say, Our GOD: For no Creature can be raised (...) an Equality
with Him: But my God, and your God: Intimating that the Father is His in a
singular and incommunicable Manner; and Ours through Him, in such a Kind as a
Creature is capable of.

V. 21. Peace be unto you -- This is the Foundation of the Mission of a true
Gospel-Minister, Peace in his own Soul, 2 Cor. iv. 1. As the Father has sent
me, so send I you -- Christ was the Apostle of the Father, Heb. iii. 1. Peter
and the rest, the Apostles of Christ.

V. 22. He breathed on them -- New Life and Vigor, and says, As ye receive
this Breath out of my Mouth, so receive ye the Spirit out of my Fullness: The
Holy Ghost influencing you in a peculiar Manner, to fit you for your great
Embassy. This was an Earnest of Pentecost.

V. 23. Whose soever sins ye remit -- (According to the Tenor of the Gospel,
that is, supposing them to repent and believe) they are remitted, and whose
soever sins ye retain (supposing them to remain impenitent) they are retained.
So far is plain. But here arises a Difficulty. Are not the Sins of one who
truly repents, and unfeignedly believes in Christ remitted, without sacerdotal
Absolution? And are not the Sins of one, who does not repent or believe,
retained even with it? What then does this Commission imply? Can it imply any
more than, 1. A Power of declaring with Authority the Christian Terms of
Pardon? Whose Sins are remitted, and whose retained? As in our daily Form of
Absolution: And, 2. A Power of inflicting and remitting Ecclesiastical
Censures? That is, of excluding from, and re-admitting into, a Christian
Congregation.


V. 26. After eight days -- On the next Sunday.

V. 28. And Thomas said, My Lord and my God -- The Disciples had said, We have
seen the LORD. Thomas now not only acknowledges Him to be the LORD, as he had
done before, and to be risen, as his Fellow-Disciples had affirmed, but also
confesses his Godhead, and that more explicitly than any other had yet done.
And all this he did without thrusting his Hand into his Side.

V. 30. Jesus wrought many miracles, which are not written in this book -- Of
St. John: Nor indeed of the other Evangelists.

V. 31. But these things are written, that ye may believe -- That ye may be
confirmed in believing. Faith comes sometimes by Reading; though ordinarily by
Hearing.

XXI.
After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples at the sea
of Tiberias; he manifested himself thus. sons of Zebedee, and two other of his
disciples. (for they were not far from land, about two hundred cubits) drawing
the net full of fishes. and dine. And none of the disciples presumed to ask
him, Who art thou? Knowing that it was the Lord.

son of Jonah, love thou me more than these do? He says to him, Yea, Lord,
thou know that I love thee. He says to him, Feed my lambs. son of Jonah,
love thou me? He says to him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee. He
says to him, Feed my sheep. son of Jonah, love thou me? Peter was grieved,
because he said to him the third time, Love thou me? And he said to him,
Lord, thou know all things; thou know that I love thee. Jesus says to
him, Feed my sheep: thee whither thou would not. This he said, signifying by
what death he should glorify God. shall this man do? is it to thee? is it to
thee?



V. 2. There were together -- At Home, in one House.

V. 4. They knew not that it was Jesus -- Probably their Eyes were holden.

V. 6. They were not able to draw it, for the multitude of fishes -- This was
not only a Demonstration of the Power of our LORD, but a kind Supply for them
and their Families, and such as might be of Service to them, when they waited
afterward in Jerusalem. It was likewise an Emblem of the great Success which
should attend them as Fishers of men.

V. 7. Peter girt on his upper coat ( for he was stripped of it before)
Reverencing the Presence of his LORD: and threw himself into the sea -- To swim
to Him immediately. The Love of Christ draws Men through Fire and Water.

V. 12. Come ye and dine -- Our LORD needed not Food. And none presumed -- To
ask a needless Question.

V. 14. The third time -- That He appeared to so many of the Apostles together.

V. 15. Simon, son of Jonah -- The Appellation Christ had given him, when he
made that glorious Confession, Mat. xvi. the Remembrance of which might make
him more deeply sensible of his late Denial of Him whom he had so confessed.
Love thou me? -- Thrice our LORD asks him, who had denied Him thrice: More
than these -- Thy Fellow-Disciples, do? Peter thought so once, Mat. xxvi. 33.
but he now answers only, I love thee, without adding more than these. Thou
know -- He had now learnt by sad Experience, that Jesus knew his Heart. My
lambs -- The weakest and tenderest of the Flock.

V. 17. Because he said the third time -- As if He did not believe him.

V. 18. When thou art old -- He lived about thirty-six Years after this;
another shall gird thee -- They were tied to the Cross till the Nails were
driven in; and shall carry thee -- With the Cross; where thou would not --
According to Nature; to the Place where the Cross was set up

V. 19. By what death he should glorify God -- It is not only by Acting, but
chiefly by Suffering, that the Saints glorify GOD. Follow me -- Showing hereby
likewise what Death he should die.

V. 20. Peter turning -- As he was walking after Christ. Sees the disciple
whom Jesus loved following him -- There is a peculiar Spirit and Tenderness in
this plain Passage. Christ orders St. Peter to follow Him in Token of his
Readiness to be crucified in his Cause. St. John stays not for the Call; he
rises and follows Him too; but says not one Word of his own Love or Zeal. He
chose that the Action only should speak this; and even when he records the
Circumstance, he tells us not what that Action meant, but with great Simplicity
relates the Fact only. If here and there a generous Heart sees and emulates it,
be it so; but he is not solicitous that Men should admire it. It was addressed
to his beloved Master, and it was enough that He understood it.

V. 22. If I will that he tarry -- Without dying, till I come -- To Judgment.
Certainly he did tarry, till Christ came to destroy Jerusalem. And who can
tell, when or how he died? What is that to thee? -- Who art to follow me long
before.

V. 23. The brethren -- That is, the Christians. Our LORD Himself taught them
that Appellation, chapter xx. 17. Yet Jesus did not say to him, That he should not
die -- Not expressly. And St. John himself, at the Time of writing his Gospel,
seems not to have known clearly, whether he should die or not.

V. 24. This is the disciple who testifies -- Being still alive after he had
wrote. And we know that his testimony is true -- The Church added these Words
to St. John's Gospel, as Tertius did those to St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans,
chapter xvi. 22.

V. 25. If they were to be written particularly -- Every Fact and all the
Circumstances of it. I suppose -- This Expression, which softens the Hyperbole,
shows that St. John wrote this Verse.

The End of the First Volume.

