THREE Instructive Dialogues, BETWEEN A TRUE GOSPEL MINISTER AND ONE OF HIS
PARISHONERS, UPON THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

By the Rev. Archdeacon VIVIAN, Devonshire.

TENTH EDITION.

BALTIMORE: Printed by DAVID GRAHAM, in Calvert-street, between Market-street
and the Courthouse. MDCCXCI

TO THE PARISHONERS OF ST. Savior's SOUTHWARK.
My dear People,
THE following Dialogues were written by a worthy clergyman of our own church,
and have been already made very useful to many persons. In hopes that they will
be made equally useful to you, I am encouraged to re-print them, and to put
them into your hands -- They contain the substance of what I have delivered to
you from the pulpit, and are entirely agreeable to the doctrine of Scripture,
and of the church of England, I may therefore, with great safety, recommend
them (as I hereby do) to your serious and attentive perusal. I have long had it
upon my mind, that it was my bounden duty, as your minister to visist you "from
house to house," and enforce the truths of the gospel upon you. I am now
determined by the the grace of God, to set about this important part of my
office -- Let me hope my dear people will give me a favorable reception, and
pay a regard to my well-meant admonitions. It Is impossible for me to address
every person, in this large and populous parish, so particularly as could be
wished: permit me, therefore, to convey my advice in the following Dialogues.
They speak my whole heart upon the matter, and are so judiciously executed,
that, while the most improved readers will find much in them both for
edification and delight, the plainest and simplest capacities may understand
and be benefited by them. Let me then entreat your candid attention to these
Dialogues. They contain whatever I would say to you one by one, were I to
address you singly, and are much better executed than any thing of my own upon
the subject would be. It may not be amiss to add that they are wrote by a
father in Christ, one who has a parish of his own, and who is a faithful
preacher of the gospel of our dear Savior. God grant you may read them in the
same spirit they were wrote in! then I am persuaded you will receive a blessing
from the perusal. In the name of my Master then, I pay you this friendly visit,
and entreat your acceptance of this little book. For his sake I beseech you
seriously to consider the truths contained therein. Those of you who live
without any concern for your poor souls, I would earnestly call upon to attend
with diligence to the "things that belong unto their peace." These, and all
such as are contented with a bare profession, and the mere externals of
religion, would do well to consider the first Dialogue. Those of you who are
seeking the kingdom of heaven (and I trust I have many such among you) will
find some useful directions in the second; and the soul, which is justified by
faith, will meet with very profitable instruction in the third. I would advise
you, however, to give them all a serious reading; although I recommend it to
you to fix your particular attention upon that Dialogue that suits your state
-- My dear brethren, I wish you knew how earnestly I "long for your souls "in
the bowels of Jesus Christ;" how sincerely I desire your salvation. An eternity
is before you: Oh that I might be instrumental to your finding that eternity a
blessed one! With this desire I beg leave to wait on you and present you with
these Dialogues. I need no apology for taking this liberty, since my office
allows me to take it. I would rather ask Pardon for having neglected it so
long. But, for the future, I intend, God willing, to renew my visits once a
year, while he shall spare me to "labor amongst you." I likewise invite all
such of my parish as are willing to receive any little instructions I can give
them, the poorest among you I invite, to come to me whenever they choose, with
all the freedom of a friend, and with all the confidence of a brother. My dear
people, indeed I bear you on my heart. Were you my parents or my brethren, I
could not love you more affectionately than I do. "I seek not yours but you,"
only glorify my blessed Master, by striving in earnest to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, and I have my reward. -- May the blessed Jesus incline your
hearts to seek his face here, that you may be glorified with him hereafter!
This, you may be assured is my hearty prayer to God for you. I often remember
you at the throne of grace, let me entreat your prayers for me in return. I am,
with great respect and esteem.

My dear people, Your affectionate, Though unworthy Minister, T. JONES.

DIALOGUE I. BETWEEN A Minister and one of his Parishioners.

M. FARMER, good morrow. I find you have been early up, and diligently
employed: Your cattle are fed, and servants at work. I see thriving in the
world is a matter very near your heart.


P. Ay, Sir, all this is necessary. Meat and clothes must be provided; the
lord's rent must be paid; and this requires much care and labor.


M. I would by no means discourage your industry. It is your duty to be not
slothful in business. But, you know, you have another calling besides
husbandry: The soul must be fed and clothed too.


P. Doubtless the soul ought to be minded in the first place, for that is the
chief concern: But I hope I do not neglect my soul and the world to come: I
should be sorry you should think me so bad a man: I believe you have no reason
--


M. No particular reason to be suspicious of you rather than others. But when I
look round, and observe the general unconcern about salvation in which men
live, I am concerned for my fellow-mortals: And with respect to you of this
parish in particular. I think myself obliged to admonish you of your danger,
that you may not die before you have obtained forgiveness of your sins through
faith in JESUS CHRIST, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified.


P. Lord! Sir, why should you entertain such uncharitable thoughts of us?


M. Do not so abuse the word charity: It signifies the same as love. Now love
does not require that we think well of every body with or without reason, but
that we wish and intend well to every body. If I gave myself no trouble about
you, that is, if I was utterly void of charity, you would think (...) very
charitable man.


P. But I hope you do not condemn us all: Some of us indeed are wicked,
swearing, drunken men; but we are not all so. You know yourself that I keep my
church, and come sometimes to sacrament. I never hurted any man in my life, and
pay every man his due.


M. And upon this you build your hopes of heaven? -- If this is your
foundation, I must plainly tell you, it will leave you hopeless in the day of
trial. Let us examine it by the word of God.

"You never did any hurt to any man." You mean, I suppose, you never robbed nor
murdered any person: I do not think you have; but still you have committed much
sin, and done much hurt, not only to others, but especially to your own soul,
by great and numberless, nay daily offenses against the holy law of GOD. Nay
you have broken every one of his commandments.


P. Who could give you such an account of me?


M. You yourself, last Lord's day. When you heard me repeat the commandments,
you made answer after each of them, Lord, have mercy upon me, etc. Your calling
for mercy was plainly acknowledging yourself guilty.


P. I never committed idolatry, murder, adultery --


M. Yes, all of them. Have you never loved any worldly thing more than God and
his favor? not feared any thing more than his displeasure, so as to neglect a
known (...) rather than draw upon yourself some temporal inconvenience? This
was a breach of the first commandment. The second commandment respects the
manner of expressing the devotion of the heart; and therefore, whatever in your
service has been unbecoming, such as wandering thoughts, carelessness and
irreverence, as well as using images, is a breach of this commandment: So is
also neglect of GOD's service. And here you will not pretend, I suppose, to be
not guilty. Consequently your coming to church and sacrament in this manner
deserves rather to be reckoned among your sins, than tusted to for
justification before GOD. But a few minutes ago, in my hearing, you took the
Lord's name in vain, using it needlessly, and without an awful sense, of his
Majesty, of whom you spoke. You have done the same perhaps ten thousand times
in your life. This is a breach of the third commandment. Whenever you have
neglected to attend on GOD's worship on the Sabbath without a necessary
hindrance, suffered worldly thoughts to unfit you for GOD's service, done
worldly business on that day that might be done on another, and neglected to
devote the whole to GOD, by reading, hearing, prayer, meditation and useful
conversation -- you have profaned the LORD's day. The substance of these
commandments is, Thou shall love the LORD thy GOD with all thy heart: But you
have come short of this whenever you have not acted to the glory of GOD. Now
what think you of your innocence with respect to the duties of the first table?


P. I cannot pretend to justify myself with respect to GOD; but I am sure I
have done no hurt to man.


M. You would not say so, if you understood the spirituality and extent of
GOD's commandments, as explained by our LORD in his sermon on the mount. There
you find that concupiscence in the eye or heart is esteemed adultery in the
sight of GOD; and causeless anger, and especially injurious language, is
accounted a degree of murder: And who can acquit himself of these?

If you take the same method to understand the other commandments, all parts of
your behavior that are unsuitable to the station in which Providence has
placed you, all irreverence and proud censuring of your superiors, and all
unkind and injurious treatment of those that are beneath you, will appear to be
breaches of the fifth commandment. All evil speaking, rash censuring, and
repeating of stories injurous to the characters of others, are contrary to the
ninth: And all murmuring and discontent, envy and greediness, are sins
forbidden by the tenth.


P. Then it seems there is but one commandment against which I have not sinned.


M. If you rightly knew yourself and the law of GOD, you would not acquit
yourself of that neither. Be not offended, I speak out of love to your soul. I
do not think you a thief or a robber: Yet, have you never concealed the faults
and bad properties of what you sold, when you knew that ignorance of these
faults was the very thing that induced the person to buy? Nay, have you often
recommended your goods in such general terms, as were inconsistent with strict
truth? Have you not cruelly taken advantage of the necessity of a needy seller,
and beat down his ware much below its real value? These will certainly witness
against you.


P. Why, Sir, after this rate you condemn all the world. According to your
account, there is not a good man upon earth.


M. It is not my account, but the scripture account: There is none that does
good, no not one, Romans iii. 12.


P. I am glad then you do not think me worse than my neighbors. I hope I shall
do as well as others, for all are sinners.


M. Therefore you think you need not be grealty troubled, if you are so too;
but hope to pass in the crowd. Does not some such thought as that lurk at the
bottom? But what signify numbers with GOD, whose all searching eye no man can
lie concealed from, and whose arm none can resist or escape? Had you lived in
Sodom, or the old world, this same thought might have lulled you asleep in the
prevailing abominations, but would not save you from the overflowing deluge,
nor the streams of fire.


P. After this rate you damn all the world.


M. Damn! What a word is that? It signifies to adjudge to eternal torment, to
do which belongs only to the righteous Judge. I would with all my soul rescue
all men from this misery. And with that view I now speak plainly and faithfully
to you, and agreeably to the word of GOD.


P. Who then can be saved? Not you yourself. Pray, Sir, did you never sin?


M. Friend, be serious. The subject we are now upon is of the utmost
importance. I have sinned as well as you; I have greatly sinned, and my sins
have deserved eternal damnation: But GOD has been pleased to awaken me to
repentance, he has shown me my danger, and stirred me up to flee from the
wrath to come. He has shown me also the way of escaping the wages of sin,
opened in the blessed gospel. The tender of salvation there made I trust I have
embraced, and obtained forgiveness through faith in JESUS CHRIST.


P. I hope I have repented too: I am sure, if I offend GOD, I am sorry for it
afterward. And for faith, why, we are all christians, I hope, are we not?


M. If your repentance is sincere, and your faith lively and saving, your state
is safe and happy. But many persons deceive themselves by a dead faith and
imperfect repentance. Are you willing to have the sincerity of yours tried?


P. I am; for the trial can do me no hurt. If I am safe, it is well; if I am
not, I hope it is not too late to amend.


M. You say very right. First, then, let us examine your repentance. Now true
repentance implies a sense of sin, its odiousness and deformity, a hatred of
it, humilation and self loathing on account of it, an actual forsaking of it,
and a turning to GOD by newness of life. Is your repentance such as this?


P. I hope it is.


M. The wages of sin is death, eternal death. Do you think you deserve this
death?


P. As much as other men, for all are sinners: But GOD is merciful.


M. Do not now talk of other men. Do you A. B. think that you deserve eternal
death?


P. If GOD should deal with me according to strict justice, I do: But as I
think GOD is merciful, so I hope I shall do well enough.


M. I fear your notions of GOD'S mercy are such as prevent true repentance. You
seem to have entertained hopes of mercy, without being deeply sensible of your
utter misery without it; to have applied the healing balsam, before you were
wounded. This is what the Almighty styles healing the wounds of his people
slightly. Now you seem in this manner to have deceived yourself. You never saw
yourself in a state of sin and death; you never saw sin odious; you were never
greatly afraid of perishing, nor saw that there was no help or strength in
yourself; therefore you never fled to him that is a refuge from the storm. And,
if you never fled thus to CHRIST, as helpless and undone without him, it is
plain that you are still without any saving interest in him.

See how it was with those converts mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles:
Peter's hearers were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men and brethren, what
shall we do? The jailer came trembling, through a sense of his miserable
condition before he was baptized, and received forgiveness of sins. Paul was
struck to the ground.


P. All these were infidels, I was baptized in my infaney, and bred up to know
good things, and always believed.


M. GOD does not deal with all exactly in the same way. But take heed you do
not depend too much upon these privileges. You were early baptized; but search
your heart and life. Have you not lived for a long time together as without God
in the world? Instead of renouncing the world, and flesh, and devil, have you
not followed, and been led by them? Have you not been led by the world in
judging of things according to the opinions of men, in opposition to the word
of GOD? Have you not in many things conformed to its customs, contrary to the
commands of GOD? Have you not frequently obeyed your carnal lusts and
inclinations, so as to violate frequently the pure law of GOD, if not by actual
offenses, yet by indulging evil thoughts, and living in lesser sins without
concern? And has not the devil been for a considerable time your master,
leading you to offend GOD by profaning his holy name and holy day, and that for
the sake of such a trifling pleasure, as plainly argues his ascendancy over
you? And have you not continued still in these things with little or no
concern, hoping not withstanding that all would be well? Nay, is not this still
in some measure your case? -- I see you acknowledge it is. It is plain then,
your baptismal vow and covenant is broken; and there is an absolute necessity
of turning unto GOD, and beginning all anew.


P. How must I begin anew?


M. By acknowledging that by your departure from God you have brought yourself
to a state of sin and misery; alienated from GOD, inclined to evil, and
therefore at enmity with GOD in your heart; that for these things you deserve
his wrath, and stand on the brink of ruin, covered with guilt.


P. I am willing to forsake all sin, turn to GOD, and do better. Will that do?


M. These are good resolutions, but they do not seem to proceed from a right
principle. You would forsake sin, and do better, I see, with some secret
dependence upon your amendment and doings, that these will fit you for
acceptance, and gain you an interest in CHRIST: But this is a legal spirit of
self-dependance, a going about to establish your own righteousness. When I see
you acknowledge yourself sinful, vile and base, and, like Job, abhorring
yourself; when I see you sensible that you are unworthy of the least mercy, and
unable of yourself to do any good thing; when I see you renouncing your best
deeds as defiled by sin, casting yourself before GOD as lost and helpless,
having no hope in yourself, but supported only by the promise of salvation made
in JESUS CHRIST; when this is not only the language of the tongue, but these
convictions are deeply impessed on the heart -- When this is your case, I shall
think a real work of grace is begun in your soul.


P. Why, this is advising me to despair!


M. Indeed I would have you despair of all help from yourself, or on account of
any thing you have done, or can do; for till then you will not sufficiently
value JESUS CHRIST, nor fly to him as your only Savior, who came to preach
deliverance to the captives, and to bind up the brokenhearted.


P. I believe all this may be necessary for a notorious sinner, or an heathen;
but I have lived in some fear of GOD, kept my church, and always believed.


M. I doubt you never believed at all, properly speaking: But of this I will
talk more with you another time. At present, it is plain, your repentance has
not been real. You never saw and felt your danger, consequently could never be
so desirous of escaping it as is necessary. You always flattered yourself with
some hopes that your state was safe, or certainly would be, when you lived a
little better; which was at bottom depending on yourself, with respect to the
branches of repentance, such as forsaking sin -- it is evident to yourself you
have lived without concern in some lesser habitual sins; and, as for turning to
GOD, you were never sensible, that in the stream of your affections and the
general course of your life, you were turned from him.

Indeed (though you seem not to know it) the ruling principle in you, and every
natural man, is a principle of sin and corruption. Instead of seeking to please
GOD, you have all along been seeking to please yourself; to procure some
gratification to corrupted nature, such as sensual delights, riches, worldly
esteem, ease, or the like. This has been the acting principle throughout your
whole conduct, instead of obeying that command, do all to the glory of GOD.
Nay, if you search narrowly, you will find in your heart an enmity against GOD.
For so says the apostle, Romans viii. 7. The carnal mind (and such is every
man's by nature) is enmity against GOD. And this enmity shows itself in
opposing GOD's will, by doing what he has forbidden, and leaving undone what
he has commanded; and also in flying from GOD as your enemy, and endeavoring
to hide yourself from him like Adam. Have you not passed days and weeks without
one serious thought of GOD, though you were all that time receiving mercies at
his hand? Have you not banished and suppressed such thoughts, when they have
risen in your mind? Have you not fled from serious thoughts of GOD and
eternity, as enemies to your peace, and drowned them in worldly cares, vain
conversation, and idle amusements? Have you not thus fled from GOD, You know
you have. -- Hitherto, suffer me to be plain with you, you have gone wrong, and
have been insensible of your danger, deceived yourself, and spoken peace to
your soul, when there was no peace. Now consider what you have heard from me,
read your Bible, examine yourself, and pray unto GOD to give you a sense of
your real state, and a right judgment in all things.


DIALOGUE II.
M. I WAS in hopes of seeing you before now, Farmer, that we might have an
opportunity of talking together again on the same important subject.


P. Indeed, Sir, if I may make so bold, I must say I did not like what you said
so well, as to desire to hear any more of it. And I should not have come to you
now, had it not been for something I heard in your sermon yesterday.


M. I like your honest plainness very well, neighbor. But what was it I
offended you in?


P. I thought you bore too hard upon me, and I was afraid you would make me
melancholy.


M. Do you not think that what I said proceeded from love to your soul!


P. I really believe it did.


M. Do you think I said any thing that was not true?


P. I did think so then. You seemed to judge too hardly of me, and to put me on
the level with the worst of men. But I am now convinced that what you said was
all true.


M. What has produced this change in your sentiments?


P. Your yesterday's sermon about the day of judgment. I have been very uneasy
ever since I heard it. For I am greatly afraid, that, if the day of judgment
was now to come, it would find me unprepared. And then -- the LORD have mercy
upon my poor soul!


M. It would be too late then to cry and hope for mercy. But what was it
particularly that made you form such a judgment of yourself?


P. You showed us from the twenty-fifth chapter of St. Matthew, that judgment
begins with a separation of the godly from the wicked? and this separation was
owing to a separation made in this life, when the righteous were taken from
among the wicked; by leaving the works and the society of the ungodly. I was
not sensible any such change had been wrought in me, and am therefore afraid I
am still in the state of sin, in which you told us all men are by nature.


M. You have great reason to be afraid. I told you, that those would be
esteemed righteous on that day, who had fled to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, for
righteousness to justify them, and had been made holy by the Spirit of GOD,
creating in them a new heart, and had evidenced this change by an holy
conversation through the remaining part of their life, how many or great soever
their sins had been: And that the wicked were those that had lived and died
without faith in CHRIST, and the indwelling of GOD's Spirit, however orderly
and decent their conduct was.


P. Ay, that was it that terriffed me. You told us that the most upright man
had committed sins enough to condemn him, if he died without an interest in
CHRIST, and without being accepted as righteous through him.

But if this mercy and acceptance through JESUS CHRIST, were obtained before
death, no man's sins would be remembered against him in that day. And to prove
this, you showed us, that in the proceedings of the last day, as related by St.
Matthew, no sins of the righteous are mentioned by the Judge, nor any good
deeds of the wicked.


M. The wicked, that is, they that lived and died without an humbling sense of
their natural corruption and actual sins, so as never by faith to fly for
refuge to GOD's mercy in CHRIST, have, properly speaking, no good works to be
mentioned, for all they do is from a wrong principle; either for selfish or
worldly ends, or in order to be accepted on account of their doings; which is
seeking salvation by the law of works. On this account their works are not
regarded, being not done in faith; that is, not proceeding from an union with
CHRIST by faith, without whom we can do nothing acceptable in GOD's sight. John
xv. 5. On the other hand, the righteous being themselves accepted through
CHRIST, their sins are not mentioned, because long before forgiven and blotted
out: And their imperfect services being accepted through JESUS their
High Priest, who bears the iniquity of their holy things, receive at the hands
of their bountiful Judge a reward of grace. So that which principally
distinguishes the godly from the ungodly, is, that the one is accepted as
righteous, and has obtained forgiveness through CHRIST, according to the new or
gospel covenant: The other, never being deeply sensible of his sinful lost
state (indeed too proud to acknowledge it) has not applied for the mercy
represented in the gospel, and so at the day of judgment stands on his own
bottom, without a mediator, and without forgiveness, and therefore must be
condemned.


P. But then why are works mentioned at all on that day, as we find they are?


M. I gave you two reasons for this. First, Because though they are not the
ground of man's acceptance, yet they show a man to be in a justified state; for
we cannot bear the fruit of holiness, unless we are in and abide in CHRIST,
John xv. 4. And they that do not act righteously deceive themselves, if they
think themselves righteous; so that good works serve to distinguish believers
from unbelievers. Secondly, Because the different degrees of fruitfulness make
a difference between the godly themselves, so that GOD is pleased graciously to
confer upon them different degrees of glory. That any man is at all saved is
owing to his faith in the Redeemer: His degree of glory is proportioned to his
fruitfulness and diligence in the vinyard.


P. I always thought that we christians were all believers, one as much as
another: And that at the day of judgment they would be reckoned godly that
lived orderly and uprightly, among whom I reckoned myself and all were better
than I; and that the profane and ungodly, and all that were secretly wicked and
ill-designed, would be condemned. Indeed I had always some fears that I was not
good enough: I did not know how great a number would be acknowledged righteous;
but I thought I stood a better chance than many, or most that I knew.


M. You did not learn this from the word of GOD. But what think you now?


P. I see that all depends on my obtaining, whilst on earth, mercy and
forgiveness of all that is past; and that not on account of any thing done by
me, but through faith in JESUS CHRIST. But what that faith is I know not: This
I know, that I have been all along out of the way.


M. Indeed I think you have; and it is high time for you to awake, and seek the
LORD in earnest, left he cut you off in the midst of your sins, and appoint you
your portion where is weeping, and waiting, and gnashing of teeth.


P. Pray, Sir, tell me what I must do to be saved?


M. What think you of your past life?


P. I see that I have been daily offending GOD, by breaking his commandments,
and pleasing myself, not him; and that now I stand under the guilt of thousands
of sins, the least of which were enough to condemn me.


M. What think you of your good deeds?


P. I have none to think about. I see sin in every thing I do. My pride on
account of my being not so bad as others, my worldliness, my vanity and
trifling spirit in prayer and hearing sermons, were enough to condemn me, if I
had done nothing else.


M. And what do you intend to do?


P. I will do better, I will strive against sin, I will pray.


M. But all these duties, you say, have been heretofore mixed with sin; how
then do you hope they will make you accepted now? Or could you do these things
ever so well all is your necessary bounden duty: The good deeds you shall do,
cannot make amends for past offenses. On all these accounts, by the deeds of
the law shall no man living be justified.


P. I see no way -- If ever there was a lost soul, I am lie. What shall I do?


M. Believe on the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and thou shall be saved, Acts xvi. 31.
This is the work of GOD, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, John vi. 29.
and by him all that believe are justified from all things, Acts xiii. 39. Come,
naked, sinful, and helpless as ye are, to GOD through CHRIST for mercy. He is
able to save to the uttermost all those that come unto GOD through him, seeing
he has died for them, and ever lives to make intercession for them. Heb. vii.
25. He can wash you from the guilt of all your sins, destroy the power and
dominion of sin in you, sanctify you thoroughly in body, soul and spirit, and
present you to the Father without spot or blemish.


P. I have no manner of doubt of CHRIST's power to save, for he is the Son of
GOD. But I fear I am not a fit person to be saved.


M. In order to determine that, look into your Bible. There this tender of
salvation is made: CHRIST JESUS came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy i.
15. Now what think you? Are you of the number he came to save, or not?


P. But he will not, he does not save all sinners.


M. That is because they will not come to him, to be saved. Of this he
complains, John v. 40. Ye will not come to me, that ye may have life.


P. But I find certain conditions mentioned necessary to qualify men, which I
fear I have not. It is said, Repent, and believe the gospel; and, He that
believes, and is babtized, shall be saved.


M. If you are weary with the burden of sin, loath it, and earnestly desire to
be saved from the guilt and pollution of it; -- A true repentance is begun in
you. And if for this purpose you apply unto CHRIST as held forth in the gospel,
this is the faith that saves. And, for baptism -- you are already baptized
with water; and if you are willing to renew and confirm your baptismal vow,
come unto CHRIST, out of his fullness, to receive the inward and spiritual
grace, the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost: For he alone can give it.


P. It is said, Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able; and, Not
every one that says unto me, Lord! Lord! shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. This makes me fear, and keep at a distance.


M. Whither then do you intend to go?


P. I know no place? for there is no other name under heaven whereby one may be
saved.


M. Then fly to CHRIST -- to escape the wages of sin, the curse of the law, and
the wrath of God: Fly to him for pardon and peace, grace and glory. And, if
seeking to enter into the kingdom is not enough, strive. If many that say,
Lord! Lord! fails let this be the language of your heart and life, as well as
of the tongue. Not that, after all, any diligence and strength of yours is the
thing that will gain acceptance. But when faith is true, lively and saving, it
will be attended with those and the like works.


P. This is what I fear that my faith is not true faith.


M. If your faith is true faith, you will have confidence in nothing in
yourself, no works or strength of your own; but you will rely solely on GOD's
promise of mercy* made in CHRIST. A true faith will also in some degree be
lively, showing itself in a zeal for GOD and godliness, and a steady warfare
against sin. And this will be also saving: You will be thereby saved not only
from guilt, but from the power of sin and the dominion of your lusts, and this
will give you a good hope and expectation, and by degrees a firm persuasion, of
being saved from wrath in the great day of the LORD JESUS.


P. I cannot find I have this faith; therefore dare not believe that GOD will
forgive and receive me.


M. Then come unto CHRIST, embrace and depend on GOD's promises in him, that
your faith may grow up to this. For this faith itself is of the operation of
the Spirit of GOD, and therefore to be sought of him by prayer, through the
mediation of JESUS CHRIST.


P. I dare not thus embrace the promises, come to and depend on CHRIST, for I
am utterly unworthy of the least mercy.


M. When do you think you shall make yourself worthy?


P. Never.


M. Then come to him just as you are, to be made worthy.


P. May I dare thus to come to CHRIST, and depend upon him for salvation?


M. Do not depend upon my word, but hear the word of GOD. He invites you to
come: Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, Isa. lv. 1. He
commands you to come: This is his commandment, that we should believe on the
name of his Son JESUS CHRIST. He promises to receive those that come: Him that
comes unto me I will in no wise cast off, John vi. 37. He threatens if you do
not come: He that believes not shall be damned, Mark xvi. 16.


P. But to whom are these words addressed?


M. To you, to me, and to every one that hears them: Preach the gospel to every
creature, Mark xvi. 15. They are addressed to those in particular, that see
their want of salvation, because they alone will receive them. Come unto me,
all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. xi. 28.


P. These arguments from scripture stop my mouth. But still I cannot believe
CHRIST will receive such a sinner as I am.


M. This is what I said before: Faith is not of man, but the gift of GOD,
wrought by the SPIRIT in them that hear the gospel. Therefore seek this and
every other grace of GOD by prayer, in the name of JESUS. And, to encourage you
in this, consider that God gave CHRIST for this purpose, to save sinners: For
this he came into the world; for this he labored, wept, and bled; for this he
reigns and intercedes in heaven. He is so far from being unwilling to save,
that he is offended with them, when they will not come to him to be saved. When
he was upon earth, he wept over Jerusalem on this account.


P. I know not what to say.


M. What do you intend to do?


P. I am greatly afraid I shall never be saved. But I know there is no other
way but GOD's free mercy in CHRIST. Therefore will I seek it as long as I live;
and if I perish, it shall be at the foot of CHRIST's cross, calling for mercy.


M. Continue this resolution, and all the precious promises in the gospel are
your own. But take heed that you do not suffer these impressions to wear away,
and so settle in a false peace. Do not seek rest any where but in CHRIST.
Beware, lest worldly cares or pleasures divert your attention from the things
of GOD, and lest sin grieve the HOLY SPIRIT. Remember it is said, If a man draw
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.


DIALOGUE III.
P. SIR, I hope you will not be offended at the trouble I gave you: But I want
your advice very much.


M. You need make no compliments, Farmer. I should be glad, if all the people
in my parish would give me the same trouble you do. But what is the matter?


P. I have been for some time so as I was never in my life before: I have been
afraid I should be damned. This has filled me with thought and fears day and
night. You had no need to caution me against the danger of worldly cares and
pleasures: For wherever I was, or what ever I have been doing, my sins and
hell have been before my eyes.


M. What have you thought of your sins? -- In what light have appeared to you?


P. Sins committed many years ago have now risen in my mind, and condemned me.
The remembrance of the sins of my youth has followed me, as if committed but
yesterday. And some hard scriptures, that I have heard and read, seem to be
sentences of my condemnation. I believe I have thought an hundred times of
those words: The wages of sin is death.


M. Have you been looking into your heart, and seen and lamented the
corruptions there?


P. I did not use to understand what you meant by looking into the heart; but I
think I do now. I find in myself a strong inclination to many sins,
notwithstanding that I am convinced in my mind that I deserve God's wrath on
account of complying with these inclinations heretofore. Indeed it is much
better with me now than it was. Formerly I have been led by my own wicked heart
to delight in idle company; to talk of myself in an empty vain manner; to be
greedy after the world; to pass slightly over, or entirely neglect prayer, and
other duties, as a tedious burden; and to be guilty of other sins. At present
I bless God, it is not so; but all my thoughts are, in a manner taken up about
the care of my soul, and the world to come.


M. I fear, you do not know your heart as well as you imagine. You seem to
think that all things are already become new in you. But be not deceived: Such
a cage of unclean birds, as the heart of every man is by nature, is not so soon
cleansed from its various lusts and vile affections. These that seem to be
rooted out are only asleep for a season: Be watchful therefore; they will one
day awake again. Some of them probably are only exchanged for others as bad and
dangerous, such as pride, presumption, and the like.


P. Really, Sir, I have had some fear of that. For you must know that one day I
was thinking what a sinful wretch I was, and what would become of me in the
next world; when these words came strongly into my mind; I will heal their
backslidings, I will love them freely. I am sure they are somewhere in the
Bible, but I cannot find them. However, they gave me much comfort, and I have
been very easy ever since. Now a neighbor that I have been talking with, tells
me, "This is to be looked on as a word from God," and that I am from henceforth
to look on myself as a converted man. But I fear this would be presumption. Now
what do you think of this?


M. I must desire some time to resolve this question: seven years, at least,
before I can give a positive answer to it.

The words you mentioned are in the prophet Hosea, xiv. 4. They were perhaps
spoken more immediately of the restoration of the captive Jews: But they
contain a sweet promise perfectly in the gospel strain, and are therefore free
for every humble soul to embrace by faith. The prophet you see at verse 1, 2,
3, exhorts the people to repentance and humiliation for sin: O Israel, return
unto the LORD thy GOD; for thou have fallen by iniquity. Take with you words,
and turn to the LORD. Say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously. -- For in thee the fatherless finds mercy. Now, as God has given
you a sense of your sinful, helpless state, and a desire of turning to him,
like this which the prophet here describes as preparatory to an answer of
peace. I hope the following promise belongs to you: I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely; for my anger is turned away from him,
verse 4. I hope too, that comfort, which you found in applying the promise to
yourself by a particular faith, proceeds from the Spirit of God. In the same
manner as I look on that conviction of sin, which filled you with fear and
self-abasement, when you called to mind your sinfulness and God's judgment
denounced against sinners, to be the work of the same Spirit. For it is he that
convinces the world of sin and of righteousness. But this I must tell you: All
these feelings are to be suspected, till we see what fruit follows in the heart
and life. For though, these are sometimes owing to the Spirit of God, and come
well recommended, when, as in your case, they are so closely connected with the
word of God; yet the enemy of souls sometimes imitates these sensible
experiences in order to deceive. And it is impossible to say how much our
natural temper and spirit may contribute thereto.


P. Pray, Sir, tell me plainly what you think of my state.


M. Satan, I tell you, sometimes puts on the appearance of an angel of light,
in order to deceive. Those sensible experiences sometimes vouchsafed by the
Spirit of God, and impressions made on men's minds, of which sort are what the
scripture terms peace in believing and joy in the Holy Ghost -- these the enemy
sometimes imitates, and thereby deludes hypocrites into spiritual pride, and
even the godly some times, so as to puff them up, and make them secure and
careless. But there are two tokens of grace, which the devil will not, cannot
effect: These are an holy heart, steadily hating sin; and an holy life, having
respect to all God's commandments. Have these, and evidence the one by the
other; and continue for some considerable time thus to adorn your profession --
Then I shall not have the least doubt but you are in a state of grace.


P. As far as I know my own heart, I would not willingly offend God for the
whole world. I love those that seem to be his servants, and would go upon my
hands and knees to do them good, or to make others like them. I love to hear
his word, to pray, and to talk of good things; and, I think, I could die with
pleasure if it was his will.


M. Very well. These are good signs. But this is the fervor of your first
love. It will not always be so with you It Is true most lose the fervor of
their first love, but none reed, since the Lord is able to save to the
uttermost, Heb. vii^. 25.
. So was it with the Israelites after passing the Red Sea, the Galatians, and
the church of Ephesus. But each of these grew colder afterward: And the
prophet Jeremiah ii. 2. St. Paul, Gal. iv. 15. and our Lord, Rev. ii. 4.
reprove them for it.


P. Sir, I believe you know my danger better than I do myself. Pray direct me
what I shall do.


M. Strive to make your calling and election sure and evident both to yourself
and others, by bringing forth the fruit of righteousness in a good conversation.

My first advice is, Be humble, and walk humbly with thy God. Let the
remembrance of your past life of sin and folly still cover you with shame.
Recollect the many aggravating circumstances of a life hitherto spent in
rebellion against God: During all which he daily heaped mercies upon you and
yours; giving food and raiment, health and strength; and continued these
mercies to you, while you forgot the hand that gave them, and returned evil for
good. He spared you in all your provocations; and at last opened your eyes to
see your danger, stirred you up to avoid it, and now has given you a good hope
through grace of obtaining eternal life. Thus compare together what God has
done and you deserved, and thus learn humility. Keep a watchful (...) also upon
the remains of indwelling sin still in you. And let every sinful inclination,
vain thought, backwardness to duty, and failure in it, teach you to be humble
and fear. Thus, distrusting yourself, look up to God for continual support,
like an helpless little child; expecting, through the mediation of Jesus
Christ, to be assisted in every time of need.

My next advice is, Keep a conscience void of offense. If you have wronged any
man, be not ashamed to acknowledge it; and according to your power make
restitution: That the accursed thing may not cleave unto you. Take heed that
you grieve not the Spirit of God by unholy walking, left you provoke him to
forsake you. To this end, watch over your heart, repress its first inclinations
to sin, and be watchful against temptations from without; fixing your eye
especially on the sins with which you have heretofore been most easily beset.
If at any time sin prevail against you, do not endeavor to forget it, or hide
it in your bosom: But go to God immediately; take shame to yourself: plead the
gospel promises to returning sinners, looking unto Jesus Christ as your
all-sufficient sacrifice, and advocate with the Father; and never cease
wrestling with God in Prayer, until he again speak peace to your troubled soul,
and fill you with a greater fear of offending him.

As I hope you are now planted in God's vineyard, Be fruitful. Bear on your
heart a sense of God's love to sinners in Jesus Christ. Consider in particular,
what God has done for you, in calling you out of darkness into his mavelous
light. Remember how you lay fast asleep in sin and fatal security, when God
awaked you to see your danger and escape it. Think what would have been your
condition in eternity, if God had lest you to yourself. Think how many still go
on in the same fatal path in which you trod. And let the sense of God's
distinguishing love to you excite you to some return. Love him, because he
first loved you. And let love to your heavenly Father influence your thoughts
and words, and actions.

Let your meditations of God be sweet and frequent. Lift up your heart to him
that sees in secret, and tries the heart and reins. Seek a close communion
with the Father of your spirit: And to this end, endeavor to withdraw your
thoughts from worldly things, and to raise your affections from earth to
heaven, to those things, which are not seen but by the eyes of faith. That thus
you may walk by faith, guided by it as the eye of the soul, and raised by it to
heavenly-mindedness; so as to love and delight in God.

Instead of your former vain conversation, henceforth let your tongue be
employed to God's glory; in speaking good of his name; in prayer and praise to
your great Benefactor; in telling others what he has done for your soul; in
warning sinners of their danger, and encouraging them that fear God to be bold
and hearty in his service.

And let your conduct in life be such as becomes the gospel. You are called to
fight the good fight of faith; see that you faint not, neither be weary in well
doing. Show that you are alive unto GOD by living unto GOD, by devoting
yourself to his service, and by diligence therein. Do something for him that
has done so much for you. Be loving unto all men, for they are the work of
God's hands: Do good unto all men according to your ability. Your time and
strength, and every other talent* are given you to be improved, lay them out in
acts of charity and love. Let your heart be enlarged to all men, not excepting
your enemies: (...) have your prayers and forgiveness, and be (...) come evil
by good.

See also that (...) power of godliness in the (...) thee duties. Be kindly
(...) to all about you, (...) an example of (...). Express your regard for
(...) their bodies, by a devout, serious course or (...)-worship. Let those of
your household and acquaintance see that you have a new heart by your leading a
new life, studying in all things to be conformed to the will and word of God.
Be strict and coonscientious in all your dealings. Render to all their due;
tribute to whom tribute, and custom to (...) custom is due, as well as every
other lawful debt: Not defrauding either the king or your fellow subjects, or
any way of encouraging those that do.

Show a particular regard for them that are of the household of faith, all the
sincerely godly, for Christ's sake. For as all men were originally created
after God's image, in them is the image in some measure restored. These
therefore in a peculiar manner belong to Christ, being washed from their sins
in his blood, and sanctified by his Spirit. And to animate you to greater
diligence in this work and labor of love, view often with the eyes of faith
the glorious reward set before you, the eternal weight of glory to be bestowed
on that day when Christ shall reward acts of mercy and love, done in his name
as if done to himself.

Quickened by this principle, and encouraged by this prospect, strive to grow
in knowledge, and purity, and faith, and love, and godly fear; in meekness, and
every christian grace. Study to promote God's glory, the welfare of all men,
and such a disposition in your own soul, as may render you meet to be a
partaker of the inheritance of the saints in light. And, in order to promote
this work of sanctification in you, wait for God's blessing and grace in a
conscientious use of the ordinances, in prayer public and private, hearing and
reading God's word; and confirm your covenant with God at his table. Thus may
you hope to be a fruitful vine, and experience in your soul those blessings,
which the prophet immediately adds to that promise of free mercy, in which you
have found so much consolation. Hosea xiv. 5, 6, 7. I will be as the dew unto
Israel. He shall grow as the lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon;
growing upwards by faith and love, and downwards by humility. His branches
shall spread; and his beauty shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as
Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow shall return from all their
wanderings: They shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine. The scent (or
blossom) therefore shall be as the vine of Lebanon, beautiful, fruitful, and
pleasant in God's sight.


P. Sir, I thank you. I see a great work before me; but, by God's help, I hope
I shall be able to hold out to the end.


M. You must expect many difficulties and much opposition. The way to heaven is
the way of the cross, and through much tribulation. The world and flesh and
devil are strong enemies, and they are closely leagued together. Your own
corrupt nature will be always near to tempt, to discourage, and draw you back;
for this will still be your burden; your greatest plague will be that of your
own heart. And, as soon as you appear to be going out of the broad way, in
which the generality walk to destruction, you must expect the world will be
upon you. Not only the careless and profane will sneer and ridicule you, but
the more decent formalists also will be highly offended. They will say in their
hearts, as the Pharisees of old: In doing this, in going out of the common
fashionable road, and pretending to uncommon strictness, thou condemnest us
also. And these his two allies, the world and the flesh, the devil can manage
with wonderful skill, and sometimes throw in some evil thoughts himself. But be
not discouraged: God is above all. Christ ever lives to make intercession for
us, and to save in every difficulty those that come unto God through him. Holy
angels will be employed as your guardians; and all the truly godly will be your
loving brethren and ready friends. They that are for you, are more than they
that are against you. Be not your own enemy, and nothing can hurt you. However,
Be not high-minded, but fear. Happy is the man that fears always.


FINIS.

