THE NATURE AND NECESSITY OF AN Internal Call to preach the Gospel.

THE NATURE and NECESSITY OF AN INTERNAL CALL TO PREACH THE Everlasting Gospel;
With Marks to distinguish the Ministers of Christ from all Deceivers.

By ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN MIDDLEBOROUGH.

How shall they preach, except they be sent?

Romans x. 15. THE SECOND EDITION, IMPROVED.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, in Cornhill. MDCCCXII.

THE PREFACE.
AS the ministry of the gospel is a chief means of the salvation of mankind, it
is of great importance for all to have right ideas about the call and
characters of the ministers of Christ. Yet mistakes about these things are
exceeding common in the world. And though men generally complain of these
evils, yet how few make the holy scriptures their only rule to guard against
them? Many exclaim against old traditious, who are far from being clear of them
themselves; and opposition of science, falsely so called, has filled the world
with perverse disputings. And we have abundant evidence, that the love of money
is the root of all evil. 1 Timothy vi. 5, 10, 20. But as persecution has not the
sword of the magistrate in America to enforce it, opposition of knowledge
cannot be so fierce here, as in other countries.

When the ensuing discourse was first published, in the year 1754, great
violence was exercised against all ministers who were not educated for that
work, and supported by worldly power. And among the multitude of publications
since, I have never seen one upon the nature and necessity of an internal call
from God to preach his gospel. And as this discourse has lately been
frequently inquired after, I have thought proper to revise it, and send it
again into the world. For God says, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. And if this be essential to the character of a Christian,
how much more for a minister of Christ? And he says, Ye shall know them by
their fruits. Therefore an attempt is here also made to explain those fruits,
as they are plainly described in the holy scriptures. And each person has an
equal right to judge for himself about soul-guides, as he can answer it to God,
who will finally reward every man according to his works: when no deceitful
arts can avail with any teacher or hearer. And deceit and cruelty, under
religious pretenses, has brought forth the infidelity and contempt of all
vital and practical religion, which so much prevails in our day. Men have been
very careful in civil governments, to attribute all the mischiefs therein to
inferior officers, or to the people, and not to the HEAD of the government; but
in religious matters, all the hypocrisies and villainies that have appeared
among those who have professed to believe the Christian religion, have been
turned against the authority of Christ in his church. But the time is nigh,
when the deaf shall hear the words of God's book, and the eyes of the blind
shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness; the meek also shall increase
their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the holy One of
Israel.

February 20. 1792.
THE NATURE AND NECESSITY OF AN Internal Call to preach the Gospel.
THE public preaching of the gospel, is as plain an ordinance of God as any one
that he ever instituted; and the importance of it is acknowledged by all men
who profess any regard to the truth of Christianity. But how men are called
into that work, and how others may know them, so as to obey the gospel, and
avoid deceivers, are questions which have filled the world with controversy.
And as true believers are always the best subjects of civil government,
deceitful men have held them in bondage, ever since the sword of the magistrate
was brought into the church of Christ. Ministers had assumed the place of
lawgivers and judges for the church, before Constantine came to the throne; and
it is said, "He confirmed with his royal authority, the canons and
determinations of the bishops, which they had decreed in their consistories,
that so the princes of other nations might not abrogate their decrees. For the
judgment of the priesthood in ecclesiastical matters, is to be preferred before
the opinion of a secular judge." Eusebius's life of Constantine, p. 61.
And from that day to this, the prejudices of natural affection, education,
honor, gain, and self-righteousness, have all conspired against allowing each
one to answer a good conscience toward God in all the affairs of his worship.
The sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, gave a deadly wound to the
power of the beast, in the REFORMATION two hundred and seventy-five years ago;
but that deadly wound was soon healed, so that deceit and cruelty, which is the
character of the devil and his children, has been carried as far round the
world by Protestants, as ever it was by Papists. And the priesthood of Jesus
Christ, and of his children, is as much disregarded under the one as the other
of these names. For the inspired apostle Peter says to every true believer,
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto
unfeigned love of the brethren; see that ye love one another with a pure heart
fervently: being born again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the
word of God, which lives and abides forever. -- And this is the word which by
the gospel is preached unto you. Wherefore, laying aside all malice, and all
guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil-speakings, as newborn babes,
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby; if so be ye have
tasted that the Lord is gracious: to whom coming, as unto a living stone,
disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious; ye also, as lively
stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. -- Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye
should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light. 1 Peter i. 22 -- 25. ii. 1 -- 9.

Every person who is born again, is a priest unto God, and is required daily to
offer up spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ. And these are the only
priesthood, and holy nation, that he has under heaven. And our Lord says,
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not see the
kingdom of heaven. Whosoever, therefore, shall humble himself as this little
child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Mat. xviii. 3, 4. And
it is out of such little children, that the Son of God calls forth his
ministers, who are never called priests in the new testament, in distinction
from the brethren. And the proposition that I mean to prove is,

That every true minister of Christ, is called into that work by the same Holy
Spirit, that all his prophets and apostles were of old. And I shall endeavor
to explain this proposition, and then prove it, and vindicate it against
various objections. In explaining of it, I would observe, that all the writers
of the oracles of God, were endued by him with power to work miracles to
confirm the words which they published; which power is not given to his
ordinary ministers, among people who profess to own the truth of revelation.
After the resurrection of our Lord, he appeared unto the eleven, and said unto
them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall
be damned. -- And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen. Mark xvi. 14 --
20. But since the sacred volume is completed, and miracles are ceased, the
ministers of Christ have not that power from him: Though the man of sin was
advanced in the temple of God, which is his church, with powers, and signs, and
lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, in them that
perish; because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 -- 10. Faith which works by love, is the only thing
which avails any soul before God. Gal. v. 6. And, speaking the truth in love,
is the only way of growing up into Christ, the HEAD of the church. Ephesians. iv. 15.
Who says, If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have
kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love. John xv. 10. And to guard
against mockers, who walk after their own ungodly lusts, the command to
believers is, Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Jude 18 -- 21. Obedience to the revealed
will of God, is the only way of safety and happiness, both for ministers and
people. It was equally so with his church before the Son of God gave himself a
sacrifice for us, as it is since, and will be to the end of the world. And that
every true minister of Christ, is internally called into that work by the same
Spirit that the prophets and apostles were, I think is evident, from the
following considerations.

I. They come in the name of the eternal JEHOVAH, as really as any of his
servants did of old. Moses was to say, I AM has sent me unto you. Exodus iii.
14. And Ezekiel was to say, Thus says the Lord God, whether they would hear,
or whether they would forbear. Ezekiel. ii. 4, 5. So Jesus says, Before Abraham
was, I AM. John viii. 58. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I AM with you
always even unto the end of the world. Amen. Mat. xxviii. 19, 20. Thus every
true minister of Christ, acts in the name of the great I AM; and therefore must
be called into the work by his Spirit.

II. God is as near to his church as ever he was, and therefore no men can be
invested with power in his room, to call forth his ministers. The judges,
priests, and kings in Israel, were only to execute the laws of God, which he
revealed by his prophets. And God said, the man that will do presumptuously,
and will not hearken unto the priest (that stands to minister there before
the Lord thy God) or unto the judge, even that man shall die; and thou shall
put away the evil from Israel. And if they would set up a king over them, he
must be first chosen by God, from among their brethren; and he was to read in
the law of God all the days of his life, that his heart might not be lifted up
above his brethren. Deuteronomy. xvii. 11 -- 20. And Jesus is the only antetype of
Moses, Aaron, and David. Acts ii. 22 -- 36. iii. 22, 23. Heb. v. 1 -- 6. And he
says to his church, Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on
earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of
my Father which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them. Mat. xviii. 15 -- 20. To meet in his
name, is to meet according to his commandment, with which his promise is
connected, Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world. And as he is
always with the faithful, he as really calls forth his ministers, by his word
and Spirit, as he ever did in ancient times.

III. The children of men, yea, the children of God, are as incapable to
determine who shall be his ministers, as they were formerly. And an inspired
apostle says, After that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.
-- God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and
God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are
mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are; that
no flesh should glory in his presence. 1 Cor. i. 21 -- 29. This he now does,
both as to his children and his ministers, as much as he did in the apostolic
age. And men must shut their eyes against the light of reason, as well as the
light of revelation, not to see this in his late wonderful works among the
nations. And yet many of the children of God are still disputing, who shall be
the greatest. The apostle John, under that disposition, once said, Master, we
saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he follows not us; and we forbad
him, because he follows not us. But Jesus said, Forbid him not; for there is
no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me.
Mark ix. 33 -- 39. The line of things, which is made ready to our hand, says,
He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. For not he that commends
himself, is approved, but whom the Lord commends. 2 Cor. x. 16 -- 18. This
line is drawn by inspiration in the word of God. But many teachers have taken
this passage to prove, that all men within lines which men have drawn, ought to
be forced to support such teachers as are chosen by the ruling party therein;
and also, that such teachers may forbid all others to preach the gospel within
those lines, who please them not. Though the great apostle of the Gentiles
says, If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. And he says,
If any man preach any other gospel unto you, let him be accursed. Gal. i. 7 --
10.

IV. The work of the gospel ministry is essentially as great as ever it was;
therefore men are to be called into it by the same holy Spirit that all the
servants of God were of old. The church of Christ is built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
Stone. Ephesians. ii. 20. The Jews who built upon their own righteousness, were in
covenant with death, and with hell were at agreement. Isaiah xxviii. 15, 16.
Romans ix. 32, 33. For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually
minded, is life and peace: because the carnal mind is enmity against God; for
it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans viii. 6, 7.
Loving him with all our powers, and loving our neighbors as ourselves, is the
one thing needful. Luke x. 27, 28, 42. Therefore, to love the world, or our own
righteousness, above God, is enmity against him. And he says, The friendship of
the world is enmity with God. Jam. iv. 4. And God said to Ezekiel, I have set
thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shall hear the word at
my mouth, and warn them from me. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 7. So he says by an inspired
apostle, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us; for we
trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. Heb.
xiii. 17, 18. But how can ministers live honestly, if their trust is in an arm
of flesh, instead of the eternal JEHOVAH! for a curse of blindness is upon all
such men. Jer. xvii. 5 -- 8. Therefore the apostle Paul said to the elders of
Ephesus, I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all
men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take
heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock over the which the Holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them. Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years I ceased
not to warn every one night and day with tears. And now brethren, I commend you
to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to
give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Acts xx. 26 -- 32.

Elders and overseers or bishops, are here called brethren, by one of the
chiefest of the apostles; who informs them, that the Holy Ghost made them
overseers of the flock of God; whose power, and the word of his grace, was
their sufficient security against grievous wolves, and perverse disputers.
Therefore, as every true minister of Christ, acts in the name of the same God
that the prophets and apostles did; and he is as near to his church now as
formerly; and men are as unable to determine who shall be his messengers as
ever they were, and their work of watching for souls and feeding Christ's
sheep, is as great as ever, I conclude that he as really calls them forth by
his Spirit now as ever he did in the world. But how does he perform this great
work? or how are any men now called to preach the gospel? I answer, 1. Our
ascended Lord, by the Holy Spirit, gives the church gifts for pastors and
teachers, as well as for all other purposes in his kingdom. The Lord gave the
word, great was the company of those that published it. -- Thou have ascended
on high, thou have led captivity captive: thou have received gifts for men;
yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them. And he
says to his church, There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. Psalm lxviii. 11,
18. Ephesians. iv. 4 -- 10. By this heavenly influence, the natural capacities and
human accomplishments of believers are sanctified, and they are prepared to
fill up their place with duty and usefulness, as much as every member of our
natural body does, under the direction of the head. And they who are designed
for preachers of the gospel, have special light given them, and the nature of
revelation is opened with great sweetness to their souls. Jeremiah said, Thy
words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and
rejoicing of mine heart. But he met with such cruel treatment, for his
faithfulness in his work, that he said, I will not make mention of him, nor
speak any more in his name. But his word was in my heart as a burning fire shut
up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. Jer. xv.
16. xx. 9. So God said to Ezekiel, Son of man, eat that thou find; eat this
roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel. So I opened my mouth, and he
caused me to eat the roll; and he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to
eat, and fill thy bowels, with this roll that I give thee. Then I did eat it,
and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness. And he said unto me, Son of man,
go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them. Ezekiel.
iii. 1 -- 4. Also, at the command of God, John took and eat the little book,
and says, It was in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it, my
belly was bitter. And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many
peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings. Rev. x. 8 -- 10. In all which,
the sweetness of God's word, and the bitterness of preaching it to a sinful
world, is plainly held forth. 2. A discovery of the worth of souls, and of the
state of the church, goes before a call to preach the gospel to them. This is
necessary in order for any to be faithful watchmen. Hence it is said, When
Jesus saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because they
fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. Then says he
unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few.
Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his
harvest. And he directly sent forth the twelve into the harvest. Mar. ix. 36 --
38.x. 1 -- 7. And he sent forth the seventy in the same manner. Luke x. 1 -- 3.
And he said, Every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, is
like unto a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure
things new and old. Mat. xiii. 52. He is diligent, in the use of all lawful
means, in storing up knowledge of divine things, and of the state of the
church, as well as the world of mankind; and out of this store he brings
forth food, to feed the people with knowledge and understanding, which is the
work of a pastor according to God's own heart. Jer. iii. 15. 3. When special
gifts are bestowed upon any person, for the great work of the gospel ministry,
the authority of Christ requires him to be a faithful steward thereof, as he
can answer it to God in the last day. Hence the apostle Paul, after he had
given the law of Christ, concerning the support of his ministers, and given
notice that he did not expect it of the church of Corinth, said, Necessity is
laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel. 1 Cor. ix. 7 --
16. But many teachers in our day, insist upon it, that all kind of necessity is
inconsistent with moral agency. Though, at the same time, they lay a necessity
upon all around them to yield to their wills, or to suffer from them. They are
selfwilled, under the name of liberty. 2 Peter ii. 10, 19. But our Lord said,
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out. For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that sent me. John vi. 37, 38. And who will dare to plead
for a moral agency, contrary to the declaration of Christ and his apostles! For
they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and
by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. To be
selfwilled, is the cause of all the sinful divisions in the world. Romans xvi.
17, 18. But God says, As every man has received the gift, even so minister the
same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it
as of the ability which God gives: that God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise and dominion forever and ever. Amen. 1
Peter iv. 10, 11.


The means and methods which God makes use of, in calling forth his ministers,
are exceeding various; so that no exact steps can be described by us, for his
calling forth his ministers, any more than for his calling souls into the
kingdom of his grace. But the teaching of the Spirit of God in his word, a view
of the worth of souls and of the present state of things among the people, with
the command of Christ to preach his gospel to them, is the essence of an
internal call into that great work. The external call is by his church, who are
invested with authority from Christ to carry all his laws into execution in his
name. For, after warning believers of the danger, of being spoiled through
philosophy and vain deceit, by men who do not hold THE HEAD, he says, Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one
another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your
hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. Col. ii. 8 -- 10,
18 -- 23. iii. 16, 17. In the last of these chapters he says, Covetousness is
idolatry. And in another place he says, No whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor
covetous man who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ,
and of God. Ephesians. v. 5. And such have ever had a great influence in all national
churches, by whom all wars have been managed. But when the house of God, which
is his church, shall be established upon his revealed will, above all the
powers of this world, bloody wars will come to an end. And believers will say,
All people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in the
name of the Lord our God forever and ever. Micah iv. 1 -- 5. The saints of the
Most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever, even forever
and ever. Dan. vii. 18. For, though the devil will deceive multitudes, after
the reign of the saints for a thousand years, yet their complete destruction
will prevent any interruption of the kingdom of the saints. Rev. xx. 7 -- 9.
All men desire safety and happiness, and no men would disobey the revealed will
of God, if they were not deceived. Titus iii. 3. Evil men and seducers shall
wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. 2 Timothy iii. 13. No men
would deceive others, if they were not first deceived themselves. And Christ
says, If it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. Mat. xxiv. 24.
And multitudes are now so much deceived, as to deny that God has an elect
number among mankind, distinct from the rest. But the apostle Peter writes to
the saints, and calls them the Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ. And to them he says, The elders which are among you
I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and
also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed; feed the flock of God
which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being lords
over God's heritage, but being ensamples of the flock. And when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away.
Likewise ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder; yea, all of you be
subject one to and be clothed with humility: for God resists the proud, and
gives grace unto the humble. 1 Peter i. 2. v. 1 -- 5.

Here is an exact description of a church of Christ, and of the government
thereof, distinct from all other communities in this world. They are elected by
God, and sanctified by his Spirit, and sprinkled by the blood of Christ, our
only High Priest. And all of these are an holy priesthood. But the chief
officers in the church are called elders, in distinction from the rest of God's
heritage. They are also called overseers or bishops. Acts xx. 28. Titus i. 5,
7. And Peter, the first of the apostles, calls himself an elder. And it is the
laboring elders, who are worthy of their reward. 1 Timothy v. 17, 18. And the
Lord has ordained, that they who preach the gospel, should live of the gospel.
1 Cor. ix. 14. And if an angel from heaven should preach any other gospel, than
what the apostles preached, and the churches then received, the command is, Let
him be accursed. Gal. i. 7 -- 9. For the gospel of Christ, says unto Zion, Thy
God reigns. Isaiah lii. 7. Romans x. 15. His laws, executed by his church,
where all must act as little children, is the essence of government therein.
For lordship is of the Gentiles, and is excluded from the church of Christ.
Mark x. 15, 42, 43. And it is now excluded from the United States of America,
and from the government of France; and shall lordship be retained by religious
ministers? Shall every civil officer be set up, or deposed by the people, and
this liberty be denied to the church of Christ? How much has infidelity been
promoted by this tyranny? Yet many objections have been made against our
doctrine, the chief of which I shall attempt to answer.

The first is, that we would set up common ministers of the word, as equal with
the prophets and apostles. To which I answer, that the apostle Peter, in the
passages now recited, puts himself upon a level with other elders, in the
government of the church, saying, God resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble. And he begins his second epistle by saying, Simon Peter, a servant
and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith
with us, through the righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: Grace
and peace be multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus
our Lord; according as his divine power has given unto us all things that
pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called
us to glory and virtue; whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having
escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. And giving all
diligence, in the pursuit of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience,
godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity, is the only way that he points out,
for us to make our calling and election sure. 2 Peter i. 1 -- 10. Therefore all
men who hold that they are elected, and shall be finally saved, without
diligence in the way of holiness, are deceived. And enemies to salvation by
sovereign grace, have taken great advantage from such men. But for any to claim
the promises of God, without obeying his precepts, is tempting of him, and not
trusting in him; which iniquity caused multitudes to lay their carcases in the
wilderness. And Paul says, Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest,
left any man fall after the same example of unbelief. Deuteronomy. vi. 16, 17. Mat.
iv. 7. Heb. iii. 5 -- 11. iv. 11. By all which we may see, that the apostles
put themselves upon a level with every believer, about faith and obedience to
God in his church. And one of them says, I wrote unto the church; but
Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence among them, receives us not.
Wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds which he does, prating against
us with malicious words; and not content therewith, neither does he himself
receive the brethren, and forbids them that would, and casts them out of
the church. 3 John 9, 10. And the world has been filled with such arbitrary
and malicious conduct, ever since the days of Constantine. All ministers who
claim a power above the church of Christ, in sending forth his ministers, exalt
themselves above the apostles, who claimed no dominion over the faith of the
church. 2 Cor. i. 24.

Yet a second objection against the call now pleaded for, is taken from the
words of Paul to Timothy, who said, The things that thou have heard of me among
many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to
teach others also. Commit thou, is held to be the work of ministers in
ordinations, and not of the church. But how little do these objectors regard
other things in the same epistle? For therein the apostle says, Hold fast the
form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in faith and love which is in
Christ Jesus. -- And the things that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to saithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also. -- This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall
come; for men shall be lovers of their ownselves -- having a form of godliness,
but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. 2 Timothy i. 13. ii. 2. iii. 1
-- 5. The form of godliness is in the holy scriptures; but a form, to cover
self-love, is condemned therein. It is also said, The time will come when they
will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears. And they shall turn away their ears
from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. 2 Timothy iv. 3, 4. And what
heaps of teachers of fables have there been since the apostolic age! and can
there be a greater fable, than the conceit is of an external succession of
office power in officers from the apostles to our times! For if ministers can
initiate children into the church, before they can choose for themselves, and
no men but ministers can give or take away that power, they are above all civil
rulers upon earth, who are all set up or pulled down by the people. And is not
this the great city, which reigns over the kings of the earth? Rev. xvii. 18.

Yet, thirdly, many object against the internal call now pleaded for, as a
thing which would destroy all order in the church. If every man who thinks he
is called of God to preach the gospel, is under obligation to do it, will not
all manner of confusion take place in the church, and no power on earth can
control them? Thus teachers have reasoned against the call now pleaded for.
But who controuled the power of Great Britain, when they were spurred on by
religious teachers, to contend with fire and sword for power to take away our
money unjustly? was it not the PEOPLE of America, assisted by the eternal GOD,
who makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth? Psalm xlvi. 9. 10. He only
calls any soul out of darkness, into the mavelous light of his gospel; and
he says to his royal priesthood, and holy nation, Submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. 1 Peter ii. 9, 13 If any men invade the
rights of their neighbors, the magistrate bears not the sword in vain; for
rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Romans xiii. 1 -- 10.
While false teachers, bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that
puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him. Micah iii. 5.
And if such men are supported by the sword of the magistrate, they are the
greatest obstructers of all good order, both in church and state. But when the
church of Christ is governed by his laws, she tries false teachers, as well as
false brethren, and is commended by her Lord for so doing. Rev. ii. 2, 3. It
was the one particular church of Ephesus, who performed this acceptable
service, and not all the seven churches of Asia; and much less not a convention
of all their officers.

Yet, fourthly, some insist upon it, that if any think that they are called
into the work of the gospel ministry, by the same Spirit who called the
prophets and apostles, they must work miracles to confirm their mission. But it
is very evident, that working miracles, to confirm the truth of the word of
God, was not so great an evidence of the call of a person into the kingdom of
grace, or into the ministry, as the works of faith, hope, and charity. 1 Cor.
xiii. 1 -- 3, 13. And when a dispute was raised in the church of Corinth,
whether Paul was a true minister of Christ, or not, he said, Ye are our epistle
written in our hearts, known and read of all men; forasmuch as ye are
manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ, ministered by us, written not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in
fleshly tables of the heart. 2 Cor. iii. 1 -- 3. Epistles of commendation, of
members and ministers, to those who knew them not before, is a practice
established by reason and revelation; but the conversion of souls, by the
preaching of any man, is a greater commendation of the preacher, than external
miracles upon the bodies of any men can be. For the turning fornicators unto a
chaste way of living; idolaters to the worship of the living God; thieves, the
covetous, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners, into the ways of honesty,
liberality, temperance, and true benevolence, recommends the instruments of
such a glorious change, more than any letters written with ink and pen can do.
Therefore Paul said, The seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord. 1 Cor.
vi. 8 -- 11. ix. 2. How vain then is the above objection?

Fifthly, Many have objected against our doctrine, as that which would
invalidate human learning, and the benefit of a liberal education; which they
have called, A river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God. But
if we attend to the same sacred writer, from whom they have taken these words,
he will condemn their scheme. For he says, Blessed is the man that walks not
in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits
in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in
his law does he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by
the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also
shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper. Psalm i. 1 -- 3. xlvi.
4. Such men trust in the Lord. But there is a curse of blindness, upon all men
who make flesh their arm. Jer. xvii. 5 -- 8. Therefore our Lord says, If any
man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes on me, as the
scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. John
vii. 37, 38. O what blindness then have all teachers who put human learning in
the place of DIVINE REVELATION! For none are truly learned, but they who are
taught of God. John vi. 44, 45. Others are ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy iii. 7. And such men wrest the
scriptures unto their own destruction. 2 Peter iii. 16. So God said of the
church of Israel, Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are
evening wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the morrow. Her prophets are light
and treacherous persons; her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have
done violence to the law. Zeph. iii. 3, 4. And national churches in latter
ages, have done the like through the world. But an inspired apostle says, What
man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even
so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. Now we have
received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we
might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Which things also we
speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches; comparing spiritual things with spiritual. 1 Cor. ii. 11 -- 13. The
words of scripture were given by the Spirit of God, who gives us a most solemn
warning against adding to, or taking therefrom. And I believe that the book of
life, means the holy scriptures. Rev. xxii. 18, 19. For Moses says, Set your
hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day; which ye shall
command your children to observe, to do all the words of this law: for it is
not a vain thing for you, because it is your life. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 46, 47. And
Christ says, The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are
life. -- He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that
judges him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last
day. John vi. 63. xii. 48. So Paul says, God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, according to my gospel -- Circumcision is that of the heart, in
the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. Romans
ii. 16, 29. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.
For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Phil. iii. 2, 3. And there
is not a word in all the Bible, for bringing any one person into the church of
Christ, without a personal confession of faith in him. And this may help us in
answering

A sixth objection against the necessity of an internal call, by the Spirit of
God, to preach his gospel; which is, That many enthusiasts, and deluded persons
have held to such an internal call; but none of the great reformers, nor of the
fathers of this country, ever held to any such thing. Answer, The example of
ancient reformers, and of their good fathers, has been the plea of all men
when it would suit their designs; but when it did not please them, they were
ready to exclaim against old traditions, and to follow their own inventions.
Though, if the reformers in Germany, and the fathers of New England, had not
been moved by the Spirit of God, independent of all the powers of Europe, they
could never have accomplished the great work of reformation in either country.
Neither did the reformers in Germany, nor our fathers in this land, hold to an
external succession of ministerial power from the church of Rome. But the
church of England held theirs from thence; and they have now carried deceit and
cruelty as far as any power upon earth, as America and the East Indies have
fully experienced. And the fathers of Plymouth colony, the first in
New England, held to an internal call to preach the gospel, and rejected
external force to support religious ministers, until the year 1658. And the
next year two men were hanged at Boston, whose blood has caused loud
exclamations against our country ever since. Though it is a most wicked thing
for any to censure our whole country, for the evils which were produced by a
practice which our first fathers abhorred. A practice which came from Rome,
through England to America. And it is impossible for any men to use force with
others about the worship of God, without injuring all those who dissent from
them. And though, while God was the only lawgiver for the church of Israel, he
required that all adulterers, idolaters, and blasphemers, should die without
mercy; yet he never allowed them to use force in collecting provision for his
house, or support for his ministers. Each man was to bring in the tithes and
offerings that he required, as he would desire the blessing of God, and to
escape his awful curse. This is fully evident in the twenty-sixth, and
twenty-seventh chapters of Deuteronomy. And when they generally neglected his
ordinances, after their return from captivity, God said, Ye are cursed with a
curse; for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation. Bring ye all the tithes
into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. Mal. iii. 7 -- 10. At the same time he cursed the blessings of the
priests, for being partial in the law. Mal. ii. 1 -- 9. And partiality and
hypocrisy, are the unavoidable consequence of supporting any religious teachers
by force. Therefore it is said, I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for a
burnt offering. Isaiah lxi. 1 -- 8. Which words our Lord Christ applies to the
gospel day. Luke iv. 18 -- 21. And men who are fond of judging others, while
they do not obey the law of equity themselves, he calls hypocrites, dogs,
swine, and wolves. Mat. vii. 1 -- 6, 12, 15. But the ruling party in every
country, have never been willing to think that they were such. To know both
good and evil, was the dignity and liberty which the serpent promised to our
first mother; and all her children are deceived with such flatteries to this
day. False ideas of good, carry men away from the fountain of all good; but all
who follow such lying vanities, forsake their own mercies. For Christ is
exalted to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Acts v. 31. For
by grace are ye saved, through faith; and that not of yourselves; it is the
gift of God. Ephesians. ii. 8. For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will
give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly. Psalm. lxxxiv. 11. He never promised his blessings to any, but in
the way of truth and uprightness; and all who walk in that way, receive
righteousness and strength from Christ, as a free gift of grace, and not for
any good in them, or done by them. For God says, There is none that does good,
no not one. And he says this of all the world. Romans iii. 12, 19. Yea, of the
whole world. 1 John v. 19. Rev. xii. 9. And this may lead us to take notice of
some capital MARKS, whereby the ministers of Christ may be known from all
deceivers.

1. True ministers of Christ, preach the word of God in simplicity and godly
sincerity. Hence one of them said, We are not as many, who corrupt the word of
God; but as of sincerity, as of God, in the fight of God speak we in Christ. --
We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth,
commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. -- I have
espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ. But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve, through his
subtilty, so your mind should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ. 2 Cor. i. 12. ii. 17. iv. 1, 2. xi. 2, 3. Another says, My little
children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in
truth. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts
before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knows all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we
keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And
this is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment. And he that keeps
his commandments dwells in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. -- Ye are of God, little
children, and have overcome them; because greater is he that is in you, than he
that is in the world. They are of the world; therefore speak they of the world,
and the world hears them. 1 John iii. 18 -- 24. iv. 1 -- 5. This is the exact
difference between the ministers of Christ, and the ministers of Antichrist.
But by confounding church and world together, which is Babylon, men have filled
the world with hypocrisy and tyranny, under religious pretenses. So an ancient
prophet says, They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine
heritage. They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. Yet
they say, The Lord shall not see; neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. --
Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief
by a law? Psalm xciv. 5 -- 7, 20. And from such thrones, and such laws, have
come all the force that was ever used to support religious teachers; and in
Babylon will be found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that
were slain upon the earth. Rev. xviii. 24. But God has promised to destroy the
face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all
nations; and he says, In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah,
We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and for bulwarks.
Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps the truth may enter
in. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because
he trusts in thee. Trust ye in the Lord forever; for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength. For he brings down them that dwell on high, the lofty
city he lays it low; he lays it low, even to the ground; he brings it
even to the dust. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and
the steps of the needy. Isaiah xxv. 6, 7. xxvi. 1 -- 6.

How exactly does this prophecy describe the difference between the church of
Christ, and all national churches in the world? For none have a right in the
church of Christ, but righteous persons, who keep the truth. They receive the
perfect righteousness of Christ as a free gift, and so are made righteous by
the obedience of One; as we were all made sinners by the disobedience of one:
only we were made sinners by the law, but are made righteous by grace,
abundance of grace. Romans v. 12 -- 19. For the wages of sin is death; but the
gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans vi. 23. For
the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. And he
said, To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth, hears my
voice. John i. 17. xviii. 37. And says God to his children, I have not written
unto you because ye know not the truth; but because ye know it, and that no lie
is of the truth. 1 John ii. 21. The devil is the father of lies, and he seduced
Eve into the opinion that the penalty of the law of God was not truth. But by
suffering that penalty, Christ bear witness unto the truth, and bruised the
head of the serpent. This he did, that God might be just, and the justifier of
him which believes in Jesus. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what
law? of works? Nay; but by the law of faith. Romans iii. 24 -- 27. The difference
between debt, and a gift, is as plain as any idea in the world. Justice
requires the payment of debts; but gifts are bestowed on whom the giver
pleases. And salvation is appointed for walls and for bulwarks around the
righteous nation, who keep the truth. And God says, With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. Romans x. 10. This is the only way into his church, which God has
appointed. But many put moral sincerity, in the room of godly sincerity, in
building churches; and hereby cruel persecutors are introduced. For our Lord
says, The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think he does God
service. John xvi. 2. And Paul says, I verily thought with myself, that I ought
to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Acts xxvi. 9. But
I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief. 1 Timothy i. 13. All
men who sin presumptuously, or wilfully against the Spirit of grace, never had
any atonement proclaimed for them. 2 Peter ii. 10. Heb. x. 26 -- 29. Numb. xv.
30. Therefore the apostle John says, If any man see a brother sin a sin which
is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin
not unto death. There is a sin unto death; I do not say, that ye shall pray for
it. All unrighteousness is sin; and there is a sin not unto death. We know that
whosoever is born of God sins not; but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not. 1 John v. 16 -- 18. How
dangerous then is it, for any to receive any into the church without evidence
of their being born of God? For they who have only a form of godliness, while
they resist the truth, are reprobate concerning the faith. 2 Timothy iii. 5 -- 8.
If Jesus Christ is not in them, they are reprobates. 2 Cor. xiii. 2 -- 6. They
profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Titus i. 16. The word
signifies adulterate or counterfeit. Jer. vi. 30. Yet many now insist upon it,
that we cannot believe that God elected a certain number of men, to holiness
and eternal happiness, without reprobating all the rest. But who ever thought
that a government could not make good money, without making counterfeit also!
or who will say, that grace, shown by government, is inconsistent with
vengeance on rebels! Such men deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, who destroys impenitent unbelievers. They defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Jude 4 -- 8.

2. True ministers are examples to the flock. Nothing is more pernicious to the
souls of men, than the sight of evils in teachers which they condemn in the
people. Therefore the first of the apostles says to all believers, So is the
will of God, that with welldoing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men: as free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God. -- For hereunto were ye called; because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: who
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself
to him that judges righteously: who his own self bare our sins in his own body
on the tree, that we, being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness: by
whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now
returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. -- The elders which are
among you I exhort, who am also an elder -- feed the flock of God which is
among you -- being ensamples to the flock. 1 Peter ii. 15 -- 25. v. 1 -- 3.
Another says, Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my
faith by my works. James ii. 18. A third says, Brethren, be followers together
of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an ensample. (For many
walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they
are enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is
their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things). For
our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even
to subdue all things unto himself. Phil. iii. 17 -- 21. Now we command you,
brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves
from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which
he received of us. For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us; for we
behaved not ourselves disorderly among you, neither did we eat any man's bread
for naught. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6 -- 9. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature; old things are past away, behold all things are become new. And all
things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has
given to us the ministry of reconciliation. 2 Cor. v. 17, 18. All disorderly
persons, who eat the bread of others for naught, are to be excluded from
special communion in the church of Christ. And no officers nor members be
admitted but new creatures. But who can tell how many teachers there have been,
who have called believers disorderly, for refusing to yield to their iniquity
in eating other men's bread for naught! But God says, Woe unto them that call
evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness;
that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Isaiah v. 20. The world is
full of such wickedness.

3. Our Lord is ever with his faithful ministers. Lo, I am with you always, is
his promise to all his faithful servants, even unto the end of the world. And
he only can direct and support them, in the midst of outward and inward
enemies, and make them faithful unto death. Therefore Paul said to Timothy, God
has not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound
mind. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his
prisoner; but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel, according to
the power of God; who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was
given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began; but is now made manifest by
the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has
brought life and immortality to light through the gospel. 2 Timothy i. 7 -- 10.
The devil said to our first mother, Ye shall not surely die. And ever since she
hearkened to him, he has held her children in bondage through fear of death;
from which the death of Christ is our only way of deliverance. Heb. ii. 13 --
18. And God laid this plan of salvation in his Son, before the world began; and
no teachers are to be followed, but they who hold that Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, and today, and forever. Heb. xiii. 7, 8. He is unchangeable in the
designs of his grace, and in his power to carry the same into execution. And
Paul said, I will come to you, if the Lord will, and will know, not the speech
of them which are puffed up, but the power; for the kingdom of God is not in
word, but in power. I Cor. iv. 19, 20. And we are required to turn away from
all who deny the power of godliness. 2 Timothy iii. 5. And how full is the world
of such! Even of men who deny the power of God in changing the heart, and in
carrying his children, in the way of holiness unto eternal happiness. The
number of the beast is the number of a man; and his number is six hundred sixty
and six. Rev. xiii. 18. God gave Israel rest, in the seventh day, the seventh
month, and seventh year. And Jesus says, Come unto me, all ye that labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Mat. xi. 28. And our apostle says,
We which have believed do enter into rest. Heb. iv. 28. But God says, The
wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt. Isaiah lvii. 20. Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own
shame. Jude 13. They have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his
image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name. Rev. xiv. 11. The
inventions of men about the worship of God give no rest, in hundreds, in tens,
or in units. And this is as true in all who neglect his worship, and pursue the
world for safety and happiness, as in any false worship. Therefore our apostle
says, Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man
shall do unto me. Heb. xiii. 5, 6. And if he is with every true believer, he
surely is with every faithful minister. And the more faithful any soul is, the
more they will know of this truth.

Yet two objections have been raised against this mark. One is, that the
servants of God, in all ages, have often lamented their case, as unsuccessful
in their work, through the hardness and blindness of their hearers. Answer,
This is the unavoidable consequence of faithfulness in the cause of God, until
his church shall be wholly governed by his laws, independent of the world. For
the light of revelation enlarges the capacities of men, beyond any other means
in the world; and where men in power have not had the truth of God rooted in
their hearts, they have joined with false teachers, in blinding the minds of
the people against it, in order to grasp all the honors and profits of the
whole community to themselves. So in Israel God said, The prophets prophesy
falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have
it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof. Jer. v. 31. Woe unto you lawyers;
for ye have taken away the key of knowledge; ye entered not in yourselves, and
them that were entering, ye hindered. Luke xi. 52. And no such men are suitable
judges, about the ministers of Christ, but are persecuters of them. And
carelessness, hardness, and piercing cruelty, like the highway, stoney, or
thorny ground, is the character that our Lord gives of most hearers of his
word; while understanding, honesty, and patience, in bringing forth good fruit,
is the character of all who receive the seed into good ground. Mat. xiii. 14 --
23. Luke viii. 11 -- 15. And a faithful minister said, We are unto God a sweet
savor of Christ; in them that are saved, and in them that perish. To the one
we are the savor of death unto death; and to the other the savor of life unto
life: and who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. ii. 15, 16. A question
which none can clearly answer, without faith in Christ, who says, My grace is
sufficient for thee. 2 Cor. xii. 9. God suffered the magicians of Egypt to
deceive Pharaoh, so that he hardened his heart, against the command of God by
Moses, to let Israel go and serve him. And he says of false teachers under the
gospel, As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall
proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs
also was. 2 Timothy iii. 8, 9. And is not this word now fulfilled? For the wisdom
of the prudent is to understand his way; but the folly of fools is deceit.
Prove. xiv. 8. And how is deceit now exposed in Europe and America! Fear moved
the Egyptians to send Israel away with rich treasures, in the very night that
God told Abraham of four hundred and thirty years before. Exodus xii. 29 -- 41.
Psalm cv. 37, 38. And if fear can do such great things, what will it do when
united with the love of Christ in the heart? For this union forms the new
creature. 2 Cor. v. 11 -- 17. Therefore all men who profess the Christian
religion, without loving Christ above all creatures, are deceived. The other
objection against the doctrine of knowing the ministers of Christ by his
presence and blessing with them, is the great and boasted success of many
deceivers. But how little do such objectors regard the words of our Lord? for
he says, Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? Mat. vii. 15 -- 23. A good man, out of the good treasure of
his heart, brings forth that which is good; and an evil man, out of the evil
treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is evil; for of the abundance
of the heart, his mouth speaks. Luke vi. 45. When a baptized person offered
money for power to convey the Holy Ghost to others, by the laying on of his
hands, Peter said, Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter; for thy heart
is not right in the sight of God. Acts. viii. 21. His words discovered that he
was a hypocrite, and no such have any right in the church of Christ. But most
teachers now in the world, despise the idea of enquiring after an inward change
of heart, in order for the admission of any into the church, or into the
ministry. External baptisms, and laying on of hands, without faith in Christ,
who has opened a fountain to wash our souls from sin, and bears away all our
guilt, has filled the church with briars and thorns. Heb. vi. 1 -- 8. For the
sons of Belial sent their servants to the people, saying, Thou shall give it me
now; and if not, I will take it by force. 1 Samuel ii. 12, 16. And the sons of
Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken
with hands. 2 Samuel xxiii. 6. And what concord has Christ with Belial? -- Come
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord. 2 Cor. vi. 15 -- 17.
Unbelievers said, We be not able. But believers, leaving self out of the
question, said, Their defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us:
fear them not. Number. xiii. 30 -- 33. xiv. 6 -- 9. And in reference to them, God
calls us to hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto
the end; and not to harden our hearts, as those unbelievers did. Heb. iii. 5 --
11. For they who worship the beast, tread the holy city under foot, and say,
Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? Rev. xi. 2. xiii.
4. Men who judge for reward, teach for hire, and divine for money, act upon
negatives, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. Micah
iii. 11. But God says, Who has required this at your hand to tread my courts?
-- Your hands are full of blood. Isaiah i. 12, 15. And how much blood has
lately been shed in our land?

The church of Christ is a holy city, which is the light of the world. Mat. v.
14 -- 16. But she has been clothed with sackcloth or mourning, ever since the
beast arose out of the bottomless pit. She is one city, as all the saints make
but one church. But while on earth they are many cities, or churches. A city is
a corporation, invested with power to govern all within its limits, and to
expel all from it, who refuse to submit to their government. And such is the
power which Christ gives to every one of his churches, as we have before
proved. And he says, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord
has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind
up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of
the prison to them that are bound: to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,
and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn. -- And they
shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, they
shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations. The men who
shall do this great work are the poor in spirit, the mourners, the meek, they
who hunger and thirst after righteousness, are merciful, pure in heart,
peacemakers, and persecuted for righteousness sake. Mat. v. 3 -- 14. These are
the only judges in the church of Christ, which will be light indeed. For
judgment will then take place, and robbery be excluded from the church of
Christ, in the support of his ministers. This is the gospel which he proclaimed
to sinful men, with vengeance upon all who rejected his proclamation. Isaiah
lxi. 1 -- 8. Luke iv. 18 -- 21. Offer of the gospel, instead of the word
proclaim or preach, has deceived multitudes with a conceit, that it contained
privileges which they might now receive, or not, as they may any thing which
men offer to them. Whereas the gospel is a proclamation of grace, which cost
Christ his precious blood; and he says, Behold, now is the accepted time;
behold, now is the day of salvation. 2 Cor. v. 21. vi. 1, 2. Therefore we ought
to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any
time we should let them slip. For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast,
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward,
how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began
to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God
also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders and diverse miracles, and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will? Heb. ii. 1 -- 4. The
passover was to be kept without leaven; and God said, The man that is clean,
and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover, even that same
soul shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the offering of
the Lord in his appointed season: that soul shall bear his sin. Exodus xii. 15.
Number. ix. 13. Hypocrisy, malice and wickedness, is the leaven which God commands
us to purge out, as we would desire to enjoy his presence, and to escape his
judgments, even sickness and death. Luke xii. 1. 1 Cor. v. 7, 8. xi. 30 -- 32.
For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of
God? and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear? 1 Peter iv. 17, 18.

These are questions which ought to alarm every soul. For all the troubles of
the righteous, which they meet with in this world, are because of their own
sins, or the iniquity of others; and if they are saved with so much difficulty,
where will those appear who indulge known sin, and neglect known duty, to avoid
present trouble? They might as rationally yield to enemies to escape danger, or
drink poison to preserve health. For deceit is the poison of asps. Romans iii.
13. And faith in the blood of Christ, is the only remedy against all such
poison. His blood will purge the conscience from dead works, to serve the
living God. If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth
is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 John i. 8, 9. And how far
is each one from honesty, who will not confess his sins to God? And how great
is the privilege for it under the gospel? Under the law, none might be priests
but the lawful seed of Aaron; but under the gospel, every penitent believer is
made a king and a priest unto God. Rev. i. 5, 6. And it is a most pernicious
delusion, for any man to think he can be a priest unto God, without faith in
the blood of Christ, and a life of devotedness to his service. But all who are
thus devoted to him, are both kings and priests; and the government of the
church of Christ belongs to them, independent of all the world besides.
Therefore no man can be safely received as a religious teacher, who is not a
member of some particular church, who can censure and exclude him, if he breaks
any of the laws of Christ. For Christ plainly commended the church of Ephesus
for so doing; and Paul appealed to the church of Corinth, against deceitful
teachers. 2 Cor. xi. 13. xiii. 1 -- 3. And who will dare to claim a power above
Christ and his apostles! For if the church had not been asleep, iniquity could
not have prevailed as it has done. But our apostle says, It is high time to
awake out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. The
night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly as in the
day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans xiii. 11 -- 14. If he were
truly obeyed, glory would soon dwell in our land.

FINIS.

