MR. ALLEN's DEDICATION SERMON.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN CHESTERFIELD, DECEMBER 8, 1791. AT THE DEDICATION OF
THE NEW MEETING HOUSE. BY TIMOTHY ALLEN, A. M. AND PASTOR of the CHURCH THERE.
AND (PUBLISHED) BY DESIRE OF THOSE WHO HEARD IT.

NORTHAMPTON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM BUTLER. -- 1792.

PREFACE.
THOUGH the Author has been often induced to exhibit his Productions to the
public view, he considered the infirmities of the Seventy-seventh year of his
age, a sufficient bar to any attempt of that kind in future; but after the
People of this Town, in a manner very unusual in such case, appeared quite
unanimous in taking down the old meeting house, fixing the spot for the new
one, and finishing it in an elegant manner: The Undertakers, Committees, and
Artificers, desired him to deliver a Discourse at the Dedication of it. And
then were urgent for a Copy of the Sermon for Publication. And considering the
several singularities of divine Providence in the whole affair, such as the
unanimity of the Town, in an affair, usually attended with division: the
notable patronage of divine Providence through the perilous operations, in
preserving every Person from harm; and the urgency of the gentlemen
abovementioned, he submitted, relying on public candor, and the allsufficient
favor and blessing of God, to serve some divine purpose, by these feeble
efforts. -- AMEN.

A Dedication Sermon, etc.
ACTS, vii. 33. Put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place where thou
stand is holy ground.


THE divine nature is the original, and only perfect sample of all holiness.
Every thing therefore named holy, under God, gets that style, from some
likeness or relation to God. It may now be asked; but what likeness or
relation, can be between a piece of ground, or any other material substance,
and a Spirit; immortal Being; the eternal mind? I answer, just the same, as
gave reason to the well known expressions, in the old state of the church; viz:
Holy Garments, holy oil, holy mountain, and as in our text, holy ground. Now
there can be no degree of likeness in nature, between any of these material
substances, and the holy God. But a relative connection with him, there
certainly was, for he ordered them to be made, appointed their use, and they
were according actually used, and in the greatest affair that ever took place
in any world, viz: Serving eternal councels in the salvation of men.
Consequently, in mere relative holiness, no virtue or property is communicated,
to give reason for the predicate, holy, to be fixed to any material substance.
There can be no holiness in it. What therefore God has styled holy, is to be
held such for that reason, without thinking of any thing in its nature
answering to that predicate.

There are two means by which this relative holiness takes place. 1st. When God
expressly prescribes it, as Exodus xxix. 33. " A stranger shall not eat things
consecrated because they are holy." So 37th verse, " The Altar is most holy,
and whatsoever touches it shall be holy." Also the anointing oil; and all the
utensils of the Temple, worship, and sacrifices, were made holy by the same
mean.

2nd. Another mean of this relative holiness, was possession, and use by God
himself, or his special order, so the censers which the two hundred and fifty
men in Korah's rebellion, had used by special order, were put into golden
plates to cover the altar, and never more to be used as censers, because they
were holy, Number. xvi. 38. So Exodus 111 5. When God possessed and used the burning
bush, and Moses was approaching to see the sight, God forbid him, because the
place was holy; i. e. was already possessed and used by God himself. So when
Jesus Christ appeared to Joshua before Jerico; he had Joshua put off his shoe,
for the place was holy, being already possessed and occupied by divine majesty.
Josh. v. 15. But that cause being removed, that effect must cease.

It may be asked, how was putting off the shoe an acknowledgement of holy
ground? This must be answered both literally and mistically.

1st. Literally. Being barefooted was badge of a servant; a token of being
always ready to run and serve. Therefore the evidence of Abigail's consent to
be David's wife was, 1. Sam. xxv. 41. That she would be devoted to wash the
feet of David's servants: which being bare as servants, were exposed to need
washing. And to be without shoes, was a type of readiness to serve God; which
was espcially necessary, when the divine majesty was visibly present. But when
this visible presence was withdrawn, there was no more reason for this
practical respect, than in all times and places.

And so putting off the shoe in the visible presence of God, was in practical
reverence of his holy majesty. A sign of submission to him; and of readiness to
do all his pleasure. It was also a token of humiliation and mourning for sin.
For this reason David went up mount Olivet barefooted, in flying from his son
Absalom. 2. Sam. xv. 30. And to show that the temper of mind pictured hereby,
becomes us, in the divine presence, as well as in all humbling circumstances,
this speaking signal was enjoined.

2. That we may understand the mistick design of this type, we must know

1. That the feet are a type of affections: For as the body moves by the feet,
so does the mind by the affections. This therefore gives light in Eccles. v. 1.
" Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God." For if not you offer
there, the sacrifice of Fools; i. e. a sacrifice, which has not your affection,
love and delight in it, because these were placed on other objects, when you
came there.

2. As our feet are placed on that which supports our bodies, so our hearts
rest and stand, on that which is the object of the affections. And as the shoe
is between the foot and its foundation, so it obstructs and hinders the foot
from coming to that foundation. Just so every wrong object of affection
interposes and hinders the mind from coming to God, trusting in Christ, and his
word, as it ought; and as it must, in order to stand firm by faith. Therefore
all such wrong objects of affection, or mental attachment, whether among
outward things, or inward dispositions, as intercept and hinder the concurrence
and compliance of the heart with holy matters, are called shoes, and are
forbidden. God commands us to put them off. And unless we do so, the heart can
never approach to God, or comfortably enjoy him. So that instead of this
command's being a senseless and unmeaning thing, it is the summary of all
practical holy religion; and quite essential to the life of holiness, and all
true christian experience.

But it may be said, as ancient types looked to Christ and his kingdom which is
come and established, and so tipical holiness antiquated; why do we retain the
style of holy hill, in several instances. As in case of the Sabbath, Bible,
Ordinances, etc. The first of these only, shall be attended to.

The holiness, or morality of the Sabbath, and our bonds to its religious
observance may be supported in the following manner, viz.

1. If the only being of perfect reason, and righteousness, had perfect reason
for following his own judgment in every point; and has made us know that he did
so, in instituting the Sabbath; then there was perfect reason for the
institution; and then we are under just such bonds to observe it. Nothing but
Atheism can evade this argument. For we are told Exodus xx. 9. "Six days shall
thou labor," etc. Giving us divine liberty for our own employments, on all
these days, that he might with more perfect reason, reserve the following
monument for himself, viz. " But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God." He did not say it shall be the Sabbath hereafter; but it is now, already
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. But if this declaration was quite right, then
the Sabbath had its foundation in the nature and reason of things; for by this
declaration it had perfect existence, before God spoke a word about it. And so
it follows. 11th vr. "wherefore" or for which reason, "God blessed," the
sabatism, for so it is is in the original, i. e. confirmed it, and connected
blessings with it, for all its faithful observers. Those blessings were not
connected with the seventh day, (though God rested or sabbatized on that day) but
with the sabbatism itself. For God never designed that day of the week should
always be the time for sabbatizing; For he knew that Jesus Christ would come,
and would be Lord of the sabbatism, and would dispose of it as he pleased, and
he did so.

2. As the only perfect being is our safe pattern, and perfect example, so we
are bound to obey that divine commandment, Ephesians. v. 1. " Be followers of God, as
dear children." The inspired word is Mimetai, which signifies to imitate, or
mimick; but we cant do so in this case, without keeping holy the Sabbath day,
for he did so. He rested on the Sabbath, blessed and hollowed it. And it is
impossible to support the character, or enjoy the peace, of dear children of
God, without imitating him, in this important case.

3. I would now give you a third reason for sanctifying the Sabbath, which
avails much more for the christian Sabbath, than for that of the Jews. But a
few sentiments are necessary to introduce it. As

1. Sabbath was always designed to memorialize and commemorate, the greatest
work which God had been know to accomplish, as Exodus xx. 10.11. Where God's
making the world, is the reason for sabbatizing.

2. Jesus Christ was the creator of the world. Jon. i. 1. In the beginning was
the word, and the word was God, all things were created by him. And Heb. i. 2.
" He made the worlds;" Yea " all things visible and invissible." Col. i. 16.

3. As creation was then the greatest work, God had been known to do, so the
first, or Jewish Sabbath was in memory of that, as the greatest work of God.

4. But redemption, wrought by the same divine agent, was infinitely greater
work than creation, creation was the stage on which redemption was to be
wrought; it was made for that very purpose. No opposition was made to creation;
but redemption was opposed by earth and hell, and yet was accomplished. No
death was necessary in creation; but the most terrible death that ever was, was
necessary to accomplish redemption. Creation was made for bodies, and natural
life; but redemption for souls, and eternal life. So it appears that redemption
was an infinitely greater, and more important work than creation. Therefore,

5. The Lord Jesus Christ, the divine agent of both, knowing when redemption
was finished in his resurrection, the reason of the first Sabbath ceased;
because now an infinitely greater divine work was to be memorialized by
sabbatizing, continued his redeeming work, through the seventh day, Sabbath,
and rested from his work, and so sabbatized on the first day of the week, Mat.
xxviii 1.6. 1. Cor. xv. 4. Heb. iv. 9.10.

And so the doctrine is established, that there is infinitely greater reason
for the christian Sabbath, than ever was for that of the Jews. And this is so
far from fixing changeableness on the institutor; that it gives evidence of his
unchangeableness. He always designed the Sabbath to be a memorial of the
greatest work of God; and now as a greater work of God has taken place, than
that of creation, he fixed the memorial of it accordingly. For,

1. He ceased, or rested from his work, i. e. sabbatized on the first day of
the week, himself: thereby setting the same example for his followers, as he
did in the beginning on the seventh day.

2. He practically taught his disciples to tread in his steps. Jon. xx. 19. For
when the disciples were assembled, on the first day of the week; he joined
them, and instead of reproving them, encouraged them, in the highest manner, by
pronouncing a Sabbath's blessing on them, in these most encouraging and
comfortable words; " Peace be unto you." Implying all blessings, and especially
spiritual ones, (for peace is such) are for you, on this day, as Sabbath; and
in this practice of sanctifying it. And because it was a point of great
importance, Luke also attests it. Luke xxiv. 33.36. And again the next Sabbath,
or first day of the week, Jesus to confirm them in this practice, met with them
again and blessed them. See Jon. xx. 26, And the inspired apostle confirms it,
by directing the Corinthean Church to be prepared for public contributions on
the first day of the week, as the stated time of their public assemblies. 1.
Cor. xvi. 2. And to encourage them in it, tells them, he had ordered the
Churches of Galatia to do the same on that day. And for this reason the first
day of the week was styled emphatically the day when disciples come together to
break bread. Act. xx. 7. And there is not one word in the Bible about
christians observing any but the first day of the week, as Sabbath, ever since.
And doubtless this was meant when Christ is called Lord of the Sabbath day.
Mark, ii. 28. And so it appears that the Sabbath is connected with the first
day of the week, by special institution, consisting in the express word, and
actual example of Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all.

Therefore though the sabbatism was moveable from one day to another, it is in
itself unchangeable, and of course, the style holy, belongs to it just as it
did originally. Exodus xvi. 23. Neh. ix. 14.

As to other subjects of the predicate holy, such Bible, Ordinances, and
worship, since I am bereaved of the use of my hand in writing, and considering
the great mercy of God to us in general, in giving us light and understanding
enough to acknowledge their holiness, I shall only add; that no portion of mere
matter can have holiness in its nature. The Bible, Elements, in the Lord's
Supper, etc. are holy by special divine order, and by their divine import. God
had also once a house of worship, styled holy, and Jesus Christ gives us the
reason, because it was a type and picture of his body, Jon. ii. 19.21. It was
also a type and picture of his Church, the collective body of his holy ones.
For of them he says, 11. Cor. vi. 16. " Ye are the temple of the living God."
And 1. Tim. iii. 15. he says, " The church of God, is the house of the living
God."

That house therefore was holy by special divine order, and by its tipical
import. But there has been no house in the world, entitled to the style of
holy, since Jesus Christ ascended to Heaven. And of course, it is owing to
ignorance, bigotry, and superstition, that a house for christian worship, is
ever styled holy, house of God, holy place; and such like. A house for
christian worship, and all religious worship in any place, is to be attended in
a a very holy manner. The object, and the business, are holy. The heart of the
subject ought to be holy; answerable to the employment.

I now proceed to make some remarks on the premises. And

1. We have seen that there can be no holiness in mere matter. Objection, Our
bodies are mere matter; and yet the apostle implies, that our bodies must be
made holy. 1 Thessalonians. v. 23.

Answer. Our bodies are holy, when they are devoted to divine service, and in
practice are conformed to the laws of holiness in the Bible, and to a principle
of holiness in the heart. But this implies no holy property in the matter of
our bodies. If mere matter cannot love God, which is the principle of holiness;
it is impossible it should have holiness in its nature.

We have seen also that the Sabbath is fixed to the first day of the weak, by
Jesus Christ the Lord: and we all know, that a primary object in building, and
furnishing this house, is to serve the appointed uses of that holy Sabbath. And
that for those purposes specially, it is solemnly dedicated this day. If we
believe these things, and have any religious, or only rational notions of them;
we shall never enter this house, for any of those most sacred purposes, with
malignity indulged in our hearts; or with the air, or spirit of levity. This is
not a vulgar house; nor made and furnished for vulgar uses. The design of it is
to be a convenient place for the service of God. Let every person who enters it
professedly for that purpose, remember God is present in the congration of his
people; and that his eye is on their heart; and he will make them eat the fruit
of their own ways; and fill them with their own devices. He will be sanctified
in them that come near him. Lev. x. 3.

2. Then our first business in all approaches to God, is to put off every
mystic shoe. It Is most dangerous to rush into the worship and service of God,
with heart and affections muffled, distempered, and embarrassed, with mystic
shoes. Remember this is the first thing he sees about us when we approach his
presence; for he looks at the heart. Jer. xx. 12. And is much displeased with
the heart that inwardly departs from the living God. It Is mockery to draw near
to God, with a false treacherous heart. We should always remember when we enter
this house, for the service of God, it must be with hearts and affections quite
barefooted. Otherwise we are in danger of his wrath every moment. The sight of
this place of worship, should bring the thoughts to view.

3. Diverse circumstances require such solemn regard, in all our improvements of
this house. As

1. There have been special Tokens of divine patronage toward this town,
respecting their place of public worship, for several years past. Men are apt
to be jealous for supposed rights, and contentious, if they are invaded. Yet a
majority of this town, who were not accommodated in the place of worship, it
being a mile from a proper center; endured that excess of travel for ten years,
in peaceable compliance with the minority. And if but one hundred persons did
so; then in going and returning, they endured two hundred miles travail every
Sabbath day. And as there are fifty two Sabbaths in a year this excess of
travail on Sabbaths only, is ten thousand and four hundred miles. And if other
occasions of meeting there, were as many more as the Sabbaths, the travail
would be more than twenty thousand miles, which is nearly equal to the diameter
of the terraqueous Globe. Yet all this was endured with more submission than is
common in like cases. Which is to the honor of those who endured it. And since
we are bound in all things to acknowledge divine Providence, Prove. iii. 6. And
since if persons enduring all this, had been as querulous as common in such
cases, the town had been convulsed; and our happy enjoyment of this house had
never existed. These considerations bind us always to enter this house with
grateful veneration for its bounteous author.

2. The goodness of God was so conspicuous, in preserving every one of the
multitude employed in taking down the old House, and erecting it here from any
disaster, that it demands a dutiful acknowledgment from every person acquainted
with these facts, whenever they enter this house, especially to worship the
preserver of men.

3. As convenient accommodation for the worship of God, is the honor and
happiness of any people; so the unusual elegance of this house, for the purpose
of its present dedication, calls aloud on its proprietors, to honor its great
object, whenever they approach his presence, to worship in it.

3. The third remark on the premises is, that we should pay such regard to the
word of God and his worship, as never to admit any thing unscriptural, or
antichristian. The Bible styled a house for worship and sacrifice, among the
Jews, The house of God, Sanctuary. etc. Reasons for which have been given. But
it allows no house for christian worship to be so styled. And since the
antitype of all those types is come, to uphold the types, is practically to
say, that Jesus Christ is not come, and that he who bore that style was an
impostor. And so to deny christianity, speak falsehood, and support the Jews.
It Is unscriptural. The Papists have holy Ground, Houses, and Places: but God
bids us " come out from among them, and not touch the unclean thing." 2. Cor.
vi. 17. and doubtless all who mean to purify themselves as he is pure, will
purify from these corruptions; because they are antichristian.

4. We have seen the absurdity of types, after their design is answered. The
name of Christ was to be above every name. Phil. ii. 9. His name alone to be
exalted in all the earth. Pas. lxvii. 10. We have seen also, there is more
reason; infinitely more reason for the christian Sabbath, than ever was for
that of the Jews. And we have had reason for a most sacred improvement of that
day; and some of them are increased by the privilege of this house. To which
others shall now be added.

1. This house is not made for vanity; but for the service of God. And is this
a triffling matter? Is there a person among us, who don't know this demands
attention, solemn attention! What shall be thought then of the person, old or
young, who shall attend worship in this house in a light, airy manner; comes
gazing, smiling, gabling, into a place dedicated to the service of God? such
indecency is infinitely more aggravated, than to rush into the presence of
worldly majesty with a whistle, which would ensure the censure of gross
illbreeding, idiotism or insanity.

2. The dedication of this house to holy uses, binds us to use it in a holy
manner. No guile, envy, hypocricy, or other evil habits, should be admitted
here. These are shoes forbidden to be worn. Indeed, it is impossible for a soul
to draw near to God, with these embarrassments. When we enter this house
therefore, remember the command, " put off thy shoes, and " be shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace."

3. We should take argument, compulsive argument, from divine Bounty, in the
comfort, convenience, and privilege of this house, for holy services and
enjoyments, to become a people to the honor of a bountiful benefactor; and make
it appear that this grace is not ill bestowed.

I shall conclude with some gratitudinary notes.

1. We are in debt to divine Majesty, for this elegant accommodation for his
worship. God said of the first house for holy services, " the silver is mine,
the gold also is mine." Hag. ii. 8. He has indulged us the materials of this
house; shall we pervert them? Shall we suffer the profanation of such favor?
Far be it! But let us at every sight of this bounty; " give unto the Lord, the
glory due to his great name." And dedicate, heartily dedicate, this monument of
his goodness to his service. And allow it to stand a witness of our duty; and
solemn test of our allegiance.

2. The People at large are to be acknowledged, for their concurrence in the
important work; as also for their steady approbation, and promotion of it from
the first. May divine blessings here renumerate to them, all their care, and
all their cost.

3. The undertakers, inspectors, and all subservient committees, are to be
thankfully acknowledged; the undertakers especially; that when divine
providence had opened a prospect of something of the kind; they indulged so
liberal a projection, as this which has taken place. And both they, and the
Inspectors, are entitled to public thanks, for that good judgment, patriotism,
firmness, and perseverance, with which the whole has been prosecuted, to the
present perfection.

4. But our gratitude, is eminently due, under God, the patron of all ingenious
artificers; to that curious artist, who with his associates, undertook that
arduous work, and whose diligence, constant attention, and high mechanism, have
accomplished this brilliant accommodation for divine service. We ought to
desire that their souls might be beautified with the Grace of God, and that
they might be edified to his Palace above the skies.

And now after honoring the presence of numerous friends on this agreeable
occasion; we again call on our souls, and all that is within us to bless and
praise the name of the Lord, for all his benefits; and for this display of his
favor, to his unworthy people. And dedicate this house, as a memorial, and
monument thereof; and as a test of our allegiance to his holy Majesty. -- AMEN.


