COPY OF A LETTER FROM BENJAMIN BANNEKER, TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE, WITH HIS
ANSWER.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY DANIEL LAWRENCE, No. 33. NORTH
FOURTH-STREET, NEAR RACE. M.DCC.XCII.

COPY OF A LETTER FROM BENJAMIN BANNEKER, etc.
Maryland, Baltimore County, August 19, 1791. SIR,
I AM fully sensible of the greatness of that freedom, which I take with you on
the present occasion; a liberty which seemed to me scarcely allowable, when I
reflected on that distinguished and dignified station in which you stand, and
the almost general prejudice and prepossession, which is so prevalent in the
world against those of my complexion.

I suppose it is a truth too well attested to you, to need a proof here, that
we are a race of beings, who have long labored under the abuse and censure of
the world; that we have long been looked upon with an eye of contempt; and that
we have long been considered rather as brutish than human, and scarcely capable
of mental endowments.

Sir, I hope I may safely admit, in consequence of that report which has
reached me, that you are a man far less inflexible in sentiments of this
nature, than many others; that you are measurably friendly, and well disposed
toward us; and that you are willing and ready to lend your aid and assistance
to our relief, from those many distresses, and numerous calamities, to which we
are reduced.

Now Sir, if this is founded in truth, I apprehend you will embrace every
opportunity, to eradicate that train of absurd and false ideas and opinions,
which so generally prevails with respect to us; and that your sentiments are
concurrent with mine, which are, that one universal Father has given being to
us all; and that he has not only made us all of one flesh, but that he has
also, without partiality, afforded us all the same sensations and endowed us
all with the same faculties; and that however variable we may be in society or
religion, however diversified in situation or color, we are all of the same
family, and stand in the same relation to him.

Sir, if these are sentiments of which you are fully persuaded, I hope you
cannot but acknowledge, that it is the indispensible duty of those, who
maintain for themselves the rights of human nature, and who possess the
obligations of Christianity, to extend their power and influence to the relief
of every part of the human race, from whatever burden or oppression they may
unjustly labor under; and this, I apprehend, a full conviction of the truth and
obligation of these principles should lead all to.

Sir, I have long been convinced, that if your love for yourselves, and for
those inestimable laws, which preserved to you the rights of human nature, was
founded on sincerity, you could not but be solicitous, that every individual,
of whatever rank or distinction, might with you equally enjoy the blessings
thereof; neither could you rest satisfied short of the most active effusion of
your exertions, in order to their promotion from any state of degradation, to
which the unjustifiable cruelty and barbarism of men may have reduced them.

Sir, I freely and cheerfully acknowledge, that I am of the African race, and
in that color which is natural to them of the deepest dye; and it is under a
sense of the most profound gratitude to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, that
I now confess to you, that I am not under that state of tyrannical thraldom,
and inhuman captivity, to which too many of my brethren are doomed, but that I
have abundantly tasted of the fruition of those blessings, which proceed from
that free and unequalled liberty with which you are favored; and which, I hope,
you will willingly allow you have mercifully received, from the immediate hand
of that Being, from whom proceeds every good and perfect Gift.

Sir, suffer me to recall to your mind that time, in which the arms and tyranny
of the British crown were exerted, with every powerful effort, in order to
reduce you to a state of servitude: look back, I entreat you, on the variety of
dangers to which you were exposed; reflect on that time, in which every human
aid appeared unavailable, and in which even hope and fortitude wore the aspect
of inability to the conflict, and you cannot but be led to a serious and
grateful sense of your miraculous and providential preservation; you cannot but
acknowledge, that the present freedom and tranquillity which you enjoy you have
mercifully received, and that it is the peculiar blessing of Heaven.

This, Sir, was a time when you cleary saw into the injustice of a state of
slavery, and in which you had just apprehensions of the horrors of its
condition. It was now that your abhorrence thereof was so excited, that you
publicly held forth this true and invaluable doctrine, which is worthy to be
recorded and remembered in all succeeding ages: "We hold these truths to be
self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable rights, and that among these are, life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."

Here was a time, in which your tender feelings for yourselves had engaged you
thus to declare, you were then impressed with proper ideas of the great
violation of liberty, and the free possession of those blessings, to which you
were entitled by nature; but, Sir, how pitiable is it to reflect, that although
you were so fully convinced of the benevolence of the Father of Mankind, and of
his equal and impartial distribution of these rights and privileges, which he
has conferred upon them, that you should at the same time counteract his
mercies, in detaining by fraud and violence so numerous a part of my brethren,
under groaning captivity and cruel oppression, that you should at the same time
be found guilty of that most criminal act, which you professedly detested in
others, with respect to yourselves.

I suppose that your knowledge of the situation of my brethren, is too
extensive to need a recital here; neither shall I presume to prescribe methods
by which they may be relieved, otherwise than by recommending to you and all
others, to wean yourselves from those narrow prejudices which you have imbibed
with respect to them, and as Job proposed to his friends, "put your soul in
their souls' stead;" thus shall your hearts be enlarged with kindness and
benevolence toward them; and thus shall you need neither the direction of
myself or others, in what manner to proceed herein.

And now, Sir, although my sympathy and affection for my brethren has caused
my enlargement thus far, I ardently hope, that your candor and generosity will
plead with you in my behalf, when I make known to you, that it was not
originally my design; but having taken up my pen in order to direct to you, as
a present, a copy of an Almanac, which I have calculated for the succeeding
year, I was unexpectedly and unavoidably led thereto.

This calculation is the production of my arduous study, in this my advanced
stage of life; for having long had unbounded desires to become acquainted with
the secrets of nature, I have had to gratify my curiosity herein, through my
own assiduous application to Astronomical Study, in which I need not recount to
you the many difficulties and disadvantages, which I have had to encounter.

And although I had almost declined to make my calculation for the ensuing
year, in consequence of that time which I had allotted therefore, being taken up
at the Federal Territory, by the request of Mr. Andrew Ellicott, yet finding
myself under several engagements to Printers of this state, to whom I had
communicated my design, on my return to my place of residence, I industriously
applied myself thereto, which I hope I have accomplished with correctness and
accuracy; a copy of which I have taken the liberty to direct to you, and which
I humbly request you will favorably receive; and although you may have the
opportunity of perusing it after its publication, yet I choose to send it to
you in manuscript previous thereto, that thereby you might not only have an
earlier inspection, but that you might also view it in my own hand writing.

And now, Sir, I shall conclude, and subscribe myself, with the most profound
respect,

Your most obedient humble servant, BENJAMIN BANNEKER.

To Mr. BENJAMIN BANNEKER.
Philadelphia, August 30, 1791. SIR,
I THANK you, sincerely, for your letter of the 19th instant, and for the
Almanac it contained. No body wishes more than I do, to see such proofs as you
exhibit, that nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to those of
the other colors of men; and that the appearance of the want of them, is owing
merely to the degraded condition of their existence, both in Africa and
America. I can add with truth, that no body wishes more ardently to see a good
system commenced, for raising the condition, both of their body and mind, to
what it ought to be, as far as the imbecility of their present existence, and
other circumstances, which cannot be neglected, will admit.

I have taken the liberty of sending your Almanac to Monsieur de Condozett,
Secretary of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, and Member of the Philanthropic
Society, because I considered it as a document, to which your whole color had a
right for their justification, against the doubts which have been entertained
of them.

I am with great esteem, Sir, Your most obedient Humble Servant, THOMAS
JEFFERSON.


