THE KINGDOM OF GOD, DESCRIBED BY HIS WORD.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD, DESCRIBED BY HIS WORD, WITH ITS Infinite Benefits to Human
Society.

By ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN MIDDLEBOROUGH.

The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice.

Psalm xcvii. 1. BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY SAMUEL HALL. MDCCXCII.

The KINGDOM of GOD, DESCRIBED BY HIS WORD.
LUKE XVII. 21. BEHOLD, THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU.


THE eternal Jehovah rules in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or may say unto him, What do thou?
But his government of his church, has ever been distinct from his general
government of the world. And from his calling Israel out of Egypt, unto the
building of his temple by Solomon, their nation was a growing church, distinct
from all other nations upon earth. But because Solomon set up high places for
idolatry, God rent away ten tribes from his son; and both kingdoms were
followed with warnings and corrections, until they were all destroyed or
carried into captivity. And the kingdom of Israel never returned from captivity
as a nation, but only as individuals; and the kingdom of Judah was always
tributary to heathen nations, until Christ came, exactly according to the
voices of the prophets concerning him. Yet when he came, the teachers and
rulers of the Jews were all against him; and after he had cleansed ten lepers,
and one of them had glorified God therefore, the Pharisees demanded of him, when
the kingdom of God should come? He answered them and said, The kingdom of God
comes not with observation. Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there; for
behold, the kingdom of God is within you.

The Son of God was born within that church, of the seed of David, in the town
of Bethlehem, according to the prophecy which says, This man shall be the
peace. Micah v. 1 -- 5. And when he entered upon his public ministry, and
appeared in Galilee, the people who sat in darkness, saw great light. Isaiah
ix. 1 -- 6. Mat. iv. 14 -- 16. Yet many in our day have imagined, that our text
proves, that there is a light within every man, superior to the holy
scriptures. In the year 1773, a paper was printed at Providence, and also at
Norwich, which represented the doctrine of God's electing a certain number of
the children of men to holiness and eternal happiness, while the rest are left
to perish in their sins, to be as cruel as the heathen, "who sacrificed their
sons and daughters unto devils." And the paper closed with saying, "Reader,
from this, and many other hurtful errors, you would soon be disentangled, could
you only shake off the chains of tradition. The universal cry of, Lo here, or
lo there, in this or that outward communion, would never engage you in any
fierce contentions, but rather pass away unnoticed by you. And the only
possible way, (believe it, or not) to avoid every prevailing error, and of
finding every saving truth, is to listen, solemnly, attentively to listen,
agreeable to the written word, to the still small voice within you."

This paper was published, and was spread through New England, by ministers who
were sent from Great Britain, to propagate Episcopacy in our land. And after
their nation had murdered many thousands, in attempting to bind us in all cases
whatsoever, the voice within them, constrained them to make peace with America,
to avoid ruin to themselves. Yet in the close of the war, a book from England
was reprinted at Philadelphia, which says, "If God disposes the state of
events in such a manner, that sin will most certainly follow, and that he also
permits, or does not hinder it, he must be the sole Author of sin himself, and
those who are called the actors, or committers of evil, are only subjects by
whom he effects it:" Phipps against Newton, 1783, p. 95.
And the author, who gives this assertion, refers us to Barclay, who said, "The
kingdom of God comes not with observation, neither shall they say, Lo here, or
lo there, for behold the kingdom of God is within you." Page 205.
And says his defender, "The Quakers neither read the scriptures, nor any thing
else, during the time of their worship, as a part of it; but after that is
over, they usually once in the year, take the opportunity, before the
congregation separate, to read those short informations and advices which are
transmitted from the yearly meeting in London. These advices always consist of
scripture-quotations, and doctrines agreeable to scripture, according to the
best of their knowledge; but the reading of them is no more a part of their
worship, than the reading testimonies of denial against immoral members, or the
substance of briefs recommended by the Crown, at such opportunities." P. 153.


Thus Episcopalians and Quakers were agreed, in sitting up a rule within
themselves above the word of God. Yea, many of them will not allow the holy
scriptures to be the word of God. But Jesus said, I am come a light into the
world, that whosoever believes on me, should not abide in darkness. And if any
man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not; for I came not to judge
the world, but to save the world. He that rejects me, and receives not my
words, has one that judges him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him in the last day. John xii. 46 -- 48. His words and his word are the
same, even the will of God revealed by his Spirit. And an inspired apostle
says, "We are not as many, who corrupt the word of God; but as of sincerity,
but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. -- We have renounced the
hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in crastiness, nor handling the word
of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending ourselves to
every man's conscience in the sight of God. 2 Cor. ii. 17. iv. 2. The body of
Jesus saw no corruption, even when it lay in the tomb; therefore the holy
scriptures are the only word of God that men can corrupt; and they do it, by
handling the word deceitfully. And were it not for this wickedness, the kingdom
of God would be easily understood, and rejoiced in, under every view of it in
his word.

In the first place, it means the proclamation of the gospel to a sinful world.
Therefore the Messenger who came to prepare the way of the Son of God, said to
the Jews, Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mat. iii. 2. And
after Jesus was baptized, and had endured the temptations of the devil, he came
into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying, The time
is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: Repent ye and believe the
gospel. And after his death and resurrection, he appeared unto the eleven, and
said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
creature. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned. Mark i. 14, 15. xvi. 15, 16. This commission
was given to the eleven, who were all born again. In the covenant of
circumcision, the regenerate and unregenerate were bound together in a national
church. Therefore when Christ sent out the twelve, he said, Go not into the way
of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not. But go
rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and as ye go, preach, saying,
The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Judas the traitor was included in this
commission. Mat. x. 1. -- 7. But after Christ by his death had disannulled the
covenant of circumcision, he gave the pure gospel commission to none but
regenerate persons.

The second sense in which the kingdom of God is taken in his word, is the
change of heart which is produced thereby. When the Son of God, the great light
of the world, came to his own people, they received him not. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believed on his name; who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And Jesus said, Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
John i. 12, 13. iii. 3. But men have been so far from believing him, that they
have generally held to the bringing of persons into the kingdom of God by
blood, by their own wills, or by the wills of other men; and from thence have
come all national churches. But God says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God. -- Him that is weak in the says receive you, but not to
doubtful disputations. -- For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans x. 17. xiv. 1, 17.
But men have commonly received persons into the church, without any evidence of
their being in the says; and they have pursued all with doubtful disputations,
who have refused to obey man in the things of God. He requires each one to act
saithfully and kindly in every station of life, as they can answer it to their
great Judge. And he says, If any man each otherwise, and consent not to wholesome
words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness; he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions and strises of words, whereof comes envy, strise, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thyself. Yet,
because godliness and bonesty, are connected with prayer for civil rulers, many
have imagined that they ought to support religious teachers by force. Whereas
this practice came from seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils. But
godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy ii. 2. iv. 1 -- 8. vi. 1 -- 5. And, to
guard against anxiety about food and raiment, our Lord says, Seek first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you. Mat. vi. 33. How much then are all men deceived, who use secular force to
support religious teachers? In them the prophecy is fulfilled, which says, All
ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all the beasts of the forest. His
watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot
bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs, which
can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all
look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter. Isaiah lvi. 9
-- 12. What a hand have such teachers had in all the wars among the nations?

The third sense of the kingdom of God, is his government of his visible
church. Our Lord said, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of
this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence. Pilate therefore said unto him, Art
thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou say that I am a king. To this end was
I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness
unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth, hears my voice. John xviii.
36, 37. Fighting with the sword, is necessary in the government of this world;
and subjection thereto ought to be a matter of conscience with every soul. Romans
xiii. 1 -- 5. But the government of the church should be as distinct from all
worldly states, as the power of truth on the mind, is from the sword on the
body. For Jesus said to the eleven, All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth: Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all
things, whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always even unto
the end of the world. Amen. Mat. xxviii. 16 -- 20. It was before observed, that
this commission was given to the eleven, without any traitor among them. But
God says, In the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers
of their ownselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. 2 Timothy iii. 1
-- 5. Language cannot describe our times more exactly, than was thus done by
inspiration above seventeen hundred years ago. And a great means of these
evils, has been the use of the sword in religious affairs, contrary to the
command of Christ, who says,

Fourthly, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man who sowed good seed in
his field; but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat,
and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit,
then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came and said
unto him, Sir, did thou not sow good seed in thy field? from whence then has
it tares? He said unto them, An enemy has done this. The servants said unto
him, Will thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay; lest while
ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both grow
together until the harvest; and in the time of harvest I will say to the
reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn
them; but gather the wheat into my barn. -- He that sows the good seed is the
Son of man: the field is the world: the good seed are the children of the
kingdom: but the tares are the children of the wicked one: the enemy that sowed
them, is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are
the angels. Mat. xiii. 24 -- 30, 37 -- 39. Accordingly he said unto hypocrites
in the Jewish church, Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of
his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. John viii. 44. And it is
impossible for the servants of Christ to root up all hypocrites out of the
world, without destroying the saints with them. Yea, and the use of the sword
in religious affairs; arms the enemies of God against his children, as the
experience of all ages has demonstrated. But,

Fifthly, the kingdom of God, means his coming in the last day, to judge the
world in righteousness; when the wicked shall go away into everlasting
punishment, and the righteous be received into life eternal. Therefore Jesus
says unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life, shall
lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it. For what
is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or
what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man shall come
in the glory of his Father, with his angels; and then shall he reward every man
according to his works. Mat. xvi. 24 -- 27. Verily verily I say unto you, the
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God; and they that hear shall live. For as the Father has life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have life in himself; and has given him authority
to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this; for
the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. John v.
25 -- 29.

And these five senses are perfectly harmonious. For the proclamation of the
gospel, believed with the heart, and obeyed in the church, without injuring any
man in the world, as each one can answer it to God in the last day, is a
glorious kingdom which cannot be moved. And if the church of Christ was
governed wholly by his laws, enforced in his name, she would be an infinite
blessing to human society. For justice, mercy, and faithfulness, are the
effence of all the revealed will of God. And he said of Abraham, I know him,
that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Genesis xviii. 19. Justice and
judgment, is the only way to enjoy the promised mercy of God to sinful men.
Only a remnant of the children of Israel, were saved by the Son of God, whose
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. And when they enquired
about the way of acceptance with him, he said, He has showed thee, O man, what
is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Micah v. 1 -- 5. vi. 8. And when one
said to Jesus, Good master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal
life? Jesus said, Why call thou me good? there is none good but one, that is
God. And when he parted with Jesus, rather than to part with his riches, in
acts of mercy, Jesus said, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. When the
disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be
saved? But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is impossible,
but with God all things are possible. Mat. xix. 16 -- 26.

It is impossible with men, to convince any soul that Jesus is truly God, and
that all good, for time and eternity, is only to be enjoyed by says in his
perfect righteousness, and obedience to his holy word. But the Spirit of God
convinced three thousand souls hereof in one day; and to them it was said, The
promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord our God shall call. -- Then they that gladly received his
word, were baptized. Acts ii. 37 -- 41. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us -- that the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of
the Spirit through faith. And they who think to receive it in any other way,
are bewitched. Gal. iii. 1 -- 14. For by thy sorceries were all nations
deceived. Rev. xviii. 23. If men were not deceived, they would never claim the
promises of God, in a way of disobedience to his precepts. And as the church is
presented as a chaste virgin to Christ, it is impossible for any men to have a
commanding power therein. But all deceitful teachers, are ministers of the
devil. And Paul appealed to the church of Corinth against such, and said, In
the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. 2 Cor. xi.
2 -- 15. xiii. 1. Exactly according to the law of Christ, who says to his
church, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Mat. xviii. 15
-- 18.

But this government of his holy city, has been trodden under foot, ever since
the beast arose out of the bottomless pit, who received his power from the
devil. Rev. xi. 2 -- 10. xiii. 1 -- 8. Force and cruelty, is the way of the
beasts, from whom our spiritual David will deliver his flock. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 4 --
25. Protestants have exercised all the power of the first beast at Rome, and
have carried blood and slavery around the world, in galleys and gallant ships.
But the church of Christ will yet be a quiet habitation; For the Lord is our
judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king, he will save us. And he
says to Babylon, Thy merchants with whom thou have labored from thy youth,
shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee. Isaiah xxxiii. 20
-- 22. xlvii. 10 -- 15. Rev. xviii. 23. The reason why piety, religion, and
morality, are essentially necessary for the good order of human society, is
because they are as much above the commanding power of man, as the showers and
shines of heaven are. Therefore Moses says, My doctrine shall drop as the rain,
my speech shall distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and
as the showers upon the grass. Because I will publish the name of the Lord:
ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his work is perfect; for all
his ways are judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is
he. -- But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked -- then he forsook God which made
him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation. -- To me belongs
vengeance and recompense; their foot shall slide in due time. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 2 --
4, 15, 35. From whence an inspired apostle says, Dearly beloved, avenge not
yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is
mine; I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on
his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Romans xii. 19 --
21. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is
faithful that promised) and let us consider one another, to provoke unto love,
and to good works; not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the
manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see
the day approaching. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses law died without mercy, under
two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted
the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and
has done despite unto the Spirit of grace? For we know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord. Heb. x. 23 --
30.

The body of the Son of God never was trodden under foot; but his holy laws
have been, and his blood has been counted an unholy thing, and great despite
has been done to the Spirit of grace. The devils believe that there is one
God; and they tremble before the Son of God. And all men who profess faith in
Christ, and do not obey his laws, have only a dead faith. For as the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. James ii. 19
-- 26. From whence I conclude, that the killing of God's two witnesses, is
triumphing over the revealed will of God, which used to torment the consciences
of men. Rev. xi. 9, 10. But God says, Behold, the day comes that shall burn as
an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and
the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall
leave them neither root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name, shall the
SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and
grow up as calves of the stall. And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they
shall be ashes under the soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this,
says the Lord of hosts. Mal. iv. 1 -- 3. And an inspired apostle says, We,
according to his promise, look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. 2 Peter iii. 13. All which proves that piety, religion,
and morality, are as much above the commanding power of men, as the showers of
heaven are, or the sun in the firmament.

Faith in Jesus Christ, and obedience to the revealed will of God, INDEPENDENT
of the world, is the only way to escape everlasting burnings. For he says, He
that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain of
oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil; he shall
dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munition of rocks, bread shall
be given him, his waters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the King in his
beauty; they shall behold the land that is very far off. Isaiah xxxiii. 13 --
17. But the general cry of the world is, Cast in thy lot among us, let us all
have one purse. -- Their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood. Surely
in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird. And they lay wait for their
own blood, they lurk privily for their own lives. So are the ways of every one
that is greedy of gain; which takes away the life of the owners thereof. Prove.
i. 14 -- 19. Which passage is expressly applied to all the world. Romans iii. 15
-- 19. And what a net did Great Britain lay for their own feet, when they were
lately so greedy of gain! Yea, how many lives did their bribery take away! For
their national debt bribed all parts of the kingdom, to pursue their was
against America to the last extremity. And the same merchandise is now carried
on in our land; for our public securities are daily bought and sold
deceitfully, so that truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.
But the eternal Father says to his Son, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my
words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the
Lord, from henceforth and forever. Isaiah lix. 14, 20, 21. And this is the only
way for any to be ingrafted into the church of Christ, which is life from the
dead. Romans xi. 15 -- 27. For he says, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the
flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and
they are life. John vi. 63. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity
of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to
save your souls. James i. 21. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but
incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides forever. -- Ye are a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that
ye should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness
into his mavelous light. 1 Peter i. 23. ii. 9.

These are the only priesthood, and holy nation, that God has under heaven.
And to them he says, Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's
sake. 1 Peter ii. 13. While he also says to them, Beware left any man spoil you
through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. -- After the commandments and
doctrines of men, which things have indeed a show of wisdom in willworship and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the
flesh. Col. viii. 22, 23. Yet after the apostolic age, philosophy and vain
deceit, spoiled the church in such a manner, as to call her officers the
priesthood, in distinction from the brethren; and they pretended to make
children holy, without their own knowledge or choice. And this willworship has
been handed down by tradition through the church of Rome, who is the mother of
harlots, and full of robbery and murder. The national church of Israel robbed
God, when they neglected to communicate the tithes and offerings which he
required of them. Mal. iii. 8. But when she said, I will go after my lovers,
that gave me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink,
she played the harlot. And God said of her officers, As troops of robbers wait
for a man, so the company of priests murder in the way by consent; for they
commit lewdness. Hosea ii. 5. vi. 9. The heads thereof judge for reward, and
the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money;
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil
can come upon us. Micah iii. 11. Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth; for
the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me. -- When ye come to appear before me, who has required
this at your hand to tread my courts? -- Your hands are full of blood. Isaiah
i. 2, 12, 15. And he says to the Christian church, The prophecy came not in old
time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swist destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through covetousness, shall
they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long
time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. 2 Peter i. 21. ii. 1 --
3.

Rebellion, in the old testament, and heresy, under the gospel, evidently mean
the same thing. Therefore when Christ had disannulled the covenant of
circumcision, and had established the new covenant with his church, the Jews
called it sedition, a sect, and heresy. Acts xxiv. 5, 14. And divisions,
seditions, and heresies, are works of the flesh. But the fruit of the Spirit is
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. 1 Cor. xi. 18, 19. Gal. v.
20 -- 24. And God says, A man that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject; knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sins,
being condemned of himself. Titus iii. 10, 11. Therefore all things whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law
and the prophets. And men who assume the place of judges of others, while they
disregard this rule of equity themselves, are hypocrites, dogs, swine, and
wolves. Mat. vii. 5 6, 12, 15. They despise government, and are self-willed,
under the name of liberty. The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the
sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. 2 Peter ii. 10, 19, 22.

Known laws, well executed, within certain limits, is the essence of all
government among mankind. And the laws of Christ, executed by his church, where
all are to act as little children, is his plan of government therein. And he
says, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein. -- The Gentiles exercise lordship over them -- but so
shall it not be among you. Mark x. 15, 42, 43. The Gentiles shall tread the
holy city under foot forty and two months. -- Power shall be given unto the
beast to continue forty and two months. Rev. xi. 2. xiii. 5. But God says to
his children, Ye know that no whore-monger, nor unclean person, nor covetous
man who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of
God. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye therefore
partakers with them. Ephesians. v. 5 -- 7. Come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive
you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. vi. 14 -- 18. He compares deceitful teachers
and professors, to the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, who are suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 31. -- 34. Isaiah i. 9 -- 15. Jer.
xxiii. 14. Ezekiel. xvi. 46 -- 50. Jude 7, 8. And men who sin against the light of
the gospel are worse than Sodom. Mat. x. 15. xi. 24. Luke x. 12. And they who
have a form of godliness, while they resist the truth, are like the magicians
of Egypt. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 8. And the great city, in the street of which the
two witnesses will lie dead, three days and an half, is spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. Rev. xi. 7 -- 10. He was
crucified by hypocrites and infidels; and how do such now hold his church in
bondage? They refuse to allow her to serve God according to his revealed will,
without injuring any man in the world. And a church of Christ, governed wholly
by his laws, is not esteemed a corporation strong enough to secure worldly
property that is consecrated to religious uses. Many BANKS are formed for the
purpose of earthly gain, while few give their services and money into the
Lord's BANK. Yet he says, Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good
pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms: provide
yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not,
where no thief approaches, neither moth corrupts. For where your treasure
is, there will your heart be also. -- Make to yourselves friends of the (...)
of unrighteousness; that when ye (...) they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. -- Wherefore thou gave not thou my money into the BANK, that at
my coming I might have required mine own with usury? Luke. ^ii. 32 -- 34. xvi.
9. xix. 23. (...) them that we rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in (...) this riches, but in the living God, who gives
us richly all things to enjoy: that they do good, that they be rich in good
weeks, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time (...) that they may lay hold
(...) like. 1. Tim. vi. 17 -- 19.

AMEN.
Lately published by the Author, and to be sold at the Shop No. 53. in Cornhill,
AN ANSWER to Mr. Wesley on Election, and (...): -- And a Discourse entitled,
The infinite Importance of the Obedience of Faith, and of a Separation from the
World. -- Also other of his Works.


