A DISCOURSE, INTENDED TO COMMEMORATE THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA BY Christopher
Columbus; DELIVERED AT THE REQUEST OF THE HISTORICAL SOCIETY IN MASSACHUSETTS,
ON THE 23d DAY OF OCTOBER, 1792, BEING THE COMPLETION OF THE THIRD CENTURY
SINCE THAT MEMORABLE EVENT.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, FOUR DISSERTATIONS, Connected with various parts of the
Discourse, viz. 1. On the circumnavigation of Africa by the ancients. 2. An
Examination of the pretensions of MARTIN BEHAIM to a discovery of America prior
to that of COLUMBUS, with a Chronological detail of all the Discoveries made in
the 15th Century. 3. On the question, whether the Honey-bee is a native of
America? 4. On the color of the native Americans and the recent population of
this Continent.


BY JEREMY BELKNAP, D. D.

" -- Venient annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens
Pateat tellus, Tiphysque novos
Detegat orbs; nec sit terris
Ultima Thule."
Seneca's Medea, written in the reign of NERO. PRINTED AT THE Apollo Press, IN
BOSTON, BY BELKNAP AND HALL, STATE STREET, MDCCXCII.

AT a Meeting of the Historical Society of Massachusetts, October 23d, 1792;
Voted, That Dr. Aaron Dexter, Rev. Dr. Peter Thacher, and William Tudor, Esquire.
be a Committee to wait on the Rev. Dr. Jeremy Belknap, and in the name of the
Society, to thank him for the Discourse delivered by him this day, at their
request, upon the subject of the Discovery of America by Columbus.

Attest, G. R. MINOT, Recording Secretary.

District of Massachusetts, to wit:
L.S. BE it remembered, That on the twenty-third day of October, in the
seventeenth year of the Independence of the United States of America, JEREMY
BELKNAP of the said district, has deposited in this office the title of a
book, the right whereof he claims as Author, in the words following, to wit, "A
Discourse intended to commemorate the Discovery of America by Christopher
Columbus; delivered at the request of the Historical Society, in Massachusetts,
on the twenty-third day of October, 1792, being the completion of the third
Century since that memorable event. To which are added four Dissertations
connected with various parts of the Discourse, viz.

"1. On the circumnavigation of Africa by the Ancients. "2. An examination of
the pretensions of Martin Behaim to a discovery of America prior to that of
Columbus, with a Chronological detail of all the Discoveries made in the 15th
Century. "3. On the question, whether the Honey-bee is a native of America? "4.
On the color of the native Americans and the recent population of this
Continent.
"BY JEREMY BELKNAP, D. D."

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States, entitled "An
Act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of Maps, Charts
and Books to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times
therein mentioned."

N. GOODALE, Clerk of the District of Massachusetts.

A true copy of Record, Attest, N. GOODALE.

A DISCOURSE ON THE DICOVERY OF AMERICA.
WE are met together, this day, my respectable auditors, to commemorate an
event; which, whether it be considered in its causes, in its execution, or in
its consequences, must be acknowledged, a splendid instance of the
accomplishment of that remarkable prediction of the prophet, DANIEL, Chap. xii.
ver. 4. "Many shall run to and fro and knowledge shall be increased."



These words in their obvious and literal meaning point out a vast increase of
science, and the subserviency of traveling to this important purpose. The time
to which they refer cannot be precisely defined; but it must be considered as
remote from that in which they were delivered; and, it is evidently connected
with the appearance of that glorious person "Michael the Prince," whose coming
and kingdom, and the salvation of which he is the author are foretold in the
same prophecy.

A thought of this kind would not readily have occurred to the mind of a
captive Jew, had he not been under the influence of the prophetic spirit.
Transported by the fortune of war into the dominions of a foreign Prince, as
was Daniel, his highest expectation would be to return to the land of his
nativity and resume his former employments and mode of acquiring knowledge; the
objects of which were, the antiquities of the world, the doctrine of the divine
unity, the series of prophecy, the ritual worship and the system of moral duty,
which were taught in the sacred books. The hope of such a return, grounded on a
divine promise was one source of consolation to the Jews in their captivity;
but this prophet was favored with such divine communications respecting the
future fortunes of his nation and the state of the Church of God under the
reign of the Messiah, as carried his views into the most distant ages, and
presented scenes and events, of a nature very different from the genius and
character of the times in which he lived. Among these, the increase of science,
as it is connected with traveling, is not the least conspicuous. Though
briefly mentioned, yet it is placed among the most important facts, and is
represented as one of the happy events attending the reign of the Prince
Messiah, of the increase of whose government and peace there shall be no end.

Subsequent ages and transactions have proved that this prediction was founded
in truth. Time has unfolded what was foreseen in prophetic vision; and the hand
of divine Providence has spread before our eyes, those great events, which many
prophets and wise men desired to see, but saw them not.

As "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy," so we may very properly
consider the travels of the Apostles to spread the knowledge of the gospel, as
one capital instance of the fulfillment of Daniel's prediction. By virtue of the
commission which they received from their Lord, and the special powers with
which they were vested, particularly the gift of tongues, those chosen
witnesses carried the knowledge of the truth to all parts of the world, then
known; so that it might be said of them, as of the luminaries of heaven, "their
found went into all the earth and their words to the end of the world; there
was no speech nor language where their voice was not heard." The effects of
that evangelic mission, though in some places transient, yet in others were
abiding. Though a corrupt form of christianity overspread many of the nations
who had heard the glad tidings of salvation; yet so much of the truth remained,
as to be a foundation for reviving the pure doctrines and practices of the
apostolic age, when a concurrence of circumstances presented a favorable
opportunity.

Beside the miraculous spreading of divine truth by the labors and travels of
the Apostles, there was no remarkable event, which might be called another
instance of the accomplishment of the prophecy of Daniel, till several
centuries had elapsed. Other causes then contributed to produce events, which,
either in their nature or consequences, proved beneficial to the interest of
science. Even the superstition which prompted the crusades, in the tenth and
eleventh centuries, opened a communication between the most distant countries
of Europe and Asia; and the adventurers, who returned from the holy land,
brought home a taste for the manners, habits and productions of the east, which
proved favorable to the spirit of commerce; the most powerful of all causes
which have contributed to enlarge the sphere of science; because it is
stimulated by one of the most active principles of the human mind.

But even the operations of commerce were slow and languid, till the discovery
of the magnetic needle, in the beginning of the fourteenth century. Before that
period, the cautious mariner followed the indentings of the shore, and consumed
much time in creeping along from Cape to Cape; seeking a port before every
tempest, and drawing up his bark to land during the reign of winter, or of
adverse winds. But when the polarity of the magnet became known, he ventured
farther into the ocean, and began to assume that dominion over the sea, for
which man had a grant from his Creator, when he was originally formed in the
divine image. Then the deep rooted errors of antiquity were gradually
corrected: The torrid and frigid zones were found to be habitable. The dream of
Scipio proved to be an illusion: Thule was no longer the last of lands, nor the
pillars of Hercules the boundary of the universe.

About the middle of the fifteenth century, when the Portuguese under the
conduct of Prince Henry, and afterward of King John II. were pushing their
discoveries along the western shore of Africa, to find a passage by the south
to India; a genius arose, whose memory has been preserved with veneration in
the pages of history, as the instrument of enlarging the region of science and
commerce, beyond any of his predecessors. CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, a native of the
Republic of Genoa, was born in tbe year 1447, and at the age of fourteen
entered on a seafaring life, as the proper sphere, in which his vigorous mind
was destined to perform exploits which should astonish mankind. Life of
Columbus by his son Ferdinand -- Chap. 4. See Vol. II. of Churchill's
Collection of Voyages.
He was educated in the sciences of Geometry and Astronomy, which form the
basis of navigation; and he was well versed in Cosmography, History and
Philosophy. His active and enterprising genius, though it enabled him to
comprehend the old systems, yet would not suffer him to rest in their
decisions, however sanctified by time or by venerable names; but, determined to
examine them by actual experiment, he first visited the seas within the polar
circle, and afterward those parts of Africa, which the Portuguese had
discovered, as far as the coast of Guinea; and by the time that he had attained
the age of thirty-seven, he had from his own experience received the fullest
conviction, that the opinion of the ancients respecting the torrid and frigid
zones was void of any just foundation.

When an old system is found erroneous in one point, it is natural to suspect
it of farther imperfections; and when one difficulty is overcome, others appear
less formidable. Such was the case with Columbus; and his views were
accelerated by an incident, which threatened to put an end to his life. During
one of his voyages, the ship in which he sailed took fire in an engagement with
a Venetian galley, and the crew were obliged to leap into the sea, to avoid
perishing in the flames. In this extremity, Columbus by the help of a floating
oar swam upwards of two leagues, to the coast of Portugal near Lisbon, and met
with a welcome reception from many of his countrymen who were settled there.

At Lisbon, he married the daughter of Perestrello, an old seaman, who had been
concerned in the discovery of Porto Santo and Madeira; from whose journals and
charts, he received the highest entertainment. Pursuing his inquiries in
Geography, and observing what slow progress the Portuguese made in their
attempts to find a way round Africa to India, "he began to reflect that as the
Portuguese traveled so far southward, it were no less proper to sail
westward," Life, Chap. V.
and that it was reasonable to expect to find the desired land in that
direction.

It must here be remembered, that India was in part known to the ancients, and
that its rich and useful productions had for many centuries been conveyed into
Europe, either by Caravans through the deserts of Syria and Arabia; or by the
way of the Red Sea, through Egypt, into the Mediterranean. Robertson's India.
Bruce's Travels.
This lucrative commerce had been successively engrossed by the Phen^cians, the
Hebrews, the Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Palmyrenes, the Arabians, the
Genoese and the Venetians. The Portuguese were then seeking it by attempting
the circumnavigation of Africa; and their expectation of finding it in that
direction was grounded on ancient historical traditions, that a voyage had been
formerly made by the orders of Necho King of Egypt, from the Red Sea, round the
southern part of Africa to the straights of Hercules; and that the same route
had been traversed by Hanno the Carthaginian, by Eudoxus the Egyptian and
others. The Portuguese had ^^nsumed about half a century in making various
attempts, and had advanced no farther, on the western Coast of Africa, than
just to cross the Equator, when Columbus conceived his great design of finding
India in the west.

The causes which led him to entertain this idea are distinguished by his son,
the writer of his life into these three, Life, Chap. VI.
"natural reason, the authority of writers, and the testimony of sailors."

By the help of "reason," he argued in this manner, That the earth and sea
composed one globe or sphere. This was known by observing the shadow of the
earth in lunar eclipses. Hence he concluded that it might be traveled over
from east to west or from west to east. It had been explored to the the east by
some European travelers as far as Cipango or Japan, and as far westward as the
Azores or Western Islands. The remaining space though now known to be more than
half, he supposed to be but one third part of the circumference of the globe.
If this space, were an open sea, he imagined it might be easily sailed over;
and if there were any land extending eastwardly beyond the known limits of
Asia, he supposed that it must be nearer to Spain by the west than by the east.
For it was then a received opinion that the continent and islands of India
extended over one third part of the circumference of the globe; that another
third part was comprehended between India and the western shore of Spain;
therefore it was concluded, that the eastern part of India must be as near to
Spain as the western part. This opinion though now known to be erroneous, yet
being then admitted as true, made it appear to Columbus very easy and
practicable to discover India in the west. He hoped also that between Spain and
India, in that direction, there might be found some islands; by the help of
which, as resting places in his voyage, he might the better pursue his main
design. The probability of the existence of land in that Ocean, he argued,
partly from the opinion of philosophers, that there was more land than sea on
the surface of the globe; and partly from the necessity of a counterpoise in
the west, for the immense quantity of land which was known to be in the east.

Another source from which he drew his conclusion, was "the authority of
learned men," who had affirmed the possibility of sailing from the western
coast of Spain, to the eastern bounds of India. Some of the ancient Geographers
had admitted this for truth, and one of them Pliny.
had affirmed that forty days were sufficient to perform this navigation. These
authorities fell in with the theory which Columbus had formed; and having as
early as 1474, communicated his ideas in writing to Paul, a learned Physician
of Florence, he received from him letters of that date, confirming his opinion
and encouraging his design; accompanied with a chart, in which Paul had laid
down the city of Quisay (supposed to be the capital of China) but little more
than two thousand leagues westward from Lisbon, which in fact is but half the
distance. Thus by arguing from true principles, and by indulging conjectures
partly well founded and partly erroneous, Columbus was led to the execution of
a plan, bold in its conception, and to his view easily practicable; for great
minds overlook intermediate obstacles, which men of smaller views magnify into
insuperable difficulties.

The third ground on which he formed his idea was "the testimony of mariners;"
a class of men who at that time, and in that imperfect state of science, were
too prone to mix fable with fact; and were often misled by appearances, which
they could not solve. In the sea, between Madeira and the Western Islands,
pieces of carved wood and large joints of cane had been discovered, which were
supposed to be brought by westerly winds. Branches of pine trees, a canoe, and
two human bodies of a complexion different from the Europeans and Africans had
been found, on the shores of these islands. Some navigators had affirmed, that
they had seen islands not more than an hundred leagues westward from the
Azores. There was a tradition, that when Spain was conquered by the Moors in
the eighth century, seven Bishops who were exiled from their country, had built
seven cities and churches, on an island called Antilla; which was supposed to
be not more than two hundred leagues west of the Canaries; and it was said that
a Portuguese ship had once discovered this island, but could never find it
again. These stories, partly true and partly fabulous, had their effect on the
mind of Columbus. He believed that islands were to be found, westward of the
Azores and Canaries, though according to his theory, they were at a greater
distance than any of his contemporaries had imagined. His candor led him to
adopt an opinion from Pliny respecting floating islands, by the help of which
he accounted for the appearances related to him, by his marine brethren. It is
not improbable that the large islands of floating ice, driven from the Polar
Seas to the southward; or the Fog Banks, which form many singular appearances
resembling land and trees, might have been the true foundation of this opinion
and of these reports. The following account of a curious deception, extracted
from the Gentleman's Magazine, may elucidate the above observations.

Gentleman's Magazine, 1752, page 88. -- "March 4, 1748 -- 9, at two in the
afternoon, made land, which bore N. E. seven leagues distance by estimation: at
five tacked, being about three leagues from said island, wind E. S. E. latitude
by observation 49 40; longitude 24 30, from the lizard. This island stretches
N. W. and S. E. about 5 leagues long, and 9 miles wide. On the south side fine
valleys and a great number of birds.

March 5, said island bore N. three leagues. N. W. a reef of rocks three miles.
This day a ship's mast came along side. On the south point of said island is a
small marshy island."

"A copy of my journal on board the snow St. Paul of London, bound from South
Carolina to London.

"William Otton, Commander."

P. S. Captain Otton thought he saw a tent on the island, and would have gone
ashore, but had unfortunately stove his boat some time before.

Gent. Mag. 1751, p. 235. -- "Commodore Rodney is commissioned to go in quest
of an island, which, according to the report of a master of a ship, and some
others, on examination before the Lords of the Admiralty, lies about 50 N. and
about 300 leagues west of England. Capt. Murdock Mackenzie, an excellent
mathematician, and author of the sea charts of the Orkney and Lewis islands,
attends him in the Culloden sloop, to bring back an account of what discoveries
he may make. As this island lies out of the track of the trade to America, it
is supposed to have been missed by navigators to our colonies, though marked in
some Dutch maps. If the Commodore discovers it, he is to take possession of it
by the name of Rodney's island."

Gent. Mag. 1752, p. 189. -- "Friday, April 10, 1752, Commodore Rodney arrived
at Woolwich: he had been cruising ten days in quest of an island, and the men
at the top-mast-head were more than once deceived with what the sailors call
fog-banks. About the 6th or 7th day the crew observed branches of trees with
their leaves on, and flights of gulls, and pieces of shipwreck, which are
generally regarded as certain signs of an adjacent shore, but could not
discover any."

N. B. The island marked in the Dutch maps, lies in latitude 57, and longitude
13 W. It has been seen by American ships in their passage from Russia, and is
now marked in the English charts; it could not have been mistaken for this
imaginary island, being but a single rock.




It is not pretended that Columbus was the only person of his age who had
acquired these ideas of the form, dimensions and balancing of the globe; but he
was one of the few who had begun to think for themselves, and he had a genius
of that kind, which makes use of speculation and reasoning only as excitements
to action. He was not a closet projector, but an enterprising adventurer; and
having established his theory on principles, he was determined to exert himself
to the utmost, to demonstrate its truth by experiment. But deeming the
enterprise too great to be undertaken by any but a sovereign state, he first
applied (as it is said) to the Republic of Genoa, by whom his project was
treated as visionary. This is said on the authority of Herrera the Spanish
historian; Ferdinando Columbus, in the life of his father, says nothing of it;
but represents his application to the King of Portugal as the first, and gives
this reason for it, "because he lived under him."
He then proposed his plan to John II. King of Portugal, who, though a Prince
of good understanding and of an enterprising disposition, yet was so deeply
engaged in prosecuting discoveries on the African coast, with a view to find a
way to India round that continent; and had been at so vast an expense without
any considerable success, that he had no inclination to accept the terms which
Columbus proposed. Influenced however by the advice of Calzadilla, a favorite
courtier, he privately gave orders to a ship, bound to the islands of Cape de
Verd, to attempt a discovery in the west, but through ignorance and want of
enterprise, the navigators, after wandering for some time in the ocean and
making no discovery, reached their destined port and turned the project of
Columbus into ridicule.

Disgusted with this base artifice he quitted Portugal, and went to Ferdinand,
King of Spain, having previously sent his brother to England to solicit the
patronage of Henry VII. But being taken by pirates, and detained several years
in captivity, Bartholomew had it not in his power to reveal his project to
Henry, till Christopher Columbus had succeeded in Spain. Before this could be
accomplished, he had various obstacles to surmount; and it was not till after
seven years of painful solicitation that he obtained his request.

The objections made to the proposal of Columbus, by the most learned men in
Spain, to whom the consideration of it was referred, will give us some idea of
the state of geographical science at that time. One objection was, How should
he know more than all the wise men and skilful sailors who had existed since
the creation? Another was the authority of Seneca who had doubted whether it
were possible to navigate the ocean at any great distance from the shore; but
admitting that it were navigable, they imagined, that three years would be
required to perform the voyage, which Columbus proposed. A third was, that if a
ship should sail westward on a round globe, she would necessarily go down, on
the opposite side, and then it would be impossible to return, because it would
be like climbing up a hill, which no ship could do with the strongest wind. A
fourth objection was grounded on a book of St. Augustine, in which he had
expressed his doubt of the existence of antipodes and the possibility of going
from one hemisphere to the other. As the writings of this Holy Father had
received the sanction of the Church, to contradict him was deemed heresy. Life
of Columbus, Chap. XII.


For such reasons, and by such reasoners the proposal of Columbus was at first
rejected; but by the influence of father Perez, a Spanish Priest, and Lewis
Santangel, an officer of the King's household, Queen Isabella was persuaded to
listen to his solicitation, and after he had been twice repulsed, to recall him
to Court; when she offered to pawn her jewels to defray the expense of the
equipment, amounting to no more than 2500 crowns; which sum was advanced by
Santangel, and the Queen's jewels were saved. Thus, to the generous decision of
a female mind, we owe the discovery of America.

The necessary preparations being made, and a year's provision laid in, on the
3d of August, 1492, Columbus sailed from Palos, a port of Spain, on the
Mediterranean, with three vessels, one of which was called a Carrack, and the
other two, Caravels; having on board, the whole, ninety men. Having passed
through the straights of Gibraltar, he arrived at the Canaries, on the 12th of
the same month; where he was detained in refitting one of the Caravels, and
taking in wood and water, till the 6th of September, when he sailed westward on
his voyage of discovery.

This voyage, which now is considered as an easy and pleasant run, between the
latitudes of 20 and 30 degrees, with a trade wind, was then the boldest attempt
which had ever been made, and filled the minds of the best seamen with
apprehension. They were going directly from home, and from all hope of relief,
if any accident should befall them. No friendly port nor human being was known
to be in that direction. Every bird which flew in the air, every fish which
appeared in the sea, and every weed which floated on its surface, was regarded
with the most minute attention, See the journal of the voyage in the Life of
Columbus, Chap. XVIII -- XXI.
as if the fate of the voyage depended on it. A phenomenon which had never
before been observed struck them with terror. The magnetic needle appeared to
vary from the pole: They began to apprehend that their compass would prove an
unfaithful guide; and the trade wind, which wasted them along with its friendly
wings, they feared would obstruct their return.

To be twenty days at sea, without sight of land was what the boldest mariner
had never before attempted. At the expiration of that time the impatient
sailors began to talk of throwing their commander into the ocean and returning
home. Their murmurs reached his ears; but his active mind was never at a loss
for expedients, even in the greatest extremity. By soothing, flattery and
artifice, by inventing reasons for every uncommon appearance, by promising
rewards to the obedient, and a gratuity to him who should first discover land,
in addition to what the King had ordered, and by deceiving them in the ship's
reckoning, he kept them on their course for sixteen days longer. In the night
of the 11th of October, he himself saw a light, which seemed to be on shore,
and in the morning of the 12th, they had the joyful sight of land, which proved
to be the island of Guanahana, one of the cluster called Bahamas, in the 25th
degree of north latitude.

Thus in the space of thirty-six days, and in the 45th year of his age,
Columbus completed a voyage which he had spent twenty years in projecting and
executing; a voyage which opened to the Europeans a new world; which gave a new
turn to their thoughts, to their spirit of enterprise and of commerce; which
enlarged the empire of Spain, and stamped with immortality the name of Columbus.

After spending several months in sailing from one island to another in that
vast archipelago, which, from the mistakes of the age, received the name of the
West Indies, Columbus returned to Spain with the two smaller vessels, the
larger having been wrecked on the island of Hispaniola. During his passage he
met with a violent tempest which threatened him with destruction. In this
extremity he gave an admirable proof of his calmness and foresight. He wrote on
parchment an account of his discoveries, wrapped it in a piece of oiled cloth,
and enclosed it in a cake of wax, which he put into a tight cask and threw into
the sea. Another parchment, secured in the same manner he placed on the stern,
that if the ship should sink, the cask might float, and possibly one or the
other might be driven on shore, or taken up at sea by some future navigator.
But this precaution proved fruitless. He arrived safe in Spain in March, 1493,
and was received with the honors due to his merit.

After this, he made three other voyages to America, in one of which he
discovered the continent; and in a succeeding voyage he endeavored to find a
passage through it to India, but in vain; that desirable country he never saw.

To particularize all the succeeding events in the life of that great man, is
not the design of this discourse; let it suffice to observe, that his latter
days were embittered by the envy of his rivals, the death of his patroness and
the jealousy of his sovereign. Though he merited the honor of giving his own
name to the continent which he discovered, yet it was called after an inferior,
but more fortunate adventurer. This fortunate adventurer was Amerigo Vespucci
or Americus Vesputius, a Florentine merchant and mathematician, who sailed as a
private adventurer with Ojeda, in 1499, and discovered the continent in the
latitude of 5 N. which Columbus, in the preceding year had discovered in the
latitude of 9 N. In 1501, Amerigo made another voyage to the West Indies; and
after the death of Columbus, was employed by Ferdinand, King of Spain, to
delineate the new discoveries on charts. From these charts, and a book which he
published, describing the new world, th^^ ^ontinent unjustly obtained the name
of AMERICA.
Nor have endeavors been wanting both formerly and lately to rob him of the
merit of originating this capital discovery. But in the pages of impartial
history, he will always be celebrated as a man of genius and science; as a
prudent, skilful, intrepid navigator; as having first reasoned out the
probability, and then demonstrated the certainty of the existence of this
continent.

It is remarkable, that a fate similar to that of Columbus, has befallen
others of the first adventurers to America. The great RALEIGH was sacrificed to
the jealousy of Spain by the pusillanimity of his sovereign. SMITH, GORGES,
MASON and POPHAM, consumed their time and fortunes in prosecuting discoveries,
and laying a foundation for the prosperity of their successors. Yet the names
of these men have not been given to any considerable part of this territory,
the object of their painful and expensive undertakings. History however will
preserve the memory of their exertions, though forgotten by those STATES which
are indebted to them for their existence.

Having thus traced the steps by which the discovery of America was made to the
Europeans; let us take a view of its connection with the advancement of science.

The first branch of science which presents itself in this inquiry is
Geography; the knowledge of which has been most essentially improved by means
of this discovery. It is to us very astonishing, that the ancient philosophers
persisted so tenaciously in their opinion respecting the five zones; and
especially that they deemed the equatorial regions uninhabitable, when they had
the means of better information. For, voyages were frequently made from the red
sea to the coast of India, within ten or twelve degrees of the equator. The
Carthaginians planted colonies on the western side of Africa, within five
degrees of it; and if the country of Ophir was the same with Sofala, on the
eastern shore of Africa, the navy of Solomon must have crossed the equator both
in going and returning. Notwithstanding this advantage which they certainly
had, it was a received opinion among the Greeks and Romans, which no one dared
to controvert; that the torrid zone was scorched by the vertical sun, and that
no human being could reside in it, or pass through it, from the northern to the
southern hemisphere. This error, it is probable, first arose from the knowledge
which they had of the vast, sandy deserts of Africa, which had sometimes proved
destructive to whole armies who had attempted to pass them. The only way, in
which we can account for their not correcting this mistake, is, that the
navigation of the southern seas was performed chiefly by the Phenicians and
Carthaginians, who were the enemies and rivals of the Greeks and Romans, and
kept their knowledge to themselves. We find among them no philosophers, and
very few authors. They were practical seamen and merchants, intent on gain, and
monopolizers of commerce.

The Greeks and Romans had very little more of the spirit of enterprise than
was connected with their hostile expeditions; but they formed theories of
geography, either by the observations and reports of their military commanders,
or by second hand information, or by conjecture and hypothesis. These nations
produced many authors, and many of their books are preserved to our times, in
which we see the imperfection of their knowledge of the globe, their prejudice
in favor of their erroneous system, and their incredulity when evidence was
offered against their preconceived hypothesis.

On the authority of these philosophers, the Roman world for many ages founded
all their geographical knowledge. That imperfect system became at length a part
of the creed of the Roman church, and was defended by the court of inquisition.
If St. Augustine doubted the diurnal motion of the earth, or the existence of
antipodes, or the habitableness of the torrid zone; St. Dominic was ready with
his infernal logic, to silence every one who presumed to dissent from the
infallible chair. Thus ignorance and error were canonized, and the feeble dawn
of science was scarcely able to penetrate the dark mist of the middle ages.
Even after the discoveries made by the Portuguese in the east, and by the
Spaniards in the west, the Roman Pontiff gravely assumed a right to divide the
world between them by a line drawn from pole to pole, at the distance of an
hundred leagues from the Azores or western islands; without any provision, in
case they should meet, and their claims should interfere on the opposite side
of the globe. See the Bull at large in Hazard's Collection, vol. I. page 5.


By the progress of discovery, those ancient systems have gradually vanished,
and mankind have founded their knowledge of the form and contents of the
terraqueous globe, on fact and experience. One traveller has succeeded another,
and one nation has emulated another, in the survey of the earth, till within
the last twenty years the boundaries of navigation have been precisely
ascertained, and the circuit of the globe is now become a familiar voyage among
our marine brethren. The reign of George III, though stained with the grossest
political errors, and disgraced by the loss of a large portion of this
continent from his dominion; yet deserves respect, for giving birth to many
expensive adventures to the most distant regions, especially in the vast
pacific ocean; by which the science of geography has been much improved. Indeed
we are now so far advanced in our acquaintance with the globe, that every
schoolboy knows more of it than all the philosophers of antiquity; and as we
proceed in our inquiries into this noble science, we learn more and more of the
wonderful works of him who is perfect in wisdom and knowledge.

Connected with geography, we may view the science of navigation as also
greatly improved since this discovery. By navigation I do not mean barely the
mathematical knowledge necessary to keep the reckoning of a ship, and the
celestial observations to determine its position; though even these are reduced
to more accuracy, and performed by better instruments than formerly; but I
would comprehend the whole art of traveling by sea, the construction and
equipment of ships, and the methods used to preserve the lives and health of
seamen in all climates. When Columbus sailed on his first voyage, two of the
vessels employed in that service were without decks, "Ex regio fisco destinata
sunt tri^ navigia; unum onerarium caveatum, alia duo levia mercatoria sine
caveis, quae ab Hispanis Caravelae vocantur."

Peter Matyr, de orb novo.
and in the short run from Spain to the Canaries one of them lost her rudder.
This must give us an idea of the very imperfect state of naval architecture at
that period; for these were doubtless the best ships which could be procured in
the dominion of Queen Isabella, and they were three months in preparing for the
voyage. After that period, commerce, the soul of navigation, dictated the
building and equipment of larger, stronger and more commodious vessels, for the
purpose of transporting merchandise, and exploring new regions. But that fatal
distemper the scurvy, was an obstacle which for many years baffled the
ingenuity of man, and the power of medicine. It is but half a century since the
squadron of ANSON, in circumnavigating the globe, were reduced to the utmost
distress, by its uncontroled ravages. But within the last twenty years, methods
have been adopted to prevent it; and the name of COOK will always be renowned
in naval history, for having successfully perfected the means of preserving the
lives of seamen in the longest voyages; as well as for having established the
limits of navigation, toward the southern and the northern poles.

It is now known by experience, that the human constitution is capable, by
proper management, of enduring all the vicissitudes of heat and cold, of
moisture and dryness, to which any accessible part of the earth is subject; and
that its health may be preserved in all climates and situations. This discovery
is in the highest degree favorable to the purposes of commerce, which in the
present age, affords its friendly assistance to the progress of knowledge and
humanity.

We may also reckon the science of natural history as greatly improved by the
discovery of this continent. It has given mankind more just and sublime ideas
of the works of GOD, some of which appear to be constructed on a larger scale,
and in a more magnificent style, than in the old continent. The immense Andes
of South America are elevated above the Alps, the Taurus or the Atlas. The
Amazon, Oronooque and La Plata discharge greater quantities of water than the
Danube, the Ganges or the Nile. The vast chain of lakes which flow into the St.
Lawrence, forms a singular phenomenon, which no part of the old continent can
parallel. Besides, America can boast of the most extensive and fertile plains,
whilst it is entirely free from those scorching sands and parched deserts,
which deform the countries of Africa and Arabia.

In America are found several species of animals unknown in other parts of the
world, beside the remains of some supposed to be now extinct, which for bulk
and strength must at least have equalled the elephant of Asia and Africa. The
vegetable productions of this continent have also enriched the medical art,
with many valuable acquisitions before unknown. The precious metals, gold and
silver as well as diamonds and pearls are vastly more common, and of less value
than before; and the fossil treasures which have been discovered, afford not
only many useful articles in commerce and the arts, but demonstrate the
certainty of an universal disruption of the earth, at some remote period, and
thus confirm the truth of sacred history.

The discovery of America has also opened an important page in the history of
man. We find our brethren of the human race, scattered over all parts of this
continent, and the adjacent islands. We see mankind in their several varieties
of color, form and habit, and we learn to consider ourselves as one great
family, sent into the world to make various experiments for happiness.

One of the grandest of these experiments has been made in our own part of this
continent. Freedom, that noble gift of heaven, has here fixed her standard, and
invited the distressed of all countries to take refuge under it. Our virtuous
ancestors fled from the impositions and persecutions to which they were
subjected in England, and found in this wilderness an asylum from that tyranny.
Their example was followed by others, and in North America, the oppressed of
Europe have always found safety and relief. But we were designed by Providence
for a nobler experiment still: Not only to open a door of safety to our
European brethren here; but to show them that they are entitled to the same
rights in their native countries; and we have set them an example of a
hazardous, but successful vindication of those rights, which are the gift of
God to man.

It is both amusing and instructive to review our former notions of liberty,
both civil and religious; and to see what imperfect ideas we had on these
subjects, derived by tradition from our European ancestors. Like them we
boasted of English liberty; as if Englishmen had some exclusive rights, beyond
any other people, on the face of the earth. And what was English liberty? Its
origin must be sought in ancient charters, and particularly in magna charta,
granted by, or rather forced from, one of the worst princes that ever disgraced
a throne. The liberties of Englishmen, after the Norman Conquest, were the
grants of their Kings; "I have always considered the boasted birthright of an
Englishman, as an arrogant pretension built on a beggarly foundation. It is
arrogant, because it intimates a kind of exclusion to the rest of mankind from
the same privileges; and it is beggarly, because it rests our legitimate
freedom on the alms of our princes."

Catharine Macaulay Graham.
and the prerogative was the claim of those Kings to power and dominion
supposed to be founded on a divine right.

In the early stages of our controversy, we had formed an idea of liberty, as
an inheritance, descended to us from our ancestors, who were Englishmen; "Few
people have extended their inquiries after the foundation of their rights
beyond a charter from the crown. Others think when they have got back to old
magna charta, that they are at the beginning of all things. They imagine
themselves on the borders of Chaos, and see creation rising out of the unformed
mass. Hence, say they, spring all the rights of men and of citizens."

James Otis. 1764.
some of whom, when they quitted England, had received of the then reigning
prince, charters under the great seal; by which it was supposed that their
privileges were confirmed to them and their posterity; and the colonies which
had these charters plumed themselves on possessing more and greater privileges,
than those styled royal provinces, which were governed by temporary commissions
from the crown, revocable at the royal pleasure.

In like manner, our title to religious freedom was supposed to be derived,
partly from the same charters and commissions; in which, liberty of conscience
was granted by the King, to such of his subjects as should settle in the
plantations; partly from acts of toleration, made in England, and construed to
extend to the colonies; and, partly from our own laws made to favor the
religious opinions and practices of those who dissented from the majority.
Religious liberty was not placed on its right foundation, nor derived from its
true source. The world was not obliged to the statesman or the divine, for the
first acknowledgment of this darling right; but to the spirit of commerce and
to the interested views of the merchant. Religious toleration was introduced
into the European countries for the benefit of trade. When the merchants of
Holland struck out the idea, it was regarded by their neighbors, with the same
horror as a pestilence. It was imported into England, with William, Prince of
Orange, under whose patronage it was formed into a law; but it has never been
there so extensively admitted as to put all sects and parties on an equal
footing. A preference is still given to one denomination above all others; and
if an Englishman would fully enjoy the privileges of an Englishman, he must
conform to the rites and ceremonies of what is called the established church;
all other persons are subject to burdens and incapacities, from which they
cannot be free, whilst they continue within that realm; and the opposers of
these unequal burdens are exposed to the rage of party zeal, which in some late
instances has been carried to the most criminal excess.

Too much of the same spirit, it must be confessed, has reigned here. Our
ancestors in New England established a test before any was enacted by the
English parliament; and though it has, long since, been abrogated, yet the idea
of an exclusive right to the honors and emoluments of government, by the
prevailing religious denomination, continued till very lately. Some of us can
remember the time, when it was thought a sufficient objection to a man's being
chosen to a seat in the legislature, that he belonged to the Episcopal Church.
And, even at this enlightened period, I blush to own, that, by the Constitution
of this Commonwealth, the Jew, the Mohammedan, the Gentoo, and the Disciple of
Confucius, are excluded from our public councils, be they ever so good
citizens; whilst men, who for convenience, call themselves Christians, though
deeply tinged with infidelity, and destitute of moral principles, may freely be
admitted.

But though imperfection is more or less interwoven with all human
constitutions; yet a spirit of improvement is evidently pervading this country.
Several of the first forms of government which were made for these States, have
been reviewed and amended. Religious tests have been gradually abolished; and
our national form of government is entirely free from them. It leaves religion
where all civil government ought to leave it; to the consciences of
individuals, under the control of the supreme Lord.

As learning is acknowledged to be essentially necessary to the preservation of
a republican government, so wherever the true spirit of liberty reigns it will
cherish the interest of science. This principle was well understood by the
fathers of New England, and we their posterity have reaped the benefit of their
wise and faithful care to provide the means of instruction for us. The same
spirit seems more and more to prevail throughout this country, and forms one of
the most happy omens of the preservation of liberty to future generations.

From our example of a government founded on the principle of representation,
excluding all family pretensions and titles of nobility, other nations are
beginning to look into their natural and original rights as men; and to assert
and maintain them against the claims of despotism. As far as the present
struggle in Europe against civil and spiritual usurpation, is conducted on
virtuous principles, we cordially wish it success. But have we not reason to
fear that the cause of liberty may be injured by the intemperate zeal of its
friends, as much as by the systematic opposition of its enemies? If wisdom,
harmony and fortitude were combined with patriotism on the side of liberty, we
might hope that the time was approaching, when an hereditary right to govern a
nation would appear as contemptible as the royal touch for the King's evil; and
when the loftiest prelates of Europe would find themselves reduced to the same
level with the curate of a parish. But what scenes of anarchy and distress may
take place before these desirable events, we must wait for time to unfold.

It is an old observation of Solomon, "He that increases knowledge increases
sorrow." This may justly be applied to the enlargement of science which is made
by the discovery of America. The field is extended, but difficulties have
arisen which are not yet solved. Though we have learned more of the works of
creation and providence than was known to preceding ages, yet we find that
there is still more behind the curtain.

Among these difficulties we may reckon the question, whence was America
peopled? For three centuries this has been a subject of debate among the
learned; and it is amusing, to see how national prejudice has become involved
with philosophical disquisition, in the attempts which have been made to solve
the question. The claims of Hanno the Carthaginian, of Madoc the Welchman, of
the seven Bishops of Spain, and the ten tribes of Israel, have had their
several advocates; and after all, the claim of the six nations is as well
founded as any, that their ancestors sprung like trees out of the soil. The
true philosopher will treat them all with indifference, and will suspend his
judgment till he has better information than any which has yet appeared. Since
the late discovery of many clusters of islands in the Pacific Ocean, and the
near approach of the Asian to the American continent, the difficulty with
respect to the population of America, by the human species is lessened; and had
this continent been discovered by a scientific people on its western, before it
was on its eastern side, perhaps the question would not have been so long nor
so warmly agitated. But still the transportation of other animals from the old
to the new continent, and the existence of some here which are not known there,
is a subject, which remains involved in obscurity.

Before we have solved one difficulty another rises to view. It is not many
years since the large bones found in the neighborhood of the Ohio excited much
attention. We had scarcely conjectured to what animal they belonged when a new
object was brought forward. Mounds and fortifications of a regular construction
were discovered in the thickest shades of the American forest, overgrown with
trees of immense age, which are supposed to be not the first growth upon the
spot since the dereliction of its ancient possessors.

The most obvious mode of solving the difficulty which arose in the curious
mind on this occasion was by making inquiry of the natives. But the structures
are too ancient for their tradition, their oldest and wisest men know nothing
of their original. Indeed the form and materials of these works seem to
indicate the existence of a race of men in a stage of improvement superior to
those natives of whom we or our fathers have had any knowledge; who had
different ideas of convenience and utility; who were more patient of labor,
and better acquainted with the art of defense.

That these works were not constructed by any Europeans who have penetrated the
American wilderness since the discovery of the continent, appears from various
considerations; See the Columbian Magazine, for 1788. P. 477, ^^^.
but most decisively from the trees found growing on them; which by indubitable
marks are known to be upwards of three hundred years old. At what remote period
these works were erected and by whom; what became of their builders: whether
they were driven away or destroyed by a more fierce and savage people, the
Goths and Vandals of America; or whether they voluntarily migrated to a distant
region; and where that region is, are questions which at present can not be
satisfactorily answered.

Our astonishment is further excited, by considering that the discovery of
America has opened a large mart for the commerce in slaves from the opposite
continent of Africa. So much has been written and spoken on the iniquity
attending this detestable species of traffic, that I need not attempt again to
excite the feelings of indignation and horror, which I doubt not have pervaded
the breast of every person now present, when contemplating this flagrant insult
on the laws of justice and humanity. I shall only observe, that the first
introduction of the negro slavery into America, was occasioned by the previous
destruction of the native inhabitants of the West India islands, by the cruelty
of their Spanish conquerors, in exacting of them more labor than they were
able to perform. The most remarkable and unaccountable circumstance attending
the beginning of this traffic, is, that it was recommended by a Spanish Bishop,
one of the most benevolent friends of the Indians, whom he could not bear to
see so wantonly destroyed by his countrymen. When they pressed him with this
difficulty, "How shall our plantations be cultivated if we may not use the
natives as our slaves?" He advised them to send to Africa, for a more robust
and patient race of men, who could better bear the fatigue of labor in a warm
climate. Thus from a principle of lenity toward the savages of America, he
introduced the commerce of slaves from Africa; which has proved destructive to
human life and happiness, in the same proportion that it has encouraged
avarice, luxury, pride and cruelty.

But do I not see the dawn of that auspicious day which shall put a stop to
this infamous traffic, and shall teach mankind that Africans have a native
right to liberty and property as well as Europeans and Americans? May these
rights ever be respected, and never more be infringed, especially by those who
have successfully contended for the establishment of their own.

Let us now turn our attention to another subject of debate, arising from the
knowledge of this continent. If the gospel was designed for an universal
benefit to mankind, why was it not brought by the Apostles to America, as well
as propagated in the several regions of the old continent? To solve this
difficulty, it has been alleged that America was known to the ancients; and
that it was enlightened by the personal ministry of the Apostles. See an
elaborate Essay on this subject by the late Dr. Samuel Mather.
With equal propriety it might be solved, by denying that America was at that
time inhabited by any human being, and it might not be impossible to maintain
this negative position, against any positive proof which can be adduced to the
contrary. But both are attended with difficulties which require more light to
unravel than has yet appeared. If America was peopled at that period, perhaps
the state of human society was such, that the wise and benevolent Author of
christianity saw no prospect of success, to the propagation of his gospel here,
without the intervention of more and greater miracles, than were consistent
with divine wisdom or the nature of man to permit.

Nearly akin to this, is another difficulty. The native inhabitants of Peru,
for some centuries before the Spanish invasion, are represented as worshipers
of the sun; whose universally benignant influence to the world they thought
themselves bound to imitate. See Garcilasso de la Vega's Royal Commentations of
Peru.
Accordingly their national character was mild, gentle and humane. They made no
offensive wars; and when they repelled the invasions of their savage
neighbors, and conquered them, it was done with a view to reduce them from
their native ferocity, under the government of rational and social principles;
and to incorporate them with themselves, that they might enjoy the benefits of
their own pacific system. Their code of laws, delivered by the founder of their
empire, was a work of reason and benevolence, and bore a great resemblance to
the divine precepts given by Moses and confirmed by Jesus Christ. In short,
they seem to have made the nearest approach to the system of christianity, I
mean the moral part of it, of any people who had never been formally instructed
in its principles.

It would seem then to human reason, that they were fit objects for an
apostolic mission; and, that if the pure, simple, original doctrine of the
gospel had been preached to them they would readily have embraced it.

But when we find that these mild and peaceful people were invaded by
avaricious Spaniards, under a pretense of converting them to the catholic
faith; when instead of the meek and humble language of a primitive evangelist,
we see a bigoted Friar gravely advancing at the head of a Spanish army, and, in
a language unknown to the Peruvians, declaring that their country was given to
his nation, by the Pope of Rome, God's only vicar on earth, and commanding them
to receive their new masters on pain of death; when we consider this parade of
arrogant hypocrisy as the signal for slaughter, and see the innocent victims
falling by the sword of these ministers of destruction; when we see the whole
nation vanquished, disheartened, and either murdered or reduced to slavery, by
their savage conquerors; when instead of the worship which they addressed to
the luminary of heaven, and which needed but one step more to conduct them to
the knowledge of its invisible Creator, we see the pomp of Popish idolatry,
with the infernal horrors of the Inquisition introduced into their country; our
astonishment is excited to the highest, degree, and we can only exclaim, "Thy
judgments, O Lord, are a great deep! and thy ways are past finding out!"

It would give me the greatest pleasure, if in concluding this discourse I
could say any thing, with respect to the propagation of christianity, among the
original natives of America, which could be construed into a fulfillment of the
prediction of Daniel, concerning the progress of knowledge.

Every European nation, which possesses any considerable share of the
continent, has made this desirable work a part of their professed design; in
planting and settling the country; and it must be acknowledged that some very
zealous and well meant endeavors have been made, by men who had neither wealth
nor power in their view; but the success has not been answerable to the
goodness of the design, nor to the wishes of those who have engaged in it. If
we survey the whole continent, from the first discovery of America, to the
present time, the number of converts to christianity, among the Indians, bears
but a small proportion to those, who have been destroyed either by war, by
slavery or by spirituous liquors. And, with respect to many of those who have
been called converts, it may justly be inquired, whether any thing more can be
said in favor of their conversion, than that they have exchanged their
original superstitions, for others, more glittering and refined.

If the truths of our holy religion are to be propagated among the savages, it
will become us to consider, whether we had not better first agree among
ourselves, what these truths are. For whilst they see diversities of opinion
among us, and that some of the more zealous advocates of particular tenets, are
endeavoring to instill the peculiarities of their respective sects among them,
and to prejudice them against others; the native sagacity with which these
people are endowed will lead them to avoid confounding themselves with our
distinctions, and to retain the religion of their ancestors, till they can find
one, more free from perplexity, than christianity appears by the diversity of
our opinions concerning it.

It is also worthy of consideration, whether the vicious lives and conduct of
our own people, and especially those on the frontiers, with whom the Indians
are most acquainted, be not a great obstruction to the spreading of divine
knowledge among them. It is very natural to estimate the goodness of any
religion, by the influence which it appears to have on those who profess it;
and, if they are to regard the conduct of the people by whom they have been
cheated, robbed, and murdered, as a specimen of the influence of christianity
on the human mind, it would be a greater wonder that they should embrace it
than reject it.

If the christian religion is to be propagated, without the assistance of
miracles, among the savages of this continent, it must be in some such manner
as the Moravians have attempted. These people seem to have an art of attaching
savage nations to their faith and manners, and of forming them into civilized
and laborious society, beyond any other denomination of christians; and, for
the honor of the common cause, I cannot but wish them all that support and
encouragement which their zealous and benevolent efforts deserve.

It is much to be wished, that the spirit of bigotry and the shibboleth of
party were totally abolished; that the christian religion may appear in its
native simplicity and purity, and that the professors of it would distinguish
themselves by that love, that meekness and gentleness which marked the
character of its author and his primitive followers. By these marks all men
will know us to be his disciples; our light will so shine before men, that they
will see our good works* and glorify our father who is in heaven.

Notwithstanding any present unfavourable appearances, yet we have the greatest
reason to expect that the time will come when knowledge will universally
prevail; when speculative truth will be reduced to practice, and men will be
led to a devout acknowledgement of the only true God, and of Jesus Christ whom
he has sent, evidenced by a careful obedience to the laws of virtue and
righteousness. Then will "the earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the
waters cover the sea." Then will be fulfilled those sublime predictions of the
inspired Isaiah. "I will bring thy seed from the east and gather them from the
west; I will say to the north, give up; and to the south, keep not back, bring
my sons from far and my daughters from the ends of the earth. Thy gates shall
be open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night; because the
abundance of the sea shall be converted to thee, the forces of the Gentiles
shall come to thee. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders; but thy walls shall be salvation and thy gates
praise. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself;
for the Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and thy God shall be thy glory.
Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land forever,
the branch of my planting, the work of my hand that I may be glorified. I the
Lord will hasten it in his time."

ODE FOR THE 23d OF OCTOBER, 1792. Sung after the Discourse, by Mr. REA and a
select Choir, accompanied by the Organ.
I.
WHEN formed by GOD's creating hand,
This beauteous fabric first appeared;
Eternal Wisdom gave command,
All Nature with attention heard*
II.
"Here, Ocean, roll thy swelling tide;
"Here spread thy vast Atlantic main;
"From European eyes to hide
"That Western World, which bounds thy reign."
III.
Whilst Ocean kept his sacred charge,
And fair COLUMBIA lay concealed;
Through Europe, Discord roam'd at large,
Till War had crimsoned every field.
IV.
Black Superstition's dismal night
Extinguished Reason's golden ray;
And Science, driven from the light,
Beneath monastic rubbish lay.
V.
The Crown and Mitre, close allied,
Trampled whole nations to the dust;
Whilst FREEDOM, wandering far and wide,
And pure RELIGION, quite were lost.
VI.
Then, guided by the Almighty Hand,
COLUMBUS spread his daring sail;
Ocean received a new command,
And Zephyrs breathed a gentle gale.
VII.
The Western World appeared to view,
Her friendly arms extended wide;
Then FREEDOM over the Atlantic flew,
With pure RELIGION by her side.
VII.
Tyrants with mortal hate pursued;
In vain their forces they employ;
In vain the Serpent pours his flood, Rev. xii, 15.

Those heaven-born Exiles to destroy.
IX.
"No weapon formed against my flock
"Shall prosper," says the Almighty Lord;
"Their proudest threatenings thou shall mock,
"For I will be thy shield and sword.
X.
"Sweet peace and heavenly truth shall shine
"On fair COLUMBIA's happy ground;
"There FREEDOM and RELIGION join,
"And spread their influence all around."
CHORUS.
Hail! GREAT COLUMBIA! favored soil;
Thy fields with plenty crown thy toil;
Thy shore, the seat of growing wealth;
Thy clime the source of balmy health.
From thee proceeds the virtuous plan,
To vindicate the Rights of Man.
Thy fame shall spread from pole to pole,
Whilst everlasting ages roll.
DISSERTATION I. ON THE CIRCUMNAVIGATION OF AFRICA BY THE ANCIENTS.
THE authenticity of historical traditions on this subject has been questioned
by several writers ancient and modern. I shall here place in one view, what
evidence has been produced on both sides of the question, as far as I have had
opportunity to inquire; with such observations as have occurred to me during
the inquiry.

The first navigators of whom we have any account were the Phenicians, who were
scattered along the coasts of the Mediterranean and of the Red Sea. As early as
the days of Moses, they had extended their navigation beyond the pillars of
Hercules, on the western coast of Africa, toward the south; and as far
northward as the island of Britain, whence they imported tin and lead, See
Numbers, Chap. xxxi. ver. 22.
which according to the universal testimony of the ancients, were not then
found in any other country.

From the accounts given in ancient history of the expeditions of Sesostris,
King of Egypt, some have been led to conclude, that he made a discovery of all
the coasts of Africa. Forster's History of Voyages and Discoveries, page 7.
However this might be, there is no doubt that he opened, or revived a
commercial intercourse with India and Ethiopia, by way of the Red Sea. It has
also been thought, that the voyages of the Phenicians and Hebrews to Ophir, in
the time of Solomon, were nothing more nor less than circumnavigations of
Africa. Ibid.


But, leaving these for the present in the region of conjecture; the earliest
regular account which we have, of any voyage round the continent of Africa, is
that performed by order of Necho, King of Egypt, and recorded by Herodotus; the
most ancient historian, except the sacred writers, whose works have come down
to our time. His character as a historian is, "candid in his acknowledgment of
what is uncertain, and absolute when he speaks of what he knows." The date of
Necho's reign is fixed by Rollin 616 years before Christ. The date of
Herodotus's history is placed by Dufresnoy in the third year of the 83d
Olympiad answering to 446 years before Christ. So that he must have penned his
narration of this voyage, in less than two centuries after it was performed. I
shall give his account at large, in a literal translation, from the Geneva
Edition of his work, in Greek and Latin, by Stephanus. Lib. iv. Cap. 42.
In describing the several great divisions of the earth, he speaks thus:

"I wonder at those who have divided and distinguished Libya, Libya is the name
by which the whole continent of Africa was called by the Greeks.
Asia and Europe, between which there is not a little difference. If indeed
Europe agrees with the others in length, yet in breadth it does not seem to me,
worthy to be compared. For Libya shows itself to be surrounded by the sea,
except where it joins to Asia. Necos, King of the Egyptians, being the first of
those, whom we know, to demonstrate it. After he had desisted from digging a
ditch from the Nile to the Arabic gulf [in which work above twenty thousand
Egyptians perished; he betook himself to raising armies and building ships,
partly in the north sea By the north sea is meant the Mediterranean, which lies
north of Egypt.
and partly in the Arabian gulf, at the Red Sea, of which they yet show some
remains. Lib. ii. Cap. 48.
] He sent certain Phenicians in ships, commanding them, that having passed the
pillars of Hercules, they should penetrate the north sea, and so return to
Egypt. The Phenicians therefore loosing from the Red Sea, went away into the
southern sea, and, directing their ships to land, made a seed time, that when
autumn should come, they might expect a harvest, and might assiduously coast
Libya. Then, having gathered the harvest, they sailed. "Into whatever part of
Libya seamen came, they waited for harvest, and when they had reaped, they
loosed from the shore." (Note of Stephanus.)
Thus, two years being consumed; in the third year, coming round the pillars of
Hercules, they returned to Egypt; reporting things which with me have no
credit, but may perhaps with others, that in sailing round Libya they had the
sun on the right hand. i. e. They being in the southern hemisphere and sailing
to the westward, had the sun to the right hand or to the northward.
In this manner it was first known.

"In the second place, there have been Carthaginians, who have said, that a
certain Sataspes, son of Teaspis, a man of the Achamenides did not sail round
Libya, when he was sent; but being deterred by the length of the navigation and
the solitude of the country returned home, having not fulfilled the labor
which his mother enjoined him. For he had violated a virgin daughter of
Zopyrus, the son of Megabysus; and for that cause, being by Xerxes condemned to
be crucified, his mother, who was sister to Darius, liberated him; because he
said, he had rather impose on himself that punishment, than submit to the
King's command. Wherefore it became necessary for him to sail round all Libya,
till he should come to the Arabian Gulf. Xerxes consenting to this, Sataspes
went into Egypt, and, having there taken a ship and companions, sailed to the
pillars of Hercules. Having passed them, and having doubled the promontory of
Libya called Syloes, Now called Cape Bojador in the 26th degree of north
latitude.
he kept a southern course. Having traversed much of the sea in many months,
and finding much more time necessary, he turned about and came back to Egypt.
Returning to Xerxes, he reported, that in visiting the remotest coasts, he had
seen small men, clothed in Phenician garments; who at the approach of his
ships, fled to the mountains and left their villages; which he entered, and
took nothing from them but cattle. He gave this reason for not having sailed
round Libya, that his ship could sail no farther; but was stopped. Xerxes did
not believe him, and because he had not performed his engagement, ordered him
to undergo his destined punishment."

To the authenticity of this circumnavigation of the African continent, the
following objections have been made.

First, it is said that "the vessels which the ancients employed, were so small
as not to afford stowage for provisions, sufficient to subsist a crew during a
long voyage."

Secondly, "their construction was such that they could seldom venture to
depart far from land, and their mode of steering along the coast was so
circuitous and slow, that we may pronounce a voyage from the Mediterranean to
India, by the Cape of Good Hope, to have been an undertaking beyond their power
to accomplish, in such a manner as to render it in any degree subservient to
commerce. To this decision, the account preserved by Herodotus of a voyage
performed by some Phenician ships employed by the King of Egypt, can hardly be
considered as repugnant." Robertson's India, p. 175, American edition. The
objections taken from this learned author were not made directly against the
voyage mentioned by Herodotus; but rather against the possibility of a passage
to India by way of the Atlantic Ocean, and round the African continent.
However, as he brings this voyage into view in the same argument, and speaks of
it dubiously, it is conceived that his sentiments are not misrepresented in the
above quotations.


I have chosen to consider both these objections together, because that each
one helps to destroy the other. For if the vessels were so small, as not to
contain provisions for a long voyage, this was one reason for the navigators to
keep their course near the land; that they might find water fruits, game and
cattle on the shore, as well as fish on the shoals and rocks near the coast,
for their subsistence. And if it was their design to keep near the land, for
the sake of discovery, small vessels were best adapted to the purpose; because
they could pass over shoals and through small openings, between islands and
rocks, which are generally situate near the coasts of great continents.
Besides, if the vessels were small they could carry but small crews, who would
not require very large quantities of provision.

But Herodotus has helped us to solve the difficulty respecting provisions, in
a manner perfectly agreeable to the practice of antiquity, though unknown to
modern navigators. They went on shore and sowed corn, and when it was ripe
gathered the harvest. This enables us to account for two circumstances
attending the voyage of Necho; the length of time employed, and the supply of
provision, at least of bread, consumed in it.

Nor was this sowing and reaping any loss of time; for the monsoons in the
Indian ocean would not permit them to proceed any faster. A ship sailing from
the Red Sea with the N. E. monsoon, in the summer or autumn, would meet with
the S. W. monsoon, in the beginning of December, which must have detained her
in some of the harbors, on the eastern coast of Africa, till the next April.
During this time in that warm climate, corn might be sown and reaped; and any
other articles, either of provision or merchandise, might be taken on board.
Then the N. E. monsoon would carry her to the southern parts of Africa, into
the region of variable winds. This regular course and changing of the monsoons
was familiarly known to the navigators of Solomon's ships, and was the cause of
their spending three years, in the voyage to and from Ophir. "In going and
returning, they changed the monsoon six times, which made thirty six months.
They needed no longer time to complete the voyage, and they could not perform
it in less." Bruce's Travels -- B. II. chap. iv.


It is not pleaded, that the voyage of Necho was undertaken for the sake of
commerce; or if the authenticity of it were established, that it would prove
the practicability of a voyage from the Mediterranean to India, round the Cape
of Good Hope, by the vessels then in use, and the nautical skill then acquired.
The voyage of which Herodotus speaks might have been a voyage of discovery;
such an one as was perfectly agreeable to the genius of the people by whom it
was performed, and of the prince, by whose order and at whose expense it was
undertaken. "The progress of the Phenicians and Carthaginians, in their
knowledge of the globe, was not owing entirely to the desire of extending their
trade from one country to another. Commerce was followed by its usual effects,
among both those people. It awakened curiosity, enlarged the ideas and desires
of men, and incited them to bold enterprises. Voyages were undertaken, the sole
object of which was to discover new countries and to explore unknown seas."
Robertson's America -- Vol. I. p. 11, 4th edit.
The knowledge acquired in these voyages of discovery might afterward be
subservient to commerce; and though the Phenicians might not think it
convenient, to circumnavigate Africa, more than once, yet that they carried on
a commercial intercourse with different parts of that country, and particularly
with places situate on the eastern coast, in the Indian ocean, we have evidence
from the sacred writings. In the reign of Solomon "the king's ships with the
servants of Hiram and the navy of Tharshish every three years brought ivory, 2 Chronicles. viii.18. ix.21.
apes and peacocks, besides silver and the gold of Ophir," which is with great
reason supposed to be the country now called Sofala on the eastern coast of
Africa, in the southern hemisphere; as the learned Bruce, in his late book of
travels, has satisfactorily proved.

The prophet Ezekiel, who was contemporary with Necho, King of Egypt, in the
account which he gives of the merchandise of Tire, enumerates several
commodities, which it is well known belong to Africa, "horns of ivory and
ebony, and the persons of men." Ezekiel, chap. xxvii. ver. 13, 15.
We may form some idea of the strength and materials of the ships of the
Tyrians, and of their skill in navigation, from the following passages in his
apostrophe to Tyrus. "They have made all thy ship-boards of fir trees of Senir;
they have taken cedars of Lebanon to make masts for thee; of the oaks of Bashan
have they made thine oars. Thy wise men, O Tyrus* were thy pilots. The ancients
of Gebal, the wise men thereof were thy calkers. The ships of Tharshish did
sing of thee; thou wast replenished and made very glorious in the midst of the
seas; thy rowers have brought thee into great waters." Though we have no
particular description of the size or model of their ships; yet they certainly
had masts and sails and oars; their pilots and calkers were wise men, and they
were not afraid to sail in great waters, by which is probably meant the ocean,
in distinction from the Mediterranean.

Of the form and structure of the Grecian vessels we have a more particular
knowledge. "They were of inconsiderable burden, and mostly without decks. They
had only one mast, and were strangers to the use of anchors." Robertson's
America -- Vol. I. p. 15.
But then it must be remembered, that "the Phenicians, who instructed the
Greeks in other useful arts, did not communicate to them that extensive
knowledge of navigation, which they themselves possessed." Ibid. p 14.
We may hence conclude that the ships of the Phenicians were much superior to
the Grecian vessels; that they were fitted with masts; sails and oars, and with
expert pilots. We have then no evidence from the structure of their vessels or
their mode of sailing, to warrant a doubt of the ability of their ships or
seamen, to perform a voyage round the continent of Africa in three years.

To an European theorist such a voyage may seem less practicable than to an
American. The Europeans have usually employed none but ships of great burden,
in their trade to India and China; but since the Americans have visited those
countries, sloops of fifty or sixty tons have sailed round the Cape of Good
Hope to China, and round Cape Horn to the northwest coast of America, and
across the north Pacific Ocean. If any doubt can yet remain, it may be entirely
removed by the recollection of a voyage performed in the year 1789, by
Lieutenant Bligh of the British navy; who, being turned adrift by his mutinous
crew, traversed the south Pacific Ocean, above twelve hundred leagues, in a
boat of twenty three feet long, without a deck, in much stormy weather, with
scanty provisions; and having passed many dangerous rocks and shoals, among
unknown islands, arrived in forty one days at a Dutch settlement in the
Moluccas. See the printed narrative by Lieut. Bligh.
The objections then against the reality of Necho's voyage, from the size and
structure of the Phenician vessels, and the want of provision are not so
formidable on examination as at the first appearance.

A third objection against the credibility of this early circumnavigation is,
that "several writers of the greatest eminence among the ancients, and most
distinguished for their knowledge of geography, regarded this account rather as
an amusing tale, than the history of a real transaction; and, either
entertained doubts concerning the possibility of sailing round Africa, or
absolutely denied it." Robertson's India, p. 175.
That the Roman geographers and historians did doubt and disbelieve the story
is very evident; and the causes are not far to be sought.

The first was the jealousy of the Phenicians. "Whatever acquaintance with the
remote regions of the earth the Phenicians or Carthaginians acquired, was
concealed from the rest of mankind with a mercantile jealousy. Every thing
relative to the course of navigation was a secret of state as well as a mystery
of trade. Extraordinary facts are recorded concerning their solicitude to
prevent other nations from penetrating into what they wished should remain
undivulged." Robertson's America, vol. I. p. 13.
One of these extraordinary facts is thus related by Strabo. The Romans being
desirous to discover the places, whence the Carthaginians fetched tin and amber
"sent a vessel, with orders to sail in the wake of a Phenician vessel. This
being observed by the Carthaginian, he purposely ran his vessel among rocks and
sand banks; so that it was lost, together with that of the inquisitive Roman.
The patriotic commander of the former was indemnified for his loss by his
country." Forster's History of Voyages and Discoveries. chap. I.


A second reason was the pride of the Romans. If, as Pope tells us* With honest
scorn the first famed Cato viewed
Rome learning arts from Greece whom she subdued;"
the same pride would make their wise men scorn to learn geography or
navigation, theoretically, from those who were best able to teach them. It is
acknowledged that the Romans "did not imbibe that commercial spirit and ardor
for discovery which distinguished their rivals." Robertson's America, vol. I.
p. 14.
It must also be observed, that there was but little intercourse between them;
and that the Carthaginians were deficient in those sciences for which the
Romans were famous. Among the Phenicians and Carthaginians, the study and
knowledge of their youth were confined to writing, arithmetic and mercantile
accounts; whilst polite literature, history and philosophy were in little
repute; and by a law of Carthage, the study of the Greek language was
prohibited; lest any communication should be carried on with their enemies.
Rollin's Ancient History, book II. part I. sect. 7.


A third reason was the opinion which the wisest men among the Romans had
formed, and to which they obstinately adhered, concerning the five zones, and
the impossibility of passing from one hemisphere to the other, because of the
torrid zone lying between. This doctrine of the zones is so fully represented
by Dr. Robertson Robertson's America, vol. I, note 8.
that I need only refer the reader to what he has written on the subject.

But notwithstanding the doubts and the infidelity of the Roman Philosophers,
and the great deference paid to them by this learned and cautious inquirer;
there is one circumstance which has almost convinced him of the reality of
Necho's voyage, as related by Herodotus. It is this, that the Phenicians, in
sailing round Africa, "had the sun on their right hand;" which Herodotus, with
his usual modesty and candor says, "with me has no credit, though it may with
others." On this the Doctor judiciously remarks, "The science of astronomy was
in that early period so imperfect, that it was by experience only, that the
Phenicians could come at the knowledge of this fact; they durst not, without
this, have ventured to assert what would have appeared to be an improbable
fiction." Robertson's India, note 54.
Indeed if they had not known it by experience, there is not the least
conceivable reason for their inventing such a report; nor even for the entrance
of such an idea into their imagination. The modest doubt of Herodotus is
another argument in favor of the truth and genuineness of it; for as he had no
experience to guide him, and the idea was new, it was very proper for him to
hesitate in admitting it, though he showed his impartiality by inserting it in
his relation.

So much for the voyage performed by the Phenicians under the orders of Necho,
which is the first proof produced by Herodotus of his position that* "Libya is
surrounded by the sea, except where it joins Asia."

His second proof is not so conclusive, nor the design of his introducing it so
obvious. It is the relation of a voyage undertaken by Sataspes a Persian, whose
punishment was commuted from crucifixion to sailing round Libya; which voyage
he began, but returned by the same route, not having completed it. The reason
which he gave for returning was, that "his ship was stopped and could sail no
farther," which his sovereign did not believe, and therefore put him to death,
to which he had before been condemned.

The only evidence which this story can afford is, that the circumnavigation of
the African continent was, at that time, thought practicable. Sataspes thought
so, or he would not have proposed it to his sovereign; and Xerxes thought so,
or he would not have disbelieved the story of the ship being stopped; by which
expression was meant that the sea was no farther navigable, by reason of land.

The exact date of this voyage is not ascertained; but as Xerxes reigned twelve
years, and died in the year 473 before Christ, it could not have been much more
than thirty years, preceding the time when Herodotus published his history.

The voyage of Hanno the Carthaginian, is thus briefly mentioned by Pliny. "In
the flourishing state of Carthage, Hanno having sailed round from Gades [Cadiz]
to the border of Arabia, committed to writing an account of his voyage; as did
Himilco, who was at the same time sent to discover the extreme parts of
Europe." Pliny's Natural History, lib. 2, cap. 67.
The character of Pliny, as a historian is, that "he collected from all
authors, good and bad, who had written before him; and that his work is a
mixture of truth and error, which it is difficult to separate." An instance in
confirmation of this remark occurs in this very chapter; where he speaks of
some merchants, sailing from India, and thrown by a tempest, on the coast of
Germany. He also mentions a voyage, made by Eudoxus; from the Arabian gulf to
Gades, and another of Coelius Antipater from Spain to Ethiopia.

Of these voyages, that of Hanno is best authenticated. He sailed from Carthage
with sixty galleys, each carrying fifty oars, having on board thirty thousand
men and women, with provisions and articles of traffic. The design of this
equipment was to plant colonies along the western shore of Africa, which the
Carthaginians, from priority of discovery, and from its contiguity to their
territory, considered as their own dominion. Hanno was absent five years, on
this colonizing expedition; but there is no certainty of his having proceeded
any farther southward, than the Bay of Benin, in the eighth degree of north
latitude. A fragment of his journal, which at his return he deposited in the
temple of Saturn, at Carthage, is now extant; and though it has been treated as
fabulous by several authors, ancient and modern, yet its authenticity has been
vindicated by M. Bougainville, in the 26th volume of the Memoirs of the Royal
Academy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres; where a French translation of it is
given from the Greek, into which language it was rendered from the original
Punic.

Concerning the voyage of Eudoxus, the following account is given by Bruce.
Travels, book II. chap. V. The voyage of Eudoxus was originally written by
Posidonius, but I have not met with that author.
He was sent by Ptolemy Euergetes, as an ambassador to India, to remove the bad
effects of the King's conduct in the beginning of his reign, who had extorted
contributions from merchants of that and other trading countries. Eudoxus
returned after the King's death, and was wrecked on the coast of Ethiopia;
where he discovered the prow of a ship, which had suffered the same fate. It
was the figure of a horse, and the sailors, who had been employed in European
voyages, knew this to have been part of one of those vessels, which traded on
the Atlantic ocean; of which trade Gades was the principal port. This
circumstance amounted to a proof, that there was a passage round Africa, from
the Indian to the Atlantic ocean. The discovery was of no greater importance to
any person, than to Eudoxus himself; for, some time afterward, falling under
the displeasure of Ptolemy Lathyrus, and being in danger of his life, he fled;
and embarking on the Red Sea, sailed round Africa and came to Gades.

This voyage of Eudoxus was treated as a fable by Strabo, the Roman geographer,
who wrote about a century and a half after the time when it is said to have
been performed. The true cause of the incredulity of him and of other Roman
authors in respect to these voyages and discoveries, was the doctrine of the
zones, to which they inflexibly adhered, and which effectually precluded all
conviction.

These are all the evidences which I have had opportunity to examine respecting
the question of the circumnavigation of Africa, Dr. FORSTER, in his history of
Voyages and Discoveries (chap. I) refers to three German authors, GESNER,
SCHLOZER and MICHAELIS, who have written on this subject, and observes, that
"the circumnavigation of Africa by the Phenicians and Egyptians is proved
almost to a demonstration."
and upon the whole there appears to be this peculiarity attending the subject,
that it was believed by those who lived nearest to the time when the voyage of
Necho is said to have been made; and, that in proportion to the distance of
time afterward, it was doubted, disbelieved and denied; till its credibility
was established beyond all doubt by the Portuguese adventurers in the fifteenth
century.

APPENDIX TO DISSERTATION I. The following Table exhibits a Chronological
Detail of Facts and Opinions, relative to the circumnavigation of AFRICA.
Rollin. In his reign the Phenicians sailed round Africa from the Red Sea to
the pillars of Hercules, and returned to Egypt in three years. Herodotus. Old
Testament. Rollin. In his reign Sataspes sailed to the western coast of Africa,
and returned to Egypt. Herodotus. Dufresnoy. Bochart. Dufresnoy and Robertson.
Hampton's Translation. Dufresnoy. In his reign, is placed, the voyage of
Eudoxus from the Red Sea, round Africa to Cadiz. Bruce. Somnium Scipionis.
Strabo. Pliny. Ptolemy. The opinions of these philosophers were implicitly
believed for the succeeding twelve centuries. Robertson.
DISSERTATION II. AN EXAMINATION OF THE PRETENSIONS OF MARTIN BEHAIM, TO A
DISCOVERY OF AMERICA, PRIOR TO THAT OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS.
SO much has already been well written on this subject by Dr. ROBERTSON, that I
should not have thought of adding any thing to it; had not a Memoir appeared in
the second volume of the Transactions of the American Philosophical Society No.
35, p. 263.
at Philadelphia, in which the pretensions of Behaim are revived by M. OTTO;
who has produced some authorities which he had obtained from Nuremberg, an
imperial city of Germany, and which appear to him, "to establish in the
clearest manner a discovery of America anterior to that of Columbus."

It is conceded that Behaim was a man of learning and enterprise; that he was
contemporary with Columbus and was his friend; that he pursued the same studies
and drew the same conclusions; that he was employed by King John II. in making
discoveries; and, that he met with deserved honor for the important services
which he rendered to the Crown of Portugal. But, there are such difficulties
attending the story of his discovering America, as appear to me insuperable.
These I shall state; together with some remarks on the authorities produced by
M. Otto.

The first of his authorities contains several assertions which are
contradicted by other histories; Memoirs of Philip de Comines. Mezeray's and
Henault's history of France. Collier's Dictionary.
(1) That Isabella, daughter of John, King of Portugal, reigned after the death
of Philip, Duke of Burgundy, surnamed the Good. (2) That to this lady, when
regent of the Duchy of Burgundy and Flanders, Behaim paid a visit in 1459, and
(3) that having informed her of his designs, he procured a vessel in which he
made the discovery of the island of Fayal, in 1460.

It is true that Philip, Duke of Burgundy and Flanders, surnamed the Good,
married Isabella the daughter of John I. King of Portugal; but Philip did not
die till 1467, and was immediately succeeded by his son Charles, surnamed the
Bold, then thirty-four years of age. There could therefore have been no
interregnum, nor female regent after the death of Philip; and if there had
been, the time of Behaim's visit will not correspond with it; that being placed
in 1459, eight years before the death of Philip. Such a mistake, in point of
fact, and of chronology, is sufficient to induce a suspicion that the "archives
of Nuremberg" are too deficient in accuracy to be depended on as authorities.

With respect to the discovery of Fayal, in 1460, M. Otto acknowledges that it
is "contrary to the received opinion;" and well he might; for the first of the
Azores, St. Maria was discovered in 1431; the second, St. Michael in 1444; the
third, Terceira in 1445; and before 1449, the islands, St. George, Graciosa,
Fayal and Pico, were known to the Portuguese. Forster's history of voyages and
discoveries, p. 256, 257, Dublin edition.
However true it may be that Behaim settled in the island of Fayal, and lived
there twenty years; yet his claim to the discovery of it must have a better
foundation than the "archives of Nuremberg," before it can be admitted.

The genuine account of the settlement of Fayal, and the interest which Behaim
had in it, is thus related by Dr. Forster, a German author of much learning and
good credit.

"After the death of the infant Don Henry [which happened in 1463,] the island
of Fayal was made a present of by [his sister] Isabella, Duchess of Burgundy,
to Jobst von Hurter, a native of Nuremberg. Hurter went in 1466, with a colony
of more than 2000 Flemings of both sexes, to his property, the isle of Fayal.
The Duchess had provided the Flemish emigrants with all necessaries for two
years, and the colony soon increased. About the year 1486, Martin Behaim
married a daughter of the Chevalier Jobst von Hurter, and had a son by her
named Martin. -- Jobst von Hurter, and Martin Behaim, both natives of
Nuremberg, were Lords of Fayal and Pico." Forster's history of voyages, and
discoveries, p. 257, 258, 259.


The date of the supposed discovery of America, by Behaim, is placed by M.
Otto, in 1484, eight years before the celebrated voyage of Columbus. In the
same year we are told Garcilasso de la Vega's Royal commentaries. Preface.
Purchase. vol. V. p. 1454.
that Alonzo Sanchez de Huelva was driven by a storm to the westward for
twenty-nine days; and saw an island, of which at his return he gave information
to Columbus; from both these supposed discoveries this conclusion is drawn,
"That Columbus would never have thought of his expedition to America, had not
Behaim gone there before him." Whether it be supposed that Behaim and Sanchez
sailed in the same ship, or that they made a discovery of two different parts
of America, in the same year, it is not easy to understand from the authorities
produced; but what destroys the credibility of this plausible tale, is, that
Columbus had formed his theory, and projected his voyage, at least ten years
before; as appears by his correspondence with Paul, a learned physician of
Florence, which bears date in 1474. Life, chap. viii.
It is uncertain at what time Columbus first made his application to the King
of Portugal, to fit him out for a western voyage; but it is certain that after
a negotiation with him on the subject, and after he had found out the secret
and unsuccessful attempt which had been made to anticipate a discovery; he
quitted that kingdom in disgust, and went into Spain, in the latter end of the
year 1484. Ibid. chap. xii.
The authority of these facts is unquestioned; and from them it fully appears,
that a prior discovery of America, by Behaim or Sanchez, made in 1484, could
not have been the foundation of the enterprise of Columbus.

M. Otto speaks of letters written by Behaim in 1486, in the German language,
and preserved in the "archives of Nuremberg" which support this claim to a
prior discovery. As these letters are not produced, no certain opinion can be
formed concerning them; but from the date of the letters, and from the voyages
which Behaim actually performed in the two preceding years, we may with great
probability suppose, that they related to the discovery of CONGO, in Africa; to
which Behaim has an uncontroverted claim.

I will now state the facts relative to this event, partly from the authorities
cited by M. Otto; and partly from others.

Dr. Robertson places the discovery of Congo and Benin in 1483, and with him
Dr. Forster agrees. The authors of the modern universal history Vol. XVI. p.
133, 135.
speak of two voyages to that coast, the first in 1484; the second in 1485;
both of which were made by Diego Came, Diego is the Spanish name of James, in
Latin Jacobus. and in Portuguese, Jago. Came is in Latin, Camus or Canus, and in
Spanish, Cano; these different names are found in different authors.
who is said to have been one of the most expert sailors and of an enterprising
genius. From the chronicle of Hartman Schedl, as quoted by M. Otto, we are
informed, that Behaim sailed with Came, in these voyages, which are described in
the following terms. "These two, by the bounty of heaven, coasting along the
southern ocean, and having crossed the equator, got into the other hemisphere;
where, facing to the eastward, their shadows projected toward the south, and
right hand." No words could be more completely descriptive of a voyage from
Portugal to Congo, as any person may be satisfied by inspecting a map of
Africa; but how could M. Otto imagine that the discovery of America was
accomplished in such a voyage as this? "Having finished this cruize (continues
Schedl) in the space of 26 months, they returned to Portugal, with the loss of
many of their seamen, by the violence of the climate." This latter circumstance
also agrees very well with the climate of the African coast; See Brooks's
Gazetteer, Benin.
but Schedl says not a word of the discovery of America.

M. Otto goes on to tell us "that the most positive proof of the great services
rendered to the crown of Portugal by Behaim, is the recompense bestowed on him
by King John II; who in the most solemn manner, knighted him, in the presence
of all his court." Then follows a particular detail of the ceremony of
installation, as performed on the 18th of February, 1485, and M. Otto fairly
owns that this was "a reward for the discovery of Congo." Now let us bring the
detached parts of the story together.

Behaim was knighted on the 18th of February, 1485, for the discovery of Congo,
in which he had been employed 26 months preceding; having within that time made
two voyages thither in company with Diego Came. It will follow then that the
whole of the preceding years, 1484 and 1483 were taken up in these two voyages.
This agrees very well with the accounts of the discovery of Congo, in Robertson
and Forster, and does not disagree with the modern universal history, as far as
the year 1484 is concerned; which unfortunately is the year assigned for
Behaim's discovery of "that part of America called Brasil, and his sailing even
to the Straights of Magellan."

The only thing in M. Otto's memoir which bears any resemblance to a solution
of this difficulty is this. "We may suppose that Behaim, engaged in an
expedition to Congo, was driven by the winds to Fernambouc, and from thence by
the currents toward the coast of Guiana." But suppositions without proof will
avail little; and suppositions against proof will avail nothing. The two
voyages to Congo are admitted. The course is described; and the time is
determined; and both these are directly opposed to the supposition of his being
driven by winds and currents to America. For if he had been driven out of his
course and had spent "several years in examining the American islands, and
discovering the straight which bears the name of Magellan;" Memoirs, p. 269.
and if one of those years was the year 148^, then he could not have spent 26
months preceding February, 1485, in the discovery of Congo; but of this we have
full and satisfactory evidence; the discovery of America therefore must be
given up.

There is one thing further in this memoir which deserves a particular remark,
and that is the reason assigned by M. Otto, for which the King of Portugal
declined the proposal of Columbus to sail to India by the west. "The refusal of
John II. is a proof of the knowledge which that politic prince had already
procured, of the existence of a new continent, which offered him only barren
lands, inhabited by unconquerable savages." Memoirs, p. 276.
This knowledge is supposed to have been derived from the discoveries made by
Behaim. But, not to urge again the chronological difficulty with which this
conjecture is embarrassed, I will take notice of two circumstances in the life
of Columbus, which militate with this idea. The first is, that when Columbus
had proposed a western voyage to King John, and he declined it, "The King by
the advice of one Doctor Calzadilla, resolved to send a caravel privately, to
attempt that which Columbus had proposed to him; because in case those
countries were so discovered, he thought himself not obliged to bestow any
great reward. Having speedily equipped a caravel, which was to carry supplies
to the islands of Cabo Verde, he sent it that way which the admiral proposed to
go. But those whom he sent wanted the knowledge, constancy and spirit of the
admiral. After wandering many days upon the sea, they turned back to the
islands of Cabo Verde, laughing at the undertaking, and saying it was
impossible there should be any land in those seas." Life of Columbus, chap. xi.


Afterward "the King being sensible how faulty they were whom he had sent with
the caravel, had a mind to restore the admiral to his favor, and desired that
he should renew the discourse of his enterprise; but not being so diligent to
put this in execution as the admiral was in getting away, he lost that good
opportunity; the admiral, about the end of the year 1484, stole away privately
out of Portugal for fear of being stopped by the King." Life of Columbus, chap.
xii.
This account does not agree with the supposition of a prior discovery.

The other circumstance is an interview which Columbus had with the people of
Lisbon, and the King of Portugal, on his return from his first voyage. For it
so happened that Columbus on his return was by stress of weather obliged to
take shelter in the port of Lisbon; and as soon as it was known that he had
come from the Indies, "the people thronged to see the natives whom he had
brought and hear the news; so that the caravel would not contain them. Some of
them praising God for so great a happiness; others storming that they had lost
the discovery through their King's incredulity."

When the King sent for Columbus, "he was doubtful what to do; but to take off
all suspicion that he came from his conquests, he consented." At the interview,
"the King offered him all that he stood in need of for the service of their
Catholic Majesty's, though he thought, that forasmuch as he had been a captain
in Portugal, that conquest belonged to him. To which the admiral answered, that
he knew of no such agreement, and that he had strictly observed his orders,
which were not to go to the mines of Portugal, [the gold coast] nor to Guinea."
Life, chap. xli.
Had John II. heard of Behaim's voyage to a western continent, would he not
have claimed it by priority of discovery rather than by the commission which
Columbus had formerly borne in his service? Had such a prior discovery been
made, could it have been concealed from the people of Lisbon? And would they
have been angry that their King had lost it by his incredulity? These
circumstances appear to me to carry sufficient evidence, that no discovery of
America prior to that of Columbus had come to the knowledge of the King of
Portugal.

In answer to the question "Why are we searching the archives of an imperial
city for the causes of an event, which took place in the western extremity of
Europe?" M. Otto gives us to understand, that "from the fourteenth to the
sixteenth centuries, the Germans were the best geographers, the best historians
and the most enlightened politicians." Not to detract from the merit of the
German literati of those ages, I think we may give equal credit to a learned
German author of the present age, Dr. John Reinhold Forster; who appears to
have a thorough understanding of the claims not only of his own countrymen, but
of others. In his indefatigable researches into the discoveries which have been
made by all nations, though he has given due credit to the adventures of Behaim
in Congo and Fayal, yet he has not said one word of his visiting America; which
he certainly would have done if in his opinion there had been any foundation
for it.

He has indeed given us a long detail, with much reasoning, on a discovery made
in the 11th century by the Normans, of a country called Winland; which he
supposes to be the island of Newfoundland; but neither he nor any other writer
pretends that the knowledge of this discovery was ever communicated to
Columbus. That great man therefore, is justly entitled to the honor of an
original discovery of America.

APPENDIX TO DISSERTATION II. No. I. LETTERS from PAUL a Physician of Florence,
to CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, concerning the Discovery of the Indies.
To CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, PAUL the Physician wishes health.
I PERCEIVE your noble and earnest desire to sail to those parts where the
spice is produced; and therefore in answer to a letter of yours, I send you
another letter, which some days since I wrote to a friend of mine, and servant
to the King of Portugal before the wars of Castile, in answer to another he
wrote to me by his highness's order, upon this same account; and I send you
another sea-chart like that I sent him, which will satisfy your demands. The
copy of the letter is this.

To FERDINAND MARTINEZ, canon of Lisbon, PAUL the Physician wishes health.
I AM very glad to hear of the familiarity you have with your most serene and
magnificent King; and though I have very often discoursed concerning the short
way there is from hence to the Indies where the spice is produced, by sea,
which I look upon to be shorter than that you take by the coast of Guinea; yet
you now tell me that his highness would have me make out and demonstrate it, so
as it may be understood and put in practice. Therefore, though I could better
show it him with a globe in my hand, and make him sensible of the figure of the
world; yet I have resolved to render it more easy and intelligible, to show
this way upon a chart, such as are used in navigation; and therefore I send one
to his majesty, made and drawn with my own hand; wherein is set down the utmost
bounds of the west, from Ireland in the north, to the farthest part of Guinea,
with all the islands that lie in the way. Opposite to which western coast is
described the beginning of the Indies, with the islands and places whither you
may go, and how far you may bend from the north pole toward the equinoctial,
and for how long a time; that is, how many leagues you may sail, before you
come to those places most fruitful in all sorts of spice, jewels and precious
stones. Do not wonder if I term that country where the spice grows west, that
product being generally ascribed to the east; because those who shall sail
westward will always find those places in the west; and th^^ that travel by
land eastward will ever find those places in the east. The strait lines that
lie lengthways in the chart, show the distance there is from west to east; the
others cross them, show the distance from north to south. I have also marked
down in the said chart, several places in India, where ships might put in, upon
any storm or contrary winds, or any other accident unforeseen.

Moreover to give you full information of all those places which you are very
desirous to know; you must understand, that none but traders live or reside in
all those islands, and that there is as great a number of ships and seafaring
people with merchandise, as in any other part of the world; particularly in a
most noble port called Zacton, where there are every year a hundred large ships
of pepper loaded and unloaded, besides many other ships that take in other
spice.

This country is mighty populous, and there are many provinces and kingdoms,
and innumerable cities under the dominion of a prince called the great Kham,
which name signifies King of Kings, who for the most part resides in the
Province of Cathay. His predecessors were very desirous to have commerce and be
in amity with Christians; and 200 years since, sent ambassadors to the Pope;
desiring him to send them many learned men and doctors to teach them our faith;
but by reason of some obstacles the ambassadors met with, they returned back,
without coming to Rome.

Besides, there came an ambassador to Pope Eugenius IV. who told him the great
friendship there was between those princes, their people and the Christians. I
discoursed with him a long while upon the several matters of the grandeur of
their royal structures, and of the greatness, length and breadth of their
rivers. He told me many wonderful things of the multitude of towns and cities
founded along the banks of the rivers; and that there were 200 cities upon one
river only, with marble bridges over it, of a great length and breadth, and
adorned with abundance of pillars. This country deserves as well as any other
to be discovered; and there may not only be great profit made there, and many
things of value found, but also gold, silver, all sorts of precious stones, and
spices in abundance, which are not brought into our parts. And it is certain,
that many wise men, philosophers, astrologers, and other persons skilled in all
arts, and very ingenious, govern that mighty province, and command their armies.

From Lisbon directly westward, there are in the chart 26 spaces, each of which
contains 250 miles, to the most noble and vast city of Quisay, which is 100
miles in compass, that is 35 leagues; in it there are ten marble bridges* the
name signifies a heavenly city; of which, wonderful things are reported, as to
the ingenuity of the people, the buildings and the revenues. This space
abovementioned is almost the third part of the globe. This city is in the
province of Mango, bordering on that of Cathay, where the King for the most
part resides.

From the island Antilla, which you call the seven cities, and of which you
have some knowledge, to the most noble island of Cipango are ten spaces, which
make 2500 miles, or 225 leagues; which island abounds in gold, pearls and
precious stones; and you must understand, they cover their temples and palaces
with plates of pure gold. So that for want of knowing the way, all these things
are hidden and concealed, and yet may be gone to with safety.

Much more might be said, but having told you what is most material, and you
being wise and judicious, I am satisfied there is nothing of it, but what you
understand, and therefore I will not be more prolix. Thus much may serve to
satisfy your curiosity, it being as much as the shortness of time and my
business would permit me to say. So I remain most ready to satisfy and serve
his highness to the utmost in all the commands he shall lay upon me.

Florence, June 25, 1474.

LETTER II.
To CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, PAUL the Physician wishes health.
I RECEIVED your letters with the things you sent me, which I take as a great
favor, and commend your noble and ardent desire of sailing from east to west,
as it is marked out in the chart I sent you, which would demonstrate itself
better in the form of a globe.

I am glad it is well understood, and that the voyage laid down is not only
possible, but true, certain, honorable, very advantageous and most glorious
among all Christians. You cannot be perfect in the knowledge of it, but by
experience and practice, as I have had in great measure, and by the solid and
true information of worthy and wise men, who are come from those parts to this
court of Rome; and from merchants who have traded long in those parts, and are
persons of good reputation. So that when the said voyage is performed, it will
be to powerful kingdoms, and to the most noble cities and provinces; rich and
abounding in all things we stand in need of, particularly in all sorts of spice
in great quantities, and store of jewels.

This will moreover be grateful to those kings and princes, who are very
desirous to converse and trade with Christians of these our countries; whether
it be for some of them to become Christians, or else to have communication with
the wise and ingenious men of these parts, as well in point of religion, as in
all sciences, because of the extraordinary account they have of the kingdoms
and government of these parts. For which reasons, and many more that might be
alleged, I do not at all admire, that you who have a great heart, and all the
Portuguese nation which has ever had notable men in all undertakings, be
eagerly bent upon performing this voyage.

APPENDIX. No. II. A Chronological detail of Discoveries made in the fifteenth
Century, connected with Events in the Life of COLUMBUS.
Robertson. third island of the Azores discovered, which from that circumstance
is called Terce-ira. Forster. Papal Bull conferring the newly discovered
countries on the Portuguese. Robertson. Forster. (Uncertain date.) Alphonso V.
King of Portugal grants an exclusive right of discovery to Gomez, and gives the
island of Fayal to his sister Isabella, Duchess of Burgundy and Flanders. Rob.
Forster. Forster. the good, Duke of Burgundy and Flanders, and husband to
Isabella, dies at Bruges, Aet. 73: Is succeeded by his son Charles the bold,
Aet. 34. Collier. Mezeray. Forster. Life of Col. by Ferdinand Col. St. George
de la Mina, lat. 5 N. Forster. Schedl. Forster. ( Uncertain.) Columbus proposes
his plan of a western voyage to the republic of Genoa, without success.
Herrera. Then to John II, of Portugal; who, by the advice of Calzadilla,
privately sends a vessel to make discoveries in the west, which comes back to
Cape de Verd, without success. Ferd. Col. Mod. Univ. Hist. Rob. supposed to be
some parts of America. Robertson's America, vol. I. p. 322. May 12. Sets out
from Granada, for Palos, whence, Aug. 3, he sails with three vessels* Aug. 12,
arrives at the Canaries. Septem. 6. Sails thence to the westward. Oct. 12.
Discovers Guanahana, one of the Bahama islands, distant 950 leagues from the
Canaries. Hazard's State pap. Prince's Chron. Sept. 25. Sails on his second
voyage to the West Indies. by accident the continent of America, in lat. 10 S.
which is called Brasil. Rob. Otto. Ferd. Col.
DISSERTATION III. ON THE QUESTION, WHETHER THE HONEY BE IS A NATIVE OF
AMERICA.
MR. JEFFERSON, in his notes on Virginia, has said, that "the honey be is not
a native of our continent. The Indians concur with us in the tradition that it
was brought from Europe, but when, and by whom we know not. The bees have
generally extended themselves into the country, a little in advance of the
white settlers, The Indians therefore call them the white man's fly; and
consider their approach as indicating the approach of the settlement of the
whites." He allows that "in Brasil there is a species of honey be, without a
sting, but that it is very different from the one we have, which perfectly
resembles that of Europe." The facts adduced by this respectable author are
true; but they will not warrant his conclusion that "the honey be, meaning the
one resembling that of Europe, is not a native of our continent." Page 79,
American Edition. 121. English.


There is one circumstance in the history of Columbus, which proves that bees
were known in the islands of the West Indies, at the time of his discovery.
When on his first return to Europe he was in danger of perishing at sea, he
wrote an account of his discovery on parchment, which he enclosed in a cake of
wax, and put into a tight cask, committing the whole to the sea, in hope of its
being driven on shore or taken up. This wax was procured in the island of
Hispaniola See his Life, chap. xxx.
which he had visited, and it was one of the first fruits of his discovery.

The indefatigable Purchase gives us an account of the revenues of the empire of
Mexico, before the arrival of the Spaniards, as described in its annals; which
were pictures drawn on cotton cloth. Among other articles he exhibits the
figures of covered pots, with two handles, which are said to be pots of "bees
honey." Purchase, vol. IV.
Of these pots, two hundred are depicted in one tribute-roll, and one hundred
in several others.

This account is confirmed by a late history of Mexico, written by the Abbe
Clavigero, a native of Vera Cruz, who from a residence of thirty-six years in
Mexico, and a minute inquiry into the natural history and antiquities of his
country must be supposed to be well informed, and competent to give a just
account. He tells us, that a part of every useful production of nature or art
was paid in tribute to the Kings of Mexico; and among other articles of revenue
he reckons "600 cups of honey" paid annually by the inhabitants of the southern
parts of the empire. Book VII, p. 351, 4 to edit.
He also says, "that though they extracted a great quantity of wax from the
honey comb; they either did not know how, or were not at the pains to make
lights of it."

In his enumeration of the insects of Mexico, he reckons six different kinds of
bees which make honey, Book I, p. 68.
four of which have no stings, and of the other two which have stings, one
"agrees with the common be of Europe, not only in size, shape and color; but
also in its disposition and manners, and in the qualities of its honey and wax."

In the account given by Purchase, of the travels of Ferdinando de Soto, in
Florida, it is observed, that when he came to Chiaha, which by the description
was on one of the upper branches of the Mobille, [now in the state of Georgia]
he found among the provisions of the natives "a pot full of honey of bees."
Purchase, vol. V. p. 1539.
This was A. D. 1540, when there were no Europeans settled on the continent of
America, but in Mexico and Peru.

From these authorities it is evident that honey bees were known in Mexico and
the islands, before the arrival of the Europeans; and that they had extended as
far northward as Florida, a country so denominated from the numberless flowers,
which grow there in wild luxuriance and afford a plenty of food, for this
useful tribe of insects. The inference is, that bees were not imported by the
Spaniards; for however fond they might be of honey as an article of food, or of
wax to make tapers for common use, or for the illumination of their churches;
yet as bees were known to be in the country, there could be no need of
importing them. The report of honey and wax being found in the islands, in
Mexico, and in Florida, had reached Europe and had been published there long
before any emigrations were made to the northward; if therefore if these had
been considered as articles of subsistence or of commerce; the sanguine spirit
of the first adventurers would have rather led them to think of finding them in
America, than of transporting bees from Europe to make them.

As to the circumstance of the bees "extending themselves a little in advance
of the white settlers," it cannot be considered as a conclusive argument in
favor of their having been first brought from Europe. It is well known, that
where land is cultivated, bees find a greater plenty of food than in the
forest. The blossoms of fruit trees, of grasses and grain, particularly clover
and buck wheat, afford them a rich and plentiful repast; and they are seen in
vast numbers in our fields and orchards at the season of those blossoms. They
therefore delight in the neighborhood of "the white settlers," and are able to
increase in numbers, as well as to augment their quantity of stores, by
availing themselves of the labor of man. May it not be from this circumstance
that the Indians have given them the name of "the white man's fly;" and that
they "consider their approach (or frequent appearance) as indicating the
approach of the settlement of the whites?"

The first European settlement in Virginia was made about seventy years after
the expedition of Soto, in Florida, and the first settlement in New England was
ten years posterior to that in Virginia. The large intermediate country was
uncultivated for a long time afterward. The southern bees therefore could have
no inducement, to extend themselves very far to the northward, for many years
after the settlements were begun; and within that time bees were imported from
Europe.

That honey and wax were not known to the Indians of New England is evident
from this, that they had no words in their language for them. When Mr. ELIOT
translated the bible into the Indian language, wherever these terms occurred,
he used the English words, though sometimes with an Indian termination.

Josselyn, who visited New England first in 1638, and afterward in 1663, and
wrote an account of his voyages with some sketches of natural history in 1673,
speaks of the honey be in these words, "The honey bees are carried over by the
English, and thrive there exceedingly." Voyage to New England, p. 120.


There is a tradition in New England, that the person who first brought a hive
of bees into the country was rewarded with a grant of land; but the person's
name, or the place where the land lay, or by whom the grant was made, I have
not been able to learn.

It appears then, that the honey be is a native of America, and that its
productions were found by the first European visitors as far northward as
Florida and Georgia. It is also true that bees were imported from Europe into
New England, and probably into Virginia; but whether, if this importation had
not taken place, the bees of the southern parts would not have extended
themselves northerly, or whether those which we now have are not a mixture of
native and imported bees, cannot be determined. It is however certain that they
have multiplied exceedingly, and that they are frequently found in New England,
in a wild state, in the trunks of hollow trees, as far northward as cultivation
and settlements have extended, which is nearly to the forty-fifth degree of
latitude.

I have made inquiry of several persons from Canada; but have not learned that
bees were known during their residence in that country. It is however not
improbable that as cultivation extends, the bees may find their way to the
northward of the lakes and river of Canada, even though none should be
transported thither by the inhabitants.

DISSERTATION IV. ON THE COLOR OF THE NATIVE AMERICANS, AND THE RECENT
POPULATION OF THIS CONTINENT.
IT has been queried, "if the blackness of the Africans and the East Indians
within the torrid zone, be the effect of climate; why are not the original
natives of America, within the same latitudes equally black?" American Museum,
1790 -- p. 78.


That the blackness mentioned is the effect of climate is generally admitted by
philosophical writers. Their meaning is, that the excessive heat of the
climate, in a long series of time, produces this effect. The heat of a country
depends not only on its proximity to the equator; but on its particular and
relative situation. A plain is hotter than a mountain, a continent is hotter
than an island, and one side of a continent is hotter than the other. Though
almost all the countries and islands of Asia and Africa, between the tropics,
have black inhabitants; yet there is a diversity in the shades of their sable
hue, as well as in the form of their hair. The crisped woolly headed
inhabitants of the western coast of Africa, are said to be the blackest of
mankind, because that country, from its peculiar situation, receives and
retains a greater degree of heat than any other part of the globe; the easterly
winds which pass over that continent being extremely heated in their passage.
The same wind (which at sea is called the trade wind) is cooled in passing over
the Atlantic. The eastern parts of South America are much cooler than the
opposite coast of Africa, in the same latitude; and the natives of Guiana and
Brasil are of a brown color. Between Brasil and Peru are situate those lofty
mountains, the Andes; which again arrest and cool the easterly wind* before it
reaches the western coast of America; and, the inhabitants of Peru are of a
lighter color than those of Brasil. Mexico is in the same latitude with
Senegal and Gambia; the inhabitants of the two latter countries are black,
whilst those of the former are of an olive complexion, which is supposed to
have been the original color of the human species.

This account is conformable to that given by the celebrated naturalist,
Buffon; but he has also formed an opinion, which, if it were admitted, might
solve the question in another way. He conjectures that America is "of a much
more recent existence" than the old continent; that it must have remained
buried under the waters of the sea much longer; and has but lately emerged from
the waves. In illustration of this conjecture he asks, "if this continent be
really as ancient as the other, why did so few men exist on it? Why were those
few savage and dispersed? Why did the inhabitants of Mexico and Peru, (the only
ones which had the smallest degree of society) reckon only two or three hundred
years from the time that they were first assembled together?" He might have
gone on with his queries thus -- Why are not the inhabitants of the torrid zone
in America, of as dark a complexion as those of the Asian islands, and the
eastern side of the African continent? For it is well known, that length of
time as well as heat of climate, is necessary to produce any great and
permanent change in the human color.

This conjecture of the late emersion of the American continent from the waters
of the ocean, advanced by Buffon, De Paw, and other European theorists, appears
to me attended with an insuperable difficulty. For whilst buried in the water
it must either have been sunk below, or the water must have been raised above
the present level of the continent. On the former supposition, there must have
been some mighty convulsion of nature, and of very long continuance; to raise
so immense a bulk from the bottom of the ocean to its present elevation; and
the water which covered it must have been so driven back on all sides, as to
have made great encroachments on the shores of the other continent and islands
of the globe. Or, on the latter supposition, that the water was raised above
the present level of America, it would have been impossible, for that element
to preserve its equilibrium, according to the laws of hydrostatics, without at
the same time overwhelming the ancient continent. This difficulty renders the
conjecture inadmissible, without some historical proof of the existence of
these effects.

But, though the antiquity of America be allowed equal to the rest of the
world* yet it is possible that its population may be more recent. It is very
certain that the annals of Mexico and Peru extended back but a few centuries
previous to the Spanish invasion. If we are to believe them, Manco Capac, the
founder of the Peruvian monarchy, was contemporary with Henry II. of England,
in the twelfth century; and the Mexican empire was established in the
fourteenth. The most elaborate investigation of the late historian Clavigero,
carries the first population of Mexico by the Toltecas, no further back than
the seventh century of the Christian Era. Beyond that, they had no tradition,
excepting that their ancestors came from the north west.

If any analogy can be drawn from the progress which the ancient Assyrians and
Egyptians made from a rude to a civilized state; that is, to the same degree of
improvement which the Mexicans and Peruvians had attained; there could not have
intervened more than four or five centuries, from their first arrival in
America, to the appearance of Manco. This calculation will bring the time of
the population of America, five or six centuries within the Christian Era.

Since modern voyagers have discovered the Pacific Ocean to be full of islands,
and those islands full of people, many of whom are well skilled in navigation,
the population of the western parts of America, from the eastern shores and
islands of Asia is rendered more credible than ever; and if the Mexicans and
Peruvians came originally from the north of China or Corea, they might probably
bring some degree of refinement with them, beyond what those had who found
their way hither from the more northern deserts of Tartary. If this could be
ascertained, it would greatly strengthen the argument for the recent population
of America, and help us to account for the difference between the inhabitants
of those celebrated empires, and the wild wanderers in the northern regions of
this vast continent; which is very analagous to the difference between the
people of China, and the roving Tartars in the northern forests of Asia.

In such an inquiry, where so little light can be derived from history or
tradition, the mind is apt to rest, perhaps too much on circumstantial proofs
which seem to favor an hypothesis. Let this be my apology, if any be
necessary, for introducing the following quotation from the learned Dr. Forster.

"From the year 1259 to 1294 of the Christian Era, reigned KUBLAI-KHAN,
[Sovereign of Tartary, whose residence was in Kathay, the northern part of
China, and whose capital was a part of the present city of Peking.] He sent a
fleet and army to Niphon, or Japan for the purpose of conquering that country.
The ships composing his fleet were very much shattered by storms, and it is
probable that some of them were not able to get back to Japan or China. About
this period there sprung up in America almost at one and the same time, two
great empires, Mexico and Peru, which had regular institutes of religion;
notions of rank and subordinations, were in some measure civilized; were
connected with each other by various kinds of association; practiced
agriculture; and in the matrimonial state did not allow polygamy. In Mexico,
they had even a kind of hieroglyphic writing, together with many other marks of
cultivation; notwithstanding that both these empires are surrounded on all
sides by savage and rude nations, very inconsiderable in point of extent, and
are besides at a distance from each other. All this favors the supposition,
that these two colonies came thither by sea, in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries; perhaps they are some of the people who were lost in the expedition
to Japan* their ships having been driven by the storm to America." Forster's
History of Voyages and Discoveries, chap. I. p. 43.


ADVERTISEMENT.
There is now preparing for the Press, A WORK, ENTITLED AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY; OR,
An Historical Account of those persons who have been distinguished in America,
as ADVENTURERS, STATESMEN, PHILOSOPHERS, DIVINES, WARRIORS, AUTHORS,
And other remarkable Characters. Comprehending a Recital of the Events
connected with their Lives and Actions.

THIS work is begun, and will be prosecuted with as much expedition as the
difficulty of collecting materials will permit. As soon as matter sufficient
for one volume is put into order it will be published; but it cannot be
determined, at present, in how many volumes the work will be comprised. It is
hoped that the first will be finished within one year from this date; the
others will follow as soon afterward as possible.

Gentlemen of curiosity and intelligence in every part of the American
continent, and islands, are respectfully solicited, to favor the Editor, with
such communications, as the nature of the work requires; which will be
gratefully accepted and acknowledged by their most humble servant,

JEREMY BELKNAP.
Boston, Nov. 10, 1792.
PUBLISHED, by the same Author, [According to Act of Congress.] THE HISTORY OF
NEW HAMPSHIRE. IN THREE VOLUMES, 8vo.

VOL. I. Comprehending the Events of one complete Century, from the Discovery
of the River Pascataqua in 1614. VOL. II. Comprehending the Events of
seventy-five years, from 1715 to 1790, illustrated by a Map of the State. VOL.
III. Containing a Geographical Description of the State, with sketches of its
natural History, Productions, Improvements, and present state of Society and
Manners, Laws and Government.
Sold in Boston by JAMES WHITE; in Philadelphia by THOMAS DOBSON; and in London
by CHARLES DILLY.


