MR. BLOOD's ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE LEGISLATURE OF THE State of Vermont;
CONVENED AT RUTLAND, October 11th, 1792.

BEING THE DAY OF General Election. PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

By CALEB BLOOD, PASTOR OF A BAPTIST CHURCH IN SHAFTSBURY.

PRINTED AT RUTLAND BY ANTHONY HASWELL

In GENERAL ASSEMBLY, October 12th, 1792.
RESOLVED, That Messrs. EMMONS, AILEN and I. SMITH, be (...) to wait on the
reverend Mr. BLOOD, to return him the (...) of this House, for his ELECTION
SERMON, delivered (...), and request a copy of the same for the press.

Attest. RICHARD WHITNEY, CLERK.

In GENERAL ASSEMBLY, October I9th, I792.
RESOLVED, That the Committee appointed to wait on the reverend Mr BLOOD, with
the thanks of this House, for his ELECTION SERMON, and request a copy of the
same for the press, -- be a committer to procure three hundred copies thereof
to be printed.

Attest. RICHARD WHITNEY, CLERK.

AN Election Sermon.
ECCLESIASTES iii, I5. THAT WHICH HAS BEEN, IS NOW; AND THAT WHICH IS TO BE
HAS ALREADY BEEN; AND GOD REQUIRES THAT WHICH IS PAST.
IT is hard to find a more complicated character, in all the annals of time,
than that of Solomon. The first part of his life presents us with the greatest
instance of human sagacity, and wisdom, joined with a special regard to
religion and virtue, but a second part was filled up with luxury and wickedness.

THE just portrait we have of this complex character, not only exhibits the
impartiality of the sacred history; but is joined with a display of infinite
wisdom.

GOD in his all wise providence, raised Solomon, to the very summit or worldly
glory. There was scarce a single thing in all the rich variety of nature's
garden, but he might partake of at his pleasure. But alas! instead of improving
the mercies he had to the glory of that God from whom they came; he laid the
reins on the neck of his lusts, and gave a loose to almost every vain desire.
This conduct of Solomon appears the more exceedingly criminal, when we consider
his exalted station in life, which gave him a superior influence among men.

IT pleased the Lord however to magnify the infinite riches of his grace, in
making this celebrated king of Israel, a true penitent for all his sin. This
occasioned him to write the book, of which the words now read are a part. This
indeed contains as full, and ample a confession as any we shall find extant
upon earth.

BY this means the Lord has graciously left a sacred record, a standing monitor
to the world. By which we are assured, that however great our abilities,
however high our seize in wisdom and knowledge; or if we are raised to
the summit of worldly honor and riches, yet that we are poor, fallible,
changing creatures, wholly dependant on him that made us. By this we are
assured that all plans and systems, founded in human wisdom, however we may
think them placed on a sure basis, or arranged with the greatest coherence; yet
they are subject to error.

IT is often that the turning of but one leaf in the book of divine providence,
makes us sensible, that the firmness of their foundation, is not sufficient to
dissipate our fears; or prevent the disappointment of our most sanguine
expectations. Well did the prophet say, Isaiah ii.22 Cease from man, whose
breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of. Again Psalms
xxxix, 5. Verily every man at his best estate, is altogether vanity. This king
of Israel, deeply sensible of this humiliating truth and the madness of his own
sin and solly while he anticipated the scene of trouble that must come upon his
family and subjects by his means; was led, in our context, particularly to warn
others of the changing, fluctuating state, of all men and things, in this
sinful world: and of the great necessity of our engrossing in our affections
some superior objects for delight.

ROVING in his thoughts, through the wild confusion, of a sinful world; he at
length found the desired object, (viz.) The system of God's unchanging
government, and the glory of his character displayed therein, for the good of
being. Like the dove of Noah, he here found an ark of rest. Here he had found a
system that could suffer no change. I know, says he, verse I4th. That
whatsoever Gcd does it shall be forever: nothing can be put to it, nor any
thing taken from it: and God does it that men should fear before him.

FURTHER to express his views, of its unchanging sameness, he makes use of the
words of our text. That which has been is now; and that which is to be has
already been, and God requires that which is past.

THIS sacred passage, therefore, affords us this soul consolating doctrine;
(viz.) that that eternal rule of righteousness, contained in God's moral
government, and the ground of our acceptance with him, is so infinitely
perfect, and so well suited to the capacities, and circumstances of his
creatures, on every occasion, that it can admit of no change. But that which
has been the rule of our conduct toward God and our fellow men, and that
which has been the ground of our acceptance with God, is now; and that which
is to be has already been. And likewise that the same virtuous exercises, that
were required in past ages of the world, are required now.

FOR our further improvement of this subject on the present important occasion
we shall observe,

I. THAT the scheme of divine administration, both in its nature and
requirements, is so suited to the capacities of men, that it is the
indispensible duty, of all ranks of men, without distinction, cheerfully to
submit to, and obey God therein,

II. THAT this obedience only, can afford substantial and lasting satisfaction
to the human heart.

III. THAT this obedience will qualify us to fill our several stations in life,
as well in the civil as the ecclesiastical kingdom, to the glory of God and the
good of our fellow men.

I. THAT the scheme of divine administration, both in its nature and
requirements, is so suited to the capacities of men, that it is the
indispensible duty, of all ranks of men, without distinction, cheerfully to
submit to and obey God therein.

THE nature of divine government is like its author, infinitely holy, just and
good. Its holy nature is easily seen, when we consider its great end and
design; which is to assert the rights of the Godhead, and invariably to
vindicate truth and suppress falsehood: and that in a manner directly tending
to the general good of being.

ONE very considerable branch of divine operation, is to be seen in the
creation of the world: in which there are creatures made of different ranks,
and their different stations assigned them, exactly according to their various
capacities. As we are favored with a rank among the creatures of God, what more
immediately concerns us to know, is, our own station in the scale of being, and
what is the business assigned us therein.

THAT we are made rational creatures, capable of contemplating upon and
exploring objects presented to our view, is a truth, this respectable audience,
will think it needless to use arguments to prove.

IF this be granted we are necessitated to believe, that we are capable, in
some measure, to judge of the quality of those objects; and feel ourselves
consciously concerned, to estimate them according to their real value. The most
valuable objects, therefore, that come within the compass of our speculation,
justly merit our greatest attention. Nor can this be esteemed a hardship to a
rational mind, if rightly disposed, Should we not indeed feel ourselves greatly
injured, if we were prohibited contemplation, on the best objects presented to
our view, and were obliged to fill up all our searches and researches on an
inferior good.

ONE part of the business, therefore assigned us in the system, and which
appears well adapted to our capacities, is to employ our thoughts in
contemplating on, and in forming a right judgment of those glorious perfections
of the Deity, which are so clearly manifested in his works.

ANOTHER branch of our work is, always to be employed in loving those objects
that are made known to us, according to their real worth. THIS also is an easy
yoke, well suited to our necks. That we are capable of loving objects of a
moral nature, will hardly be denied: for as we cannot be delighted in objects
that we cannot love, we either must allow that we are incapacitated for any
higher enjoyments, than those which are merely natural, or that we are capable,
affectionately to embrace, the important ideas of holiness and virtue. If we
admit the former, then we are driven to the disagreeable necessity of
believing, that there are no objects for delight, afforded us in the universe,
but those which our context and our own experience proves, to be as unstable as
water, and entirely insufficient. If the latter then, we must allow, that our
supreme affection and delight, ought ever to be placed on that God who is the
essence of all possible excellence and glory.

THE principles of common justice dictate, that every being ought to be loved
according to their real worth; as God therefore is the supreme good in the
universe, he justly claims our supreme affections. This is so well suited to
our capacities, that if we rove in our affections through all the glories of
this world, we shall find no rest; nothing permanent, no suitable object for
delight: untiil we say with the Psalmist, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for
the Lord has deals bountifully with thee. Psalms, cx, 7. I am not insensible
that the cavils of wicked men are often raised against the degree of this holy
exercise which the divine law requires of us. But shall I ask, what is the
extent of its requisstions? The Lord Jesus defines it thus, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and with all thy mind,
and thy neighbor as thyself. Matthew, xxii, 37, 39 -- On these two hang all
the law and the prophets. This reduced to practice in heart, lip, and life,
comprises the whole duty of man.

NOR can this justly be thought too severe; for there is nothing more required
than all the heart, soul, and mind, that is, all the faculties that are given.
And for God to give faculties to us capable of virtuous exercises, and not
require the use of them would be unjust, and directly militate against the
happiness of his creatures.

As to the love required to our fellow creatures, it is to love our neighbor
as ourselves. This also is right and fit in the nature of things, for as every
creature ought to be loved in proportion to its real worth, in the scale of
being; and as our fellow men hold the same rank with us in the system, we ought
therefore to love them as ourselves.

ANOTHER idea implied, in this obedience to God, is an unreserved submission to
his sovereign will. This also is just and reasonable: for as with the all-wise
and omniscient Jehovah, there can be no possible error, either in judgment or
design, it is infinitely fit that he should have the sovereign disposal of all
events.

NOR does this take any privilege from us; seeing we are capacitated to be
happy only is a cheerful obedience to him. So long as we may rest assured, that
the judge of all the earth will do right, it can never afford us any uneasiness
that he should govern, unless we are unwilling that right should take place.

THIS leads us to see the necessity of faith in God, as another branch of our
duty to him. By faith I mean, that a^^ of the mind, by which we affectionately
embrace, and unreservedly rely, on the truth of God, which he has made manifest
concerning his character and will: and those things which respect the relation
we stand in to him, and our fellow creatures. No other evidence is necessary
for the ground of this faith, than to be assured, that the doctrine proposed
for our belief comes from God. That we are capable of believing the truth upon
this evidence, will not be denied; and for finite creatures to call in question
the testimony of the God of truth, is a crime of the first magnitude. Hence
faith the apostle, I John v. I0. He that believes not God has made him a
liar, because he believes not the record God gave of his son.

FROM the whole it appears that the nature of the divine government, in all its
demands upon us, is perfectly suited to our capacities, and fully secures all
our rights to us.

An impartial view of this made our Savior say, Matt. xi, 29, 30. Take my yoke
upon you and learn of me, for my yoke is easy and my burden is light.

WE cannot therefore call in question the most sacred obligations that all men
are under without distinction, to obey these divine precepts: seeing it is a
law that necessarily exists, in consequence of our relation to God, as his
creatures, and not arbitrarily imposed on us, by him, as a sovereign.

BY this time, perhaps, some may think, that the speaker has forgotten the
doctrine we so often hear from the pulpit, viz. that mankind are fallen,
depraved creatures, wholly dead in trespases and sins. Indeed I have not
forgotten so great a truth, which is not only asserted by an apostle, Ephesians
ii, I, but is always written in indelible characters before my eyes. But we
wish however to have skill enough to distinguish between the depravity of the
human heart, and those faculties by which we are capacitated to obey God. The
apostle has well expressed the idea of depravity: dead in trespasses and sins.
This death therefore cannot consist in reducing our natural faculties to a
state or inactivity: otherwise we could not be active in trespasses and sins.
Depravity therefore, must respect the disposition of the heart: and the sense
is, that man, by his fall from God, has lost his original righteousness, and is
now wholly and voluntarily opposed to virtue.

NOR can this justly be considered in the least degree to lessen our
obligations: for it is not the virtue or vice that we possess, that is the bond
of our obligation to God. Should a person guilty of treason against the state,
be brought before this venerable court, and appear wilfully determined to
pursue his villainy, would they judge that the vileness of his disposition
should exculpate him from blame? Would they not rather think that such a
judgment would be taking sides with the criminal? Neither can the vileness of
our hearts, be any just excuse for our rebellion against God our rightful
sovereign.

IT may be said, if men are thus guilty, how is it God spares the criminal, and
continues the world in its present state? I answer, only upon the plan of grace
which respects the unworthy. This GRACE however is exercised in a way perfectly
consonant with the divine law and government.

HERE we see the necessity of a mediator, to make atonement for sin. It can be
thought but doing justice to the subject, to advert for a few minutes to the
character and work of Christ as mediator.

ST. John in the beginning of his gospel gives in the following important
account of the character of Christ. In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and the word was God. All things were made by him, and without
him there was not any thing made that was made. And the word was made flesh and
dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of
the Father full of grace and truth.

FROM hence we learn, that the Lord Jesus Christ is very God, that all created
things were made by him, that he is of the one undivided offense, equal with
God, and that he became flesh, or took upon him our nature; so that he is very
man as well as God: also that this God-man is full of grace and truth. Full of
the designs of grace and mercy to a guilty world, and fully determined to
exhibit that grace in a manner that should assert the truth, respecting the
rights of the Godhead, and the honors of divine law and government.

No less a character than this, is equal to the work of a mediator between
offended justice, and the offending sinner. As sin is against an infinite God,
there must be an infinite display made of his disapprobation of it: otherwise
his character and government could not be vindicated. The creature being
finite, this display could not be made, in the execution of penalty on the
sinner, in any other way, than that the sentence should extend to an infinite
duration of punishment. Hence we see why the sacred scriptures threaten
everlasting punishment upon the wicked.

LET us pause a moment! What mean creature, however exalted in the scale of
being, that would not blush to attempt the unequal task, of making to atonement
answerable to the demands of infinite justice? And should we not all shrink at
the thought that divinity should change, and become a suffering advocate? Here
all created intelligences are thrown into a consternation! condemnation to the
criminal must sparkle in every eye! Until the complex character of the God-man
appears: who in his human nature was able by his obedience, perfectly to
illustrate the glory, and vindicate the honors of the divine precepts: and by
his suffering and death, fully to disclose the divine righteousness in the
penal part of the law. Although his sufferings were comparatively short, yet
the infinitive dignity of his person was such, that he was able to bear the
whole at once. In this obedience and suffering of Christ, we see a full display
made, of that infinite rule of right contained in the divine law, and of God's
holy indignation against sin.

HERE we see a way opened for God to exercise grace and mercy, to the sinner,
consistent with the rights of justice. Through this atonement the Holy Ghost is
sent down to renew the hearts of man, and bring them to acknowledge the rights
of justice in repentance for sin; and by faith to trust alone in this complete
righteousness of Christ for justification, -- as the ground of our acceptance
with God.

THIS will appear the more consistent, when we consider that the Lord Jesus,
not only suffered and died, but that he rose again from the dead; ascended up
on high who is set on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the
heavens. Heb. VIII.I. And that all judgment is committed unto him, and all
power both in heaven and earth. This gracious prince therefore, is become the
rightful legislator of the world. Seated on a throne of grace his government
toward us is a gracious administration. Hence it is the world is spared in its
present state, and a space allowed us for repentance.

BY this, I think we must be assured of our renewed obligations to love, fear
and serve God, who has made such rich displays of himself; both as a God of
grace and justice: and also, immediately, to repent of our sins, and believe
the testimony which God has given of his son. Otherwise our crimes will be
greatly augmented in his sight. But it is time that I hastened to show,

II. THAT this obedience only can afford substantial and lasting satisfaction
to the human heart.

That object in the universe that is of the most real worth, in its own
essential properties; must be thought the most delightful object for our
contemplation: if we are rightly disposed and can have access to the knowledge
ot it.

THAT God is this supreme good, and that he has revealed himself to man as
such, we have already noticed. And as we cannot be delighted in things that we
have no knowledge of, it must be essential to our happiness to employ our
thoughts in contemplating on the glories of the divine character. To pass this
unnoticed is always to remain ignorant of, and destitute of delight in, the
greatest good.

AGAIN, however much we may know of the qualities of an object, yet if we do
not love it, the more we know of it the more disagreeable feelings we have;
love therefore, to those excellencies of the divine character which he has
revealed, is essential to our happiness.

THIS leads us to observe, that if we know and love God as he is, infinitely
holy, just and good; with whom there can be no possible error, either in
judgment or design; we cannot be happy unless we freely resign the disposal of
all events into his hands. And to be deprived of believing it such a being,
would be to prohibit our confidence in the supreme object of our delight.

FURTHERMORE, he who walks in this obedience, f^^^ly chooses God for his
portion, and the chief object of his delight. Here he has an inheritance that
is incorruptible and that fades not away. In this he is not subject to
disappointments as others are; though he may be disappointed in creature good,
yet he can say with the prophet, Heb. iii, I7, I8. Although the figtree, the
vine, the olive, the (...) and the flock should fail, yet will I rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

As the divine law and government contains a perfect rule of right, it can
never operate to the disadvantage of any one, that is an obedient subject. And
as it is below the dignity of a rational conscious mind to be happy in
opposition to right, it is easy to see that a conformity to the divine law is
essential to our happiness. Indeed it is impossible for a man to be happy
without the temper of mind that the law requires, viz. love or real
benevolence; if we have not this we must be possessed of its opposite; unless
we admit that we can fall into a state of entire indifference, and without any
affectionate regard to any being whatever, which would be to fall below the
rank of rational creatures.

THE opposite to benevolence is to estimate our own happiness, and the
gratification of our own desires, above the honor of God, and the good of being
in general. How miserable such a person must be! having set up himself in
opposition to the divine glory and the general good of being, in the promotion
of which all events must finally terminate: every event therefore in the
universe must necessarily operate against him, and fill the mind with (...)
co^^usion and guilt: unless at times (while in this world) the mind is amused,
and the conscience lulled asleep, in the gratification of animal sensations.

BUT on the contrary, how happy is that soul, which glows with supreme love to
God; and with undissembled benevolence to being in general. And while he rests
assured that the allwise legislator of the world governs in the best manner, he
delights himself in the sweet employment of glorifying him, and doing good to
his fellow creatures. Thus, while the mind is released from the narrow circle
of selfishness, it can rove in the extensive fields of truth and righteousness,
and partake of the sweet fruits of holiness and virtue.

This benevolence to being in general, must include our love in particular to
those of our own species, with whom we are more immediately conversant, and to
whom we are more particularly called to administer good. And who can but see
what a heaven upon earth we should have, if this disposition was to govern in
families, neighbourhoods, towns, and kingdoms.

AGAIN, as without repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
we cannot please God, this also must be essential to our happiness. By
repentance we turn from sin unto God, and cheerfully submit to his government:
By faith we affectionately embrace, and unreservedly rely on the characters,
offices and work of Christ as mediator, and receive his righteousness, as the
alone matter of our justification: through which we receive the free pardon of
all our sins, peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

THIS righteousness is an everlasting righteousness; that which man had in his
first state was not so, That righteousness he destroyed by disobedience. if we
indeed were to be set back again upon the soul of creature righteousness, it
would not be fit that an absolute promise of eternal life should be made us
upon it: for we might destroy it again by sin, and become unrighteous. But this
righteousness, completed by a redeemer, will everlastingly secure the honors
of infinite justice, while gra^e is displayed in our redemption and
justification. We see therefore, that here is a permanent foundation for hope
and delight.

FURTHER, to illustrate that our happiness is connected with obedience to God,
we may observe, that it unites us with, and engages us in, the same cause that
God himself, the holy angels, the glorified spirits in heaven, and all the
virtuous on earth are engaged in. The cause I mean is that of truth and
righteousness. If therefore we are heartily engaged in this cause, we are in
fellowship and agreement with them. Here we may rest assured of the divine
approbation and protection. Here we shall share in the kind offices of angels,
as ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation. In this also, we shall enjoy the prayers of all the saints upon
earth, and the good wishes of those in heaven. We may say then with the
apostle, Romans viii, 3I. If God be for us who can be against us.

In this righteous cause we are assured of victory over all our enemies, and
that they must fall victims to divine justice, in the end, unless we admit,
that God, at last, will suffer virtue to become a prey to vice, and truth to
falsehood. We come to observe,

III. THAT this obedience will qualify us, to fill our several stations in
life, as well in the civil as the ecclesiastical kingdom, to the glory of God
and the good of our fellow men.

RIGHT views of God and his government, gives us right ideas of holiness,
truth, righteousness and justice, administered according to the true principles
of benevolence. That these are the principles on which all governments ought to
be administered, will not be denied. That a competent degree of knowledge
therefore, in this divine system, is needful in order to the right
administration of government, is equally obvious. If then we have so filled up
our searches and researches, as to have obtained a good degree of acquaintance
with this infinitely perfect system, it will follow what we have acquired one
very important qualification, to be useful either in church or state.

PUT on the contrary, to remain ignorant of this, is always to remain ignorant
of what is right; and consequently not qualified to do right. Such ignorance as
this is the cause why some men are to anxious to be promoted in places of
public trust. Puffed up with a sense of their own importance, and stimulated
from pecuniary motives, they eagerly rush into important stations in life,
ignorant of the great business they undertake; and without any proper concern,
either for the glory of God, or the good of society.

THE parable of Jotham, as in Judges, 9th chapter, gives a just portrait of
such characters; for while a becoming diffidence possessed the minds of those
worthy characters, who may fitly be compared to the olive, the figure and the
vine; yet the bramble, not only destitute of those sweet fruits so useful to
mankind, bur are full of pricking thorns, was ready to accept the office of
ruler over the trees. Brambles indeed are such selfish rulers! and experience
often makes good the prophet's words: The best of them is as a brier, and the
most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge. Micah vii, 4

BUT those, whose real merit brings them to posts of honor, feel feasible that
they have need of wisdom and prudence, need to ponder the paths of their feet,
that they might so steer the helm of government, as to run clear of those fatal
bars, that always lie in the narrow gulf of a wicked and selfish administration.

BUT knowledge only will not complete a virtuous character; love also to the
truth we know is an essential qualification: for as we are generally governed
by the supreme object of our delight, we shall never make it our chief concern
to fill our several stations among men, in conformity to the divine character
and will, unless he has our supreme affections. I do not say but that an
unregenerate man, or one who has not true love to God, may be useful in civil
society, and do many noble things, both in the legislative and executive
departments, or that he may not do valiantly in the martial line, and in many
other respects.

WICKED men are not only often restrained, by the all powerful influence of
Jehovah, from those vicious acts, which would be hurtful to society; but are
sometimes influenced, contrary to the general bias of their minds, to do things
that are for the general good. But this by no means argues, that we should
tempt God, by filling the important places of public trust with wicked men.
Neither does it argue, but that the truly virtuous mind is the best qualified
to serve the public.

WHAT should we have left of a truly patriotic character, i^ we subtract from
it all love to the perfect rule of right, and the general good of the people?
He might indeed have great natural powers, and large acquired abilities, an
easy powerful and pathetic address; but does not love to use them for the
general good of society. We cannot but fear the consequences of promoting such
a character. But when we see a man put into office, who possesses a real spirit
of patriotism, it is with pleasure that we anticipate the happiness we expect
to enjoy under his administration, as a minister of God for good to the people.

SUBJECTION to divine sovereignty, is also a useful qualification for men
entrusted with the affairs of state; otherwise in the most trying and critical
circumstances of government, he is liable to be thrown into anxiety and
confusion: which will unfit him for those manly exercises which the important
duties of his station calls for, in so interesting a period.

As the character, offices and work of Christ, gives us the greatest and
richest display of the divine character and government; we can but think that
faith in him, is at least a very useful qualification for a civil officer.
Without this it is impossible to please God: because if we do not believe God,
we do not put confidence in, nor rely on his testimony, but practically say
that he is a lier, which can he thought no less than an insult upon his
INFINITE MAJESTY.

WE may not expect therefore than an unbeliever will ever act from the
principles of true benevolence, in any thing that he does. But more especially
we cannot expect it, from those who are so lost to all virtue, as to openly
treat the character, offices, and work of Christ, as mediator, with contempt.
Especially when we consider then so hardened in sin, as to rise in opposition
to the testimony of God the Father, Son and Spirit; and in opposition to the
testimony of angels, of prophets, apostles, and all the saints in every age of
the world; also against the miraculous operations of the Holy Ghost, to confirm
the divine mission of Christ, and his apostles; and against all the
corroborating testimonies of divine providence, in almost every age of the
world.

I DO not say, indeed, but that even those infidels, (under the restraints
before mentioned) may do many things that may be for the public good. Yet I
think that we cannot deny, but that a truly virtuous and benevolent mind is
better qualified to manage the great affairs of government, on which the
general good so much depends.

AGAIN it is easy for an unprejudiced mind to see, that the temper and practice
inculcated by the gospel of Christ, is essential to the good of society, viz.
love to God and man, subjection to the divine will, faith in the system of
righteousness and truth: also meekness and humility, calmness and patience, a
desire to forgive injuries, and to do by others as we would that they should do
by us. These things if reduced to practice, will make the child obedient to his
parents, the parent to bring up his children in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord; and makes the subjects yield all due submission to magistracy as an
ordinance of God: and the magistrate to fill his important station, as a
minister of God for good to the people. And who will say that these are not
excellent qualifications for a civil officer.

IT is objected, that in many instances, those rulers who have made the highest
profession of the christian religion, have been the most tyranical and cruel.

THIS I will not undertake to deny, but it is however to be remembered, that a
profession only of religion, is very different from the real possession of it
in heart and practice. Had those antichristian rulers (as I must call them)
have been as much concerned to be governed by religion, as they were to govern
it by the civil sword, they would never have invaded the sacred rights of
conscience in the manner they did. But making religion a mere engine of state
policy, and setting up its ministers to be supported by the civil arm; their
office soon became a place of worldly honor and profit. This occasioned persons
of superior advantages in life, merely from pecuniary views, to invade the
sacred office. And what was the event but a scene of horrid priest craft,
attended with pernicious consequences. This I think however, is so far from any
just objection, that it rather argues the necessity of pious and christian
rulers. Such indeed, as have so sacred a regard for the rights and liberties of
the people, both civil and religous, as that they will seek to preserve them
inviolate.

I AM far from wishing to have America involved in the great error of blending
the government of church and state together. But I heartily wish that all (...)
may be truly virtuous, and such as (...) in the fear of God.

THEIR superior influence among men argues the necessity of it, their examples
have great influence upon the common people. One vicious magistrate will do
more toward corrupting the morals of the people, and lessening the energy of
government, than (...) others. Such is the depravity of men, that we shall
scarce ever find a magistrate that is openly vile, but he has a number around
him, that are glad to follow his pernicious examples; and however such
magistrates may do good in some things, yet the hurt they do eventually, far
exceeds all the benefit we receive from them.

THE nature of a republican government, is another argument why virtue should
be considered as a necessary qualification for a civil ruler. It is observed by
an ingenious author, "that in despotic governments, the force of education is
to inculcate fear; in monarchal governments, to inculcate honor; and in
republican governments to inculcate virtue." This is true, for virtue is the
basis of a free and republican government.

THIS virtue in the people principally consists in three things. Is It. In
forming a constitution that is a proper basis for a virtuous government. 2d. In
choosing virtuous rulers to administer upon it. 3d. In a cheerful submission to
their righteous administration. But this golden chain is at once broken, unless
we admit that virtue is a necessary qualification for a civil ruler.

FROM the whole it appears that the more we are conformed to the unchanging,
and perfect rule of righteousness, the more solid and substantial happiness we
have, and the better we are qualified to do good to others. What remains
therefore is some reflections in suitable addresses.

OUR chief magistrate justly claims our first attention.

May it please your excellency,

IT is with pleasure we behold you as God's minister for good, to this great
and growing people: your often and repeated election to the highest; fear in
this commonwealth, gives you the greatest assurance of the love and confidence
of the people. May it ever be with grateful acknowledgements, that we as a
people reflect on the goodness of our God, that has raised up one from amongst
us, of our brethren, who was able and willing to take us by the hand in our
infancy and weakness, and safely lead us forth into the brilliant fields of
liberty, peace, and good government; until we have justly merited the
approbation and esteem of our sister states, and are accounted worthy to hold a
seat in the government of the great and growing empire of America.

MAY it still please the great benefactor of the world, to scatter light in
your paths, and safely conduct you through the many difficulties that attend
the important station, that God and your brethren have called you to. We can
assure you our most fervent prayers, that you may be succeeded in all your
efforts to promote the general good of the state; and in giving proper energy
to government.

YOUR excellency is sensible that while you have the approbation and esteem of
your brethren, it is of the last importance, that all the services done to your
country, are done from such motives, as will meet the approbation of him, who
is the great (...) of all hearts, and before whom (...) of men must appear to
give an account of the deeds done in the body.

SELF EXAMINATION well becomes one who fills the chair or state. A wrong temper
of mind seldom fails to misguide the judgment; the consequences of which are
the more fatal, in proportion to the trust reposed in us. A mistake in the
helmsman often proves fatal, both to the ship and all on board. The wise
magistrate therefore, will examine his own heart, and will ascend the throne of
power with the prayer of the psalmist. Search me O God and know my heart; try
me and know my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me
in the way everlasting.

FOR one who fills the chair of state, to have the motives of his actions,
enclosed in the doleful dungeon of selfishness and pride, in which there is no
light, for right judging of matters, but what forces its way through the dreary
gra^es of a stifled conscience, is far below the dignity of his station. And to
die in such a state, is to go from a throne of power, and seat of judgment on
earth, to be judged as a guilty criminal, at the bar of almighty God.

BUT on the contrary, if his eye is single to the glory of God, his whole body
is full of light, and his patriotic breast will glow with desire for the
general good of his subjects; who are made to rejoice under his faithful
administration. Your excellency, therefore, will feel the importance of being
personally virtuous in heart, lip and life; otherwise your sacred office, of so
much consequence to the state, will not appear with that real importance which
it deserves, and which is necessary to give proper energy to government.

MAY the Lord grant you grace and wisdom, to fill the important station you
hold, to his glory and the people's good. That you at last may close a life of
long usefulness here, with the approbation of him, by whom kings reign and
princes decree justice.

SHALL I be indulged, while I include your excellency in an address to his
honor the lieutenant governor, the honorable council, and house of
representatives.

VENERABLE AND RESPECTFUL RULERS,

You are this day, by the free suffrages of your brethren, vested with the full
power of legislation for a great and growing people: the oath of God is upon
you, to maintain the sacred principles of our constitution. You have bound
yourselves, by all that is sacred, to the faithful discharge of your office. In
addition to your oath you will feel the sacred injunctions of the divine law,
which must necessarily exist as long as truth remains sacred.

THIS law of love to God and man, is essential to a truly patriotic character.
It becomes you therefore, as men, as citizens, and especially as rulers, to
examine your own hearts, whether you have true evangelical repentance toward
God, and that faith in our Lord Jesus Christ that works by love and purifies
the heart. Be assured venerable ^^^s, that without this, although you may do
many things that may be of public utility; yet they will nor be done from such
motives, as will meet the approbation of the great judge of all hearts.

YOUR honors will also feel sensible, that your own importance as ^^^^rs, the
goal of society, and the energy of our excellent government, much depends on
your being clothed with practical piety.

FOR those who are concerned in enacting laws, suitable for the regulation of
our conduct in civil life, to be guilty of wronging their creditors, by keeping
them out of their just dues, or by over reaching, cheating and (...) their
neighbors; or in any other way to injure their fellow citizens, in person,
name or estate; is in fact practically to say, that the laws they have made are
not worthy to be regarded: which can never fail to lessen the energy of
government.

A WISE magistrate will let a constant guard over the words of his mouth; that
with a becoming moderation, he may express his resentment of injuries done
(...); and have all his language such as shall (...) to prevent others from an
uncivil, profane was of treating their fellow citizens. A magistrate that is
rough and profane in his language, is a monstrous character. He is not civil
himself, and we cannot expect but that the practice, at least, will do (...) in
the community. He is not the gentleman, for any person of sense knows, that a
rough profane way of treating mankind, better fits the character of a clown
than a gentleman. Can I suppose myself in danger of giving offense? No, I
cannot think that so respectable a body, as I am now called to address, will
think me too severe in centuring so great an evil: especially seeing it so much
prevails in our land at the present day.

We, your children, shall look up to you as our political fathers, that all
those officers who come under the direction of your wisdom to appoint, will be
such characters as shall do honor to their office. Such as are men of integrity
and uprightness. Such as shall make conscience of executing the law on
offenders, and such whose examples shall give energy to government.

THE institution of learning is of great consequence to a tree people. Grateful
acknowledgements are justly due to our wise legislators, whose liberal and
friendly exertions, has given so early a birth to an institution of this kind,
in this infant state. The tender mother of this promising infant, will never
forget her sucking child, but will nourish and cherish it; from whom she may
justly expect protection and support in her riper years.

As religion at all times, is a matter between God and individuals, your honors
will never think it within the limits of your legislation, to dictate the
conscience of a single individual. The unchangeable law of righteousness,
forbids us to delegate such a power to any man, or body of man, either in
church or state. I do not wish however, to countenance those, who through ^ea^
of religious tyranny despise good order in society, and reject those friendly
aids to the cause of our holy religion, which may justly be expected from our
political fathers. Neither would I wish to be found with those, who with for
religious establishments by law; which never fail of pernicious consequences
both to church and state.

As a man, it is the duty of a magistrate, to befriend the cause of religion in
the profession and practice of it. As the head of a family he should maintain
family worship, and bring up his children (...) nurture and admonition of the
(...)

PERMIT me here to introduce the words of an ingenous author DR. STILLMAN.
, whose learning and experience adds weight to his sentiments. "As a magistrate
he should be a nursing father to the church of Christ, by protecting all the
peaceable members of it, from injury on account of religion; and by securing to
them the uninterrupted enjoyment of equal religious liberty." And after
observing the necessity of union in the state, he adds, "On the other hand, if
the magistrate destroys the equality of the subjects of the state on account of
religion, he violates a fundamental principle of a free government, establishes
a separate interest in it, and lays a foundation for disaffection to rulers,
and endless quarrels among the people."

THIS however, by no means prohibits the civil magistrate from enacting those
laws that shall enforce the observance of those precepts in the christian
religion, the violation of which is a breach of the civil peace; viz. such as
forbid murder, theft, adultery, false witness, and injuring our neighbor,
either in person, name, or estate. And among others, that of observing the
Sabbath, should be enforced by the civil power. Otherwise, those irreligious
persons who are so lost to virtue, as neither to regard divine worship, nor the
time appointed for it, will not only interrupt us, by coming to our houses in
our absence, and drawing off our children from good order and family
government, but will also, in attending to their worldly business, disturb us
in the hours of our most solemn devotions to God. And this is not all, but
tyrannical and cruel masters will be allowed to subject their servants to a
constant series of labor, without proper time to rest, or attend to the
important concerns of a future world. One reason given by Moses for keeping the
Sabbath, was, that thy man servant and thy maid servant may rest as well as
thou.

As to the aid of the civil power to force men to support gospel ministers, I
humbly conceive that it never can be necessary. This they will do freely,
unless it is contrary either to their consciences, or wills; if contrary to
their consciences, to force them is the worst of tyranny, if contrary to their
wills, like Peter's sword it cuts off the ear, and fills the mind with
prejudice against both the doctrine and the preacher, and of course does hurt
to the cause of religion. All such as are friends to religion, are heartily
willing to comply with those plain injunctions of heaven, that require the
honorable support of gospel ministers. And if we would make them religious that
are not, it is a poor way first so be let them by cutting their purse-strings
with the civil sword, which lays a fatal bar against our having access to their
consciences afterward. I appears therefore, that as religion is a benefit to
society, that forcing men to support its ministers, is a damage both to church
and state.

MAY the great legislator of the world honor you with his divine presence and
blessing, and prefine over you in all your deliberations: that the people may
rejoice under your wife and virtuous administration, and you be so happy at
last as to meet the approbation of him, who is king of kings, and lord of lords.

SHALL I be allowed a few words to this respectable audience in general,

FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,

THROUGH the infinite goodness of God, we as subjects of America, enjoy the
precious jewel of liberty, which is of more worth than mountains of gold. How
does it become us to adore and praise that God who has exalted us in privileges
above any other nation in the world. It we would have these blessings
perpetuated to us, let us make it our chief concern to walk worthy of them. Let
us examine our own hearts, whether we love the perfect system of ihe divine
government, and delight in subjection to it. The more we are subjected to this
perfect rule of righit, the better we shall be qualified to perform the various
duties we owe to God and our fellow man.

BUT if we live and die enemies to God, by wicked works, although we may here
enjoy natural liberty, yea we must go at last to the dreadful confines of
eternal darkness and despair. But if we live the life we now live in the flesh,
by the faiht the Son of God, we shall receive that grace, through his
worthiness, whereby we may perseve in well doing, unto eternal life and liberty
above.

LET US then strive to fill up our remaining moments, in love to God and man,
and in subjection to ihe examples and precepts of our divine redeemer. And as
virtue is of so great necessity for civil rulers, let us not sacrifice our
country and privileges, either by inattention to whom we elect from one time to
another, to rule over us, or by knowingly appointing such as have not a regard
to religion and virtue. Let us also yield due submission to magistracy as an
ordinance of God. Rendering honor to whom honor is due -- and fear to whom tear.

MAY the Lord of heaven bless rulers and ruled, ministers and people, that we
may all lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty.

AMEN.

