COMMERCE IN THE HUMAN SPECIES, AND THE ENSLAVING OF INNOCENT PERSONS, INIMICAL
TO THE LAWS OF MOSES, AND THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST.

A SERMON, PREACHED IN LITTLE PRESCOT STREET, GOODMAN's FIELDS, LONDON, JAN.
29, 1792. BY ABRAHAM BOOTH, A. M. PASTOR OF A BAPTIST CHURCH.

BEHOLD THE TEARS OF SUCH AS WERE OPPRESSED, AND THEY HAD NO COMFORTER; AND ON
THE SIDE OF THEIR OPPRESSORS THERE WAS POWER, BUT THEY HAD NO COMFORTER.

ECCLESIASTES iv. 1.8. REMEMBER HEAVEN HAS AN AVENGING ROD;
TO SMITE THE POOR IS TREASON AGAINST GOD.
COWPER. LONDON, PRINTED, PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED AND SOLD BY DANIEL LAWRENCE,
NO. 33. NORTH 4th STREET, NEAR RACE-STREET. M.DCC.XCII.

To the American Reader.
THE following discourse on a subject, which engrosses the attention of the
HUMANE, being exceedingly scarce in this country, and very great enquiry made
after it, by many who have heard of it; it has been suggested, that an American
impression of the same, wound prove highly acceptable to the man of
Benevolence, and the real Christian. The publication of such excellent
performances, which convey sentiments, so eminently calculated for the general
diffusion of genuine liberty, and universal happiness, appears more than ever
necessary in the UNITED STATES Last August, in the newspapers of GEORGIA, were
several advertisements, offering for public sale, the unoffending Sons and
Daughters of devoted AFRICA!!!
. -- A certain writer with much propriety remarks, that "it is a matter of real
surprise, for a free people voluntarily to become the importers of SLAVES." Not
only reason and justice, but the religion of the bible, enjoin a different
conduct; and to continue a custom so contrary to their injunctions, is no great
proof of sound political wisdom, or vital piety.

That the time may speedily arrive, when each state will be compelled to let
the hapless African sleep undisturbed upon his native shore, is the fervent
prayer of THOUSANDS! The Poet beautifully sings,

"Freedom, fair freedom, sprang from heaven!
"By the SUPREME to ALL 'twas given."
A free circulation of such ingenuous productions, must greatly contribute
toward helping forward one of the noblest of undertakings, determined upon by
increasing numbers -- never to let the subject drop, until a traffic so
disgraceful to human nature, and repugnant to the whole system of revealed
Truth, is wholly exploded by an ACT of CONGRESS.

A SERMON, etc.
EXODUS xxi. 16. HE THAT STEALS A MAN AND SELLS HIM, OR IF HE BE FOUND IN
HIS HAND, HE SHALL SURELY BE PUT TO DEATH.


TO adore our Almighty Maker, to confide in the Lord Redeemer, and to exercise
genuine benevolence toward all mankind, manifestly include both our duty and
happiness in the present state. To the first we are bound as reasonable
creatures; to the second, we are encouraged by the gospel, as perishing
sinners; and to the last we are obliged as social beings, surrounded with
multitudes of our own species. -- To promote this worship of God our Creator,
this confidence in Christ the Redeemer, and this cordial affection for our
neighbors, in the great end of an evangelical ministry, and of all divine
institutions that are of a religious kind. For this end are we now assembled;
and to plead the cause of moral justice, of true benevolence, and of
compassion, relative to the poor oppressed Africans, I have read that part of
sacred writ which is now before us. Yes, my brethren, I now stand to bear a
public testimony against that diversified iniquity, which is inseparable from a
commerce in the human species -- that commerce which is called the Slave Trade,
together with its numerous and horrid consequences.

That slavery against which I am going to plead is not of a civil or political
kind, but entirely of a personal nature. For though it is much to be wished
that liberty, in a civil and political sense, may be enjoyed and slourish
without licentiousness, in all the nations of the earth; yet I never thought
subjects of that nature proper to be discussed in the pulpit, and especially on
the Lord's day. But the exercise of moral justice, of benevolence, and of
humanity, being enforced by every principle of evangelical truth; an endeavor
to promote those virtuous affections toward our extremely degraded and
oppressed fellow creatures, the Negroes, must be completely consistent with the
commands of divine law, the grace of the glorious gospel, and the solemnities
of public worship.

It may be proper for me here to remark, that it is not against personal
slavery, as absolutely, universally, and in every possible case, evil, that I
am going to speak. By no means. For a man may so violate the laws and rights of
society, as justly to forfeit his liberty; as to deserve slavery -- slavery, in
a strict and proper sense -- that he may be an example to others, and
compensate, as far as lies in his power, the injuries done to society by an
abuse of his own liberty. Yet even in this case, the holding of his posterity,
not guilty of similar crimes, in a state of slavery, would be a flagrant
violation of justice. It is then, against the stealing, the purchasing, and the
enslaving of innocent persons, that I intend to argue -- innocent, not in a
moral, but in a civil sense. For if we consider ourselves as the subjects of
Jehovah's moral government, we are all guilty; we all deserve to perish, and
lie at his merey: nor would any man have the least ground of complaint against
the divine conduct, were eternal justice to plunge him in final ruin. But with
regard to that relation in which men stand to a secular sovereign, and as
members of civil society, the case is widely different. For here they may be
innocent; and, being so, are completely entitled to personal freedom.

In pursuance of my design, I shall now show, That the law in our text, though
given to the ancient Hebrews as a body politic, proceeds on a moral ground --
That though God, in certain cases, permitted the Israelites to purchase their
fellow creatures for servitude; yet that purchase and servitude were attended
with such restrictions, as rendered them essentially different from the
European Slave Trade and its consequences. That supposing God had permitted the
Israelitish people to traffic in the human species, and to enslave the Gentiles
in a much greater degree than he did; it would not have warranted the conduct
of Europeans toward the Africans. -- And, that the European commerce in man,
and the slavery consequent upon it, are absolutely inimical to the precepts of
Jesus Christ, and the whole tenor of his doctrine.

FIRST, The law in our text, though given to the ancient Hebrews as a body
politic, proceeds on a moral ground.

That no great labor of proof is necessary to evince the truth of this
proposition, a small degree of reflection will show. For though the divine law
before us was manifestly given to the Israelites, as part of their judicial
code, and was intended to regulate their conduct one toward another; yet it no
less apparently proceeds on the same principle with that prohibition of the
decalogue, Thou shall not steal. So Paul, with reference perhaps to this very
passage, says, The law is not made for a righteous man, but for -- murderers of
fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers, for whoremongens, for them
that defile themselves with mankind, for MEN-STEALERS, for liars, for perijured
persons. Man-stealing is here classed with such crimes as are most detestable
in the sight of God, most pernicious to society and most deserving of death by
the sword of the civil magistrate. Manstealing, therefore, must be considered
as a moral evil -- universally evil, in every age and in every nation. Nor is
it only an evil, but one of the first magnitude against our neighbor. If he
who pilfers any one's property, steals a sheep, robs on the high road, or
commits a burglary, be considered and treated as a thief, a robber, a pest of
society; of what enormous villainy must he be guilty, who kidnaps my honest
neighbor, my faithful servant, my dutiful child, or my affectionate wife, to
transport the one or the other to a country entirely unknown, and never thence
to return! This outrage on the sacred rights of liberty, of justice, and of
humanity, is greatly enhanced, if that worst of thieves intend, either to treat
them himself as the most abject of slaves, like those in the British
West Indies; or to sell them for that most infamous and cruel purpose. In
either of these cases, and much more when both are united, reason and
conscience, the common sentiments and feelings of mankind, will all unite, if
not debauched by avarice, or blunted by habit, in approving this law of Jehovah
as just; He that steals a man and sells him, or if he be found in his hand,
HE SHALL SURELY BE PUT TO DEATH. Nor is there a man upon earth, not even among
those who are grown hoary in the trade of manstealing, or of bartering "brandy
and baubles" for human flesh and blood; that would not execrate the character
of him to whose power of subtilty he had fallen a victim for fimilar purposes,
and that would not pronounce him worthy of death.

Now, if this law of the Lord, given to the ancient Hebrews, be founded on a
strictly moral principle; if it rest on the broad basis of common rectitude, of
justice, and of humanity; as the manstealer himself deserves to die for his
flagitious crime, the purchaser of those who are become the victims of his
avarice, cannot be accounted innocent. Innnoent! far from it! For his known,
or, at least, supposed readiness to buy unoffending fellow creatures, is
generally the principal motive to the commission of the horrid theft. There is
a vulgar saying, "If there were no receivers, there would be no thieves." It is
on the principle of that old observation the criminal law of this country
proceeds, in punishing the purchasers of stolen goods, knowing them to be
stolen: and it is much to be lamented, that this part of our criminal code
should have no force, relative to British subjects, who purchase on the coasts
of Africa, not a little despicable property, but innocent persons, knowing, or
having the highest possible presumptive reason to believe, that they were
stolen! How insulting to moral justice, and how affronting to common sense,
that those very persons who, in England, would be flogged at the cart's tail,
or perhaps transported to Botany Bay, for secretly purchasing five shillings
worth of property, knowing it to have been stolen, should have it in their
power publicly to buy and sell whole families of stolen, innocent Africans,
with complete impunity, and without violating any prohibitory law of the land!
As if rectitude and robbery were local things! the former losing its
respectability, and the latter its turpitude, whenever the liberty and the
lives of harmless Negroes become the object of British avarice! Or as if it
were equally consistent with private justice and national honor, actually to
fit out a number of ships, furnished with manacles, chains, and fetters, for
cargoes of harmless men and women; as it is for the Greenland traders to equip
others, for the capturing and stowage of all that is valuable in whales and
seals! -- It being apparent then, that the law under consideration rests on a
moral ground, I shall proceed to show,

SECONDLY, That though God, in certain cases, permitted the Isrealites to
purchase their fellow creatures for servitude; yet that purchase and servitude
were attended with such restrictions, as rendered them essentially different
from the Eurorean Slave Trade and its consequences.

There were two cases in which an Israelite himself might, according to divine
law, be sold into a state of servitude. These were, theft and insolvency.
Relative to the former, the Mosaic statute runs thus: If a man shall steal an
ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox,
and four sheep for a sheep -- If a thief have nothing, then he shall be sold
for his theft. Exodus xxii. 1 -- 4.
Here it is manifest the laws of the Hebrews had such a regard for personal
freedom, that even a thief was not considered as a proper subject of sale and
servitude, except he was unable to make the appointed restitution.

The Mosaic statutes permitted insolvent debtors to be sold for the benefit of
their creditors: but then the servitude to which such debtors were obliged, was
far from being oppressive and cruel. For thus runs the law of the case: If thy
brother that dwells by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou shall
not comple him to serve as a BOND-SERVANT, but as an HIRED servant, and as a
sojourner, he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee to the year of jubilee;
and then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him, and
shall return unto his own family, and unto the possessions of his father shall
he return. Thou shall not rule over him with RIGOR, but shall fear thy God.
Lev. xxv. 39 -- 43. See 2 Kings iv. 1. Matt. xviii. 24, 25.
So strictly, in this case, did the divine law guard against severity and
oppression in the servitude! Besides, the duration of that servitude, both in
regard to theft and insolvency, was at the longest expressly limited to six
years. For thus it is written: If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years shall
he serve; and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing. Nay, respecting
those who had been sold for debt, it is in another place, enacted: When thou
sendest him out free from three, thou shall not let him go away empty; thou
shall furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of
thy winepress; of that wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed thee, thou shall
give unto him. Exed. xxi. 2. Deuteronomy. xv. 12 -- 15.
How different all this from the laws relating to slavery in the West India
islands! It is evident, therefore, that the servitude to which any of Abraham's
natural posterity were exposed, was not, properly speaking, slavery; and much
less was it similar to that which is endured by many thousands of Negroes in
our sugar islands.

The state and circumstances of certain Gentiles among the ancient Hebrews, now
claim our serious consideration; because the situation of those Heathens, and
the Mosaic law respecting them, afford the most plausible argument that can be
deduced from the Scripture, in favor of West India slavery Relative to this
case the law of Jehovah says: Both thy bondmen and thy bondmaids, which thou
shall have, shall be of the Heathen that are round about you, of them shall ye
buy bondmen and bondmaids. Moreover, of the children of the strangers that do
sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with
you, which they begat in your land. Lev. xxv. 44, 45.
-- On this divine statute it may be remarked, that it did not require, but
only permit, the Israelites to purchase Heathens for a lower degree of
servitude than that in which any Hebrew might be employed. That is, if they
held bond servants at all, those meanest of servants must be had from among the
Gentiles. This law did not warrant the Israelites to go by sea or land to a far
distant country, as the slave-merchants now do, to purchase their
fellow creatures for servitude; but ordered, if they made any such purchase,
that it should be either of the strangers who sojourned among them; or of the
petty Heathen states that were around them. The bondservice permitted by this
law, could not, with the least appearance of reason, be so understood by the
Hebrews, as to think themselves warranted to exercise oppression and cruelty
upon their Gentile servants; because, to treat strangers of any description in
that manner, was most expressly and repeatedly forbidden Exed. xxii. 21. xxiii.
9. Lev. xxv. 35. Deuteronomy. x. 17.18.19. xxiv. 14, 15, 17. xxvii. 19. -- Ezekiel. xxii.
7.
. So far was divine law, relative to the treatment of either males or females
in a state of servitude, from authorizing an offended master to exercise
cruelty upon their persons, that its language is: If a man smite the eye of his
servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish, HE SHALL LET HIM GO FREE FOR
HIS EYE'S SAKE. And if he smite out his man-servant's tooth, or his
maid-servant's tooth; HE SHALL LET HIM GO FREE FOR HIS TOOTH'S SAKE. Exodus xxi.
26, 27.
Again: He that kills ANY MAN, shall surely be put to death. Ye shall have
one manner of law, as well for the STRANGER, as for one of your own country;
for I am the Lord your God Lev. xxiv. 17.22.
How essentially different is this from the British Colonial laws, respecting
the treatment of slaves!

There is great reason to conclude, that the divine permission which is under
our notice, was limited to the remains of those Canaanitish nations, the
extermination of which had been consigned to Israel. To this conclusion we are
led by the following considerations. Divine law, as already observed, was far
from authorizing the chosen tribes to visit distant continents, in order to
capture or to purchase their fellow creatures, either for their own use, or to
barter with other nations; making commerce in the human species an established
article of their trade, which, to our immorral infamy, is now the case with us.
No: the attention of the Israelites, respecting this instance of Jehovah's
pleasure, was directed to the neighboring Gentile states, and to them only.
Though the natives of Gentile nations in general, when residing among the
Israelites, were denominated strangers; and though none of them were to be
treated with cruelty, yet the Mosaic laws did not consider them as all on a
level, or as equally entitled to the benevolence of the Hebrews. For while God
permitted some of those aliens to be purchased and placed in the state of
bondservants, which was expressly prohibited, with regard to any Israelite; he
required, in the very same chapter, that others of them, if oppressed with
poverty, should experience all that compassion which was due to the descendants
of Abraham, when in a similar situation. Respecting this particular, the law
was: If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou
shall relieve him; yea, though he be a STRANJER, or a SOJOURNER, that he may
live with thee Lev. xxv. 35.
Hence arises no small degree of presumptive evidence, that none but strangers
of the Canaanitish race were to be purchased for bondservants. It does not
appear, that the Israelites were warned by their Eternal Sovereign, to carry
their arms into distant countries, except when those countries were the
aggressors. Their commission to invade, to subjugate, or to destroy, was
limited, if I be not under a great mistake, to the flagitious inhabitants of
the land; which, by a divine grant, had been expressly consigned to Abraham and
his posterity. It is natural to conclude, therefore, that the law which
authorized the descendants of Abraham to purchase fellow creatures of the
Heathens around them for bondservants, had its operation limited to the remains
of those Canaanitish nations. The history of the Gibeonites is, if I mistake
not, perfectly conformable to this view of the case. Those Hivites constituted
a part of the Cannanitish nations whom God had ordered to be subdued. Alarmed
with apprehensions of impending ruin, they, by an act of deception, made a
league with Israel, preserved their own lives, and were permitted to dwell
among the chosen people: but, as an expression of resentment against their
disingenuity, and as a mark of their being part of those nations against whom
the severity of punishment had been denounced, they were placed in a state of
inferiority, and occupied in mean employments. Joshua ix.
We find, however, that when Saul had treated their posterity with cruelty, the
divine anger was roused; and God was offended with David, for not having
avenged that cruelty in a more early art of his reign. 2 Samuel xxi.
We have another instance much to our purpose, in the reign of David's
illustrious successor, of whom it is thus recorded: All the people that were
lest of the Amorites, Hittites, Perrizites, Hivites, and Jebuzites, which were
not of the children of Israel; their children that were left after them in the
land, whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy, UPON
THOSE DID SOLOMON LEVY A TRIBUTE OF BOND-SERVICE UNTO THIS DAY. But of the
children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen: but they were men of war, and
his servants, and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots and
his horesemen 1 Kings ix. 20, 21, 22.
Whence it appears, that bondservice among the ancient Hebrews, was not
contrasted with the natural rights of humanity, as in the case of West India
slavery; but with military services, and with honorable employments in the
state. No: the lives even of the Canaanitish people were not, by cruel bondage,
rendered a burden to them: for though, in a comparative sense, they were
slaves, and excluded from respectable stations, yet they were under the
protection of divine law, and enjoyed the rights of men, though not of
citizens. An essentially different situation, therefore, from that of the Negro
Slaves in our plantations!

As the case of those Canaanitish Heathens is the only thing which, in the law
of Moses, and in the authorized conduct of the Israelites, bears almost any
resemblance to that personal slavery against which I plead; it may be
expedient, briefly to enquire into the reasons of it. Be it observed then, that
God, being the Creator of all things, is the universal Proprietor. No one has
either liberty or life, except by a grant from God: If therefore that grant be
recalled, men cease to have any claim to those dearest of all temporal
enjoyments. Mankind having revolted from God, and rebelled against him, they
have universally forfeited their all to Eternal Justice. God may therefore
justly deprive them of their property, their liberty, or their lives, according
to his own sovereign pleasure, without being accountable to any of his
creatures. The Canaanitish nations, it is evident, were extremely wicked. See
Lev. xviii. 6 -- 30.
The universal Sovereign might, therefore, with apparent propriety make them,
in the present world, examples of his justice: that not only his chosen people,
but others, in distant countries, might learn to revere his righteous
government, and stand in awe of his terrible judgments. He was perfectly at
liberty, therefore, to permit the Israelites to purchase those Canaanites for
bondservants, and to inflict such hardships upon them as he pleased. Nay, he
might not only permit, but expressly command them, to treat those devoted
people in such a manner as would have been enormously criminal, detached from
that command. Thus, for instance, it would have been highly criminal for the
Israelites to have invaded the Canaanitish country, had not he who is the
Universal Proprietor, and Absolute Sovereign, ordered them so to do. But, as
that land was his own; as, by a divine grant, it had been consigned to
Abraham's posterity; and as the tribes of Jacob were ordered to invade the
country, to subdue its inhabitants, and to take possession, their conduct in so
doing was lawful. It would have been still more criminal for the chosen seed to
have attempted, not only the conquest, but also the extermination of those
devoted nations, had not the Lord commanded it. But he, by whose command they
were to be extirpated, was equally at liberty to order their execution by the
sword of Israel, as to have destroyed them by an earthquake, by the pestilence,
or, as in the case of Sodom, by fire from heaven. -- It is on this ground, as I
conceive, that the Mosaic laws relative to bondservants proceed; the degrading
service itself being subjected to the forementioned limitations -- I must now
show,

THIRDLY, That supposing God had permitted the Israelitish people to traffic in
the human species, and to enslave the Gentiles in a much greater degree than he
did, it would not have authorized the conduct of Europeans toward the Africans.

To prove and illustrate this position, the following particulars may not be
impertinent. The Israelites, as a body politic, were the peculiar people of
God, in distinction from all other nations then upon earth. But this is not the
case, with any people now in the world. While the Mosaic Dispensation
continued, that singular and high prerogative was exclusively enjoyed by the
Jews: but when the Christian Economy was established, that prerogative ceased;
nor did any other nation succeed to the honor. If the English, for instance,
the Dutch, the French, or the Spaniards, were to claim the privilege; it would
behove them to produce the divine charter by which it was granted. But it is
manifest that no such authority can be adduced. God, under that sublimest of
all names, JEHOVAH, was not only the object of religious worship to the chosen
people; but also their political monarch. The whole statute law of that
kingdom, as well judicial, as moral and religious, was of his enacting: and on
the observing that system of law which was promulgated by Jehovah, their
national happiness depended. Now it is plain from what has been said, that the
divine statute which authorized the Hebrews to purchase persons of the nations
around them for bond-servants, belonged to the judicial part of their legal
code. But what nation pretends now to be governed by a system of law that is
divine, or to have Jehovah for its political sovereign? The Canaanitish country
was, by Jehovah, expressly given to the Israelites for their inheritance; which
rendered it lawful for them to conquer and possess it. But what nation in
Europe has the least pretense to a divine grant of any particular district on
the African continent? Divine justice doomed the profligate and impious
Canaanitish nations to destruction, or to a low state of subjugation; and
Abraham's posterity were expressly appointed to execute the sentence. But to
which of the European powers has God committed the execution of similar
judgments upon the Africans? Those whom Jehovah permitted his people to buy,
for a comparative degree of slavery, were to be, either Canaanites residing
among them, or persons of the same description in the nations around them. But
will this warrant our having recourse to a distant continent, for the purpose
of purchasing and enslaving its innocent inhabitants? Those Gentiles whom God
permitted the Hebrews to buy, were to be employed in low services among
themselves. But will this justify the English, or any commercial people, in
purchasing Negroes and selling them to other nations? The former were treated
as men, who, in the divine estimation, had forfeited the rights of citizens;
but the latter, like beasts of burden, or as articles of mere commerce.
Canaanitish bond-servants, among the Israelites, were under the protection of
divine law, which prohibited the exercise of cruelty upon them. But will any
defender of West India slavery pretend, that our Colonial laws afford an equal
degree of protection to the poor Negroes?

Again: The ancient distinction between Jews and Gentiles being entirely
abolished, by the divine establishment of Christianity, those prerogatives that
were peculiar to Judaism and its professors, do not now exist: among which
prerogatives, the right of purchasing Gentiles for bond-servants is to be
classed. Consequently, it is now as criminal and wicked for Europeans, either
to steal, or to purchase and sell, the innocent Africans for slaves, as it
would have been for the Israelites to have stolen, sold, and enslaved one
another: which, nevertheless, as appears from our text itself, was absolutely
forbidden under the severest of all temporal penalties. Nay, supposing our own
countrymen, for instance, could prove, that they have succeeded to the ancient
Israelitish prerogative respecting this matter; yet, from the particulars
adduced in the preceding paragraph, it is apparent, that their conduct would
stand condemned by the Mosaic law. This would be more strikingly evident still,
were I to lay before you the decetiful arts and iniquitous violence which are
frequently used to obtain the poor Africans in their own country -- the cruel
manner in which they are stowed on board the ships, when transported to the
West India islands; the brutal mode of exposing them to sale when there -- the
inhuman separation of brothers and sisters, of parents and children, of
husbands and wives, on that infamous occasion -- and the cruelty with which
they are generally treated, when employed in the sugar islands See an Abstract
of the Evidence before a Select Committee of the House of Commons, relative to
the Slave Trade.
. For were these things described in detail, as they appear in the testimonies
of numerous respectable witnesses -- they would make your ears tingle -- they
would shock your tender feelings -- they would rouse your indignation against a
trade so degrading to humanity, and so enormously wicked.

Further: Supposing the lawfulness of purchasing and of enslaving our innocent
fellow creatures were granted, it would be natural to ask -- For whom is it
lawful, and on what description of unoffending persons does the exercise of
that despotic right fall? Is it lawful for the English, the French, the
Europeans in general, to buy and enslave the Africans? But whence did they,
rather than those very Africans, derive that dreadful right? I say, dreadful
right. For the idea of any individual, or of any people, possessing authority
to treat the innocent as if they were flagitiously guilty, is hateful, and
shocking to reason, to conscience, and to common sense. -- Whence, then, I
demand, is that authority derived? From the Europeans professing Christianity,
the Africans in question being Pagans? -- But, as those Pagans are men, are
neighbors, are brethren of the human kind, so Christianity is the religion of
truth and justice, of benevolence, and of peace. It inspires them by whom it is
known, and not disgraced, with love to God and love to their neighbors:
Whereas the traffic in MAN is unjust and cruel, is barbarous and savage. Does,
then, the right in question originate in divine law, as given to the ancient
Israelites? but those laws that were peculiar to the Hebrew theocracy, have
long been obsolete; nor, were they in full force, would the present MAN- trade
be countenanced by them. As to that part of the Jewish law, which is properly
and strictly speaking moral, the obligation of which extends to all mankind in
every age; it forbids nothing to an African, that is equitable in the conduct
of a European. It knows no more of a white man buying and enslaving a black
one, than it does of the latter so treating the former. In its impartial
estimate, and under its commanding power, Africans and Europeans, Pagans and
Christians, are all on a level. Must the right under consideration, then, be
inferred from what is called the law of nature? But that is the same in Africa,
as it is in Europe; entirely the same all over the globe. According to this
law, be the station of an innocent Negro ever so obscure, his poverty ever so
great, his manners ever so rude, or his mental capacities ever so contracted,
he has an equal claim to personal liberty with any man upon earth. For the
rights of humanity being common to the whole of our species, are the same in
every part of the world.

It follows, therefore, that if the lawfulness of purchasing innocent persons
for the most degrading and cruel slavery exist among men, it must be a common
right, and equally possessed by all nations: nor can the exercise of it have
any limitation from principles of a moral nature. No limits can be here
assigned, except those of power, of policy, or of inclination. It would,
consequently, be quite as equitable, benevolent, and humane, for the Africans,
laden with produce of their own country, annually to visit our English ports,
as we do theirs, and for similar purposes. Yes, they might, if it were in their
power, with equal justice, and with less dishonor, fit out an hundred and
eighty, or two hundred ships, for the port of London, of Bristol, and of
Liverpool -- ships adapted to the stowage of MAN, and furnished with a
frightful apparatus, to render the confinement of Britons completely miserable,
as well as perfectly secure. When this commercial, this man-trading fleet
arrived, if cargoes of men, women, and children were not prepared, the officers
belonging to each vessel might practice all their arts, to excite a spirit of
covetousness and of cruelty in our governors and fellow subjects; in order
that, by an armed force, the peaceable inhabitants of whole villages might be
captured -- that, in our courts of justice, innocent persons, for the advantage
of their judges, might be convicted -- that private individuals might kidnap
whomsoever they could, and thought saleable -- that, by all these infamous
means, the ships might be freighted, at every returning season, with 40,000
Britons -- and, finally, that all who survive their miserable confinement while
on board, might be taken to the best market for the human species; exposed, in
the most indecent manner, to public sale; handled and examined, like so many
head of cattle, by their purchasers; consigned over, with their unborn
posterity, to the most abject and cruel slavery, from generation to generation;
and all for -- what? Here let humanity blush, let mercy weep, and let justice
be roused into indignation: but let not Britons forget, that this is a picture,
in miniature, of their own behavior toward the Africans!

Once more: Were the conduct of our man-merchants lawful, neither the
principles of morality, nor those of religon, could lie in the way of their
buying, and selling for slaves, the innocent natives of Holland or France, or
any other neighboring nation. For as it is impossible to prove, that the
natural rights of humanity are not equally sacred in Africa, as they are in
Europe; so the cruel and bloody hand of rapacity might with equal justice lay
hold of the Dutchman, or the Frenchman, as of the swarthy Guineaman. Nor, other
things being equal, is there the least reason for us to imagine, that the white
skin of a European would afford any more protection against a violent seizure,
than does the black skin of an African. No: had the trader in man an equal
opportunity of gratifying his cruel avarice; were he equally sure of impunity,
and no more exposed to infamy, in the one case than in the other; the same
disregard to justice, and the same principle of avarice, would have a similar
operation on the persons of neighboring Europeans, as they have on the poor
Negroes. Nay, he who is, by profession, a Negro Merchant; whose business it is
to buy and sell his fellow creatures, without regard to their guilt, or their
innocence; who has been in that practice for a course of years; who is
habituated to it and hardened in it, so that he carries on his iniquitous
commerce without remorse or shame, in the face of the sun, cannot be considered
as restrained by any religious or virtuous principle, though he never attempted
to purchase, for West India slavery, any of his peaceable neighbors in this
country. No: would the laws and customs of the land permit, as in former times,
As in former times. Relative to this fact, Dr. Henry says; Shives still
continue to he a capital article, both in the internal and foreign trade of
Britain. When an estate was conveyed from one proprietor to another, all the
villains or slaves annexed to that estate were conveyed at the same time, and
by the same deed. When any person had more children than he could maintain, or
more domestic slaves than he those to keep, he sold them to a merchant, who
disposed of them either at home or abroad, as he found would be most
profitable. It was a common vice ( says Giraldus Cambrensis) of the English,
when they were reduced to poverty, that rather than endure it patiently, they
exposed their own children to sale. Many of these unhappy persons were carried
into Ireland, and no doubt into other countries, and there sold. A strong law
was made against this barbarous kind of commerce, in a great Council held at
St. Peter's, Westminster, A. D. 1102. Let no man, for the future, presume to
carry on the wicked trade of selling men in markets, like brute beasts, which
hitherto has been the common custom of England. But this law did not put an
end to the trade in slaves. For in the great Council held at Armah, A. D. 1171
-- the whole Clergy of Ireland, after having deliberated long concerning the
cause of the calamities with which they were threatened, by the invasion of the
English, at length agreed, That the great judgment had been inflicted upon them
by the displeasure of God, for the sins of the people; particularly for their
having bought so great a number of English slaves, from merchants, pirates, and
robbers, and for detaining them still in hondage. They therefore decreed --
That all the English slaves in the whole island of Ireland should be
immediately emancipated, and restored (...) former liberty." -- History of
England, Vol. VI. p. 267, 268, 269.
, he would no more scruple to encourage kidnapping in England, than in Africa;
and be equally ready to buy a native of his own parish, as he would the
inhabitants of a romote continent. It appears therefore, with superior
evidence, That the European commerce in man, and the slavery connected with it,
are absolutely indefensible on the grounds of the Jewish law -- I now proceed
to show,

FOURTHLY, That the European Commerce in Man, and the Slavery consequent upon
it, are absolutely inimical to the precepts of Jesus Christ, and to the whole
scope of his Doctrine.

To the PRECEPTS of Jesus Christ. For instance: Love your enemies. Do good to
them that hate you. Now, is not the whole of that system against which I plead,
at irreconcilable enmity with the spirit of these divine precepts? If our
sovereign Lord require genuine benevolence and active love to our enemies, he
certainly cannot be satisfied with a less degree of social regard, and virtuous
affection, toward those who are not our enemies -- those who never did us any
evil; who never had it in their power to injure us; and who, perhaps, never
heard of us. To treat such persons as if they had notoriously injured us in our
dearest interests, and as if they were our implacable enemies, must be
absolutely contrary to the divine requisition in these precepts, and to every
dictate of moral duty. Yet such are the Negro Trade and its consequences, that
the most diabolical malice, which ever existed in the heart of man against his
bitterest enemy, could scarcely contrive or with more aggravated misery to
befall him in this life, than that under which many thousands of innocent,
captured, and enslaved Africans groan.

Again: All things whatsoever ye would, that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them, is another of our Lord's precepts. This admirably just and
comprehensive command, requires each of us to treat every man, as we might
reasonably wish every one to treat us, were situations and circumstances
reversed. It considers every man AS a man, and requires that he be so treated.
It impartially views every man, as having capacities, feelings, and rights,
peculiar to his own species: and it forbids those capacities to be insulted by
degradation, those feelings by unmerited pain, and those rights by injustice.
-- But is not the horrid MAN- trade, and the detestable connections in which it
stands, a manifest outrage on this most salutary precept? Do not that inhuman
commerce, and the consequent cruel slavery, treat vast multituds of human
creatures, as if they had no share in the capacities, the feelings, or the
rights of men? as if they were mere brutes, made to be taken and sold, enslaved
and destroyed? He, therefore, who dares to vindicate such conduct might, on his
own principles, be justly kidnapped, bought and fold, for a similar state of
slavery. Because, whatever arguments prove that any innocent man has an
inviolable claim to personal freedom, will equally prove the same thing
respecting every one of that character.

All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them. This has been frequently called, THE GOLDEN RULE. It recommends itself to
every man's reason and conscience, as completely wise and good. Every one
implicitly appeals to it as worthy of the highest regard, when his own rights
are violated by his neighbor: nor must even the Negro merchants, or the
slave-holders, be considered as insensible to the excellence of this moral
precept, when their own persons, families, or interests, are concerned. For who
among all the traders in man, and holders of slaves, would think himself
treated with equity, were he, after having been kidnapped by a villain, to find
his bones and sinews, his bowels and blood, exposed to sale, and actually
purchased by one whose profession it was to trade in the persons of men? Ezekiel.
xxvii. 13.
Must not his indignation rise, and would he not prefer instant death to a life
of slavery, if an apprehension of eternal fire did not forbid? Nay, would not
his indignation and anguish be greatly heightened, if possible, were his
affectionate wife and his dutiful children in the same situation; just going to
be separated, and never more to see one another? The very thought of such a
catastrophe stings with distress; and yet if any man upon earth deserves to be
so treated, it must be he who has made it his business to buy and to enslave
his innocent fellow creatures.

To the DOCTRINE of Christ. This doctrine is denominated the gospel, or glad
tidings, by way of eminence. Yes, my Brethren, it is glad tidings of pardon, of
peace, and of life eternal, through Jesus Christ, for perishing sinners. -- The
gospel, strictly so called, is the doctrine of divine benevolence to man; of
mercy to the miserable, and of grace to the unworthy. It reveals Jesus Christ
as coming into the world to save sinners. Its whole business is with those that
are justly condemned by divine law, and who deserve to perish. In this gracious
gospel the Lord Redeemer addresses Jews and Gentiles, Europeans and Africans,
without any difference; and his charming language is, Look unto Me, and he ye
saved, all ye ends of the earth. Come unto Me, all ye that labor, and and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Him that comes unto Me, I will in no
wise cast out. Such are the benign import, and the benevolent design of our
Lord's doctrine! Consequently, its natural tendency must be to produce and
promote love to God, and love to man. But nothing can be more inimical to that
devout and kind affection, than the buying, the selling, and the enslaving of
our innocent fellow creatures. For that commerce and slavery originate in the
basest avarice; are carried on by injustice and cruelty, and issue in the
misery and murder of thousands, who have an equal claim to liberty and to
happiness with ourselves.

Were you, my Brethren, mutually to consider the character of a Slave Merchant,
it would be sound, I presume, to include the following particulars. He is, by
profession, a buyer and seller of men, women, and children. If not a kidnapper
himself, he encourages, rewards, and rejoices in the practice: for without it
his trade would be at a stand. Instead of delighting in the domestic happiness
of others, universally, he makes it his business violently to separate the
nearest and dearest relatives: for conjugal, parental, and fraternal ties, are
by him dissolved without the least remorse. So far is he from sympathizing with
widows and orphans, as such, in their afflictions, that the distresses of
multitudes under those characters, arise from his rapacity. Such is the nature
of his employment, that it cannot succeed, without his fellow creatures being
deprived of their most sacred natural rights: because, for numbers to be
divested of their personal freedom, their mental tranqility, their social
connections, their bodily ease, and their pittance of property, is essential to
the joy of his gain. His profession is, as a man of business, to provide
victims for abject slavery, for pinching want, for capricious cruelty, for dark
despair, and for untimely death, in its various forms. His trade, as well as
his profits, must cease, except he diversify and propagate human misery. He may
call himself a Christian, or a disciple of Him that went about doing good; but
the amiable character is profaned by his traffic in man: for it becomes none
but a savage, or a votary of Moloch. He may, possibly, deserve commendation for
the exercise of benevolent affections in his own family, and in the
neighborhood where he resides; but, considered as a trader in MAN, he declares
war against the dignity and happiness of his own species; he insults the laws
of his Maker, and sustains a character, that is completely fitted for universal
abhorrence. So enormously criminal are the trade and the slavery under our
notice, that, had they commenced among Britons but a few years ago, and been
practiced only by five or six merchants and planters, the conduct of those
concerned would have met with general execration; their characters would have
been stigmatized with public infamy; and all intimacy with them would have been
studiously avoided by every person of decent morals. Nay, had the MAN-trade,
the slavery consequent upon it, and the execrable wickedness of both, been of
so recent a date, practiced by so few, and the iniquitous transactions laid
open to public view, as they now are, there is reason to conclude, that various
articles of commerce, produced by the sweat, and groans, and tears of the poor
Negroes, would have been considered by Britons as tinged with human blood. Did
the man after God's own heart, on a certain occasion, say, Is not thie the
blood of the men that went and jeoparded their lives? 2 Samuel xxiii. 15, 16, 17.
so, it is probable, the generality of our countrymen would have said,
respecting certain species of West India produce; Are not these the BLOOD of
innocent men, that have been stolen, and bought, and sold, and treated like
brutes? It behooves us to remember, however, that a system of iniquity is not
sanctified by its inveteracy, nor yet by the multitudes concerned in it.
Evidently, therefore, does it appear, that the commerce and slavery of which I
speak, are absolutely inimical to the precepts of Christ, and to the whole
scope of his doctrine, as might be more largely proved, would time permit.

As our English seaports, Liverpool and Bristol, are infamously conspicuous in
modern times, for their trading in the persons and rights of men, so were Tire
and Zidon, in the ages of remote antiquity. Let us hear, then, what Jehovah
says to the inhuman, though opulent merchants of those ancient cities. Thus run
the divine remonstrance, and the awful prediction: What have ye to do with me,
O Tire and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? Will ye render me a
recompense? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily will I return your
recompense upon your own head: because -- the children also of Judah and the
children of Jerusalem, have ye SOLD unto the Grecians, that ye might remove
them far from their border. Behold! I will raise them out of the place whither
ye have sold them, and will return your recompense upon your own head: and I
will SELL your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah,
and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far off: for the Lord has
spoken it (...). iii. 4 -- 8. Compare Ezekiel. xxvii. Rev. xviii. 10 -- 13.
Such was Jehovah's determination against Tire and Zidon, the Liverpool and
Bristol of ancient times!

It may perhaps be objected, Personal flavery, though authorized by the laws of
Greece and Rome, and though much practiced in the apostolic times, is no where
expressly condemned in the New Testament: nay, Christian slaves are exhorted lo
live in peaceable subjection to their own masters. To this it may be replied:
Nor was the sanguinary despotism of NERO expressly condemned; but the disciples
of Christ were commanded to behave peaceably under his government. The sports
of the gladiators, authorized by the Roman laws, were extremely bloody and
wicked; yet are they no where expressly condemned by the Apostles. Numerous are
the species of dishonesty and theft, which are common among us, and perhaps
were so among people in those times; which, nevertheless, are not expressly
forbidden in the New Testament. But, as all these things are breaches of moral
duty; and as they are all inconsistent with that regard which is due to our
neighbor's happiness, it is quite sufficient, that they are implicitly and
strongly forbidden by general moral principles, and by requisitions of a
contrary conduct. Any man of common sense, whose mind is not biassed by
self-interest, may easily infer, from the general principles, commands and
prohibitions of Christianity, that stealing an innocent man must be the worst
of rapine; that buying such a kidnapped person is justifying the robbery; and
that actually enslaving him, gives a sanction to those infamous deeds, by
putting a finishing hand to the work of injustice. Besides, as an express
prohibition of slavery might have exeited a more violent opposition to the
Christian cause, than almost any thing with which it had to conflict, so,
neither the doctrine of Christ, nor the spiritual nature of his kingdom,
require it. If the gracious gospel found persons in a state of slaveny, whether
civil or personal, it relieved their consciences, and cheered their hearts; but
it made no altenation respecting that slavery. The subject of a tyrannical
civil governor continued to be a subject; and the slave of a private master
continued to be a slave; except the governor and the master became acquainted
with their own duty, and willing, to perform it.

Having discussed my subject according to the plan proposed, I shall now
conclude with a few exhortations relative to our own duty. As being professedly
the followers of Christ, and the friends of mankind, I would exhort you, my
Brethren, carnestly and frequently to pray for the interposition of Providence
to abolish the detestable traffic in man. That it is our indispensable duty to
pray for the enlargement of our Lord's visible kingdom among men, is plain;
that the despised Africans are naturally as capable of being made the spiritual
subjects of Jesus Christias ourselves, ought not to be questioned; and that the
Slave Trade is, at present, an effectual bar to the propagation of Christianity
among them, appears with decisive evidence. Nay, it is an insuperable
obstruction to the progness of civilization among them, and to an honorable
commerce with them. Zeal for the honor of God, and love for our
fellow creatures, ought therefore to inspire us with ardent prayer, that the
horrid impediment may be removed, and that Christ may be glorified among them.
Nor ought we to pray, merely that God would abolish the infamous commerce in
man, on the shores of Africa; but also for the gradual emancipation of
oppressed Negroes in the West India istands: that the slavery of innovent
persons may cease to exist, and sink under the deteslation of all Europe. For
what must the enslaved Africans in those islands think of Christians, of
Christianity, and of Christ, under the tuition of their oppressors?

Again: Let your ardent and frequent prayers be accompauied with prudent,
peaceable, and steady efforts, in order to procure the toral abolition of that
criminal traffic, and of the cruel slavery consequent upon it. This is
manifestly enjoined by the law of the Lord, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thyself. A divine precept this, which requires us to do to others, as we might
reasonably wish them to treat us, were we in their situation and they in ours.
When reslecting on this branch of moral duty, with reference to the case before
us, I have sometimes been struck with the following supposed case: I have
imagined myself, my family, and all my dearest social connections, with many
thousands of my countrymen, to have been kidnapped, bought, and sold into a
state of cruel slavery. I have imagined the inhabitants of my native country in
general, to have received authentic information of the iniquitous manner in
which we were captured, transported into a foreign land, and there enslaved. I
have still further imagined, that extremely few among Britons had any
compassion for us; that only here and there one would remember us in their
prayers, or exert any endeavors, either to relieve our distresses, or to
prevent many thousands of equally innocent persons from falling, year after
year, into similar miseries. I have then supposed, that, in such a situation, I
should consider Britons as quite insensible to the honor of national
character, to the claims of private justice, and to the finer feelings of
civilized humanity. Nay, I have imagined that, when under paroxisms of pain, I
should reflect on their merciless conduct with indignation; consider them as
devoted to the gain of oppression; as filling up their measure of national
guilt; and as the destined objects of Divine vengeance.

On the other hand, I have supposed all those myriads of Negroes in our
West India islands, that are groaning under cruel slavery, to be acquainted
with the true God, and with the prayers of thousands in this country, in order
to procure a speedy abolition of the horrid traffic in man on the coast of
Africa, and a total, but gradual abolition of slavery in our sugar islands. I
have then thought of the gratitude which must, on such a supposition, abound in
the bosoms of those Negroes toward their compassionate friends; of the ten
thousand times ten thousand prayers which they must address to the Father of
Mercies, that success may attend the cause of justice and of humanity, in which
their friends were sincerely engaged; and of the numerous benedictione which,
from their hearts, they must pronounce on the persons, the families, and all
the lawful pursuits of those who are seeking to do them good.

On my own mind these thoughts have sometimes made a strong impression, and
have roused attention to the natural rights of oppressed Africans. For though
they are ignorant of true God, and unacquainted with our concern to promote
their happiness; yet they are men, they are brethren of the human race:
agreeable to that saying, God has made of one blood all nations of men. Few of
them, indeed, can either speculate on our conduct respecting a melioration of
their state, or pray for us; yet they are no less the proper objects of our
benevolence, but rather deserve a greater degree of compassion on that account.

As it is our design at this time to make a collection for promoting the
general design of that worthy Society, which has existed for some years in this
Metropolis, in order to effect the Abolition of the Slave Trade, I would
earnestly exhort you to make a liberal contribution for their assistance. The
members of that benevolent Society have done worthily. They deserve the
assistance and the thanks of every friend to moral justice, and to humanity.
Let us therefore endeavor to strengthen their hands, and to promote the
righteous cause in which the are united: not doubting but the wisdom, the
rectitude, and the benevolence of our British Legislature, will ere long be
manifested, in totally abolishing the English commerce in man; and for
providing for the gradual emancipation of Negro Slaves in our West India
islands.

To conclude, my Brethren, as each disinterested individual that is tolerably
well informed, respecting the subject before us, and maturely reflects upon it,
cannot but detest both the Trade and the Slavery against which I plead; so
every one is bound, by the authority of God, and by the regard which is due to
his own immortal interests, to guard against every corruption within, and every
temptation without, that would render him a slave to sin. Because it is
possible for a man to be just, kind, and humane to his fellow creatures, while
he is under the power of strong disaffection to God, and a subject of Satan's
domion. Having the love of God shead abroad in our hearts, and possessing the
liberty of righteousness, it would be incomparably better for us, after having
been bought and sold like beasts, to be slaves in the West Indies; than to
enjoy all the liberties of British subjects, and to continue under the dominion
of our own depravity. For, whatever may be our situation as to secular bondage,
if we do but possess peace in our consciences through atoning blood, and
freedom from the power of corruption through regenerating grace, we are freemen
of Christ, and heirs of immortal glory.

Extract of a letter from the worthy Author of the foregoing discourse, to one
of his friends in Philadelphia, daled London, January 31, 1792.
THE last Lord's day in the afternoon, I preached a Sermon, at the request of
the Church to which I stand related, in order to bear a public testimony,
against that system of enormous wickedness, the capturing, the buying, and the
holding of Slaves, in the West India islands; and to make a collection for the
assistance of a Society in London, whose professed intention is, if possible,
to procure the Abolition of the Slave Trade. We had a crowded auditory, and
collected at the time L 55 10 9. A little piece was published here the last
summer, intended to stir up the people, to lay aside the use of West India
Sugar and Rum; which has had an astonishing eflect. It is supposed that, in the
county of Cornwall, upwards of 20,000 persons have laid Sugar aside; and the
Friends of Humanity are now in high spirits, with reference to that abolition
being soon obtained. I should rejoice to hear, that not only the importation of
NEGROES into your American States were abolished, as I understand it is; but
that slavery itself were utterly banished from them all. For I have not a
stronger conviction of scarcely any thing, than that Slave-holding (except
where the Slave has forfeited his personal liberty by crimes against society)
is wicked, and inconsistent with a Christian Character. I am indeed well
informed, that Slaves among the AMERICANS, are not so cruelly treated as they
are in the West Indies; but it is impossible to prove, that an innocent black
man has not as much right to his personal liberty, as an innocent white man:
and to me it is evident, that whoever would purchase an innocent black man, to
make him a Slave, would with equal readiness purchase a white one, for the same
purpose, could he do it with equal impunity, and with no more disgrace. Surely
nothing can be more inconsistent, than zeal to maintain our civil liberty, and
a disposition to deprive our innocent fellow creatures of their personal
liberty; or to continue them in Slavery, when reduced to that Abject State.

THE END

