SKETCHES ON ROTATIONS OF CROPS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY CHARLES CIST, NO. 104. NORTH SECOND-STREET,
M,DCC,XCII.

SKETCHES ON ROTATIONS OF CROPS.
UPON visiting a farmer, lately, I found he had been designing a System of
Farming, according to principles which tend to preserve the richness of the
soil, and even improve it; which give more of income, and admit of a succession
of steady pleasant employment, with less of the perplexing and disagreeable
extremes of great hurry in work at some times, and but little call for it at
others. He asked for my assistance: but as this was in the moment of leaving
him, his request could not then be complied with. I, however, intended to write
to him concerning Rotations of Crops; and now address to him, and to other
improving farmers, the following sketches.

OF THE ENGLISH OLD SYSTEM OF CROPS.
UNTIL about the middle of the present century one of the best common courses
of farming in England consisted of a fallow, which, however, left the soil
exposed to the scorching sun during the hottest season, without any shading
crop: on this wheat was sowed; peace or beans followed the wheat crop; then
barley (or oats or both) in rotation, on one moiety of the farm, during ten or
twenty years: the other moiety being at the same time in common pasture
grasses. When a change was to be made, the moiety in grass was ploughed and
prepared; and then thrown into the rotation of crops as above; and that which
had been in crops, was sown with mixed grass seeds (not clover) to lay as
before ten or twenty years. The whole arable or ploughable part of the farm was
thus divided into moieties, or nearly so, exclusive of the homestead and
standing meadow. So that a farm of 300 acres (besides homestead and meadow)
admitted of 150 acres in grass, lay or old field, and 150 in crops. Their
fields bearing crops were seldom equal in quantity: but it is here convenient
to consider them so: No. I.
37 a. fallow, yielding nothing. 37-wheat, 15 bushls. 555 37-peace or beans, 555
37-barley, 20 bushls. 740 150 a. in crops, 4 fields. 1850 bushls. 150 in grass
or lay. 300 acres.

THE dung added, improves; yet the hot sun shining on the naked soil, exhales
much of the valuable contents of the ground. IF what voyagers say be true, that
the dews, particularly in the Persian Gulf, are salt, the farmer may readily
apprehend, that a part of the riches of his soil may also be exhaled by the
sun, in the hot season especially; and he will readily resort to shading crops
on his fallows, for defending it against waste. Besides, he knows the value of
mere moisture, and how soon it evaporates when the earth is exposed, without
shelter, to the sun and wind.


THE above is of the crops of one field during four years; or of the four
fields in one year. The following is a plan of the whole farm (homestead and
meadow excepted) with the rotation of its crops in those four fields, during
four years, and the moiety in grass or lay old field, during the ten or twenty
years.

FIELDS.
1. 2. 3. 4. Years. 1791. F. W. P. B. Grass-Lay. 1792. W. P. B. F. 1793. P. B.
F. W. 1794. B. F. W. P.

THE medium produce of those fields might be more than is above stated. But it
is well to suppose, the quantity they produced per acre was the same as in this
statement, and as in the next following: nor is it material what the quantity
is, when how much the English soil of how much ours gives, is not under
consideration.

ENGLISH NEW SYSTEM OF CROPS.
THE better course of husbandry now well experienced and approved of in
England, is founded on these principles: To fallow To fallow, is to plough up
the ground repeatedly; which shifts its surfaces and lightens and cleans it
from wild grass and weeds. One or two fields being so fallowed in each year as
in the new rotations, the whole is broken up and cleaned once in every five or
six years.
, and to have growing on the fallow, a shading and ameliorating crop; never to
sow any sort of corn immediately after corn of any kind; to sow clover with or
on every field of grain; and by a course of well chosen crops and the shaded
fallows, prevent the soil from resting, hardening or running into weeds and
common grasses. Thus entire farms are continued in a constant rotation under 5
to 6 or 8 divisions; so as with the clean, mellow state of the whole arable, to
give a pleasing system of business, which improves the soil and procures a
considerably larger income.

No. II.
60 a. barley 20 Bs. 1200 -- exhausting. 60-clover -- ameliorating. 60-wheat-15
900 -- exhausting. 60-clover -- ameliorating. 60-peace or beans 900 --
ameliorating. 300 a. in 5 fields. 3000 bushels.

IN their sandy light lands, turnips in a well prepared soil, are a common
fallow crop instead of peace or beans; the turnips being thinned greatly, and
frequently handhoed, or if in rows horsehoed, so as to keep the ground clean
and well stirred, and they are always on manured ground.

FIELDS.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 1791. B. C. W. C. P. 1792. C. W. C. P. B. 1793. W. C. P. B. C.
1794. C. P. B. C. W. 1795. P. B. C. W. C. 1791. B. 1792. C. 1793. C. 1794. W.
1795. P.

HERE the crops are the same as the preceding -- but the course is different.
In that the clover is annual; in this it continues two years, and is inferior
to the former. Clover only one year on the ground, is the most recent course.
When it is continued two or more years, it lets in weeds and some binding of
the ground, to a degree which occasioned the saying, that the ground becomes
"clover sick." But yearly renewing the clover, in the rotation of crops,
neither admits of weeds or a binding of the ground. The clover in this case,
being sufficiently thick and well sowed, effectually shades and mellows the
soil, without having time allowed it to decline.

COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ENGLISH OLD AND NEW SYSTEMS OF CROPS.
UPON comparing the new with the old courses of crops in England, it occurs
that the 120 acres in clover, may be superior to the 150 acres of common
grasses on the hidebound soil of the lay or old field; and that the grain and
straw is superior as 300 to 185. Peace and beans are allowed to be inoffensive,
as is clover, and even ameliorating. They all shade the ground during the
hottest time of the year. All corns impoverish; and withal the small kinds let
in weeds; which, with rest, bind and foul the soil.

No. I. has two fields ploughed and cleaned, namely, the fallow (a naked one)
and the pea or bean field; the growing crop of the last, shelters the soil from
extreme exhalation. This is the only ameliorating crop against the two
exhausting crops, wheat and barley. No. II. has one horsehoed or ploughed
field, in a fallow crop of peace or beans; and three fields of ameliorating
productions, which are peace, clover, clover, against two exhausters, wheat and
barley. It is to be observed, that the field-bean in England, though small, is of
the nature of the garden or Windsor bean. It grows upright, and giving but a
partial shade, is not fully an ameliorating crop, (...) and well horsehoed in
the inter^^^^ between the rows. Neither are turnips or potatoes good fallow
crops, unless they are cultivated in the like manner. They always are on
manured ground. Peace soon covering and shading the ground, are good fallow
crops, without manure and even without horsehoing.

OF THE AMERICAN OLD SYSTEM OF CROPS.
WHEN in America a farm is divided into three fields, the common course is maiz
Maiz, or Indian Corn.
, wheat (or rye), and rubbish pasture. When in four fields, it is maiz, naked
fallow, wheat, and the like mean pasture: or maiz, wheat, lay or poor pasture
during two years. And whilst in some parts of America, the fields are 4 or 5,
in other parts the divisions are as low as 2. Although 5 are better than 4; and 4
better than 3; yet the best of these admit not of a proper course or rotation
of crops, especially when maiz is one of them. So mean are the productions of
the 3 and 4 field divisions, when (...) continued a crop, that they will not
allow of being rated by the acre, near so high as the present statements allow
to either mode of the English husbandry or, as we may believe, to the American
husbandry, when practiced according to the improved principles of cropping,
with or without maiz. Two exhausting corn crops, perpetually taken from 3 or 4
fields, after some years, will scarcely admit of 8 bushels of wheat an acre on
common land, one year with another A few years since, it was a general belief
that six bushels of wheat was the (...) crop of a large extent of the country,
but it is now evident that, from greater attentions, (...) in general advanced
so as to give considerably more by the acre, in that district.
: but, suppose, No. III.
100 a. maiz, at 12 bushels, 1200 100-wheat 8 800 100-lay or mean pasture, 300
a. in 3 fields, 2000 bs. No. IV.
75 a. maiz. 75- wheat, 75- lay, 75- lay, 300 a. in 4 fields.

IF clover seed had been sowed with or on the wheat (...) the lay fields would
have given better pasture than when the lay is left to run into rubbish grass
and weeds: but either is far inferior to the new courses. No. III. and IV. give
light crops, mostly of a cheap corn, very poor pasture, and but little hay (if
any) for the emolument of the farmer, the comfort of a stock of hidebound
beasts, and the preservation of a soil, which is in an obvious consumption.
Under such severe treatment, land is continually losing strength; and it may
be, greater productions are here allowed than the old settled maiz farms yield,
and than new ones can long continue to yield under the old habits of a less
rational mode of farming, if it may be called farming.

WE almost universally cultivate one field in maiz, whatever may be in the
other fields. The maiz being frequently ploughed (horsehoed) "Horsehoeing," is
stirring and cleaning from weeds the interval ground, with a plough or any
instrument that turns it by the power of a horse at the same time that a crop
is growing in rows between the parts horsehoed. Whilst our Maiz is growing, we
repeatedly horsehoe it. We call it, "ploughing the corn."
, the ground is thereby kept clean, and gives a fallow with a crop: but it is
an ill chosen crop for a fallow, because of its giving only a trifle of shade
to the fresh exposed soil, and because it is corn, to be succeeded by another
crop of corn; both terrible exhausters. Some farmers sow wheat on this
maiz-field, before the maiz is ripe, on a clean and light soil. Others delay
sowing it till the ensuing summer, when the soil being somewhat settled and in
weeds, they plough, harrow and sow it with wheat. Of the two evils, farmers
differ in their choice. I have known some of them, who had practiced both
methods, return to the former, because the latter was, as they judged, more
injurious to the soil than the former method.

AMERICAN NEW FALLOW-CROP METHOD; WITH AND WITHOUT MAIZ.
MAIZ, taken into a rotation under the new system of crops, according to the
new principles of husbandry, occasions some difficulties, which seem best
overcome by increasing the number of fields. Our husbandmen are so used to this
kind of corn, that scarcely any appear disposed to give up the culture of it
for productions, which are much milder, in their effects on land.

A Maiz-Course.
No. V.
50 a. maiz-15 bushels 750 50 wheat (or spring barley) 750 50 clover 50 rye (or
winter barley) 900 50 clover 50 clover 300 a. in 6 fields. 2400

THE great fault in this system is in wheat succeeding maiz, that is corn on
corn. Rye or barley might have been in the place of wheat; but these also are
corns which exhaust the soil. Clover after maiz is not likely to succeed,
especially when sowed without a sheltering crop; and this sheltering crop being
from gram, would introduce the mischief incident to corn on corn. But even this
faulty system is far preferable to any of our old courses. Had there been only
five fields it would have been worse for the soil; because a course of only two
fields in clover to three in corn, must in time render the ground weak, and
comparatively unproductive.

Better Maiz-Courses.
No. VI.
50 a. maiz 750 bushels. 50 beans 500 50 barley 1000 50 clover 50 wheat 750 50
clover 300 a. in 6 fields. 3000 No. VII.
43 a. maiz-15 Bs. 645 43-beans-10 430 43-barley-20 860 43-clover 43-wheat-15
645 43-clover 43-clover 300 a. in 7 fields. 2580

HERE the corn crops Corn crops. Wheat, barley, rye, maiz, oats, and generally
all sorts of grain of which bread is made, are corns.
are interposed by beans; a pulse which is ameliorating to soil; especially
when growing in rows so near as to shade the well ploughed and cleaned
intervals: and these crops (...), give 3 or 4 amelioraters to 3 exhausters.

Bean-Courses.
THOSE who would exclude maiz from their crops, may adopt the system No. II. in
five fields; or one of the following in 6 or 7 fields; observing that the beans
must be the American sorts, not the English.

No. VIII.
50 a. Beans 500 bushels. 50-barley 1000 50-clover 50-wheat 750 50-clover
50-rye (or clover) 750 300 a. in 6 fields. 3000 No. IX.
43 a, beans 430 bushels. 43-barley 860 43-clover 43-wheat 645 43-clover 43-rye
645 43-clover 300 a. in 7 fields. 2580

THE following are plans of all the fields in the farm. No. VI. a maiz system,
and No. VIII. a bean system; showing the whole of their rotations during six
years.

FIELDS.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 1791. M. Be. Ba. C. W. C. 1792. Be. Ba. C. W. C. M. 1793.
Ba. C. W. C. M. Be. 1794. C. W. C. M. Be. Ba. 1795. W. C. M. Be. Ba. C. 1796.
C. M. Be. Ba. C. W. FIELDS.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 1791. Be. Ba. C. W. C. R. 1792. Ba. C. W. C. R. Be. 1793. C.
W. C. R. Be. Ba. 1794. W. C. R. Be. Ba. C. 1795. C. R. Be. Ba. C. W. 1796. R.
Be. Ba. C. W. C.

THE greatest quantity of grain produced in a rotation is not alone a proof of
its being the best system. A large quantity of good meadow will yield much hay.
It is a sin against good husbandry to sell off the hay of a farm. Numbers of
cattle well fed and well littered, give the manure requisite for invigorating
the soil: but numbers of cattle cannot be kept in good condition, through the
year, unless clover or grass as well as hay abound. The summer food and that of
the winter are to bear a due proportion to each other. No IX. may be a better
system than No. VIII. for a farm having a great quantity of standingmeadow. It
has near a third more of clover for summer food; will keep more cattle, and at
the same time is more favorable to the soil.

IT is reasonable to expect that the better courses No. VI. VII. VIII. and IX.
will yield, by the acre, more of every article of produce than the inferior
course No. V. But they are here stated alike. Of the several sorts of white
beans I have only cultivated the white dwarf or bush bean in my fields, in rows
18 inches apart. They considerably shaded the ground, but not so fully as I
wished. I therefore intended to have tried white beans that would run and
shelter the ground entirely, after being horsehoed with a shim Shims (or Skims)
are in various forms as may please the farmer. In general it is a hoe drawn by
a horse. The blade of the one I used was 12 inches wide, and was welded to a
coulter on each side of it. Two slilts are fastened to the coulters with screws
and nuts, which are shifted to different holes for setting the shim to go
deaper or shallower in the ground. It is not used in half ploughed ground: but
this having been previously well ploughed and harrowed, the shim runs 3 or 4
inches deep, and crumbles the earth into such minute parts that, as it
proceeds, the earth seems to pour over the blade of the shim like water. A
coarse rake, or small harrow, of 4 or 5 teeth, hangs to the tail of the shim
and is drawn after it. The two coulters or side standards seemed to interfere
with the growing vines, when they were advanced to a considerable size. But I
never saw any real damage from it. A single standard of wood or iron would be
clear of even full grown vines. I did not always hill or ridge up potatoes and
beans, nor even maiz. But it is well to edge up some moderate quantity of earth
to plants cultivated in rows with the horsehoe or the shim. The intention
whereof is to smother infant weeds, which have but just broke out close to the
crop, and beyond the reach of the shim. Hills and ridges are not otherwise so
advantageous as is commonly thought: and there are advantages in keeping the
ground of summer crops nearly level. A slip of iron is made to shift off and on
each side of the blade of the shim, for edging up light ridges of earth. The
shim is an excellent instrument against young weeds; but is insufficient where
grass and weeds have obtained strength. When the ground is in good condition,
it rids off a vast deal of work, very satisfactorily.
repeatedly, as long as that instrument could be admitted to pass between the
rows to advantage. Parting with my farm prevented this experiment. It is said
that white beans are generally in great demand in Madeira and the southern
countries of Europe. I have seen letters from Barcelona, stating the price of
"white beans" higher than of wheat. Other sorts of American beans as well as
several sorts of American peace, I have cultivated; and the crops of all sorts
were rather precarious; peace generally more so than beans. Until some other
plant shall be introduced that will answer the purposes better than beans, for
a fallow crop, the farmer ought to think nothing of 6 or 8 shs. a bushel for
them to be applied to produce a shading, ameliorating article of fallow,
although not a seed should ever be gained from them: preserving the system
being so very important! But a worthy person assured me, she used to cultivate
country peace or beans (I am not certain which) till the pods were well filled
and the fruit partly ripe, and then she pulled up or cut and cured the haulm or
vines, with the pods on, and these were stacked or stored and given to milch
cows in the course of the winter; and they were preferable, she added, to other
food for increasing the quantity of milk and butter, and for improving their
quality. It is not uncommon for the active, spirited class of farmers in
England, to sow the seeds of various plants, merely for improving their soil;
such as vetches, tares, Vetches and Tares are different names for the same
pulse. The varieties are great. Generally, they are divided into winter and
summer vetches. Consult Mr. Anderson's Agriculture. He speaks of sorts that are
perpetual. I would prefer a vetch hardy enough to bear our winters the best,
and that withal is of quick and luxuriant growth and ripens early, whether it
be of the perennial kind or not. If we had such a plant, we might then fully
practice the "round and complete" mode mentioned in page 22 of these sketches.
I have tried one sort of winter vetch (the seed from England). The seeds were
sowed in two successive autumns. The ground was rather of the sort called
"waterholding," and only about half of the plants stood through the winters.
peace, buckwheat, etc. -- These, whilst growing, shade the fallow, and when
ploughed in, they ferment and open the soil. Such also are the effects from
clover; which having wheat sown on one ploughing of it, is followed with
extraordinary crops. I cannot defer here mentioning, from the experienced and
judicious Mr. Young, a very excellent course of shade and green dressing on the
same ground, preparative to a corn crop; by which seeds for producing three
crops were sown on the same ground, between autumn and autumn, with only three
ploughings, thus: Winter tares were sowed in September with one ploughing: they
were reaped early in the next summer: then immediately buckwheat was sowed on
one ploughing and harrowing: the buckwheat was ploughed in Buckwheat is to be
ploughed in before it seeds, lest a new growth becomes a weed to the crop of
corn. The Partridgepea, Aquamaque or Magothy-bay bean, has wonders imputed to
it as an ameliorater of the light sandy lands in the peninsula of Virginia. In
size and other particulars the plant may be considered as being a Lilliputian
locust tree. For, although it is an annual, yet its stem is a hard locust-like
wood; and its leaves, flowers, pods and seeds greatly resemble those of that
tree. The woody hardness of the plant is in appearance against its being a
choice ameliorater, as it is not likely to ferment and as it were melt away in
the ground, so soon as buckwheat and other juicy soft substances. No plant,
however, can exceed the shade it gave on a piece of ground in my garden. A
Lilliputian might have been there lost in darkness. This shade, during the
hottest season, together with an extraordinary quantity of blossoms, pods and
leaves, which the plant deposits on the ground are probably what give the great
improvements, which the people of Aquamaque satisfactorily experience and
positively assert*
in September; and wheat was sowed on this, on one ploughing; the crop whereof
was great. Thus, as the spring advances and the sun becomes powerful enough to
exhale the humidity and with it the nutritious particles of the land, the crop
(which was from a fall sowing) advances and screens it from the action of his
beams. Whatever weeds are in the soil, vegetate with the young tares, and are
either stranggled by their luxuriance, or cut off with them before they can
seed. This crop is cleared from the land so early that the soil would remain
exposed to the sun through the most burning part of the summer for three
months; and if so left exposed, the three ploughings would do mischief, except
in killing some weeds. To give one ploughing immediately and harrow in
buckwheat, spares expense, and the growing herbage shades the earth when it
wants most to be so protected: withal a dressing of manure is gained at no
expense. It is not in the power of science, of theory or of practice to
introduce a system more round and complete. Many have sown tares; and many have
ploughed in buckwheat; (and most have given a year to each) but it is the
combination of the two that forms the merit.

CLOVER-SEED.
THIS is an important article in the improved system of crops: but its bearing
some price or costing some labor to obtain it, renders it a bugbear to common
husbandmen, whose habits have diverted them from the large use of it. It is
indeed absolutely necessary, that it should be a common crop in rotation with
other articles of crop. And it is hoped, there are farmers spirited and
determined enough to defeat the objections; and who will consider the cost not
chargeable merely to the crop of clover, but to the whole round of crops; the
clover being so essential thereto that without it, the soil, the cattle, and
the corn crops would greatly suffer; and the farmer's income, his reputation,
and his independency would be lessened. If 4lbs. of clean clover seed, when
sown with such a box as is described below, clothe the ground as well with
plants as 10 or 12lbs. sown in the common broad-cast way, of which I have had a
little experience, then a bushel of seed will sow 15 acres; which is a cost of
only 5 shillings an acre. Thirty loads of dung per acre ( unbought) would cost
the farmer four times as much for loading, carrying and dispersing them on the
field; and, if bought, many times more. He can manure, or ameliorate 100 acres
with clover more certainly than he can 20 from his dungheap; and moreover in
the time that his clover is sheltering the soil, perspiring its excrementitious
effluvia on the ground, dropping its putrid leaves, and mellowing the ground
with its tap roots, it gives full food to the stock of cattle, keeps them in
heart, and increases the dunghill. Nor is the amelioration by clover very
inferior to that by dung, as this is commonly managed. In some respects it is
preferable. With dung, innumerable seeds of weeds are carried out and sown on
the fields: not so of clover, when (...) is well cleaned. Clover is the best
preparative for a crop of wheat. Dung inclines wheat to run more into straw
than (...) grain. Wheat on clover has the best grain and the fullest crop.

THE farmer, to whom these sketches are more immediately addressed, gave me a
pleasing account of some improvements in the method of gathering and cleaning
clover seed. But my memory has not retained enough of it to enable me to
describe them particularly. In general, the clover heads are rippled off by a
simple machine, moved by a horse, so as to gather and throw into a carriage the
seed of 5 acres in a day. The heads are carried to an oil-mill, (having two
stones rolled in the manner of tanners bark stones) which separates from the
haulm, full five bushels a day.

TWO fields, 50 acres each, being in clover, one or a part of one may be kept
up for giving seed in August, after cutting and feeding off the early growth.
In 10 days the seed may be gathered at a small expense; and in 10 more 50
bushels may be separated from the haulm, and cleaned with a san, or with
sieves. Whatever may be the medium produce, I count on only one bushel of seed
from an acre. Of this seed 7 to 10 or more bushels may be sown on the two fifty
acre fields in wheat and barley; say 10 bushels sown; other 10 bushels may be
kept, lest there should happen to be a failure of seed in the next crop.

A BOX for sowing clover seed on wheat beds (rather than ridges) seven feet
wide, including the water or opening furrow, was made of light half inch plank,
for the sides, bottom and divisions. It was seven feet long, five or six inches
wide, that the seed, laying thin, may easily shift about and not press heavily
on the outlet holes. It was three inches deep, and was divided into seven
parts, each division or receptacle having two holes bored through the bottom,
half an inch in diameter, and placed diagonally; the holes were then singed
with a hot iron rod to smooth them; square pieces of strong writing-paper were
pasted over the holes, on the inside of the box; these had, each of them, a
hole burnt through with coarse knitting needles: it is tried then, with seed
shook gently through the holes as you walk on a floor or carpet; and the holes
are enlarged by the same hot knitting needles, as far as there may be occasion
for dropping a due quantity of seed. It was used for sowing other small, round
seeds, (as turnip and mustard seeds,) the old papers being taken of, and new
ones pasted on, and then holes burnt suitable to the seeds. At about a third of
the distance from each end of the box, were fastened strong leather straps; by
which the box was held, and a little agitated in carrying it before the
seedsman, in a direction crossing the beds or ridges, whilst the seedsman
walked along the beds.

THE only comparative experiment, made by me, of clover seed sown with the hand
box above described, against broadcast sowing, was thus: In the moment when a
seedsman, long used to sow clover seed, was sowing seed in the chaff at the
rate of 12 lbs. of clean seed, according to his estimation, I sowed clean seed
on several lands or ridges with the box. After sowing about 200 yards in
length, the seed put into the box did not appear reduced in quantity, and I
feared it was sown too thin. But the growth of clover from the box sowing,
proved to be thicker and much more equally distant, plant from plant, than that
from the broadcast, and the plants were sufficiently close. These operations
left the seeds on the top earth, of the same field of wheat, without any means
used to cover them. The time of sowing was about the middle of March, whilst
there were yet light frosts. It was a season in which I had often sowed clover
seed in the chaff, and left it uncovered, without ever experiencing any loss.
When clean clover seeds are sown on a clean ground and harrowed in, numbers are
smothered under small lumps of earth, as well as under large ones -- not so of
seed left on the ground uncovered, during the frosts, in March rather than
earlier. It therefore seems proper that much more than 4 lbs. an acre should be
sowed, when the seed is to be covered.

BEAN DRILL.
LET not the novelty or labor of sowing beans in field husbandry, be made a
difficulty to the application of them in a system of crops. They may be dropped
by hand. But a simple and cheap machine may be made for dropping them in
clusters as quick as a horse drawing it can walk. Two wheels, made of an inch
plank doubled, turn an axis, of about 5 inches diameter, having notches on one
line round it, from each of which 3 or 4 beans are discharged at the same time
into a furrow opened by a ploughshare or wooden coulter, the ground having been
first well prepared -- a stave or a little rake, at the tail of the drill,
covering the furrow at the same time. If the wheels are two feet in diameter,
they will have a circumference of 75 inches, which divided by 10 inches give 7
for the number of notches round the axis, for dropping the seeds at 10 inches
apart in the rows. -- I drilled beans with such an instrument.

SOWING WHEAT ON CLOVER.
THE language of farmers on this head is, that wheat on clover is to be sown on
"one earth" -- "one ploughing." To conform to this idea, I conducted the
business, on 15 acres, in this manner:

1. THE clover, having been cut once and then pastured, was turned in deep, by
a plough.

2. THE wheat was sowed, broadcast.

3. THE harrow followed twice, in the same direction in which the clover was
ploughed in.

4. THE sown wheat was then rolled.

THE crop stood well and yielded satisfactorily. It grew near two miles from my
other field wheat, on a soil not quite similar, so that a just comparison could
not be made between them. The operations immediately followed each other,
without any pause between them. The plough, the harrow, the seed, etc. were all
ready on the spot, before the plough proceeded.

MR. YOUNG was requested, in Ireland, to instruct the farmers of that country
in proper courses of crops: and when he comes to direct them how to sow wheat
on clover, he only says -- The clover is to be well ploughed in, with an even,
regular furrow; and the wheat sown and harrowed well. Which is precisely the
method I used; only that, in addition, my ground was then rolled. THE
operations may vary, according to circumstances in the state of the ground and
the nature of the soil. On a clean mellow earth, I have experienced, in a
comparative yiew, that harrowing in wheat is equal to ploughing it in, on the
same soil and equally clean and mellow; both being adjacent, and the work
performed on the same day -- not so of foul or indifferently tilled ground. In
some cases the rolling may be dispensed with, and would be better omitted; as
on heavy ground in a moist state of it. It is somewhere recommended to plough
in the clover shallow (3 inches); and that another plough follow close and
cover the first furrow with 4 inches depth of earth: so that the ground is
turned up 7 inches in all.


ONE of my neighbors intending to sow wheat on clover, ploughed up the clover
a week or two before seeding time, and then gave it a second ploughing,
across, and sowed wheat on it; but whether this was ploughed in or harrowed
in, I know not. Vast numbers of roots of the clover were left standing erect
above ground, all over the field, and had a disagreeable appearance. Here was
some unnecessary labor, a useless and even an injurious ploughing, whereby the
manure from those substantial roots and a part of the green herbage, so turned
out by the second ploughing, was lost to the crop.

ANOTHER neighbor sowed wheat on clover, with an intention not only to
experience that method of cropping, but also to discover the difference between
the produce of wheat sown on clover pastured, and on clover mowed. In both he
obtained great satisfaction. His operations were less confined than mine, which
were meant to be few and as simple as might be.

HE 1. Ploughed in the clover, deep. 2. Harrowed. 3. Rolled. 4. Sowed wheat. 5.
Ploughed it in, shallow. 6. Harrowed it, in the same direction.
HALF of the wheat, so seeded, was on the clover ground which had been twice
mowed and the clover made into hay; the other half, on what had been pastured
through the summer. The operations of seeding were at the same time, and in the
same manner. The produce from that twice mowed was (...) by the acre, to that
pastured. -- So injurious is the tread of beasts in pasturing, more than any
good derived to the soil from scattered dung, here and there dropped and exposed
to utter exhaustion by the sun and wind.

SUBMITTING these facts to the consideration of farmers, I have only to
recommend, that they endeavor to have their clover grow sufficiently thick on
the ground, and that it be suffered to remain only one summer, exclusive of the
year when the preceding crop of grain was reaped, and upon which grain-field
the clover seed was sown.

OF FARM-YARD MANURE.
To conduct the business of a farm to full advantage, we must exercise our
reasoning faculties, and build up principles which systematically embrace such
a regular course of particulars as will best follow and depend on each other
for obtaining the one whole of the design of farming. It is not immediate
product alone that we aim at: for, whilst we wish to obtain repeated full
crops, our reason assures us it is indispensably necessary to that end, that
the soil be preserved in full vigor. The mind then is employed, principally, on
the objects of preservation and improvement of the productive powers of the
earth. Observations on the state of common farming fix the opinion, that in
general no unconnected, random pursuits tend to ensure a succession of
advantageous husbandry for any length of time.

WELL chosen rotations of crops together with due culture, are believed to be
so favorable to the ground, as to need but little addition of manure, in
comparison of what the common random crops absolutely demand. Still the
application of manures is held to be an essential branch of farming, a great
link of the chain, in every instance. If very rich soils require,
comparatively, but a moderate quantity, in a rotation, where ameliorating crops
are prevalent, yet middling and poor soils want all that can be obtained; and,
under the old courses, all soils eagerly demand more manure than can be
procured. These exhausting courses, we see, are continually impoverishing our
farms. Too many farmers, therefore, incline to move to fresh lands; where they
would precisely act the same murderous part over again.

THE two principal links in good farming, are proper Rotations of Crops, which
are treated of above; and Manures, of which it is wished the occasion would
admit of more than the few observations that follow.

"IN the American practice, bay and fodder are stacked in the fields; and the
cattle are fed round the stacks and fodder houses: the disadvantages whereof
are,

1. A wasteful use of the provender;

2. THE dung lying as it dropped without straw, or other vegetable substance
brought to it, the manure is little in quantity; and

3. THAT little not lying in heaps, is reduced abundantly by exhalation and
rain; leaving scarce any thing to the soil.

IN the English and Flemish practice (feebly observed by a few of our
husbandmen) cattle are carefully housed, or otherwise confined to a foldyard
(straw yard) in which are shelters against cold rains, during the whole winter,
and as far through the spring as food will last: the advantages of which are,

1. A fair expenditure of the provender, without waste:

2. Less exhaustion of the juices; because of the dung lying together in large
heaps:

3. The dung being mixed with the straw, and other vegetable substances brought
to the beasts as litter, the whole is trod together, and forms a large quantity
of very valuable manure.

IT may be no exaggeration to affirm, that the difference in the quantities of
manure obtained from an equal stock of cattle by these several methods, may be
as three to one. If six acres may be annually manured by the inferior method,
then may eighteen by the superior. Now on a supposition that manured land is
kept in heart five years without repeating, in the one case but thirty acres
will always remain in good order; in the other ninety acres: A very important
difference! Indeed it is all the difference between an husbandman's poverty and
his riches." THE above quoted passage is from a friend, who wished me to
accompany the TREATISE ON ROTATIONS OF CROPS, with one on FARM-YARD MANURE. The
piece is a little altered; and I had inserted "ten for one" instead of three to
one. On showing him the alterations, he humorously said -- I object to nothing
but your multiplication of 10 for 1, instead of my 3 to 1; not, but that it is
absolutely true: but then people contract their eyes (the mind's eye) just in
proportion to the light that enters: -- 10 to 1, might altogether shut them up,
-- perhaps they blink even at my 3 to 1. Both of us are, however, well assured,
that 10 to 1 does not exceed the proportion that has been experienced.


Do cattle, when foddered round hay-stacks and fodder-houses or ricks, give
twelve large loads of manure (forty heaped bushels) each? do they yield one
such load? It is an established fact that, in the course of a winter, cattle do
yield full twelve such loads; and if soiled or fed well, during the summer,
with green cut grass or clover, they may be expected to yield more and richer
manure; provided that in both cases they are kept up, on a full quantity of
litter. Here, by the way, it may be noted that a lot of grass only sufficient
to keep one beast in pasturing, has sufficed five or six in soiling: and what
is of immense importance to the state of the ground and of future crops, the
ground being untrod, is left light and mellow. Another favorable circumstance
attends this method: the beasts are kept in shade, and considerably protected
from flies, especially if the house be kept dark during the heat of the day,
with only air-holes near the ground and above their heads. But it will be said,
the ground round the stacks receives the dung dropped, as a dressing to so much
of the field. Alas! we know this extends to a very small distance, and even
then the effects are in no part considerable. The place where, is some
eminences the rains and winds of half the year wash away or evaporate from the
frozen ground most of the rich substance of the winter's (...) dung so dropped
about; and the ground is, when unfrozen, during all that time, trod down and
poached, to a degree that nearly destroys the benefit remaining from the dung
dropped. A fodder house (a hollow rick, made of maiz tops in the way of thatch)
was set up in a field, as is usual; it was fenced in: at the south front of it
the maiz was husked, and the husks were sheltered in the fodder-house; they
were fed out in the course of the winter to cattle in front of the rick; in
April, the rick or fodderhouse, being then empty, was pulled down, and the
covering given to the cattle. The soil thus sheltered by the fodderhouse for
six months (October to April) showed marks of richness, greatly superior to the
ground on which the cattle (...) soddered during the same time: Grass, weeds
and crops, during the four or five following years, showed this in their great
growth: where the fodderhouse, 300 feet in length and 20 in breadth, stood and
sheltered the ground, the richness of the soil was strongly marked, when but a
faint superiority, over the common field, appeared where the cattle were fed.

Litter is an essential, without which farm-yard manure is of no account; and
unless it be in full proportion to the number of cattle, it is not thought
highly of -- but is as a half done thing. Good farmers in England deem full
littering of such importance, that after reaping with sickles and inning their
wheat, they chop the stubble with sithes, and stack it for litter, for their
live stock. Besides the straw and stubble for litter, they apply to the same
use, fern and such other vegetable substances as they can procure; and they buy
straw from common farmers who are not in the practice. In all countries, most
farmers are careless of improvement: they look not beyond their old habits.

THE like materials may be so applied in America -- straw, stubble, maiz
stalks, fern, weeds before they seed, flags, wild oats, sea grass, leaves of
trees, etc. Our farmers say, "there is no manure in corn-stalks;" MAIZ stalks.
and they leave them standing in their fields. I have been used to draw them
into my fold-yard, in the fall and during the winter; where they were laid
thick, as litter to grown cattle, and were soon trod into a spongelike state;
in which condition they catch and retain the dung and urine of the cattle, so
as to give a great quantity of manure, uncommonly rich.

IN November, all the cattle are to be confined from wandering about the
fields. The fold yard is then well littered; and as often as the litter is trod
into the dung or is soaking wet, more litter is added; so that the beasts may
always lay clean and dry. They are thus confined and littered till there is a
full bite of grass in May. All the cattle that can, are to be under shelter
from cold rains during that time. It is an indispensable measure that all
horses and young cattle be so sheltered. Litter is to be given them as above.

IN many situations, says Mr. Young, the dependence of a farm for manure, is on
the straw yard. If in that case the farmer does not properly proportion his
arable crops which feed cattle, to those which litter the yard; and both these
to the quantity of his grass fields, the farm will be long before it gets well
manured.

A DESIGN, for a Farm containing 146 Acres of rich Land.
THIS farm was shown me lately, by the worthy proprietor; it may contain 160
acres or more, but the least possible quantity is assumed for the present
purpose; the soil is the first rate hazelloam, of a quality to yield, in the
greatest perfection, every article of land-produce, suitable to the climate:
the whole is in condition for meadow, and about 40 acres are too low to be
depended on, in a rotation where barley or wheat are a part. At present it is
in the occupation of a tenant.

Homestead 6 acres. meadow 40 crops 100 146 acres. acres. bs. bs. ets. dolls.
ets. 20 bean fallow crop, 10 an acre, 200 at 80 160 00 20 barley 32 640 66 422
40 20 clover, cut and fed, green, in sheds or houses 20 wheat 24 480 93 446 40
20 clover 100 acres in 5 fields 1320 bs. 1028 80

TWENTY-FOUR bushsels of wheat, medium between 18 and 30, may be expected from
a soil so excellent, and which last year yielded 30: the barley in proportion
-- beans are more precarious in their yield, therefore only 10 bushels are
allowed.

dolis ets. Brought over 1028 80 Meadow, 100 tons of hay (sell none) homestead
80 00 beeves, 6 sold from 42, young and old, age 7 years, at 18-66. 111 96
calves, 14 sold at 4 dollars 56 00 butter, 200 per cow, from 20 cows, 4000lbs.
at 14 ets. 560 00 hog-meat, (pigs and small shotes, railed on milk of 20 cows:
hogs and large shotes kept on clover, and fattened on potatoes and corn) 160 00
1996 76

THE beans, following clover, are drilled on one deep ploughing in June. The
barley is sown in October, on one ploughing, the ground having been left clean
and mellow after inning the beans. The wheat is sown in September on one
plowing of the clover. What a saving of work! Three crops on only one ploughing
for each, and performed at leisure! The beans are ploughed for in June; the
wheat in September; the barley in October, or if preferred, in March. One of
the crops is horsehoed or shimmed, without any interference with the ploughings
or other work in seeding the wheat or barley. The clover, which is to be
ploughed up for beans, may be pastured, occasionally and cautiously, till June:
or it may be kept up and mowed for hay: this may be especially advantageous on
farms deficient in meadow; as there will then be the two cloverfields for
summer grass to the stock; and moreover the ground of that mown, will be
preserved in a light and mellow state, to receive the bean seed on the one
ploughing.

ONE of the fields annually manured with 20 loads (40 heaped bushels each) of
farm-yard dung, will take 400 loads: which may be more efficacious, to this
rich soil, than 30 loads an acre to common land. A full littering is 3 loads of
12 or 1300 (...) of straw to each grown beast. The whole quantity of straw to
43 beasts is 130 loads. The straw of 40 acres of wheat and barley, will fall
far short of this. The deficiency is to be otherwise supplied. In the best
farming counties of England, straw is sold by farmers who are tenants on short
leases, or who adhering to old-sameness, jog on as their fathers and as
themselves were trained, and from which they annot deviate. It is presumed that
here also straw is to be bought: maiz stalks will be cheap -- for a long while
they will cost little else than carriage. A skeleton frame, of light wood, may
be contrived to carry a vast quantity when they are dry: but whilst yet uncured
they may be better, because of their sweet juice which induces cattle to brouse
on them as they lay under foot in the yard: When they are well trodden, they
become of a sponge-like consistence, which retains the dung and the urine very
effectually. Let us not be sparing of expense, or be dilatory in procuring the
necessary materials for a full littering: It increases and preserves the manure
necessary for the improvement of our land, and enhances its value, as it
enables it to yield greater crops and more of pecuniary income: yet this gain
is not stated in the above account of income.

IT is advantageous to a farm, and of some immediate income, to have on it as
numerous a stock of cattle as can be kept well, and no more than can be so
kept: It is better to have too few than too many: Yet, in parts of America,
farmers exceedingly disproportion their cattle to their provender -- they will
have numbers of hidebound creatures, of which more die from the mere want of
food and shelter, than are sold or eaten: So that less meat and less manure are
derived from a great number so poorly kept, than other farmers have from a due
proportion in a smaller number well kept. Besides, does not the man feel shame
in the cruelty of starving and keeping in a state of want and misery, a
fellow creature committed to his care? Is it not a trust to the creature man,
from the Father of all creatures?

THE live stock for this farm, may be supposed to consist of,

6 calves 18=10 -- that is, 18 young cattle are equal to 10 aged, in the
expense of food. 6 yearlings 18=10 -- that is, 18 young cattle are equal to 10
aged, in the expense of food. 6 in 3d. year 18=10 -- that is, 18 young cattle
are equal to 10 aged, in the expense of food. 18
6 oxen 6 1 bull 1 20 cows 20 45 young and old = 37 aged cattle 6 horses 6
horses TWO horses, for ploughing; 4 for a wagon: 6 oxen for carts and
harrowing and rolling. Whilst there is always one bull of full age, there are
growing up, one in his third year, one in his second, and one in his first year
of age. The like rule of oxen and cows. The system gives 6 beeves, yearly,
seven years old; because the 7 in 45 cattle, young and old are 6 times: that is
6 beasts of the 45 are 7 years old; the age for clearing off the aged; and
there are 6 of every age under it.
51 head, young and (...) 43 aged beasts.
THE live stock is to be as many as can be kept sheltered from cold rains, and
with abundant winter and summer food. Of all the kinds, the norse is the most
costly and the most injurious to the farm: He bites close, is almost
continually treading and poaching the ground, and eats more than the ox as 5 to
3; yet is not, himself, eatable: When he dies, he is lost for ever. The ox is
meat: After having given us his labor, he becomes a part of ourselves; we have
the value of him for ever in us. Steers are unprofitable: They cost 6 or 7
years keeping, without yielding labor; and are then sold for less than the
cost of keeping and fattening them. IN a former publication, I endeavored to
prove that treading the ground, in constant pasturing, is more injurious to
soil than scraps of dung, dispersed and left exposed to the sun and wind, are
beneficial.
Sheep are profitable: but are not here in the design, because they are totally
discarded by the farmers of this neighborhood; and there are circumstances
which more particularly affect this than other parts of the country, respecting
them. Sows and pigs, if not also hogs, ought to be kept where there is a dairy,
as they make a considerable part of its profit, from the offal milk. Hogs are
profitably kept on green clover, and fattened on potatoes and corn.

THE quantity of land, alone, is no rule for determining the number of cattle
or other live stock: Not only the quantity and quality, but also the situation
and the crops will affect the question: and the attentive farmer will determine
from his experience, how far he is to enlarge or reduce the number of his live
stock.

Another course of crops for this farm may be; acres, bs. bs. ets. dolls. ets.
17 Bean fallow crop, 10 an acre, 170 at 80 136 00 17 barely 32 544 66 358 04
17clover 17wheat 24 408 93 379 44 17clover 17 rye 24 408 54 220 32 100 acres in
6 fields. 1530 1093 80

THE little of maiz that may be wanted, can be bought: or, if it be the choice,
the 17 acres of rye may be in maiz-crop.

IN the 6 fields, the quantity of clover is less than in the 5 fields, as 34 to
40: but the grain is more, as 153 to 132; and in value, as 1093 to 1028 dollars.

CATTLE STALLS.
ON this particular I only give what I have collected of Mr. Bakewell's method
of housing his cattle, from the Annals of Agriculture; or from John Burnei, who
was sent to America by Mr. Bakewell, four years since.

Mr. Bakewell keeps his cattle in houses: A passage is at the head of the
cattle, to feed from: The troughs out of which they eat their hay or turnips (I
suppose too their straw, for he feeds largely with straw) are 2 feet wide at
top, and slope to the bottom which is of brick; 3 feet long; 8 or 9 inches
deep: The bottom of brick is on the ground: No rack: Every stall is 6 feet
wide, for two cows; 8 for 2 bulls: In each corner of the stalls is a smooth
post with a ring larger than the post, for sliding easily up and down: A chain,
not a foot long, connects with the ring, and also with a chain collar round the
beast's neck, which locks with a T: The cattle can but just reach their food
next to the division between the two beasts. Three feet for each cow, is better
than more room: In this they lay down: More space would admit of their dirtying
each the other: Their standing is 6 feet; and behind is a step 5 or 6 inches
down to where the dung falls. The house is cleaned once a day; and the cattle
are driven twice to water. He has 45 in one place, so tied up; and they are fed
and taken care of by one man and one boy.

Cows in milk are not to want water. In this climate, they ought to be watered
three times a day. Their water ought to be near; as driving cows any distance,
is very injurious to their milk. In page 39, 200lbs of butter are allowed to
each cow on this fine farm. In England, dairy cows are allowed to give from 200
to 400lbs.

WHILST the present little work is at press, I have again visited this farm.
The tenant, after inning his wheat crop, has mowed and secured the stubble: the
motives whereof were to preserve his young clover, which was sown on the wheat
last spring, from being smothered by the rank stubble, and to use the stubble
as litter to his beasts; of which he has thirty that by November may weigh
800lbs. each. THESE were bought poor, last spring. He keeps of cows no more
than for family milk and butter; and raises no cattle.
This is the first instance that I have known of stubble being cut in America,
with any view to littering cattle! He thinks that had it not been for a stroke
of rust, he should have reaped 35 bushels of wheat an acre: as it is, he
expects near 30 bushels. This farmer has here given an important lesson, for
those who are disposed to second their judgment with determined exertion! SOME
wheat and young clover where raked up with the stubble; and the whole is
sheltered under sheds, where it makes a pleasing appearance. The quantity drawn
in was 10 heaped wagon loads, well bound down, from 6 acres. Such loads ought
to contain 1300 each, but allowing them to be 1000, they give 10,000; or per
acre near 1700lbs. of stubble. The straw and the chaff of this stout wheat may
be at the rate of 90lbs. for every bushel of wheat; and these multiplied by 30
give 2700lbs, of straw and chaff an acre; to which and the stubble saved 1700,
the whole is 4400lbs. an acre. The above design for this farm, supposes 40
acres in wheat and barley: were they all in wheat there would be 176,000lbs. of
straw, chaff and stubble: but, 20 of the acres being in barley, let us deduct
46,000, and say 130,000lbs. at 1300 for a load: we then have 100 loads of
straw, chaff and stubble; and are only 30 loads short of a full littering, for
giving 12 loads of dung each beast. The 30 loads of litter wanted, are to be
maiz stalks, etc. The quantity of straw and stubble to be produced in crops,
can only be estimated, at great uncertainty, because of the various growth that
crops take in different years. The stubble in the present case was high and
close, on uncommonly good land. In the Museum Rusticum, and in the Octavo Vol.
of Select Papers from it, are accurate accounts of a crop of wheat, and of the
proportions of straw and chaff to the wheat.


ERRORS.
Page 23 line 5 from the bottom. For, clover -- read, clover-seed, -- 30. --
15. For heard double -- read, half as much more. -- 40. -- 23. For, was. --
read, lbs.

Please to make the following Alterations:
Page 4. l. 7. from the bot. for, it is, read -- is it 5. l. first, read -- on
the fallow, whilst it is yet under the plough, 8. l. last, dele -- especially
10. l. 2. dele -- of No. IV. 13. l. 6. from bot. read -- by clover and beans --
2. from bot. dele -- with the clover fields 23. l. 5. from bot. read -- when
the seed is 30. l. 15. read -- was half as much more 35. l. 10. dele lean -- 3.
from bot. read -- cattle were 40. l. 10. read loads an acre -- 13. for, wts.
read -- lbs.

