THE HISTORY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE. VOLUME III. CONTAINING A GEOGRAPHICAL
DESCRIPTION OF THE STATE; WITH SKETCHES OF ITS NATURAL HISTORY, PRODUCTIONS,
IMPROVEMENTS, AND PRESENT STATE OF SOCIETY AND MANNERS, LAWS AND GOVERNMENT.

BY JEREMY BELKNAP, A.M. MEMBER OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY IN PHILADELPHIA,
AND OF THE ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES IN MASSACHUSETTS.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, FOR THE AUTHOR, BY BELKNAP AND YOUNG, STATE STREET.
MDCCXCII.

PREFACE.
THE materials of which this part of the History of New Hampshire is composed,
were chiefly collected during a residence of twenty-two years in the eastern
part of the State; from observations made in various places, and particularly
in several journies to the northern and western parts; from original surveys of
many townships and tracts of the Country; from the conversation of many persons
who have been employed in surveying, masting, hunting and scouting; as well as
in husbandry, manufactures, merchandise, navigation and fishery. The public
offices have also been repeatedly searched, and the obliging attention of the
officers of government, both in New Hampshire and Massachusetts, is again
thankfully acknowledged. But that no source of information might be left
unexplored, a printed circular letter was addressed to the several Clergymen,
and other gentlemen of public character, in all parts of the State, requesting
their communications on various heads of inquiry. The answers to these letters
have not been so numerous, and in some instances, not so particular as would
have been agreeable; but from those which have been received (and for which the
Author requests the several writers to accept his thanks) he has been enabled
to render his account more complete than it could have been without this
assistance.

The chapter containing a description of the white mountains, is a copy, with
some enlargements, of a memoir presented to the Philosophical Society of
Philadelphia, and published in the second volume of their transactions. This
memoir was quoted in the London Monthly Review, for February, 1787. p. 139; and
the word freshet occurring in it, the Reviewers added this note, "We are not
acquainted with this word." In the next number, a correspondent kindly
attempted to correct, what he imagined to be 'an error of the 'press,' by
substituting the word fresh in its place; meaning a tide or flowing of fresh in
distinction from salt water. But the Reviewers were not satisfied that there
was any error of the press; and in fact there was not; the word freshet is a
term familiar to the people of New England, as it was to their forefathers,
who brought it from England, where it was equally familiar in the last century.

From the following authorities it may be seen how the nouns freshet and
freshet, were used by writers of the last, and beginning of the present,
century.

The former is found in Milton's Paradise Regained, Book II. line 345.

' All fish from sea or shore,
' Freshet or purling brook, of shell or fin.'
It seems this Author, by a freshet, meant a spreading collection of fresh
water, distinguished from a brook.

In a description of New England, written and published in England, 1658, by
Ferdinando Gorges, the word is used precisely in the sense in which it is now
understood in New England.

p. 29. 'Between Salem and Charlestown, is situated the town of Lynn, near to a
river, whose strong freshet at the end of winter fills all her banks, and
with a violent torrent vents itself into the sea.'

In a letter written by William Penn, 1683, and printed in his works, he speaks
of the freshes of the Delaware, thus, 'The Dutch inhabit those parts of the
Province that lie on or near the Bay* and the Swedes the freshes of the
Delaware.' N. B. All the Swedish settlements were situate below the City of
Philadelphia.

In Oldmixon's British Empire in America, vol. I. p. 151, printed at London in
1708, it is said, 'The first town below the falls is Newton, and next to it is
Pennsbury over against Burlington. This part of the Delaware is called the
freshes.'

N. B. Burlington is twenty miles above Philadelphia.

In Beverley's History of Virginia, printed at London, 1720, we find the same
word, p. 105. 'The damage occasioned by the worms in the rivers of Virginia,
may be avoided by running [the ships] up into the freshes during five or six
weeks that the worm is above water.'

From these authorities, I conclude that the noun freshes was understood to
distinguish those parts of a river, below all the falls, where the fresh water
which comes down from above is slopped by the flowing of the sea, and at the
ebb, resumes its natural course; and which therefore, rises and falls with the
tide. But the word freshet has another signification; it means a river swollen
by rain or melted snow, in the interior country, rising above its usual level,
spreading over the adjacent lowlands, and rushing with an accelerated current
to the sea. In this sense it is understood in New England* and as it is a part
of the language of the age and country in which I write, it is frequently used
in this volume. If some of the words which our fathers brought from Britain,
and which were in vogue a century ago, be there lost or forgotten, it is no
reason that they should be disused here, especially when they convey a definite
sense.

I know not whether as much can be said in vindication of another word, which I
have frequently used, and which perhaps is not more known in England, viz.
intervale. I can cite no very ancient authority for it; but it is well
understood in all parts of New England to distinguish the low-land adjacent to
the fresh rivers, which is frequently overflowed by the freshets; and which is
accounted some of our most valuable soil, because it is rendered permanently
fertile, by the bountiful hand of nature, without the labor of man.

There is another deviation from the strict letter of the English dictionaries;
which is found extremely convenient in our discourses on population. From the
verb migro are derived emigrate and IMMIGRATE; with the same propriety as from
mergo are derived emerge and IMMERGE. Accordingly the verb IMMIGRATE and the
nouns IMMIGRANT and IMMIGRATION are used without scruple in some parts of this
volume.

In the 235th page, the number of inhabitants taken by the census of 1790, is
said to be 142,018. This number was given to me in May, 1791, by the late
Marshall John Parker, Esquire. Afterward it was discovered that a mistake had been
made by one of his assistants in returning the town of Burton twice, viz. in
the County of Strafford and the County of Grafton. In the former it was set
down as containing 133, in the latter 141. The latter is retained; and the
former being deducted from 142.018, leaves the sum total 141*885, which is the
number returned to Congress and published by authority.

Twenty years have now elapsed since this work was first undertaken; during
which time it has struggled with many embarrassments, and has, more than once,
been thrown by, as impracticable; but the favorable reception it has met with
from the public and the continual importunity of its friends, have prevailed on
me to complete it; for which purpose no pains have been spared. The receipt on
the sale of the volumes hitherto falls short of the actual expense of the
impression. How productive it may prove in future is uncertain. As some
encouragement to the work, the Legislature of New Hampshire have granted fifty
pounds, which I have received and for which they again have my thanks.

In the course of my historical researches I have found some materials for an
AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY; and have entertained thoughts of pursuing my inquiries,
with a view to present such a work to the public; if gentlemen in different
parts of the American Continent and Islands, will favor me with suitable
communications. The object is to delineate the characters and actions of
remarkable persons deceased, and the events connected with them. Among those
persons will be ranked Statesmen, Literary Persons, Warriors, Inventors,
Navigators and Travelers, whether among the European Nations who have
possessions in America and their descendants, or the original Natives. The
names will be disposed alphabetically; but how voluminous or expensive the work
will be, or how long time will be required to complete it, cannot at present be
ascertained.

Boston, April 23, 1792.
CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. SITUATION, extent, boundaries and divisions. 9. II. Air, climate and
seasons. 17 III. Face of the country, sea coast, mountains. 31 IV. Particular
description of the white mountains. 39 V. Rivers and other waters. 55 VI.
Remarks on the forest, manner of surveying, making roads and traveling. 73
VII. Monuments and relics of the Indians. 83 VIII. Forest trees and other
vegetable productions. 96 IX. Soil, cultivation and husbandry. 128 X. Native
animals. 146 XI. Caverns, stones, fossils and minerals. 188 XII. Description of
the harbor and river of Pascataqua. 197 XIII. Trade, navigation, fishery and
manufactures. Tables of exportation, entries, prices, etc. 203 XIV. Effect of
the climate and other causes on the human constitution. Remarks on population.
Tables of births, deaths and casualties. 228 XV. Political character, genius,
manners, employments and diversions of the people. 253 XVI. Constitution, laws,
revenue and militia. 266 XVII. Education, literature, religion. 288 Table of
towns, ministers, numbers of people and taxes. 300 XVIII. Conclusion, Hints of
advice on several important subjects. 326 Appendix. 335
CHAP. I. Situation, Extent, Boundaries and Divisions.
THE situation of New Hampshire, on the terraqueous globe, is between 42 41 and
45 11 of latitude, north from the equator; and between 70 40 and 72 28 of
longitude, west from the royal observatory of Greenwich. Its length from the
northern to the southern extremity is one hundred and sixty-eight miles. Its
greatest breadth, measured from the entrance of Pascataqua harbor, to the
mouth of West River, which falls into Connecticut river, opposite to the town
of Chesterfield, is ninety miles. This line crosses the 43d degree of latitude.
From this line northerly, New Hampshire decreases in breadth. On the 44th
degree of latitude, it is fifty-five miles; and on the 45th degree, nineteen
miles wide.

It is bounded on the south by the State of Massachusetts; from which it is
divided by a line, beginning on the sea shore, at a point three miles northward
of the mouth of the river Merrimack; pursuing a course similar to the curvature
of that river, at the same distance; and ending at a point, three miles north
of Patucket fall, in the town of Dracut. From this point, the line extends, on
a supposed due west course, till it crosses Connecticut river, and ends on its
western bank; the distance being fifty-five miles.

This line, called the due west line, was measured and marked in 1741, by
Richard Hazzen. He was ordered by Governor Belcher to allow ten degrees for the
westerly variation of the needle; the theory of which, now imperfect, was then
less known. It is supposed, that the variation at that time, and in that place,
was not more than eight degrees. In 1773, each end of this line was accurately
examined, by celestial observations, made by Thomas Wright, one of Capt.
Holland's company of surveyors; when the western extremity was found to decline
from the eastern two minutes and fifty-seven seconds of latitude. This was
computed to make a difference of 59,872 acres of land, which would have been
gained by New Hampshire, if the line had been run with precision.

From the point where this line strikes Connecticut river, up to the
forty-fifth degree of latitude, the western bank of that river is the western
boundary of New Hampshire, and the eastern boundary of Vermont.

On its eastern side, New Hampshire is bounded by the Atlantic ocean, from the
aforementioned point, three miles northward of the mouth of Merrimack river,
along the shore, to the middle of the main entrance of Pascataqua harbor;
which distance is computed to be about eighteen miles. Thence the boundary line
runs up the middle of the river, to its most northerly head, which is a pond,
situated partly in the town of Wakefield and partly in the town of Shapley, in
the County of York. The distance of this pond from the mouth of the harbor, is
about forty miles, in a N. N. W. course. From the head of this pond, according
to the royal determination, in 1740, the dividing line was to run north, two
degrees west, till one hundred and twenty miles were finished, from the mouth
of Pascataqua harbor, or until it meet with his Majesty's other governments.
The reason for mentioning this specific distance in the decree, was, that one
hundred and twenty miles were the extent of the Province of Maine. At that
time, no other government subject to the British Crown, lay in that direction.
In 1763, the new Province of Quebec was erected, and its southern boundary was
a line passing along the high lands, which divide the rivers that empty
themselves into the river St. Lawrence, from those which fall into the sea. By
the treaty of peace, between America and Britain, in 1783, all the lands
southward of that line, reckoning it from the eastward to the northwest head of
Connecticut river, and thence down along the middle of that river, to the
forty-fifth degree of north latitude were ceded to the United States. These
determinations have been so construed, as to fafavor an extension of the line
between New Hampshire and Maine, to the high lands which bound the Province of
Quebec; a distance of twenty-five miles beyond the northern limits of the
Province of Maine.

The line from the head of Salmon fall river, was begun to be measured and
marked, in 1741, by Walter Bryent, who also was ordered to allow ten degrees
for the westerly variation. In 1767, a controversy arose between the two
Provinces, on a suggestion that Bryent had mistaken the main branch of the
river; but no alteration was made in consequence of this suggestion. In 1768,
the Governor of New Hampshire ordered the line to be surveyed, to its farthest
extent. The surveyor, Isaac Rindge, began where Bryent had left it; and marked
the line, on the same course by the compass, to a point sixteen miles northward
of Amariscogin river, and not far from the lake Umbagog. This survey being made
twenty-seven years after the former, when the westerly variation was less than
before, gave the line a westerly inclination. No farther survey was made till
1789, twenty-one years after the second; during which period, the variation was
still decreasing, and the line was continued on the same course by the compass,
which must bring it still more westerly. For these reasons, in my map, the line
is inflected, so as to correspond with the last survey, as laid down in a plan
returned by Joseph Cramm and Jeremiah Eames, and filed in the Secretary's
office.

The State is bounded on the north, by the British Province of Quebec. The
northeastern extremity of this boundary line, is a birch tree, marked N. E.
New Hampshire, 1789. This line extends along the high lands, seventeen miles
and two hundred and seven rods, to the head of the northwestern branch of
Connecticut river; at which extremity is a fir tree, inscribed N. H. N. W.
1789. Thence the boundary descends, to the forty-fifth degree of ^^^itude,
along the middle of the northwestern branch, which there unites with the
northeastern, or main branch of the river.

The superficial area of New Hampshire, as calculated by George Sproule, in
1773, according to Holland's survey, in which he was employed, was found to be
9296 square miles, or 5,949,440 acres. The addition made by the survey of the
northern boundary, in 1789, is said to be 195 square miles, or 124,800 acres.
From the whole it is supposed a deduction may be made for water, of at least
one hundred thousand acres.

Holland's survey was made in 1773, and 1774, at the expense of the Province.
The result of it is contained in a large map, engraven in London, 1784, by the
direction and at the expense of Paul Wentworth, Esquire. Those parts which were
actually surveyed by Holland or his assistants, are laid down with great
accuracy. The eastern boundary line and the parts connected with it were not
surveyed, but taken from such materials and information as could at that time
be collected. I^ the map annexed to this work, those parts are more full and
correct, excepting the lines of townships and locations, which in so small a
draught could not be introduced without confusion. For the same reason, the
names of some townships are omitted, chiefly such as have no settlements made
in them.

The State is divided into five Counties, viz. Rockingham, Strafford,
Hillsborough, Cheshire, and Grafton, the boundaries of which are not noticed in
Holland's, but are marked on this map by dotted lines.

The straight line of Mason's patent is also described. The history of it is as
follows:

It was observed in the course of the preceding work, Vol. II. p. ^66.
that the Masonian proprietors claimed a curve line as their western boundary;
and that under the royal government no person had controverted that claim. When
the war with Great Britain was terminated by the peace of 1783, the grantees of
some crown lands, with which this line interfered, petitioned the Assembly to
ascertain the limits of Mason's patent. The Masonians at the same time
presented a petition, showing the pretension which they had to a curve line,
and praying that a survey of it, which had been made in 1768, by Robert
Fletcher, might be established. About the same time, the heirs of Allen, whose
claim had long lain dormant, for want of ability to prosecute it, having
consulted Council, and admitted some persons of property into partnership with
them, entered and took possession of the unoccupied lands within the limits of
the patent; and in imitation of the Masonians, gave general deeds of quitclaim,
to all bona fide purchasers, previously to the first of May, 1785; which deeds
were recorded in each County, and published in the news papers. They also
petitioned the Assembly to establish a head line for their patent.

After a solemn hearing of these claims, the Assembly ordered a survey to be
made of sixty miles from the sea, on the southern and eastern lines of the
State, and a straight line to be run from the end of one line of sixty miles,
to the end of the other. They also passed an act to quiet all bona fide
purchasers of lands, between the straight and curve lines, so far, as that the
State should not disturb them. This survey was made in 1787, by Joseph
Blanchard and Charles Clapham. The line begins on the southern boundary, at lot
No. 18, in the town of Rindge. Its course is north 39 east. Its extent is 93
miles. It ends at a point in the eastern boundary, which is seven miles and two
hundred and six rods, northward of Great Ossapy river. This line being
established, as the head line, or western boundary of Mason's patent, the
Masonians, for the sum of forty thousand dollars in public securities, and
eight hundred dollars in specie, purchased of the State, all its right and
title to the unoccupied lands between the straight line and the curve. The
heirs of Allen were then confined in their claim, to those waste lands only,
which were within the straight line. They have since compromised their dispute,
with the proprietors of eleven of the fifteen Masonian shares, by deeds of
mutual quitclaim and release. This was done in January, 1790.

CHAP. II. Air, Climate and Seasons.
THE air of New Hampshire is generally pure and salubrious. During the winter
months, the prevailing wind is from the northwest; which is dry, cold and
bracing; it rarely brings snow, but when it does, the degree of cold is
increased. That the coldness of our northwest wind is owing to the great lakes,
is a vulgar error, often retailed by geographical writers, and adopted by
unthinking people. All the great lakes lie westward of the N. W. point, and
some of them southward of W. It is more natural to suppose that the immense
wilderness, but especially the mountains, when covered with snow, give a
keenness to the air, as a cake of ice to a quantity of liquor in which it
floats; and that this air, put in motion, conveys its cold as far as it extends.

The deepest snows fall with a northeast wind, and storms from that quarter are
most violent, and of longest duration; after which, the wind commonly changes
to the N. W, and blows briskly for a day or two, driving the snow into heaps.
This effect is produced only in the open grounds; in the forest the snow lies
level, from two to four feet in depth, throughout the winter. On the mountains,
the snow falls earlier, and remains later than in the low grounds. On those
elevated summits, the winds also have greater force, driving the snow into the
long and deep gullies of the mountains, where it is so consolidated, as not to
be easily dissolved, by the vernal sun. Spots of snow are seen on the south
sides of the mountains as late as May, and on the highest till July.

Light frosts begin in September; in October they are more frequent, and by the
end of that month, ice is made in small collections of water; but the weather
is mostly serene. November is a variable month, alternately wet and dry; the
surface of the ground is frequently frozen and thawed. The same weather
continues through a part of December, but commonly, in the course of this
month, the rivers and the earth are thoroughly frozen, and well prepared to
receive and retain the snow. January often produces a thaw, which is succeeded
by a severe frost. In February we have the deepest snows, and the coldest
weather; but the lowest depression of the thermometer is generally followed by
wet and mild weather. March is blustering and cold, with frequent slights of
snow; but the sun is then so high as to melt the snow at noon. In April the
open country is generally cleared of snow; but it commonly lies in the woods
till May. This is the usual routine of the wintry season; but there are
sometimes variations. In 1771, the snow did not fall till the end of January.
In 1786, it was very deep in the beginning of December. When the snow comes
early, it preserves the ground from being deeply frozen, otherwise the frost
penetrates to the depth of three feet or more.

From the middle of September, the mornings and evenings begin to be so chill,
that a small fire becomes a desirable companion. In October, the weather
requires one to be kept more steadily; from the time that the autumnal rains
come on in November, it is invariably necessary, to the end of March; in April
it is intermitted at noon; a storm is always expected in May, and, till that is
past, the chimney is not closed. We therefore reckon eight months of cold
weather in the year.

Cattle are housed from the beginning of November. In the severest weather,
nature teaches the fowls to roost on the backs of cattle, in the barns, to
preserve their feet from being frozen. By the beginning of May, the grass is
sufficiently grown for cattle to live abroad; good husbandmen do not permit
them to feed till the twenty-first of May; but scarcity of fodder obliges the
poorer sort to depart from this rule.

A dry winter is extremely cold. The winter of 1779, 80, was remarkably dry,
without rain or thaw; the snow was constantly drifted by the wind, the springs
of water were very low, and the weather as severe and tedious as ever was
experienced. It was called the Canada winter, from its similarity to the usual
dry cold of that climate.

A freezing rain is no uncommon spectacle. The trees are sometimes so incrusted
with ice that the smaller branches break with its weight. The sun, shining on
these incrustations, affords a brilliant entertainment to a curious spectator;
but it is of short duration.

On the seventeenth of February, 1782, an unusual kind of hoar frost was
observed. The wind had been northerly on the preceding day, with some
appearance of snow. The morning was calm and foggy. The trees and bushes were
white with frost, which appeared on the north sides, only, of the twigs and
smaller branches; but on the larger limbs and trunks, there was none: Nor was
any seen on the houses or fences, excepting on the sharp edges of boards; but
every point of a stick or nail, and every rope and string, which was exposed to
the north, was covered. The spiculae were of all lengths, from an inch
downward, and about the thickness of a knitting pin. They increased in number
and size, for about two hours after the rising of the sun; and in about an hour
after this, began to fall, like snow, on the ground; they did not all disappear
till two hours after noon.

Light frosts have been known in every month of the year, excepting July. In
June, 1764, a sudden frost nipped the Indian corn, then newly sprouted; but it
recovered, and sprouted again. A frost in August is generally destructive to
this vegetable; the corn being then in the milk. After it has grown beyond this
stage, the frost serves to open the husk and dry the ears, to prepare it for
harvest.

A southeast storm is often as violent, but commonly shorter, than one from the
northeast; if it begin with snow it soon changes to rain. A brisk wind from the
west or south west, with a flight of snow or rain, sometimes happens, but its
duration is very short. Squalls of this kind are common in March.

In the spring months there is generally a land breeze in the morning; a sea
breeze begins an hour or two before noon, and continues till about the setting
of the sun. The heat of summer is also frequently allayed by breezes from the
sea, but they do not reach more than twenty or thirty miles into the country,
and the lighter ones not so far. The northeast storms penetrate sixty or
seventy miles, but their violence is abated at that distance from the sea.

In July the weather is clear and hot. In August the heat is greatest, and is
accompanied with a disagreeable dampness. Thunder is frequent in the summer
months; it is sometimes heard in spring and autumn, but rarely in the winter,
though in snow storms the air is often highly electrified, and flashes are
sometimes seen. Thunder showers in the summer commonly rise in the western
quarter, and pass over to the east; if they rise in the north or northeast,
they produce hail, which sometimes proves destructive to the fields; but this
mischief is never very extensive. The hail has been known to lie in hollow
places, where it has rolled into heaps, till the succeeding day; but for the
most part, it melts soon after falling.

It has often been observed that thunder clouds, when near the earth, seem to
be attracted by large collections of water. In the neighborhood of lakes and
ponds, the thunder is reverberated from the surrounding mountains, in a grand
and solemn echo of long continuance. One of the most violent thunder storms
which was ever known in the maritime parts of New Hampshire, was on the fourth
of May, 1779, at noon. A cloud rose in the N. W. and another in the S. W. at
the same time; they crossed each other, and the former passed very near the
earth; a very black darkness came on, the lightning was an incessant glare, and
the thunder a continual peal for about an hour. Many trees, several barns,
mills and dwelling houses were struck; cattle and sheep were killed in the
pastures in several towns; and a valuable new house, built for religious
worship, at Somersworth, was set on fire and consumed. Its steeple had a
metallic vane and spindle, but no conductor to the earth. The bell was melted,
and fell while in a state of fusion, and no piece of it larger than a musket
ball could be found. The effects of this storm were to be traced from Kingston,
in a northeasterly direction, to the river Kennebeck.

A southwest breeze in summer is accompanied with a serene sky, and this is the
warmest of our winds. Probably the tradition of the natives, that heaven is
situated in the S. W. arose from this circumstance. The N. W. wind does not
blow in summer, but after a thunder shower, when its elasticity and coolness
are as refreshing as the preceding heat is tedious.

Sometimes the extreme heat of several days, produces, in the maritime parts, a
sea turn, and in the inland parts, a whirlwind. A remarkable instance of both
happened in June, 1782. The heat had been extreme for five days. On the 22d,
after the setting of the sun, the wind suddenly shifted from S. W. to N. E.
This change sensibly affected the human body, and rendered an additional
garment necessary. A very large quantity of Siberian wheat was at that time in
a state of luxuriant vegetation. As far as the sea wind extended, which was
from twenty to thirty miles, the wheat was chilled and blasted; beyond that
distance it was not injured. The next day a whirlwind began near the river
Connecticut, the western boundary of New Hampshire, and directed its course
toward the east, in a vein of near half a mile wide. In its progress its fury
abated; but the blast extended to the sea, and was accompanied with thunder and
rain.

Instances of sudden changes in the weather, are noted in the earliest accounts
of the country. In 1658, when the apple trees were in blossom, there came on
such a sudden and severe degree of cold, that in a fishing boat belonging to
Hampton, one man died before they could reach the shore, another was so chilled
that he died in a few days, and a third lost his feet. MS. letter of Rev. Mr.
Gookin to Rev. Mr. Prince.
This instance is very singular. The common season for the apple trees to
blossom, is about the third week in May; but they are earlier or later
according to the degree of heat. On the eleventh of May, 1769, when the trees
were in bloom, an unusual flight of snow covered them in the afternoon, and
continued till the next morning.

In a very warm autumn the earliest apple trees have produced blossoms; and
roses have blown in the month of October, but these appearances are very rare.

Sudden changes from cold to heat are less frequent than the contrary. The most
remarkable instance of this kind, happened in the winter of 1759,60. It was on
the Lord's day, in the time of morning service. There had been a freezing rain
in the preceding night; and the trees, houses, and earth were covered with ice.
On a sudden, the wind changed to the south; the ice fell from the trees, with a
crackling noise, and a vapor rose from the houses as if they had been on fire.
On coming into the open air, the change of the weather from severe cold, to
summer heat, was astonishing. The greatest degree of heat which has been
observed by Farenheit's thermometer is 96/0 and of cold 0/9 These observations
were made at Portsmouth.

Notwithstanding these anomalous instances of inequality and sudden transition,
the sky is commonly settled and serene for many days together, and the changes
of weather are gradual. In the winter, a dry season, if there be snow on the
ground, is favorable for the purpose of transportation in sleighs and sledges.
In summer, if there be no extensive rain, for three or four weeks, the want of
it is severely felt. The years 1761 and 1762 were remarkable for early drought,
which caused a scarcity of corn and hay; the rain which fell in August, brought
forward the latter feed in the pastures and fields. The year 1782 was
remarkable for a late drought; the latter feed and the autumnal vegetables,
were destroyed. In October, the grass was so dry as to crackle under the feet.
The long continuance of drought is observed to produce a coolness in the air.
These droughts do not affect the mountainous parts of the country, so much as
the plains; which are also more injured by early frosts than the higher lands.

In the spring, the trees which have been felled the preceding year, are burned
in the new plantations. If the season be dry, the flames spread in the woods,
and a large extent of the forest is sometimes on fire at once. Fences and
buildings are often destroyed by these raging conflagrations. The only
effectual way to prevent the spreading of such a fire, is to kindle another at
a distance, and to drive the flame along through the bushes, or dry grass, to
meet the greater fire, that all the fuel may be consumed. This operation
requires a large number of people, and no small degree of dexterity and
resolution. In swamps, a fire has been known to penetrate several feet under
the ground, and consume the roots of trees. When a fire has raged to this
degree, nothing can extinguish it but a heavy rain.

From these numerous fires arise immense clouds of smoke, mingled with the
burnt leaves of the trees, which are carried to great distances by the wind.
These clouds meeting with other vapors in the atmosphere, sometimes produce
very singular appearances. The unusual darkness of the nineteenth of May, 1780,
was caused by such a combination of vapors.

Fires had spread very extensively in the woods, and the westerly wind had
driven the smoke over all the country. It was so thick near the horizon, for
several preceding days, that the sun disappeared half an hour before its
setting; and in the low grounds, it was almost suffocating. The morning of the
nineteenth was cloudy, with some rain; and a black cloud appeared in the
southwest, from which thunder was heard. The rain water, and the surface of
rivers, was covered with a sooty scum. The remains of a snow drift, which had
been raked clean the preceding day, became black. Several small birds flew into
the houses, and others were found dead abroad, being suffocated. About an hour
before noon the clouds assumed a brassy appearance; after which their color
became a dusky gray; at one hour after noon i^ was necessary to light candles.

At the time of the greatest obscuration, the smoke of a chimney was observed
to rise perpendicularly, and then incline to the west. A thick fog, which came
in from the sea, moved along the hill tops in the same direction. The place
where these observations were made, was at Dover, fifteen miles distant from
the sea. A light gleam was seen in the north. The extent of this darkness, was
more than two hundred miles, from north to south. To the westward, it reached
beyond Albany, and it was observed, by a vessel at sea, fifteen leagues
eastward of Cape-Anne.

The darkness varied its appearance, in some places, through the afternoon; but
in the maritime parts of New Hampshire, there was no cessation or interruption
of it; and the evening presented a complete specimen of as total darkness as
can be conceived. Before midnight, the vapors dispersed, and the next morning
there was no appearance of them; but for several days after, clouds of smoke
were seen in motion, and the burnt leaves of trees were wafted abroad by the
wind.

In the neighborhood of fresh rivers and ponds, a whitish fog in the morning,
lying over the water, is a sure indication of fair weather for that day; and
when no fog is seen, rain is expected before night. In the mountainous parts of
the country, the ascent of vapors, and their formation into clouds, is a
curious and entertaining object. The vapors are seen rising in small columns,
like smoke from many chimneys. When risen to a certain height, they spread,
meet, condense, and are attracted by the mountains, where they either distill in
gentle dews, and replenish the springs, or descend in showers, accompanied with
thunder. After short intermissions, the process is repeated many times, in the
course of a summer day, affording to travelers a lively illustration of what
is observed in the book of Job, 'they are wet with the showers of the
mountains.' Job xxiv. 8.


The aurora borealis was first noticed in New Hampshire, in the year 1719. The
following account of this appearance is taken from the Boston News Letter, of
March 14, 1720.

The late extraordinary appearance in the heavens, of December 11, is the first
of the kind that is known to have been seen in New England, and was at the same
time observed throughout the country. Some say it was seen at three several
times, viz. at eight, twelve, and again toward morning. The account of some,
is, of a cloud lying length way, toward the northwest and northeast; from the
ends of which arose two clouds, ascending toward the middle of the heavens, of
a deep red color, and almost meeting each other, then descending toward the
place whence they arose. The air was light in the time of it, as a little after
sun set, or before sunrise; and some saw lights, something like shooting stars,
streaming upwards from the clouds. It was seen in our towns all along; and the
great variety of accounts, may in part proceed from this, that some saw only
one, others another of its appearances.


The elder people say it is much more frequent now than formerly. It sometimes
appears in the form of a luminous arch, extending from east to west; but more
commonly rises from a dark convexity in the north, and flashes upward, toward
the zenith. In a calm night, and in the intervals between gentle flaws of wind,
an attentive ear, in a retired situation, may perceive it to be accompanied
with a sound. If any person would have a precise idea of the sound, caused by
the flashing of the aurora borealis, let him hold a silk handkerchief by the
corner, in one hand, and with the thumb and finger of the other hand, make a
quick stroke along its edge.
This luminous appearance has been observed in all seasons of the year, in the
extremes of heat and cold, and in all the intermediate degrees. The color of
the streams is sometimes variegated, white, blue, yellow and red, the luster of
which, reflected from the snow, is an appearance highly picturesque and
entertaining.

CHAP. III. Face of the Country. Sea coast. Mountains.
THE whole extent of the sea coast, from the southern boundary, to the mouth of
Pascataqua harbor, is about eighteen miles. The shore is mostly a sandy beach,
within which are salt marshes, intersected by creeks. There are several coves
for fishing vessels; but the only harbor for ships, is the entrance of
Pascataqua, where the shore is rocky. Some ledges and points of rocks, are
situate to the southward of the harbor, off Rye: but there is no remarkable
head land on the coast. Two bluffs only appear, elevated above the level of the
beach, which are called the great and little Boar's heads; these are in the
town of Hampton.

The remarkable mountain, Agamenticus, lies about four leagues north of the
entrance of Pascataqua, and there are three inferior summits, known by the name
of Frost's hills, at a less distance, on the N. W. These are situate within the
County of York, formerly called the Province of Maine; but from the sea, no
remarkable high lands appear, which are within the limits of New Hampshire,
nearer than twenty or thirty miles. The first ridge is continued through the
towns of Rochester, Barrington and Nottingham, and the several summits are
distinguished by different names, as Teneriffe, Saddleback, Tuckaway etc. but
the general name is the Blue hills. Beyond these, are several higher ones, as
Mount major, Moose mountain, etc. these are not in a continued range, but
detached; between them are many smaller elevations, some of which are, and
others are not distinctly named. Farther back the mountains rise higher, and
among the third range, Chocorua, Ossapy and Kyarsarge, claim the preeminence.
Beyond these, is the lofty ridge, which is commonly called the height of land,
because it seperates the branches of the river Connecticut, from those of
Merrimack. In this ridge is the Grand Monadnock, twenty-two miles east of the
river Connecticut, and ten miles north of the southern boundary line. Thirty
miles north of this, lies Sunnapee mountain, and forty-eight miles farther, in
the same direction, is Mooshelock. The ridge then is continued, northeasterly,
dividing the waters of the river Connecticut from those of Saco and
Amariscoggin. Here the mountains rise much higher, and the most elevated
summits in this range, are the White mountains.

Mountains appear of different colors, according to the nature of their
exterior surface, the season of the year, and the distance of the observer.
They are all covered with wood, the smaller ones wholly, the larger have bald
summits, which appear white, as long as the snow remains; but at other times,
vary their color according to the distance of the observer. If he is very
nigh, they appear of the gray color of the rock, and the farther he recedes,
their appearance is a paler blue, till it becomes nearly of the color of the
sky. The woody parts of mountains, when viewed at a small distance, are green,
at a greater distance, blue. From some favorable situations, all these
varieties may be seen at once; mountains of different shades, textures and
elevations, are presented to the eye of the curious observer.

The wood on these mountains, is of various kinds; but they have all more or
less of the evergreens, as pine, spruce, hemlock and fir, intermixed with
shrubs and vines. It is universally observed that trees of every kind diminish
in their size toward the summit; many of them, though short, appear to be very
aged. On some mountains we find (...) shrubbery of hemlock and spruce, whose
branches are knit together so as to be impenetrable. The snow lodges on their
tops, and a cavity is formed underneath. These are called by the Indians,
Hakmantaks.

On the tops of several of the highest mountains, are small collections of
water, and on others, marshy spots, which are frequented by aquatic birds. The
roads over those mountains which are passable, are frequently wet and miry,
while the valleys below are dry. About two or three feet under the surface of
the mountain, is a firm earth; called the pan, which is impenetrable by water;
the rains and dews are therefore retained in the softer soil, or formed into
springs and brooks. This soil is made by the rotting of fallen leaves and wood,
the growth of past ages;

We frequently observe large rocks detached from the mountains, some of them so
distant from the base, that they could not have rolled thither but in some
convulsion of the earth. Smaller masses are frequently dislodged by the thawing
of the ground in the spring, after it has been heaved up by the frost. In the
year 1746, a party who were ranging the woods, in the neighborhood of the
White mountains, on a warm day, in the month of March, were alarmed with a
repeated noise, which they supposed to be the firing of guns. On further
search, they found it to be caused by rocks, falling from the south side of a
steep mountain. Letter of Walter Bryent, Esquire. who was one of the party.


Mountainous countries are observed to be most subject to earthquakes; and the
nearer any lands are to mountains, it may be expected that these commotions
will be more frequent. New England has never been visited with destructive
earthquakes; but more shocks have been observed in its northern than in its
southern parts. After the great shocks in 1727 and 1755, which were perceived
through a great part of the continent, smaller shocks were more frequent in
New Hampshire than at Boston. From 1755 to 1774, scarcely a year passed without
some repetition; from that time to 1783, none were observed; and there have
been but two or three since.

Several phenomena respecting the larger mountains, afford matter of amusement;
and some are of real use. People who live near them, humourously style the
mountains their almanac, because, by the ascent and attraction of vapors, they
can form a judgment of the weather. If a cloud is attracted by a mountain, and
hovers on its top, they predict rain; and if after rain, the mountain continues
capped, they expect a repetition of showers. A storm is preceded for several
hours, by a roaring of the mountain, which may be heard ten or twelve miles.
This is frequently observed by people who live near the grand Monadnock. It is
also said, that when there is a perfect calm on the south side, there is
sometimes a furious wind on the north, which drives the snow, so that it is
seen whirling far above the trees. Ainsworth's MS. letter.


The town of Moultonborough lies under the S. W. side of the great Ossapy
mountain; and it is there observed, that in a N. E. storm, the wind falls over
the mountain, like water over a dam; and with such a force as frequently to
unroof the houses. Shaw's MS. letter.


The altitude of this mountain, has not been ascertained; but that of the grand
Monadnock was measured in 1780, by James Winthrop; Esquire. by means of a
barometer, and the table of corresponding heights, in Martin's Philosophia
Britanica. Vol. II, p. 132.
At the base, on the north side, the barometer being at 28, 4, gave an
elevation of 1395 feet. At the upper edge of the wood, it was at 27, 0, which
denoted 2682 feet; and at the highest point of the rock, 26, 4, which announced
an elevation of 3254 feet above the level of the sea.

The base of this mountain is about five miles in diameter, from north to
south; and about three, from east to west. Its summit is a bald rock; on some
parts of it are large piles of broken rocks; and on the sides are some
appearances of the explosion of subterraneous fires.

A similar phenomenon has been observed on a mountain, in the township of
Chesterfield, adjoining Connecticut river, called West river mountain. About
the year 1730, the garrison of Fort Dummer, distant four miles, was alarmed
with frequent explosions, and with columns of fire and smoke, emitted from the
mountain. The like appearances have been observed at various times since;
particularly, one in 1752, was the most violent of any. There are two places,
where the rocks bear marks of having been heated and calcined. A company of
persons having conceived a notion of precious metals being contained in this
mountain, have penetrated it in various directions; and have found further
evidences of internal fires; particularly a large quantity of scorioe, in some
parts loose, in others adhering to the rocks. The only valuable effect of their
industry, is the discovery of a fine, soft, yellow earth, which when burned, is
changed into a brown pigment; and another of the color of the peach blossom.
There is also observed on the earth, which has been thrown out, a white
incrustation, which has the taste of nitre. The top of the mountain is an area,
of about twenty rods square, which is hollow; and in a wet season, is filled
with water, as is common on the tops of mountains; but there is no appearance
of such a crater as is peculiar to volcanos. Under the mountain, are many
fragments of rock, which have fallen from it; but whether by explosions, or any
other convulsions, or by force of the frost, cannot be ascertained. An account
of these appearances was sent to the Academy of arts and sciences, by the late
Daniel Jones, Esquire. of Hinsdale. Memoirs, Vol. I, p. 312.
Since which, it is said, that the noise has been again heard; but in a late
visit to the mountain, by the Rev. Mr. Gay, no sign of any recent explosion,
could be discovered; nor can any thing be added to what Mr. Jones has written
on the subject. Gav's MS. letter, Oct. 29, 1790.


CHAP. IV. Particular Description of the White Mountains.
FROM the earliest settlement of the country, the White mountains have
attracted the attention of all sorts of persons. They are undoubtedly the
highest land in New England, and in clear weather, are discovered before any
other land, by vessels coming in to the eastern coast; but by reason of their
white appearance, are frequently mistaken for clouds. They are visible on the
land at the distance of eighty miles, on the south and southeast sides; they
appear higher when viewed from the northeast, and it is said, they are seen
from the neighborhood of Chamble and Quebec. The Indians gave them the name of
Agiocochook: They had a very ancient tradition that their country was once
drowned, with all its inhabitants, except one Powaw and his wife, who,
foreseeing the flood, fled to these mountains, where they were preserved, and
that from them the country was re-peopled. Josselyn's voyageto New England, p.
135.
They had a superstitious veneration for the summit, as the habitation of
invisible beings; they never ventured to ascend it, and always endeavored to
dissuade every one from the attempt. From them, and the captives, whom they
sometimes led to Canada, through the passes of these mountains, many fictions
have been propagated, which have given rise to mavelous and incredible
stories; particularly, it has been reported, that at immense and inaccessible
heights, there have been seen carbuncles, which are supposed to appear luminous
in the night. Some writers, who have attempted to give an account of these
mountains, have ascribed the whiteness of them, to shining rocks, or a kind of
white moss; and the highest summit has been deemed inaccessible, on account of
the extreme cold, which threatens to freeze the traveller, in the midst of
summer.

Nature has, indeed, in that region, formed her works on a large scale, and
presented to view, many objects which do not ordinarily occur. A person who is
unacquainted with a mountainous country, cannot, upon his first coming into it,
make an adequate judgment of heights and distances; he will imagine every thing
to be nearer and less than it really is, until, by experience, he learns to
correct his apprehensions, and accommodate his eye to the magnitude and
situation of the objects around him. When amazement is excited by the grandeur
and sublimity of the scenes presented to view, it is necessary to curb the
imagination, and exercise judgment with mathematical precision; or the
temptation to romance will be invincible.

The White mountains are the most elevated part of a ridge, which extends N. E.
and S. W. to an immense distance. The area of their base, is an irregular
figure, the whole circuit of which, is not less than sixty miles. The number of
summits within this area, cannot at present be ascertained, the country round
them being a thick wilderness. The greatest number which can be seen at once,
is at Dartmouth, on the N. W. side, where seven summits appear at one view, of
which four are bald. Of these, the three highest are the most distant, being on
the eastern side of the cluster; one of these is the mountain which makes so
majestic an appearance all along the shore of the eastern counties of
Massachusetts: It has lately been distinguished by the name of Mount WASHINGTON.

To arrive at the foot of this mountain, there is a continual ascent of twelve
miles, from the plain of Pigwacket, which brings the traveller to the height of
land, between Saco and Amariscoggin rivers. At this height there is a level of
about a mile square, part of which is a meadow, formerly a beaver pond, with a
dam at each end. Here, though elevated more than three thousand feet above the
level of the sea, the traveller finds himself in a deep valley. On the east is
a steep mountain, out of which issue several springs, one of which is the
fountain of Ellis river, a branch of Saco, which runs south; another, of
Peabody river, a branch of Amariscoggin, which runs north. From this meadow,
toward the west, there is an uninterrupted ascent, on a ridge, between two deep
gullies, to the summit of Mount Washington.

The lower part of the mountain is shaded by a thick growth of spruce and fir.
The surface is composed of rocks, covered with very long green moss, which
extends from one rock to another, and is, in many places, so thick and strong,
as to bear a man's weight. This immense bed of moss, serves as a sponge, to
retain the moisture brought by the clouds and vapors, which are frequently
rising and gathering round the mountains; the thick growth of wood, prevents
the rays of the sun from penetrating to exhale it; so that there is a constant
supply of water deposited in the crevices of the rocks, and issuing in the form
of springs, from every part of the mountain.

The rocks which compose the surface of the mountain, are, in some parts,
slate, in others, flint; some specimens of rock crystal have been found, but
of no great value. No lime stone has yet been discovered, though the most
likely rocks have been tried with aquafortis. There is one precipice, on the
eastern side, not only completely perpendicular, but composed of square stones,
as regular as a piece of masonry; it is about five feet high, and from fifteen
to twenty in length. The uppermost rocks of the mountain, are the common
quartz, of a dark gray color; when broken, they show very small shining
specks, but there is no such appearance on the exterior part. The eastern side
of the mountain, rises in an angle of 45 degrees, and requires six or seven
hours of hard labor to ascend it. Many of the precipices are so steep, as to
oblige the traveller to use his hands, as well as feet, and to hold by the
trees, which diminish in size, till they degenerate to shrubs and bushes; above
these, are low vines, some bearing red, and others blue berries, and the
uppermost vegetation is a species of grass, called winter-grass, mixed with the
moss of the rocks. At the base of the summit of Mount Washington, the limits of
vegetation may with propriety be fixed. There are indeed, on some of the rocks,
even to their apices, scattered specks of a mossy appearance; but I conceive
them to be extraneous substances, accidentally adhering to the rocks, for I
could not discover, with my botanical microscope, any part of that plant
regularly formed. The limits of vegetation at the base of this summit, are as
well defined as that between the woods and the bald or mossy part. So striking
is the appearance, that at a considerable distance, the mind is impressed with
an idea, that vegetation extends no further than a line, as well defined as the
penumbra and shadow, in a lunar eclipse. The stones I have by me, from the
summit, have not the smallest appearance of moss upon them.

There is evidently the appearance of three zones -- 1, the woods -- 2, the
bald mossy part -- 3, the part above vegetation. The same appearance has been
observed on the Alps, and all other high mountains.

I recollect no grass on the plain. The spaces between the rocks in the second
zone* and on the plain, are filled with spruce and fir, which, perhaps, have
been growing ever since the creation, and yet many of them have not attained a
greater height than three or four inches, but their spreading tops are so thick
and strong, as to support the weight of a man, without yielding in the smallest
degree. The snows and winds keeping the surface even with the general surface
of the rocks. In many places, on the sides, we could get glades of this growth,
some rods in extent, when we could, by sitting down on our feet, slide the
whole length. The tops of the growth of wood were so thick and firm, as to bear
us currently, a considerable distance, before we arrived at the utmost
boundaries, which were almost as well defined as the water on the shore of a
pond. The tops of the wood, had the appearance of having been shorn off,
exhibiting a smooth surface* from their upper limits, to a great distance down
the mountain.

MS. of Dr. Cutler.


Having surmounted the upper and steepest precipice, there is a large area,
called the plain. It is a dry heath, composed of rocks covered with moss, and
bearing the appearance of a pasture, in the beginning of the winter season. In
some openings, between the rocks, there are springs of water, in others, dry
gravel. Here the grous or heath bird resorts, and is generally out of danger;
several of them were shot by some travelers in October, 1774. The extent of
this plain is uncertain; from the eastern side, to the foot of the pinnacle, or
sugar loaf, it is nearly level, and it may be walked over in less than an hour.
The sugar loaf, is a pyramidal heap of gray rocks, which, in some places, are
formed like winding steps. This pinnacle has been ascended in one hour and a
half. The traveller having gained the summit, is recompensed for his toil, if
the sky be serene, with a most noble and extensive prospect. On the S. E. side,
there is a view of the Atlantic ocean, the nearest part of which, is sixty-five
miles, in a direct line. On the W. and N. the prospect is bounded by the high
lands, which separate the waters of Connecticut and Amariscoggin rivers, from
those of Lake Champlain and St. Lawrence. On the south, it extends to the
southernmost mountains of New Hampshire, comprehending a view of the Lake
Winipiseogee. On every side of these mountains, are long winding gullies,
beginning at the precipice below the plain, and deepening in the descent. In
winter, the snow lodges in these gullies; and being driven, by the N. W. and N.
E. wind* from the top, is deepest in those which are situated on the southerly
side. It is observed to lie longer in the spring on the south, than on the N.
W. side, which is the case with many other hills in New Hampshire.

A ranging company, who ascended the highest mountain, on the N. W. part, April
29th, 1725, found the snow four feet deep on that side; the summit was almost
bare of snow, though covered with white frost and ice, and a small pond of
water, near the top, was hard frozen.

In 1774, some men, who were making a road through the eastern pass of the
mountains, ascended the mountain, to the summit, on the 6th of June, and on the
south side, in one of the deep gullies, found a body of snow thirteen feet
deep, and so hard as to bear them. On the 19th of the same month, some of the
same party ascended again, and in the same spot, the snow was five feet deep.
In the first week of September, 1783, two men, who attempted to ascend the
mountain, found the bald top so covered with snow and ice, then newly formed,
that they could not reach the summit; but this does not happen every year so
soon; for the mountain has been ascended as late as the first week in October,
when no snow was upon it; and though the mountains begin to be covered, at
times, with snow, as early as September, yet it goes off again, and seldom gets
fixed till the end of October, or the beginning of November; but from that time
it remains till July. The following is a journal of the appearances of the
mountain, in the autumnal months of 1784, observed by the Rev. Mr. Haven, of
Rochester, whose house is in plain view of the south side of the mountain,
distant about sixty miles.

Sept. 17 and 18, a N. E. storm of rain. 20, Mountain appeared white. 22, Of a
pale blue. Oct. 3 and 4, Rain, succeeded by frost. 5, Mountain white. 8, Of a
pale blue. 9, White at the west end. 10, White in the morning, most part blue
P. M. 22 and 24, Blue. 28, White at the west end, the rest blue. Nov. 2, A spot
of white at the west end. 4, Uniformly whit^^ 5, Very white.
From this time, to the 23d, when the weather was clear enough to see so far,
the lower part of the mountain appeared very white; the summit involved in
squally clouds.

N. B. The west and is the highest part.


In the year 1784, snow was seen on the south side of the largest mountain,
till the 12th of July; in 1790, it lay till the month of August.

During this period, of nine or ten months, the mountains exhibit more or less
of that bright appearance, from which they are denominated white. In the
spring, when the snow is partly dissolved, they appear of a pale blue, streaked
with white; and after it is wholly gone, at the distance of sixty miles, they
are altogether of the same pale blue, nearly approaching a sky color; while at
the same time, viewed at the distance of eight miles or less, they appear of
the proper color of the rock. These changes are observed by people who live
within constant view of them; and from these facts and observations, it may
with certainty be concluded, that the whiteness of them is wholly caused by the
snow, and not by any other white substance, for in fact, there is none. There
are indeed in the summer months, some streaks, which appear brighter than other
parts; but these, when viewed attentively with a telescope, are plainly
discerned to be the edges or sides of the long deep gullies, enlightened by the
sun, and the dark parts are the shaded sides of the same; in the course of a
day, these spots may be seen to vary, according to the position of the sun.

A company of gentlemen visited these mountains in July, 1784, with a view to
make particular observations on the several phenomena which might occur. It
happened, unfortunately, that thick clouds covered the mountains almost the
whole time, so that some of the instruments, which, with much labor, they had
carried up, were rendered useless. These were a sextant, a telescope, an
instrument for ascertaining the bearings of distant objects, a barometer, a
thermometer and several others for different purposes. In the barometer, the
mercury ranged at 22,6, and the thermometer stood at 44 degrees. It was their
intention to have placed one of each at the foot of the mountain, at the same
time that the others were carried to the top, for the purpose of making
corresponding observations; but they were unhappily broken in the course of the
journey, through the rugged roads and thick woods; and the barometer, which was
carried to the summit, had suffered so much agitation, that an allowance was
necessary to be made, in calculating the height of the mountain, which was
computed, in round numbers, at five thousand and five hundred feet above the
meadow, in the valley below, and nearly ten thousand feet above the level of
the sea. This computation was made by the Rev. Dr. Cutler. Subsequent
observations and calculations have induced the author to believe the
computation of his ingenious friend too moderate, and he is persuaded, that
whenever the mountain can be measured with the requisite precision, it will be
found to exceed ten thousand feet, of perpendicular altitude, above the level
of the ocean.
They intended to have made a geometrical mensuration of the altitude; but in
the meadow, they could not obtain a base of sufficient length, nor see the
summit of the sugar loaf; and in another place, where these inconveniences were
removed, they were prevented by the almost continual obscuration of the
mountains, by clouds.

Their exercise, in ascending the mountain, was so violent, that when Doctor
Cutler, who carried the thermometer, took it out of his bosom, the mercury
stood at fever heat, but it soon fell to 44, and by the time that he had
adjusted his barometer and thermometer, the cold had nearly deprived him of the
use of his fingers. On the uppermost rock, the Rev. Mr. Little began to engrave
the letters N. H. but was so chilled with the cold, that he gave the
instruments to Col. Whipple, who finished the letters. Under a stone, they left
a plate of lead, on which their names were engraven. The sun shone clear while
they were passing over the plain, but immediately after their arrival at the
highest summit, they had the mortification to be inveloped in a dense cloud,
which came up the opposite side of the mountain. This unfortunate circumstance,
prevented their making any farther use of their instruments. Being thus
involved, as they were descending from the plain, in one of the long, deep
gullies, not being able to see to the bottom, on a sudden, their pilot slipped,
and was gone out of sight, though happily, without any other damage, than
tearing his clothes. This accident obliged them to stop. When they turned their
eyes upward, they were astonished at the immense depth and steepness of the
place, which they had descended by fixing their heels on the prominent parts of
the rock, and found it impracticable to reascend the same way; but having
discovered a winding gully, of a more gradual ascent, in this they got up to
the plain, and then came down on the eastern side; this deep gully, was on the
S. E. From these circumstances, it may be inferred, that it is more practicable
and safe, to ascend or descend on the ridges, than in the gullies of the
mountain.

These vast and irregular heights, being copiously replenished with water,
exhibit a great variety of beautiful cascades; some of which, fall in a
perpendicular sheet or spout, others are winding and sloping, others spread,
and form a basin in the rock, and then gush in a cataract over its edge. A
poetic fancy may find full gratification amidst these wild and rugged scenes,
if its ardor be not checked by the fatigue of the approach. Almost every thing
in nature, which can be supposed capable of inspiring ideas of the sublime and
beautiful, is here realized. Aged mountains, stupendous elevations, rolling
clouds, impending rocks, verdant woods, crystal streams, the gentle rill, and
the roaring torrent, all conspire to amaze, to soothe and to enrapture.

On the western part of these mountains is a pass, commonly called the notch,
which, in the narrowest part, measures but twenty-two feet, between two
perpendicular rocks. From the height above it, a brook descends, and meanders
through a meadow, formerly a beaver pond. It is surrounded by rocks, which, on
one side, are perpendicular, and on the others, rise in an angle of forty-five
degrees -- a strikingly picturesque scene! This defile was known to the
Indians, who formerly led their captives through it to Canada; but it had been
forgotten or neglected, till the year 1771, when two hunters passed through it,
and from their report, the proprietors of lands, on the northern parts of
Connecticut river, formed the plan of a road through it, to the upper Cohos,
from which it is distant twenty-five miles. Along the eastern side of the
meadow, under the perpendicular rock, is a causeway, of large logs, sunk into
the mud by rocks, blown with gunpowder, from the mountain. On this foundation,
is constructed a road, which passes through the narrow defile, at the south end
of the meadow, leaving a passage for the rivulet, which glides along the
western side. This rivulet, is the head of the river Saco; and on the north
side of the meadow, at a little distance, is another brook, which is the head
of Amonoosuck, a large branch of Connecticut river. The latitude of this place,
is 44 12, N.

The rivulet, which gives rise to Saco, descends toward the south; and at a
little distance from the defile, its waters are augmented by two streams from
the left, one of which descends in a trench of two feet wide, and is called the
flume, from the near resemblance which it bears to an artifical flume. Over
these are thrown strong bridges; and the whole construction of this road, is
firm and durable; much labor has been expended upon it, and the neat proceeds
of a confiscated estate, were applied, to defray the expense. In the descent,
the pass widens, and the stream increases; but for eight or ten miles from the
notch, the mountains on each side are so near, as to leave room only for the
river and its intervales; which are not more than half a mile wide. In the
course of this descent, several curious objects present themselves to view. On
the side of one mountain, is a projection, resembling a shelf, on which stand
four large square rocks, in a form resembling as many huge folio volumes. In
two or three places, at immense heights, and perfectly inaccessible, appear,
rocks, of a white and red hue, the surface of which is polished, like a mirror,
by the constant trickling of water over them. These being exposed to the west
and south, are capable, in the night, of reflecting the moon and star beams to
the wondering traveller in the deep, dark valley below, and by the help of
imagination, are sufficient to give rise to the fiction of carbuncles.

To encompass these mountains as the roads are laid out, through the eastern
and western passes, and round the northern side of the whole cluster, it is
necessary to travel (...) than seventy miles, and to ford eight considerable
rivers, beside many smaller (...). The distance between the heads of rivers,
which pursue such different courses, from this immense elevation, and which
fall into the sea, so many hundred miles asunder, is so small, that a traveller
may, in the course of one day, drink the waters, of Saco, Amariscoggin and
Connecticut rivers. These waters are all perfectly limpid and sweet, excepting
one brook, on the eastern side of Mount Washington, which has a saponaceous
taste, and is covered with a very thick and strong froth. It is said, that
there is a part of the mountain where the magnetic needle refuses to traverse;
this is probably caused by a body of iron ore. It is also said, that a mineral
supposed to be lead, has been discovered, near the eastern pass; but that the
spot cannot now be found. What stores the bowels of the mountains contain, time
must unfold; all searches for subterraneous treasures, having hitherto proved
fruitless. The most certain riches which they yield, are the freshets, which
bring down the soil, to the intervales below, and form a fine mould, producing,
by the aid of cultivation, corn and herbage, in the most luxuriant plenty.

CHAP. V. Rivers and other Waters.
NATURE has formed such a connection between mountains and rivers, that in
describing one, we are unavoidably led to speak of the other.

New Hampshire is so situated, that five of the largest rivers in New England,
either take their rise within its limits, or receive much of their water from
its mountains. These are the Connecticut, Amariscoggin, Saco, Merrimack and
Pascataqua.

Connecticut river rises in a ridge of mountains, which extends northeasterly,
to the gulf of St. Lawrence. It has been surveyed, about twenty-five miles
beyond the forty-fifth degree of latitude, to the spring head of its
northwestern branch. This river extends, on the western border of
New Hampshire, about one hundred and seventy miles. Its general course, for the
first thirty miles, is south; for the next thirty, southwest; for the next
fifty, south-southwest; and for the remainder of its course, it inclines more
to the south; but there are numerous serpentine curves, of almost every
direction, in the extent of these general lines. Besides many streams of less
note, it receives, on its eastern side, seven very considerable rivers; upper
Amonoosuck, Israel and John's rivers, lower Amonoosuck, Sugar river, Cold river
and Ashuclot, all which originate within the limits of New Hampshire, on the
western part of the height of land.

Amariscoggin river, rises near the end of the dividing line, between
New Hampshire and the old Province of Maine. The lake Umbagog, and several
smaller ponds, flow into it. From that lake, the river runs in a southern
direction, nearly parallel to Connecticut river, and distant from it, about
twenty-five miles; but it is deeper, wider, and more rapid. In crossing the
country, from Canada, travelers have passed Connecticut river, thinking it
only a brook, and then striking on Amariscoggin, have mistaken it for
Connecticut, and followed its course. The mistake, however, may be discovered,
by observing, that after these rivers have run parallel about twenty miles, the
inclination of Amariscoggin, is to the east, and of Connecticut, to the west.
After Amariscoggin begins to take an easterly direction, it soon crosses the
line, into the Province of Maine, and having watered a great extent of country,
in which many new townships are now settling, it forms a junction with
Kenebeck, and flows into the sea at Sagadahock.

The head of Saco river, is in the White mountains, at the western pass,
commonly called the notch; near which, also, rises the lower Amonoosuck, which
runs westerly, into Connecticut river. Saco takes a southerly direction, down
the mountain. A large branch of it, called Ellis river, rises at the eastern
pass of the mountains, where also originates Peabody river, a branch of
Amariscoggin. The fountain heads of these two rivers are so near, that a man
may set his foot in one, and reach, with his hand, to the other. In less than
half a mile, southward from this fountain, a large stream, which runs down the
highest of the White mountains, falls into Ellis river, and in about the same
distance from this, another falls from the same mountain; the former of those
streams is Cutler's river, the latter New river. The New river first made its
appearance during a long rain, in October, 1775. It bore down many rocks and
trees, forming a scene of ruin for a long course. It has ever since been a
constant stream, and where it falls into Ellis river, presents to view a noble
cascade, of about one hundred feet, above which, it is divided into three
streams, which issue out of the bowels of the mountain. Several other branches
of Saco river, fall from different parts of this immense cluster of mountains,
and unite about twelve or fifteen miles from their source, at the plain of
Pigwacket. These streams have a steep descent, and a rapid current, and the
river Saco is observed to rise and overflow very suddenly, in a time of rain,
and to subside as suddenly, after the rain has ceased. It passes, in a very
serpentine course, through the township of Conway, then crosses the line, into
Brownfield and Fryburg, and its course from thence to the sea, is about
forty-five miles, southeast. It receives, on its western side, two rivers,
called the great and little Ossapy; the former of which, comes from a large
pond, under a high mountain, both of which bear the same name; the latter flows
out of a smaller pond, on the division line, and falls into Saco river, about
nine miles below the mouth of the other. In some maps, the lesser Ossapy is
laid down as a branch of the greater, but they are two distinct branches of
Saco river.

Merrimack river is formed by the confluence of Pemigewasset and Winipiscogee
rivers, the former flows from the eastern part of the ridge called the height
of land. To one branch of it, Moos^hclock mountain gives rise; another comes
from the S. W. extremity of the White mountains, and a third from the township
of Franconia. The general course of this river, from its source, is south,
about fifty miles. It receives, on its western side, Baker's river, which comes
from the height of land, a stream from New Chester pond, and another called
Smith's river, besides many smaller ones. On its eastern side, it receives a
stream from Squam ponds, with several large and small brooks. In its long
descent from the mountains, there are many falls, and its banks in some places,
are very steep and rugged. Winipiseogee river, comes from the lake of that
name, and unites its waters with Pemigewasset, at the lower end of Sanborntown.
From this junction, the confluent stream bears the name of Merrimack, to the
sea. It receives, on its western side, before it crosses the boundary line,
Blackwater, Contoocook, Piscataquoag, Souhegan and Nashua rivers. On its
eastern side, it receives Bowcook, Suncook, Cohas, Beaver, Spicket and Powow
rivers. It runs about ninety miles, first in a southerly, then in an easterly
direction, and falls into the sea at Newbury-Port.

In its course through New Hampshire, it passes over several falls, the most
beautiful of which, is called the isle of Hookset, but the grandest is
Amuskeag. Hookset is about eight miles below the town of Concord; the descent
of the water is not more than fifteen feet perpendicular, in thirty rods; a
high rock divides the stream, and a smaller rock lies between that and the
western shore. From an eminence, on the western side, there is a delightful
landscape; the water above and below the fall, the verdant banks, the
cultivated fields, and the distant hills, in the back ground, form a
picturesque scene, which relieves the eyes of the traveller from the dull
uniformity of a road through the woods.

Eight miles below Hookset, lies Amuskeag fall; it consists of three large
pitches, one below the other, and the water is supposed to fall about eighty
feet, in the course of half a mile. The river here is so crooked, that the
whole of the fall cannot be viewed at once; though the second pitch, which may
be see^ from the road, on the western side, appears truly majestic. In the
middle of the upper part of the fall, is a high, rocky island, on some parts of
which, are several holes, of various depths, made by the circular motion of
small stones, impelled by the force of the descending water. The following
account of these cavities, was formerly sent to the royal society, and printed
in their philosophical transactions, vol. xxix. p. 70.

'A little above one of the falls of this river, at a place called Amuskeag, is
a huge rock, in the midst of the stream, on the top of which, are a great
number of pits, made exactly round, like barrels or hogsheads of different
capacities, some of which are capable of holding several tuns. The natives know
nothing of the making of them; but the neighboring Indians used to hide their
provisions here, in the wars with the Maquas, affirming that God had cut them
out for that purpose; but they seem plainly to be artificial.'




At Walpole, is a remarkable fall, in Connecticut river, This fall has been
described in the most extravagant terms, in an anonymous publication, entitled
'the History of Connecticut;' and the description has been frequently recalled
in news papers, and other periodical works.
formerly known by the name of the great fall. The breadth of the river, above
the fall, is twenty-two rods. A large rock divides the stream into two
channels, each about ninety feet wide, on the top of the shelving bank. When
the water is low, the eastern channel appears crossed, by a bar of solid rock,
and the whole stream falls into the western channel, where it is contracted to
the breadth of sixteen feet, and flows with astonishing rapidity; but the depth
of the water is not known, nor has the perpendicular height of the fall been
ascertained. There are several pitches, one above another, in the length of
half a mile, the largest of which, is that where the rock divides the stream.
Notwithstanding the velocity of the current, the salmon pass up this fall, and
are taken many miles above; but the shad proceed no farther.

In the rocks of this fall, are many cavities, like those at Amuskeag, some of
which are eighteen inches wide, and from two to four feet deep. On the steep
sides of the island rock, hang several arm chairs, fastened to ladders, and
secured by a counterpoise, in which fishermen sit to catch salmon and shad with
dipping nets.

Over this fall, in the year 1785, a strong bridge of timber was constructed,
by Col. Enoch Hale. Its length is three hundred and sixty-five feet, and it is
supported in the middle by the great rock. The expense of it was eight hundred
pounds, and by a law of the State, a toll is collected from passengers. This is
the only bridge across Connecticut river; but it is in contemplation to erect
one, thirty-six miles above, at the middle bar of White river fall, where the
passage for the water, between the rocks, is about one hundred feet wide. This
place, is in the township of Lebanon, two miles below Dartmouth college.

It would be endless to describe, particularly, the numerous falls, which, in
the mountainous parts of the country, exhibit a great variety of curious
appearances, many of which have been represented in the language of fiction and
romance. But there is one in Salmon-fall river, which, not for its magnitude,
but for its singularity, deserves notice. (...) is called the flume, and is
situate between the townships of Rochester and Lebanon. The river is here
confined between two rocks, about twenty-five feet high; the breadth, at the
top of the bank, is not more than three rods. I once visited this place, in a
time of severe drought (September, 1782,) when the flat rocks, which form the
bed of the river, were mostly dry. The flume is about sour rods in length, and
its breadth is various, not more in any part than two feet and a half, and in
one part, scarcely an hand breadth; but here the water had a subterraneous
passage.

In the flat rock, are diverse cavities, like those abovementioned; some of them
are cylindrical, and others globular; all of them contained a quantity of small
stones and gravel, and in one of them was a large turtle and several frogs. The
dimensions of five of these holes, were as follows: Diameters in feet and
inches. Depth in feet and inches. 7 -- ( filled with stones.) 3 -- 3 -- 1 -- 3
4 -- 1 -- 3 -- -- 4 1 -- 4 The largest of these cavities, is considerably
higher than where the water now flows, unless in a great freshet.

From a series of observations, made by James Winthrop, Esquire. on the rivers of
New Hampshire and Vermont, he deduces this conclusion, that the descent of our
rivers, is much less than European theorists have supposed to be necessary to
give a current to water. In the last hundred and fifty miles of Connecticut
river, it descends not more than two feet in a mile. Onion river, for
forty-three miles from its mouth, falls four feet in a mile, and is exceedingly
rapid between the cataracts. We may reckon the shore at Quebec, to be at the
level of the sea, and two hundred miles from that part of lake Champlain, where
the current begins. The difference of elevation, will be three hundred and
forty-two feet, or twenty inches to a mile. If we extend our comparison from
Quebec, to the top of the Green mountains, at Williamston, the elevation will
be one thousand six hundred and sixty-six feet, and the distance, about three
hundred and twenty miles; which is five feet two inches and a half to a mile.
MS. letter of James Winthrop, Esquire.


It is a work of great curiosity, but attended with much fatigue, to trace
rivers up to their sources, and observe the uniting of springs and rivulets, to
form those streams which are dignified by majestic names, and have been revered
as Deities by savage and superstitious people. Rivers originate in mountains,
and find their way through the crevices of rocks, to the plains below, where
they glide through natural meadows, often overflowing them with their freshets,
bringing down, from the upper grounds, a fat slime, and depositing it on the
lower, which renews and fertilizes the soil, and renders these intervale lands
extremely valuable, as no other manure is needed on them for the purposes of
agriculture.

It has been asserted, that Goldsmith's history of the Earth, Vol. I. p. 203.
rivers run in a more direct channel, as they immediately leave their sources;
that their sinuosities and turnings become more numerous as they proceed; that
it is a certain sign among the natives of America, that they are near the sea,
when they find the rivers winding and changing their direction, and that this
is even now become an indication to the Europeans themselves in their journies
through these trackless forests. It is amusing to observe how the European
writers, in their accounts of America, entertain themselves and their readers,
with a detail of circumstances, which have no foundation but in their own
fancies. Such a remark would never have occurred to any person who had traced
the rivers of New England to their sources. The fact is, that rivers run
wherever they find a passage, whether it be crooked or strait; and there are as
many windings and sinuosities, at the distance of an hundred miles from the
sea, as at any lesser distance. No judgment can be formed of the nearness of
the ocean from this circumstance.

There is an important remark concerning these rivers, which would not readily
occur to any, but those who have been in the way of actual observation; and
that is, that rivers change their courses, and leave their ancient channels
dry. Many places may be seen in our wilderness, where rivers have rolled for
ages, and where the stones are worn smooth as on the sea shore, which are now
at considerable distance from the present beds of the rivers. In some places,
these ancient channels are converted into ponds, which; from their curved form,
are called horse-shoe ponds; in others, they are overgrown with bushes and
trees. These appearances are frequent in the mountainous part of the country.
Connecticut river, which divides two States, has, in some places, changed its
course. Many acres have been thus made in a few years, and the land is of an
excellent quality.

There are generally two strata of intervale lands, on the borders of the large
rivers, one is overflowed every year, the other, which is several feet higher,
and further removed from the water, is overflowed only in very high freshets.
In some places a third is found, but this is rare. The banks of the upper and
lower intervales, are often parallel to each other, and when viewed from the
opposite side, appear like the terraces of an artificial garden.

These intervale lands are of various breadth, according to the near or remote
situation of the hills. On Connecticut river, they are from a quarter of a mile
to a mile and a half, on each side. In digging into them, large sound trunks of
trees are found at various depths.

The freshets are not equally high every year. Masts have lain in the river
above Amuskeag fall, two or three years, waiting for a sufficiency of water to
float them over. They sometimes fall athwart the stream, and are broken;
sometimes, in a narrow passage, they are lodged so firmly across, as to be
removed only by cutting; and sometimes they are so galled by the rocks, in
their passage, as to lessen their diameter, and consequently their value.

Every spring there is more or less of a freshet, caused by the dissolving of
the snow in the woods and mountains; if it be gradual, as it always is, when
not accelerated by a heavy rain, no damage is done by the rising of the water.
Destructive floods have happened at other seasons of the year, as frequently as
in the spring. In January, 1770, a remarkable inundation carried away the mills
and bridges on several branches of the river Piscataqua. A heavy rain, which
continued twelve hours, and which could not penetrate the frozen earth, raised
the rivers so high as to break up the ice, then from fourteen to eighteen
inches thick, and as hard as marble; large cakes of it being carried down by
the impetuous current, bore all before them. After this the rivers froze again,
and the ice continued as usual, till the month of April. When the ice remains
late in the spring, it does not break up with violence; but dissolves
gradually, till it disappears. In this manner the frozen lakes and ponds are
reduced to fluidity.

In the great flood of October, 1775, when a new river broke out of the White
mountains, the banks of Saco river were overflowed very suddenly. Stacks of hay
were carried off, cattle were drowned or otherwise killed, and the Indian corn,
then ripe for harvest, was destroyed. The river was of a deep brown color for
fourteen days, and when it subsided, great alterations were observed, the bed
of the river in some parts was widened, and the course of several of its
branches changed; large ridges of pebbles were thrown up in the middle, forming
two channels where there had been but one before.

Another flood happened in October, 1785, which destroyed the fields, and
carried off cattle and swine on that river; and in other places swept away
bridges, mills, and great quantities of lumber. Some mills, on Salmon-fall
river, were preserved by chains, one end of which was fastened to their
principal timbers, and the other end to trees or posts set in the ground. In
Cochecho river, below the great fall, the water rose fourteen feet above high
water mark. Immense quantities of drift wood are brought down by these
freshets, from which the inhabitants of the lower towns, contiguous to the
rivers, are supplied with fuel, and they have learned to be extremely dextrous
in towing on shore whole trees with their branches. But notwithstanding their
activity, much escapes them, and is driven out to sea, and some of it is thrown
back on the coast.

Saco river has risen twenty-five feet, in a great freshet; its common rise is
ten feet, Pemigewasset river has also been known to rise twenty-five feet.
Connecticut river, in a common freshet, is ten feet higher than its usual
summer level. Its greatest elevation does not exceed twenty feet.

Winipiseogee lake, is the largest collection of water in New Hampshire. It is
twenty-two miles in length, from S. E. to N. W. and of very unequal breadth,
but no where more than eight miles. Some very long necks of land project into
it, and it contains several islands, large and small. The mountains which
surround it, give rise to many streams which flow into it; and between it and
the mountains, are several lesser ponds, which communicate with it. Contiguous
to this lake, are the townships of Moultonborough, on the N. W. Tuftonborough
and Wolf borough on the N. E. Meredith and Gilmantown on the S. W. and a tract
of land, called the Gore, on the S. E. From the S. E. extremity of this lake,
called Merry-meeting bay, to the N. W. part, called Senter-harbour, there is
good navigation in the summer, and generally a good road in the winter; the
lake is frozen about three months, and many sleighs and teams, from the
circum^^cent towns, cross it on the ice.

The next largest lake, is Umbagog, in the northern extremity of the State. It
is but little known, and no other survey has been made of it than was necessary
for extending the divisional line between New Hampshire and Maine, in 1789.
Next to this, are Squam, in the township of Holdernesse; Sunnapee, in the
townships of Wendel and Fishersfield, and great Ossapy, in the ungranted land
of the Masonian purchase. Smaller ponds are very numerous, scarcely any town
being without one or more. There is generally a current through them; but some
have no visible outlet. Their waters are limpid and sweet.

A remarkable circumstance is mentioned, respecting Mascomy pond, which lies
partly in Lebanon and partly in Enfield, and vents into Connecticut river. It
is about five miles in length, and one in breadth; its depth is from thirty to
forty fathoms. The surrounding land bears evident marks that the surface of
this pond was once thirty or forty feet higher than its present level. By what
cause the alteration was made, and at what time, is unknown; but appearances
indicate a sudden rupture, there being no sign of any margin between its former
and present height. About a mile distant from its outlet, there is a declivity
of rocks, forty feet higher than the stream, as it now runs. By the situation
of these rocks, it appears that they were once a fall, over which the water
flowed; but it has now made for itself a very deep channel, through solid
earth, nearly a mile in length, where it seems confined for futurity. MS.
Letter of the Hon. Elisha Pain, Esquire.


In the township of Atkinson, in a large meadow, there is an island, containing
seven or eight acres, which was formerly loaded with valuable pine timber, and
other forest wood. When the meadow is overflowed, by means of an artificial
dam, this island rises in the same degree as the water rises, which is
sometimes six feet. Near the middle of this island, is a small pond, which has
been gradually lessening ever since it was known, and is now almost covered
with verdure. In this place, a pole of fifty feet has disappeared, without
finding a bottom. In the water of that pond, there have been fish in plenty;
which when the meadow has been flowed, have appeared there, and when the water
has been drawn off, have been left on the meadow; at which time the island
settles to its usual state. MS. letter of the Rev. Stephen Peabody.


In the town of Rye, there was formerly a fresh pond, covering about one
hundred and fifty acres, situate within ten or fifteen rods of the sea, being
separated from it by a bank of sand. A communication was opened between this
pond and the sea, in the year 1719, by which means the fresh water was drawn
off, and the place is regularly overflowed by the tide, and yields large crops
of salt hay. MS. letter of Rev. Mr. Porter.


Within this present year (1791) a canal has been cut through the marshes,
which opens an inland navigation, from Hampton, through Salisbury, into
Merrimack river, for about eight miles. By this passage, loaded boats may be
conducted with the utmost ease and safety.

CHAP. VI. Remarks on the Forest, Manner of Surveying, making Roads, and
Traveling.
NOTWITHSTANDING the gloomy appearance of an American forest, yet a
contemplative mind may find in it many subjects of entertainment. The most
obvious remark, is the silence which reigns through it. In a calm day, no sound
is heard but that of running water, or perhaps the chirping of a squirrel, or
the squalling of a jay. Singing birds do not frequent the thick woods; but in
every opening, made by the hand of cultivation, their melody is delightful.

Another thing, worthy of observation, is the aged and majestic appearance of
the trees, of which the most noble is the mast pine. This tree often grows to
the height of one hundred and fifty, and sometimes two hundred feet. It is
straight as an arrow, and has no branches but very near the top. It is from
twenty to forty inches in diameter at its base, and appears like a stately
pillar, adorned with a verdant capital, in form of a cone. Interspersed among
these, are the common forest trees, of various kinds, whose height is generally
about sixty or eighty feet. In swamps, and near rivers, there is a thick growth
of underwood, which renders traveling difficult. On high lands, it is not so
troublesome; and on dry plains, it is quite inconsiderable.

Amidst these wild and rugged scenes, it is amusing to observe the luxuriant
sportings of nature. Trees are seen growing on a naked rock; their roots either
penetrate some of its crevices, or run over its surface, and shoot into the
ground. When a tree is contiguous to a small rock, its bark will frequently
enclose and cover it. Branches of different trees, but of the same species,
sometimes intertwine, and even ingraft themselves, so as to grow together in
one. On some trees, are found large protuberant warts, capable of being formed
into bowls, which are very tough and durable. On rocks, as well as on trees, we
find varieties of moss; it sometimes assumes a grotesque appearance, hanging in
tufts, like long hair, from the branches; or enclosing the trunks; or spreading
over rocks, like a carpet, and extending from one rock to another. It is
observed that moss is thickest on the north sides of trees. By this mark the
savages know their course in cloudy weather, and many of our hunters have
learned of them, to travel without a compass.

In laying out roads, and line of townships, it is usual for the surveyor to
make large measure, of which, however, there is no certain standard. Some allow
one in thirty, for the swagging of the chain. The length of a man's arm to
every half chain, has been allowed for inequality of surface. The half chain is
most convenient in thick woods; but some have very absurdly used a line; and if
any allowance is made for its contraction by moisture, it must be arbitrary.
Surveyors are often sworn to go according to their best skill and judgment;
this they may do with great sincerity, and yet, for want of better skill, may
commit egregious mistakes. The variation of the needle, has not in general been
attended to with that caution which it demands, and from this negligence, many
errors have arisen. It was once proposed, in the General Assembly, that durable
monuments should be erected in convenient places, on a true meridian; by which
all surveyors should be obliged to regulate their compasses; few of them, at
that time, being skilled in the method of finding the variation by the sun's
amplitude; but the proposal was rejected.

The manner of making a new road, through the wilderness, is this: First, a
surveyor and his party, with the compass and chain explore the country, and
where they find the (...) suitable for a road, the trees are spotted, by
cutting out a piece of the bark, and at the end of every mile the number is
marked on the nearest tree. Then follow the axe-men, who clear away the bushes
and fell the trees, in a space of three rods wide, cutting them as near as
possible to the ground, that the stumps may not impede traveling; and if the
trees are very long, they cut them again, into such lengths as that the
teamsters, by the help of chains and oxen, may draw them out of the way. In wet
land, the trees thus felled, or others which are proper, are formed into
causeways and bridges. Rocks are either turned out of the road, or split by
gunpowder, or heated by fire and then softened by water.

Roads are not brought to perfection at once, especially in rocky and hilly
land; but after the first operations, they are passable for single horses and
teams of oxen. As the earth is opened to the sun, many wet places are dried,
and brooks are contracted; and as the land is more and more cleared, smaller
streams disappear. The best kind of land for roads is where the pitch pine
grows; this is generally level, or if not perfectly so, yet always dry. The
soil is sandy or gravelly; the trees are sparse; and the under growth consists
of brakes, fern and whortle bushes, which are easily subdued; but this kind of
land is not profitable. The best land for cultivation, is a deep loamy soil,
which makes miry roads, and needs much labor to be bestowed on bridges and
causeways. For crossing small streams, the beaver dams are found very safe and
convenient. They are about three or four feet wide at the top, which is on a
level with the water above, and is always firm and solid. New roads, therefore,
are frequently laid out so as to save expense, by taking advantage of the labor
of that useful animal.

When a road is constantly used, the feet of horses and cattle keep down the
growth of bushes, which sprout, with great luxuriance, from the roots of felled
trees; but if the road be neglected, these young shoots render traveling
extremely inconvenient; and it is more difficult to clear them a second time.
Men who are used to handle the axe, had rather attack a sturdy tree than hack
the bushes. High winds frequently blow up large trees by the roots, or break
them off above the ground. These wind-fallen trees often prove a great
obstruction to new roads; a single horse may find his way over or round them;
but if a team is to pass, the obstruction must be removed by the axe, for which
reason, the drivers of teams are never unprovided with this necessary
instrument.

The expense of making and keeping roads in repair, is generally borne by the
proprietors and inhabitants of the towns through which they pass; though, in
some instances, new roads have been explored and laid out, at the public
expense. In each incorporated town, the law requires that surveyors of highways
be annually chosen, whose business it is, to prevent or remove obstructions; to
keep roads and bridges in repair; and to call upon the inhabitants for their
respective quotas of labor or expense. These officers are invested with
sufficient power to answer the beneficial end of their appointment; and in case
of failure, they or the towns, are liable to be presented by the grand inquest
of the county. It was formerly the custom, for those who were at work on the
highways, to invite passengers to drink, and expect a gratuity in return; but
this beggarly practice is almost entirely abolished.

Horses are the only beasts used for riding; though, in the mountainous parts
of the country, mules might be more serviceable, if the breeding of them were
introduced. In traveling the roads along Connecticut river, which are, in many
places, both steep and clayey, it is usual, at all seasons, if the weather be
wet, to have the shoes of horses turned with sharp points. This is universally
practiced in winter, when the earth is covered with ice and snow. Oxen are also
then shod in the same manner. When a deep snow has obstructed the roads, they
are in some places opened by an instrument called a snow plough. It is made of
planks, in a triangular form, with two side boards to turn the snow out on
either hand. This instrument is drawn by a large number of oxen, and loaded
with as many people as can stand on it, whose weight makes a hard and level
path. When such an instrument is not at hand, a sled turned upside down answers
the purpose, though not so effectually. These operations are conducted by the
surveyors of highways, who direct the snow path to be made either in the common
road, or through fields and other enclosures, as necessity requires.

In traveling through New Hampshire, there are now few places so remote from
public houses, or hospitable inhabitants, as to oblige the traveller to lodge
in the woods; but when this happens, either by necessity or choice, a temporary
hut may be constructed, in an hour, by a person furnished with an axe. For this
purpose a dry situation is chosen, as near as may be to running water. The bark
of hemlock or spruce is peeled, in pieces of three or four feet long, and
flatted; two or three upright crotches are set in the ground, on which a pole
is fixed horizontally; from the pole are laid other sticks, in a sloping
position, to the ground; on these are laid the flatted pieces of bark, each
lapped over the other, in the form of shingles: Under this shed, other pieces
of bark are laid on the ground, for a floor, on which are strewed small twigs
for a carpet. Before the open side of the hut, is made a large fire, toward
which the traveller places his feet, ^^d being wrapped in a blanket, he passes
the night very comfortably, though, if the wind be unfavorable, he may be
somewhat incommoded by smoke. He is in no danger from wild beasts, who never
venture to approach a fire. People who are used to the woods, do not always
give themselves the trouble to build a hut; but lie wrapped in their blanket by
a fire; or, in foul weather, spread their blanket on sticks, and lie under it.

Within these last twenty years, the country has been much improved in respect
to roads; and the communication between the distant parts of it is become, in a
great measure, easy and commodious. Much, however, remains to be done,
especially in the western and northern parts of the State. Connecticut river is
so nearly parallel to the eastern coast of New England, as to preserve almost
the same distance from the sea, which is generally from eighty to one hundred
miles. The towns situate on that river communicate with the maritime towns, by
different roads. Those in the southwestern quarter of the State generally carry
their produce to Boston. Roads have been opened from Dartmouth College, and the
lower Cohos, to Portsmouth; and the establishment of a communication, by water
carriage, across Winipiseogee lake, has been contemplated.

The towns above the lower Cohos, have as yet no convenient roads, directly to
the sea coast. The immense mountains between the rivers Saco and Connecticut,
are, in most places, inaccessible; and where a communication is opened,
transportation is necessarily very difficult. The people on the upper branches
of Saco river, find their nearest market at Portland, in Casco bay; and thither
the inhabitants of the towns of the upper Cohos have resorted. But from a
survey made in 1782, by Dummer Sewall, Esquire. it was found, that a road from
Northumberland, on Connecticut river, to the head of navigation in Kennebec
river, is very practicable. The distance is between eighty and ninety miles;
and for a third part of that distance from Kennebec, there are already roads
and settlements.

The line which divides the northern part of New Hampshire, from the eastern
counties of Massachusetts, York and Cumberland, is an absurd and unnatural
boundary. The establishment of it originated in a narrow, selfish policy; but
as the true interest of the country is now better understood, and more liberal
sentiments prevail, it appears to many attentive observers, that the whole
extent of territory, between the upper part of Connecticut river on the west,
and the Atlantic ocean as far as Kennebec on the east, and as far northward as
the limits of the United States, is formed by nature, to have a conn^xion and
dependence, which may be rendered mutually beneficial to the maritime and
inland parts. How far the benefit may be promoted, by an union of jurisdiction,
deserves to be considered.

CHAP. VII. Monuments and relics of the Indians.
IN describing any country, it is natural to make some inquiry concerning the
vestigies of its ancient inhabitants. It is well known that the original
natives of this part of America, were not ambitious of perpetuating their fame
by durable monuments. Their invention was chiefly employed either in providing
for their subsistence, by hunting, fishing and planting, or in guarding against
and surprising their enemies. Their houses and canoes were constructed of light
and perishable materials. Their mode of traveling was to take all possible
advantage of water carriage, and to shorten distances, by transporting their
birchen canoes across the necks of land which were convenient for the purpose.
Their manner of taking fish was either by entangling them in wears, or dipping
for them in scoopnets, or striking them with spears. They took quadrupeds in
traps or pit-falls, or shot them, as well as birds, with arrows. For the
construction of their canoes and houses they used hatchets, chissels, and
gouges of stone. To cook their meat, they either broiled it on coals, or on a
wooden grate, or roasted it on a forked stick, or boiled it in kettles of
stone. Their corn was pounded in mortars of wood, with pestles of stone. Their
bread was baked either on flat stones set before a fire, or in green leaves
laid under hot ashes. Clam-shells served them for spoons, and their fingers for
knives and forks. They had no sharper instruments than could be formed of
stones, shells and bones. Of these the two last are perishable by age; but of
the first, relics are frequently found in the places of their former residence,
generally in the neighborhood of water falls, and other convenient fishing
places. The manner of finding them is by plowing or digging. The most of those
which have been discovered, have come to light by accident, and a few only are
so perfect as to merit preservation.

The hatchet is a hard stone, eight or ten inches in length and three or four
in breadth, of an oval form, flatted and rubbed to an edge at one end; near the
other end is a groove in which the handle was fastened; and their process to do
it was this: When the stone was prepared, they chose a very young sapling, and,
splitting in near the ground, they forced the hatchet into it, as far as the
groove, and left nature to complete the work by the growth of the wood, so as
to fill the groove and adhere firmly to the stone. They then cut off the
sapling above and below, and the hatchet was fit for use.

The chissel is about six inches long and two inches wide, flatted and rubbed
sharp at one end. It was used only by the hand, for it would not bear to be
driven. The gouge differs from the chissel only in being hollow at the edge.
With these instruments they felled trees, cut them into proper lengths, scooped
them out hollow for canoes, trays, or mortars, and fashioned them to any shape
which they pleased. To save labor, they made use of fire, to soften those parts
of the wood which were to be cut with these imperfect tools; and by a proper
application of wet earth or clay, they could circumscribe the operation of the
fire at their pleasure. I have seen a native (says Roger Williams) go into the
woods with his hatchet, carrying only a basket of corn, and stones to strike
fire. When he has felled his tree (either a chestnut or a pine) he makes him a
little hut or shed of the bark of it. He puts fire, and follows the burning of
it in the midst, in many places. His corn he boils, and has the brook by
him, and sometimes angles for a little fish. So he continu^th burning and
hewing, until he has, in ten or twelve days, finished, and getting hands,
launched his boat.

Beverley, in his history of Virginia, gives a similar account of the manner of
making canoes, by the Indians in that part of America. Page ^98.




Their pestles are long, cylindrical or conical stones, of the heaviest kind;
some of which have figures, rudely wrought, at the end of the handle.

Their kettle is nothing more than a hole, either natural or artificial, in a
large stone; but their mode of boiling in it would not readily occur to a
person who had seen a kettle used no other way than with a fire under it. Their
fire was made by the side of the kettle, and a number of small stones were
heated. The kettle being filled with water, and the food placed in it, the hot
stones were put in, one after another, and by a dextrous repetition of this
process, the meat or fish was boiled.

Of arrow-heads there is found a greater number than of any other instrument;
and they are of all sizes from one to five inches in length; pointed and
jagged, with a notch on each side, at the lower end, to bind them to the shaft,
the end of which was split to let in the head. Children were early taught the
use of the bow, and many of the arrow-heads which are found seem to have been
fit only for their use.

Another implement of stone is found, the use of which is to us undetermined.
It is shaped like a pear, with a neck, and was probably suspended by a string,
Some suppose it was hung to a net, and that many of them placed at the lower
edge served the purpose of weights to sink it.

Some specimens of sculpture have been found, but they are not common. In the
museum of the Academy of Arts and Sciences, there is an imitation of the head
of a serpent, at the end of a long stone pestle, found at Wells, in the county
of York. There is, in the possession of a gentleman in New Hampshire, a piece
of bone, on which is engraven the bust of a man, apparently in the agonies of
death. The countenance is savage, and the work is well executed. This bone,
with the figure on it, was found at the shore of the little bay, in the river
Pascataqua.

In the places of their habitations are sometimes found circular hearths of
flat stones, which were laid in the middle of their wigwams. Their mode of
lodging was with their feet to the fire. This custom is adopted by people who
lie abroad in the woods, and by others at home. It is accounted both a
preventive and a remedy for a cold.

The cellars in which they preserved their corn, are sometimes discovered in
the new settlements, and their graves are frequently seen. Most of the
skeletons appear to be in a sitting posture, and some remains of the
instruments which were supposed necessary to their subsistence, ornament or
defense in the "country of souls," are found with them; particularly the stone
pipe for smoking tobacco, of which there are several varieties. In a piece of
intervale land near the Ossapy ponds, is a tumulus or mound of earth, overgrown
with pine, in which, at the depth of two feet, several skeletons have been
discovered, buried with the face downward. MS. letter of Wentworth Cheswill,
Esquire.
At Exeter, about two years ago, the remains of an infant skeleton were dug up.
It was in a perpendicular position, and had been enclosed with a hollow log.
Some strings of wampum were found near it, and several spoons, apparently of
European manufacture.

The remains of their fields are still visible in many places; these were not
extensive, and the hills which they made about their corn stalks were small.
Some pieces of baked earthen ware have been found at Sanborn-town and
Goff's-town, from which it is supposed that the Indians has learned the
potter's art; but of what antiquity these remnants are, and whether
manufactured by them or not, is uncertain.

The paths which served them for carrying places between rivers, or different
parts of the same river, are frequently discovered, in the cutting of roads, or
laying out of new townships. Probably some hints might be taken from this
circumstance, to expedite and facilitate our inland navigation.

In their capital fishing places, particularly in great Ossapy and Winipiseogee
rivers, are the remains of their wears, constructed with very large stones. At
Sanborn-town there is the appearance of a fortress consisting of five distinct
walls, one within the other, and at Hinsdale there is something of the same
kind; but these are vastly inferior, both in design and execution to the
military works found in the country of the Senekas and in the neighborhood of
the Ohio.

I have heard of two specimens of an Indian Gazette, found in New Hampshire.
One was a pine tree, on the shore of Winipiseogee river, on which was depicted
a canoe, with two men in it. This is supposed to have been a mark of direction
to those who might come after. Woodman's MS. letter.
The other was a tree in Moultonborough, standing by a carrying place, between
two ponds. On this tree was carved the history of one of their expeditions. The
number of the killed and prisoners, was represented by so many human figures;
the former were marked with the stroke of a knife, across their throats, and
even the distinction between the males and females, was preserved. Shaw's MS.
letter.


Some of their modes and customs have been learned by our own people, and are
still retained. In the river Pascataqua, lobsters and flat fish are struck with
a spear; and the best time for this kind of fishing is the night. A lighted
pitch-knot is placed on the outside of a canoe, which not only attracts the
fish, but gives the fishermen direction where to strike. The river is sometimes
illuminated, by a multitude of these floating lights. The Indian scoop-net is
shaped like a pocket; the edge of which is fastened to a wooden bow, at the end
of a long pole. With these are caught salmon, shad, alewives, smelts and
lampreys. Frostfish are taken with wooden tongs, and black eels in cylindrical
baskets, with a hole, resembling mouse traps made of wire.

The culheag or log-trap, is used for taking wolves, bears and martins. Its
size varies, according to the bulk or strength of the animal. It is a forceps,
composed of two long sticks, one lying on the other, connected at one end, and
open at the other. Near the open end is made a semicircular, covered enclosure,
with short stakes, driven into the ground on one side of the logs, which are
firmly secured by another stake, on the opposite side. In this enclosure is
placed the bait, fastened to a round stick, which lies across the lower log,
the upper log resting on the end of a perpendicular pointed stick, the other
end of which is set on the round stick. The animal having scented the bait,
finds no way to come at it, but by putting his head between the logs. As soon
as he touches the bait, the round stick, on which it is fastened, rolls; the
perpendicular gives way; the upper log falls, and crushes him to death in an
instant, without injuring his skin.

To take martins, the hunters make a great number of these traps, at the
distance of about a quarter or half a mile from each other; they scent the
whole space between the traps, by drawing a piece of raw flesh on the ground;
this scent guides the animal to the trap, which is baited with the same. The
hunters visit the traps once in a day, and retire to their camp with the prey.
There are two seasons for this species of hunting, namely, in December and
March.

Beavers are taken in iron spring traps. The Indians have learned to use these
traps, in preference to their own.

The use of snow-shoes was learned at first from them. The shape and
construction of them are well known. The stick which projects behind acts as a
spring, and sets the man forward at every step; by which means, one who is used
to this mode of traveling, can walk on the snow, more expeditiously than on
the ground.

We are indebted to them, for the method of preserving the flesh of animals in
snow. This is very useful to people who raise or buy large quantities of
poultry for the market. They fill the hollow parts, and pack them in a cask
with snow; which, whilst it remains undissolved, preserves the flesh in its
original sweetness. The Indians had another way of preserving flesh, by cutting
it from the bone, and drying it in smoke; but this is now seldom used, unless
the meat has been previously cured with salt, the use of which, was unknown to
the savages.

Their mode of catching ducks, is still used in those places where this species
of game abounds. In the month of August, the old ducks shed their feathers, and
the young, being unfledged, are not able to fly. During this period they swim
on the water, and may be driven into small creeks, whence they cannot escape.
They are then easily caught in great numbers, and preserved for winter by salt
or smoke.

We have also learned from the natives, to dress leather with the brains of the
animal, which render it extremely soft and pliable. They have an art of dying
hair in various colors, which are bright and permanent. I know not whether they
have communicated this knowledge.

Some of their modes of cookery have been adopted, and are retained. Their
roasted and boiled ears of green corn, their samp and homony, which consist of
corn bruised and soaked or boiled, their nokehike, which is corn parched and
pounded, their suckatash, which is a mixture of corn and beans boiled, are much
used, and very palatable. One of the most delicate of their dishes was the
upaquontop, or the head of a bass boiled, and the broth thickened with homony.
The lip of a moose, and the tail of a beaver, prepared in this manner, were
among their greatest luxuries.

Their cultivation was extremely imperfect. The only objects of it were corn,
beans, pumpkins and squashes, which were planted by their women, with the aid
of no instruments but stones and clam-shells; and no manure but fish. Yet,
their judgment of the proper season for planting, cannot be amended. It was
when the leaves of the white oak are as big as the ear of a mouse. Their method
of girdling trees to kill them, that the land might be opened for planting, is
used by some people in their first essays of husbandry. It is not only a lazy
fashion and quite inexcuseable where axes may be had, but the ground needs
clearing as often as the trees or branches are broken off by the wind.

The virtues of many herbs, roots and barks, with which the country abounds,
were well known to the natives, and some traditionary knowledge of this kind
has been preserved, though much is lost for want of a more certain mode of
preservation than human memory. Some of their medicinal operations are still
practiced; but most of them are disused, being superseded by professional
improvements. They raised a blister by burning punk or touch wood on the skin.
They applied roots, boiled soft, in the form of a poultice to the throat or
other parts, when swelled or inflamed. They relieved a person chilled with
cold, by pouring warm water down the throat. They attempted the cure of fevers
by sweating in a covered hut, with the steam of water poured on hot stones, and
then plunging into cold water. For pains in the limbs they had another mode of
sweating. A number of sods were heated, and the patient, wrapped in a mat, was
laid on some and covered with others, till the heat of the turf was supposed to
have extracted the pain. The offices of physician and priest were united in the
same person, and a variety of mysterious rites accompanied his operations.

They had a knowledge of poisons and antidotes, and could so prepare
themselves, that the most venomous serpents would avoid them, or prove harmless
in their hands. This knowledge has seldom been communicated, and is always
treated as mysterious.

I wish it could not be said, that some of their superstitious notions have
been transferred and propagated. The idea that lonely mountains and rocks are
inhabited by departed spirits, and other invisible and imaginary beings, is not
yet worn out. Certain charms and spells, which are supposed to be effectual
preservatives, or cures in cases of witchcraft, are still in use among the
vulgar; though perhaps some of these traditions may owe their origin to the
superstition of our European ancestors, descended from the remoter savages of
Britain, Ireland and Germany. These notions, however pitied by some, and
ridiculed by others, are still deeply engraven on the minds of many, and are
maintained with an inflexibility which would do them honor if the cause were
worthy of defense. So strong are these impressions, that the same persons,
whose intrepidity in scenes of real danger is unquestionable, often render
themselves miserable by the apprehension of evils, which exist only in their
imagination.

CHAP. VIII. Forest-trees, and other Vegetable productions.
FEW persons in this country, have studied natural history as a science, and of
those who have a taste for inquiries of this kind, none have had leisure to
pursue them, to the extent which is desirable. In the description of an
American State, it would be unpardonable not to take notice of its natural
productions. With much diffidence I enter on this part of my work, sensible
that my knowledge of the subject is imperfect, yet, desirous of contributing
something, to promote a branch of science, now in its infancy; but for which
there is an ample field of inquiry. For the arrangement of the several articles
in the botanical and zoological chapters, for their generic and specific names,
and for some of the observations on their nature and properties, I am indebted
to the friendly assistance of the Rev. Dr. Manasse^ Cutler, of Ipswich, and Mr.
William D^ndridge Peck, of Kittery.


ELM ( ulmus americana.) Of this tree there is but one species, of which there
are two varieties, the white and the red. The inner rind of both is stringy and
tough, and is frequently used for the bottoms of chairs, and for bed-cords. The
wood is not easily split and therefore serves for the naves of wheels. The bark
of the white elm is used medicinally for the gravel. The EUROPEAN ELM ( ulmus
campestris) is so far naturalized as to propagate itself in copses.

SASSAFRAS ( laurus sassafras) is commonly found in moist land. It does not, in
this State, grow to a large size. Its root, bark and leaves have an aromatic
smell. It affords a valuable ingredient for beer as well as for medicinal
purposes. The wood makes handsome bedsteads, and it is said that bugs will not
be found in them for several years. The SPICE-WOOD ( laurus benzoin) or as it
is commonly called FEVER-BUSH, is another species of the laurus, common in
New Hampshire. It is more aromatic than the sassafras, In the western country,
its fruit and bark are used as a substitute for pimento.

WILD CHERRY. Of this we have many species; but they have not been well
arranged, and properly distinguished. They are very numerous in land which has
been newly cleared, if not kept down by culture. The wood of the largest
cherry-tree ( prunus virginiana) is very highly esteemed in cabinet work, being
of a firm texture, a smooth grain, and a beautiful color, between red and
yellow.

BASSWOOD or LIME-TREE ( tilia americana) is sometimes sawed into boards, which
are very white, but soft, and easily warped.

LOCUST ( robinia pseudo-acacia) is excellent fuel. Its trunk serves for
durable posts set in the ground, and may be split into trunnels for ships,
which are equal to any wood for that purpose. It thrives on sandy and gravelly
soils, and its leaves enrich them. For these reasons, the cultivation of the
locust has been thought an object worthy of attention, especially as it is a
tree of quick growth. For several years past it has been injured by a
beetleinsect, which bores a hole through its trunk. Many trees have been
entirely killed, and this circumstance has proved a discouragement to their
propagation.

BIRCH. Of this we have four species. 1. WHITE ( betula alba.) The bark of this
tree is a substance of a singular kind, and is perhaps the only bark which is
less liable to rot than the wood which it incloses. The whole interior
substance of a fallen tree, is frequently found rotten, Whilst the bark remains
sound. This bark is composed of several lamin^^, easily separable, of a firm
consistence, thin, flexible, soft and smooth. It may be written upon, like
paper. It is very inflammable, emitting a vivid flame and a very dense, black
smoke, which might easily be collected like lampblack. Of this bark the Indians
formed dishes, boxes, and light portable canoes, which they sewed together with
slender but tough filaments of the roots of spruce and cedar, cementing the
joints with turpentine. 2. BLACK ( betula nigra.) The heart of this tree is of
a beautiful brown, and is frequently split and turned. It makes handsome
bedsteads, chairs and tables. Much of it is exported to Europe. 3. RED or
YELLOW ( betula lenta.) This is chiefly used for fuel, and is much esteemed.
4. AL^^ER ( betula alnus.) Its bark is much employed in dying a dark brown. The
wood, when of a proper size, makes excellent charcoal. It is common in swamps
and by the side of rivers and brooks.

OAK. Of this we have four species in New Hampshire. 1. BLACK. ( quercus
nigra.) The inner bark is used for tanning. The timber for the keels of ships.
2. RED ( quercus rubra.) Of this species there are three varieties. (1.) The
red, which grows sometimes on high and dry land, but delights in a moist soil,
and is generally found on the declivities of hills and borders of swamps. The
wood of this tree is easily riven, and makes excellent staves for molasses and
for dry casks. (2.) The swamp oak, which is sound in low wet places. It is
possessed of greater elasticity than any other oak. Splints of this wood have
been substituted for whalebone. (3.) Yellow, which grows on hills and dry
ridges of land, makes the best of pipe staves and ship-timber. This arrangement
of the oaks is suggested by Dr. Cutler. In common parlance, the oak, which is
used for pipe* staves and ship timber, is called the upland white oak; it is
one of the most useful and valuable trees of the American forest.
3. WHITE ( quercus alba.) 4. SHRUB oak. ( quercus pumila.) It is found on
barren hills and plains. It produces a gall, which is evidently the nidus of an
insect, and has been used an ingredient in writing ink. There is another oak,
called the chestnut or newfound oak; but whether it be of a different species,
or a variety of either species abovementioned, has not been determined.

WALNUT. The American species of this genus, have been confounded by botanical
writers. There are at least three in New Hampshire. 1. WHITE or ROUND NUT
HICCORY. ( juglans alba.) Its sap is sweet, but does not flow freely. Its wood
is smooth and tough, and is much used for gun-stocks, axe-handles and
walking-sticks. 2. SHAG-BARK ( juglans cineria? I am uncertain whether this be
the cineria of authors, and therefore have added the mark of interrogation. If
it be not the cineria (to which the characters pretty well agree) it has no
specific name.

Dr. Cutler.
) The wood of this tree is not so valuable as the white; but the fruit is
preferable, being larger, and having a softer shell. 3. OIL-NUT or BUTTER-NUT.
This species has been called, by some authors, juglans alba, and by others,
juglans nigra. It differs specifically from both, and therefore Dr. Cutler has
given it the distinguishing name of juglans cathartica, expressive of the
peculiar property of its bark, the extract of which is one of the best
cathartics in the material medica. It neither produces gripings, nor leaves the
patient costive, and may be made efficacious, without hazard, by increasing the
dose. Its operation is kind and safe, even in the most delicate constitutions.
It is an excellent family medicine, is well adapted to hospitals, navies and
armies. It was much used by the military physicians, in the late war; and it
may become a valuable article of exportation. It is said to be one of the best
antidotes against the bite of the rattle-snake. The fruit of this tree, when
gathered young, in the beginning of July, makes an excellent pickle. When ripe,
it is a fattening food for swine. Its shell is black, hard and rough. Its
kernel contains a large quantity of a rich sweet oil. In the southern and
western parts of the United States, this tree is found in very great abundance.
The Indians preserved the oil which they extracted from the nut. Of this we
have an early testimony in the journal of F^rdinando de Soto, A. D. 1540. When
he came to Chiaha, situate near the Apalachian mountains, about latitude of 34,
he found great store of oil of walnuts, clear as butter, and of good taste.
(Purchase, vol. 5, page 1539.) The Indians of New England extracted an oil from
acorns, by boiling them in water with ashes of punk, or the rotten heart of
maple.

Josselyn's voyage.
Its wood makes good fencing stuff; and its bark, besides the medicinal virtues
which it possesses, has a quality of dying several shades of gray and black.

CHESTNUT. ( fagus castanea) is chiefly used for fencing; it is straight, coarse
grained, easily riv^n and very durable. It is sometimes split into staves and
heading for dry casks.

BEECH. ( fagus svlvatica.) Of this there are three varieties. The white and
the red are used as fuel. The black is small and tough, and is used only for
withes and switches.

HORNBEAM ( carpinus betulus) is a small but tough tree, and is used only for
levers, hand spikes and stakes.

BUTTON-WOOD ( platanus occidentalis) is a large tree, but as tough as the
hornbeam. It is used for windlasses, wheels and blocks.

PINE. ( pinus) Of this genus we have at least seven species. 1. The WHITE PINE
( pinus strobus) is undoubtedly the prince of the American forest in size, age
and majesty of appearance. More of this species have been produced in
New Hampshire, and the eastern counties of Massachusetts than in all America
besides. These trees have a very thin sap, and are distinguished by the name of
mast-pine from the succeeding growth of the same species, which are called
saplings. The blossom of this and other pines appears about the middle of June,
its farina is of a bright yellow, and (...) ^^^btil that it is exhaled with
vapor from the earth, ascends into the clouds and falls with rain, forming a
yellow scum on the surface of the water, which the ignorant erroneously call
^ulphur from the similarity of its color.

WHEN a mast tree is to be felled, much preparation is necessary. So tall a
stick without any limbs nearer the ground than eighty or a hundred feet, is in
great danger of breaking in the fall. To prevent this, the workmen have a
contrivance which they call bedding the tree, which is thus executed. They know
in what direction the tree will fall; and they cut down a number of smaller
trees which grow in that direction; or if there be none, they draw others to
the spot, and place them so that the falling tree may lodge on their branches;
which breaking or yielding under its pressure, render its fall easy and safe. A
time of deep snow is the most favorable season, as the rocks are then covered,
and a natural bed is formed to receive the tree. When fallen, it is examined,
and if to appearance it be sound, it is cut in the proportion of three feet in
length to every inch of its diameter, for a mast; but if intended for a
bow-sprit or a yard, it is cut shorter. If it be not sound throughout, or if it
break in falling, it is cut into logs for the saw mill.

When a mast is to be drawn, as its length will not admit of its passing in a
crooked road, a straight path is cut and cleared for it through the woods. If
it be cut in the neighborhood of a large river, it is drawn to the bank and
rolled into the water, or in the winter it is laid on the ice to be floated
away at the breaking up of the river in the spring. From other situations masts
are now conveyed twenty, thirty or forty miles to the landing places, at the
head of the tide, and as the distance has increased, more safe and easy modes
of conveyance have been invented. Formerly, if drawn on wheels, the mast was
raised by levers, and hung by chains under the axle. In this case it was
necessary to use very strong and heavy chains, and wheels of sixteen or
eighteen feet in diameter, that the mast, in passing, might be cleared from the
ground, which was often encumbered with rocks and stumps. Now, the common
wheels and chains are used, and the largest stick, by a very easy operation, is
raised on the axle. To perform this, the wheels being brought near to it, are
canted; the axle being set in a perpendicular position, one wheel on the ground
and the other aloft. The mast is then rolled over the rim and spokes of the
lower wheel, and fastened to the axle; and when it is thus fixed, a chain,
which is previously made fast to the opposite side of the upper wheel, is
hooked to a yoke of oxen; who, by a jerk, bring down the upper and raise the
lower wheel, and thus both are brought into their proper position, with the
mast mounted on the axle. They use two pairs of wheels, one at each end of the
mast; by which means, it is not galled by friction on the ground; and the
draught is rendered much easier for the cattle.

When a mast is to be drawn on the snow, one end is placed on a sled, shorter,
but higher than the common fort, and rests on a strong block, which is laid
across the middle of the sled. Formerly, the butt end was placed foremost, and
fastened by chains to the bars of the sled, which was attended by this
inconvenience; that in sidelong ground, the stick by its rolling would overset
the sled, and the drivers had much difficulty either to prevent or remedy this
disaster, by the help of levers and ropes. The invention of the swivel-chain
precludes this difficulty. One part of this chain is fastened to the tongue of
the sled, and the other to the smallest end of the mast, by means of a circular
groove cut in it; one of the intermediate links is a swivel, which, by its easy
turning, allows the stick to roll from side to side, without overturning the
sled. In descending a long and steep hill, they have a contrivance to prevent
the load from making too rapid a descent. Some of the cattle are placed behind
it; a chain which is attached to their yokes is brought forward and fastened to
the hinder end of the load, and the resistance which is made by these cattle,
checks the descent. This operation is called tailing. The most dangerous
circumstance, is the passing over the top of a sharp hill, by which means, the
oxen which are nearest to the tongue are sometimes suspended, till the foremost
cattle can draw the mast so far over the hill, as to give them opportunity to
recover the ground. In this case the drivers are obliged to use much judgment
and care, to keep the cattle from being killed. There is no other way to
prevent this inconvenience than to level the roads.

The best white pine trees are sold for masts, bowsprits and yards, for large
ships. Douglass, [vol. II, p. 53.] speaks of a white pine, cut (...) Dunstable,
in 1736, which was straight and sound, seven feet eight inches in diameter, at
the butt end. He also says, that when Col. Partridge (formerly Lieutenant
Governor of New Hampshire) had the mast contract, he sent home a ^ew of ^8
inches. and two of 42 inches.

I have obtained from the books of the late contractor, Mark Hunking Wentworth,
Esquire. deceased, the following account of the size and value of such sticks as he
sent to England for the use of the navy.

Masts. Yards. Bowsprits. Diameter in inches. Sterling value Diameter in
inches. Sterling value. Diameter in inches. Sterling value. L. L. L. 25 13, 8
15 25 2,18 26 16, 16 26 3, 27 18, 17 6,10 27 3,14 28 23, 18 9, 28 8, 2 29 28,
19 11, 4 29 15, 30 35,10 20 14,10 30 21, 31 44, 21 18,10 31 26, 32 56, 22 21,
32 29, 33 70, ^3 25,10 33 32, 34 90, 24 32, 34 40, 35 42,10 36 45, 37 52,10

N. B. It must be observed, that all these were hewn into the proper shape
before the final dimensions were taken, which determined their value.


Those of an inferior size, partly unsound, crooked, or broken in falling, are
either sawn into planks and boards, or formed into canoes, or cut into bolts
for the use of coopers, or split and shaved into clapboards and shingles.
Boards of this wood are much used for wainscoting and cabinet work; it is of
smooth grain, and when free from knots, does no injury to the tools of the
workmen; but the softness of its texture subjects it to shrink and swell with
the weather. The sapling pine, though of the same species, is not so firm and
smooth as the veteran pine of the forest, and is more sensibly affected by the
weather.

The stumps and roots of the mast pine are very durable. It is a common saying,
that no man ever cut down a pine, and lived to see the stump rotten. After many
years, when the roots have been loosened by the frost, they are, with much
labor, cut and dug out of the ground, and being turned up edge way, are set for
fences to fields; in which state they have been known to remain sound for half
a century. A collection of these roots would make an impenetrable abbatis,
which nothing but fire could easily destroy.

Before the revolution, all white pines (excepting those growing in any
township granted before the twenty-first of September, 1722) were accounted the
King's property, and heavy penalties were annexed to the cutting of them,
without leave from the King's surveyor. Since that event, these trees, like all
others, are the property of the landholder.

(2.) The YELLOW PINE ( pinus pinea) is harder and heavier than the white, but
never grows to the same size; its planks and boards are used for the floors of
houses and the decks of ships.

(3.) The PITCH PINE ( pinus lada) is the hardest and heaviest of all the
pines; it is sometimes put to the same uses as the yellow pine; but at present
the principal use of it is for fuel. When burnt in kilns, it makes the best
kind of charcoal; its knots and roots being full of the terebinthine oil,
afford a light surpassing candles; its soot is collected, and used for lamp
black. The making of tar from it, is now wholly disused. Formerly, when it was
made, the method was this. A piece of clay ground was chosen; or if such could
not conveniently be had, the earth was paved with stone or brick, in a circular
form, about twelve or fifteen feet in diameter, raised in the middle, and a
circular trench was drawn round it, a few inches in depth. The wood being cut
and split, was set upright in a conical pile, and covered on every side with
sods, a hole being left open at the top, where the pile was set on fire. The
confined heat melted the resinous juices of the wood, which flowed out at the
bottom into the circular trench, and was conducted, by other gutters, to holes
in the earth, in which were set barrels to receive it. Turpentine is collected
from every species of the pine, by boxing the trees; that from the white pine
is the purest; it sometimes distills from the tree in beautifully transparent
drops.

(4.) The LARCH ( pinus larix) is the only tree of the terebinthine quality
which sheds its leaves in autumn. Its turpentine is said to be the same with
the Burgundy pitch.

(5.) The FIR ( pinus balsamea) yields a fine balsam, which is contained in
small blisters on the exterior surface of its bark. This balsam is used both as
an external and internal medicine. The wood is coarser, and more brittle, than
the pine, and is seldom either hewn or sawn.

(6.) Of SPRUCE ( pinus canadensis) we have two varieties, the white and the
black. The white spruce is tall and slender, its grain is twisting, and when
stripped of its bark, it will crack in a warm sun. It is the worst wood for
fuel, because of its continual snapping; in this respect it exceeds hemlock
and chestnut; both which are remarkable for the same ill quality. It is
sometimes formed into oars for large boats, but is inferior to ash. It is often
used for spars, for fencing stuff and for scaffolding, for all which purposes,
its form and texture render it very convenient, as it is straight and tough,
and may be had of any size from two inches to two feet in diameter. The black
spruce is used only for beer. The young twigs of it are boiled till the bark
may easily be stripped from the wood, and being sweetened with molasses, make
one of the most pleasant and wholesome beverages which nature affords. Of this
spruce, is made the essence, which is as well known in Europe as in America.

(7.) The HEMLOCK ( pinus abies) is, in stature, the next tree to the mast
pine. It grows largest in swampy land, and is very straight. Its grain is
coarse, and is not easily split or hewn, but is sawed into planks, joists, and
laths. Its chief excellence in building is, that it holds a nail exceedingly
well. It makes good flooring for bridges and barns, and the round timber is
very durable in wharfs and dams. The bark is excellent for tanning leather. The
balsam of the hemlock is used medicinally, but it cannot be collected in any
great quantities.

WHITE CEDAR ( thuja occidentalis.)

RED CEDAR ( juniperus virginiana.)

The white cedar of the southern States ( cupressus thyoides) is a very
different tree from the white cedar of the northern States; but the red cedar
is the same in all the States. It is a juniper, and a species of that in Europe
which produces the juniper berries. The wood of the red cedar, is more durable,
when set in the earth, than any other wood growing in this country.

We have another species of juniper ( juniperus sabina) which does not rise
more than eighteen inches from the ground; but the branches extend horizontally
several yards; and form, in open pastures, an extensive bed of evergreen. The
leaves are mixed with oats, and given to horses to destroy the worms, which
infest their bowels.

WHITE WILLOW ( salix alba) is originally an exotic, but now well naturalized
and much propagated. The bark of this tree is used as a substitute for the
cortex peruviana.

SWAMP WILLOW ( salix) is the first tree that shows its blossoms in the spring.
In some seasons, its white flowers exhibit a delightful appearance, when all
the neighboring trees remain in their wintry hue.

POPLAR or ASPEN ( populus tremula.) This tree is more frequently found in open
or clear land, than in thick woods. It is of quick growth. The wood is white,
soft and smooth. It is used for lasts and heels of shoes, and for some kinds of
turned work.

BLACK POPLAR, or BALSAM TREE. This is a beautiful forest tree, of a large
size, and quick growth; very proper for walks and shades. Its buds, in the
spring, are full of a rich balsam, resembling the balsam of Peru. As the buds
expand the balsam disappears.

Of the MAPLE we have three species. 1. The WHITE ( acer negundo) especially
that which is curled in its grain, is much used in cabinet work; it is firm and
smooth; it takes a fine polish, and may be stained of the color of black
walnut or mahogany. 2. The RED ( (...) rubrum) grows in swamps, and is fit only
for fuel. 3. The BLACK or ROCK maple, exceeds the others in this respect,
being of a very close texture, hard and heavy, even when perfectly dry. But the
grand excellency of this tree, is the saccharine quality of its sap, which has
obtained for it the name of SUGAR MAPLE, ( acer saccharinum.)

Those trees which grow in cleared land, do not yield sap in such quantities as
those which grow in the thick woods; but it is richer. The same difference is
observed between those which grow in wet and in dry land.

To procure the sap, an incision is made by two scores, an inch and half, or
two inches deep, and from six to eight inches long, in the form of the letter
V. This method of tapping causes the tree to bleed very freely, and in (...) or
three years, kills it; a circumstance not much regarded where the trees are
numerous, and a continual succession of them, may be had; but if care be taken
to tap them, by making a small circular incision, and filling it with a plug
when the season is past, the bark will cover the wound, and the tree will last
many years. From the lower part of the incision, the sap is guided by a small
stick into a trough, containing two or three gallons. These troughs are made by
cutting the pine, or some other soft wood, into pieces of a yard long, and
splitting them in halves, a cavity is then made in each half, by a narrow axe,
and so expert are the woodmen at this business, that one of them will make
thirty or forty in a day. Larger troughs or vats, are placed in a central
situation, to serve as reservoirs for the sap when collected.

The season for tapping the trees is in March, and the sap will not run but in
a clear day, succeeding a frosty night. A full grown tree will then yield from
two to three gallons each day. The persons employed in the business, visit each
tree, and, collecting the sap in buckets, remove it to the larger troughs, or,
if the ground be very extensive, it is put into barrels, which are drawn on
sleds to the place appointed for boiling. The kettles in which it is boiled,
are commonly the same which are used for culinary purposes, suspended in the
usual manner, but the best way is to use broad kettles, set in brick or stone,
with the fire confined under the bottom, and not flaming up round the sides, in
which case there is danger of burning the sugar. As the sap evaporates the
kettles are filled up, the boiling is continued, and the liquor is skimmed till
it becomes a thick syrup. In this state it may rest for a week, and in the mean
time, more of the sap may undergo the same process, and be reduced to a less
quantity.

The next operation is granulating, which may be done on a cloudy day, when no
sap can be collected. But if there be a succession of fair weather, the trees
will discharge so fast, that the collection must be attended to by day, and the
boiling by night. When the syrup is to be granulated, the boiling is repeated.
The kettle is then not more than half filled, to prevent waste. To check the
too sudden rising of the liquor, a small piece of clean butter or tallow is
occasionally thrown in. To know when it will granulate, a little of it is taken
out and cooled, and when it appears to be in this state, the whole is poured
into a cooler. After the grain is formed, it is hung in bags to drain. A small
quantity of quick lime, put into the liquor, as is usual in the West Indies*
would promote and improve the granulation.

In every stage of the work much neatness is required. The sap must be strained
through a flannel sieve before the first boiling, to clear it of chips, leaves
and other adventitious substances; and before the second boiling, it must
undergo another straining. When the season is over, the troughs are either
piled in a dry place, bottom upward, or set on end against the trees, to be
kept clean for another season. The sugar, thus procured, is, by some of the
neatest workmen, rendered as white as the finest muscovado. It is an agreeable
sweet, frequently supplying the place of milk and meat, and affording wholesome
and nourishing food for children. The drainings of the sugar, or the last run
of the sap, which will not granulate, are used as molasses, to sweeten cakes,
puddings and other viands. A very palatable and refreshing beer is made by
boiling down the sap to a quarter part, and fermenting it with yeast, and
another extremely wholesome liquor, is obtained from the decoction of spruce in
the sap. Vinegar also is made by exposing the sap to the air.

The sugar, thus extracted from the maple, is clear gain to the industrious
husbandman. It is made at a time of the year when no field labor can be done.
The ground is then covered with snow, which being hardened by the frost, will
bear a man's weight. One man and a boy have collected a sufficiency of sap for
five hundred pounds of sugar, and a man, with two boys, for seven hundred. The
boiling is often performed by women. These trees are found in many parts of the
country; but they abound most in the lands between the White mountains and
Connecticut river. The wood is very suitable for the use of carpenters, who
make of it felloes of wheels, where oak cannot easily be procured, as is the
case in a great extent of country in the northwestern part of the State.

Of ASH we have two species. 1. The WHITE ASH ( fraxinus excels^or) in good
land, grows to the size of three feet in diameter. It is very tall, straight
and tough. Its leaves and bark are an antidote to the venom of the
rattle-snake. The wood i^ easily riven, and makes durable rails for fences. It
is also formed into oars and handspikes, and serves for the frames of ploughs,
carts, sleighs, and riding carriages, and for the handles of many useful tools
in agricultural and mechanical employments. 2. The other species is BLACK ASH (
fr^xinus americana) of which the RED and YELLOW are varieties. Splints of the
wood of ash are obtained by pounding it with a maul, and are employed in making
baskets and brooms. This knowledge was probably derived from the Indians. The
roots of yellow ash, are used by turners, for the making of plates and bowls.

After going through the catalogue of forest trees, it may be proper to
observe, that all woods, which grow on high land, are more firm and solid, and
better for timber or fuel, than those which grown in swamps. The same
difference may generally be observed between those in the open grounds, and
those in the thick shade of the forest. The pine is an exception to this
remark; but whether the immense age or superior stature of the forest pine be
the causes which render it more firm than that which is found in the pastures,
cannot at present be ascertained.

From several experiments made by the Count de BUFFON, it appears that the wood
of trees, stripped of their bark in the spring and left to dry standing till
they are dead, is harder, heavier and stronger, more solid and durable than
that of trees felled in their bark; and that the sappy part of wood, without
bark, is not only stronger than the common, but much more so than the heart of
wood in bark, though less heavy. The physical cause of this augmentation of
strength and solidity he thus explains. Trees increase in size by additional
coats of new wood, which i^ formed from the running sap between the bark and
the old wood. Trees stripped of their bark, form none of these new coats, and
though they live after the bark is taken off they do not grow. The substance
destined to form the new wood, finding itself stopped and obliged to fix in the
void places both of the sap and heart, augments the solidity and consequently
the strength of the wood. Not. Hist. Vol. v. p. (...) It must be observed that
his experiments were made on (...)


Beside the immense quantity of living wood with which the forest abounds,
nature has provided an ample store of that fossil, ligneous substance called
peat. It appears to be formed of the deciduous parts of trees and shrubs,
preserved in a peculiar manner, in the earth. It is usually found in swamps
between or under hills, where it has been accumulating for many ages. The
decayed vegetation of one period having served as a soil in which another
growth has taken root and come to maturity. In the town of Dover are two
swamps, which, within the last twenty-five years have been cleared of the
stumps and roots of the latest growth, which were pine and hemlock. In digging
them up, another tier of stumps was found under them, the roots of which were
found; and in some instances a third stump appeared under the second. In such
swamps is found the peat; in which the shape of twigs, bark and leaves is very
apparent; but on pressure it is consolidated into a soft fatty substance. This
being dug in spits of a proper size, and dried, becomes valuable fuel; of
which, though at present little use is made, yet posterity will doubtless reap
the benefit. I very much doubt your doctrine of peat. It appears to me to be a
substance (...) ^eneri^, Deciduous parts of trees and shrubs are often found
mixed with it. But its inflammable property, I conceive, does not depend on the
mere adventitious collections of decayed vegetables; for although peat is found
in places favorable to such collections, yet it is not found in every place
where those collections have been made. Besides, in all the peat I have
examined, there are numerous fibers of a singular construction, variously
ramified; in some kinds they are extremely fine, in others as large as a pack
thread. When the peat (...) taken from (...) pit the threads may be traced
considerable length, and, (...) washed, they have an appearance which has
induced me to suspect a vegetable organization* If they are a living vegetable,
they seem to form the (...) between the vegetable and fossil kingdom. It seems
(...) probable, if those fibers are not vegetable sui generis, they may be the
fibrous roots of a (...) of some particular spe^^^ of moss, upon which there
has been a large collection (...) matter, which has buried then a certain depth
under ground, where they are not subject to putrefaction. But there seems to be
an inflammable fossil in the composition of peat, different from the earth
commonly found in (...) places. I am told some peat appears to be entirely a
fossil, though I have never seen any such. It is as easy to conceive of such a
fossil as of pit-coal. If the fossil contains the inflammable principle, it is
not derived from deciduous vegetables. Have you never heard of its growing
again where it has been dug out? One of my neighbour^ has often told me that a
ditch was dug through a meadow in his farm, many years ago, where there is a
body of peat; that the depth of the ditch exceeded the depth of the peat; and
that the peat has pushed out on both sides so as nearly to meet in the center,
but the sides of the ditch above and below* remain much the same, except some
little change, which the length of time has produced. I have not seen the
place: but were I assured of this fact, I should be inclined to believe the
fibers to be living vegetables, and the fossil to b^ possessed of the property
of spar, with regard to the increase of its bulk; and that these two substances
were mutually dependent on each other.

MS. letter of Dr. Cutler.


It is not my intention to write, systematically, the natural history of the
country, or to describe, with botanical accuracy, the indigenous vegetables
which it contains; but briefly (...) take notice of such as are endowed with
the most remarkable qualities, either salutary or noxious.

Of grapes we have two species. The BLACK GRAPE ( vitis labrusca) and the
FOX-GRAPE ( vitis vulpina.) Of these there are several varieties. From the
specimens of foreign grapes, which ripen in our gardens, there is sufficient
reason to believe that the culture of vines, in favorable situations, might be
attended with success. This opinion is corroborated by the judgment of
foreigners, occasionally resident with us.

The BLACK CURRENT ( ribes nigrum) is a native of our swamps, and is much
improved by culture. It is not much used as food, but is an excellent medicine
for a sore mouth and throat.

The WILD GOOSEBERRY ( ribes grosularia) is very common in the borders of
woods, and has been greatly meliorated by cultivation.

We have several species of WHORTLEBERRIES ( vaccinium corymbosum) which grow
in great abundance and serve as wholesome and palatable food; some of them are
dried for winter.

The CRANEBERRY ( vaccinium oxycoccos) is a fruit peculiar to America. The
common species grows on a creeping vine in meadows. The branches of the vine
take root at the joints, and overspread the ground to the extent of an acre.
The berries hang on very slender stalks. At first they are white, but turn red
as they ripen, and when full grown, are of the size of a cherry. They yield an
agreeable acid juice, and, when stewed and made into a jelly, are extremely
cooling in a fever, and a delicious sauce at the table. They may be kept a long
time in water, and suffer no injury from the frost. They are frequently sent
abroad, and are highly refreshing at sea. The best way to preserve them for
long voyages, is to put them up, clean and dry, in bottles, closely corked.
There is another species of craneberry, which grows in clusters on a bush, but
it is not so large nor so common as the other.

The common RASPBERRY ( rubus idoeus) is found in the most exuberant plenty in
the new plantations, and in the old, by the sides of fields and roads. The
SUPERB RASPBERRY ( rubus canadensis) is larger and more delicate. Its blossom
is purple, and its leaves are sometimes a foot in diameter.

The BRAMBLEBERRY ( rubus occidentalis.) The RUNNING BLACKBERRY ( rubus
moluccanus.) The UPRIGHT BLACKBERRY ( rubus frutiosus) are also very common,
especially in the newly cleared land, and afford an agreeable refreshment.

The STRAWBERRY ( fragaria vosca) in some parts of the country, is very
luxuriant in new fields and pastures; but it is capable of great improvement by
cultivation.

The HAZLE-NUT ( corylus avellana) is found in the neglected parts of pastures,
and by the sides of rivers.

There are two species of GROUND-NUTS. One ( helianthus tuberosus) bears a
yellow blossom, resembling the sunflower. The other ( glicine apios) is a vine,
which twines itself about bushes, and bears a blossom and fruit resembling a
pea. The roots were much used for food by the Indians, and are indeed very
palatable. I know not whether they have been cultivated; but the former might
be planted like the potatoe.

Besides these, there are several kinds of plums and other wild fruits, which
have not been reduced to a systematical order, nor distinguished by any but
trivial names.

There is a great variety of native vegetables, which are used for medicinal
and domestic purposes. Among these may be reckoned the following:

The BAYBERRY ( myrica cerisera) the leaves of which yield an agreeable
perfume, and the fruit a delicate green wax, which is made into candles.
GINSENG ( panax trifolium) so much esteemed by the Chinese, is found in great
plenty in the western part of the State, and it is said that the farther
northward it is found, the better is its quality. It was formerly thought that
the ginseng grew only i^ China and Tartary; but it was discovered in America
about the year 1750, and some specimens of it having been sent to England, and
thence to China, it was, on trial, acknowledged, by the Chinese themselves, to
be the same with the oriental ginseng.

The proper time for gathering this root, is in September, just before the
frost kills the stem. The way of curing it in China, is th^s related. After the
ginseng is gathered, it is cleaned, then dipped in scalding water, and the
ligneous bark rubbed off with a piece of dry flannel. It is then laid across
sticks, over a vessel, in which yellow millet Millet is very easily cultivated,
and yields a vast increase. I have counted ten thousand grains on one stalk.
is boiling, with a gentle fire, and covered with (...) cloth. The steam of the
boiling millet gives it that color which is admired by the Chinese. When the
roots are thus prepared, they must be dried and kept close, otherwise they will
corrupt or be destroyed by worms. This root once promised to be a valuable
article o^ commerce with China; but the sale of it has been greatly injured by
the loose and careless manner in which it has been packed, and the to^ great
quantity which has been at once exported. It might however, by some proper
regulations, be still rendered advantageous.

The PRICKLY ASH (its genus unknown) is a shrub, growing in moist places, and
sometimes rising into a small tree. It is armed with spiculoe, like the locust.
The bark has a high degree of warmth and pungency; with which, in the seed, is
combined an agreeable aroma. The former is esteemed an excellent remedy for the
chronic rheumatism. The latter were used by the soldiers, in the late war, and
by many other people, remote from the trading towns, as a substitute for pepper
in seasoning food. It is chiefly found in the western part of the State.

The GARGET ( phytolacca decandra) is a valuable plant. Its berries yield a
beautiful purple juice, which might be used in dying. Its root is in great
repute among farriers.

Of the ELDER there are two species, BLACK ( sambuccus nigra) and RED (
viburnum opulus.) The former is too well known to need any description; as are
the MAIDENHAIR ( adianthus pedatuus) the SARSAPARILLA ( aralia) SNAKE ROOT (
polygala senega) and many others.

There are several plants, the virtues of which were well known to the Indians,
but are now either neglected or unknown. One of these is a running vine,
bearing a small red berry, and a round leaf, which Josselyn (who wrote in 1672)
says, the fishermen called poke; Poke is the name by which the garget is known
in the middle States*
it is known to the hunters by the name of Indian tobacco, and it was used by
the natives, before their acquaintance with the Europeans, for smoking, and
afterward was frequently mixed with the true tobacco from the southern parts of
America. It has a strong narcotic quality. It grows on the summit of
Agamenticus; and on many other mountains and dry elevated places.

Another is the INDIAN HEMP ( asclepias) of which the Indians made their
bow-strings. The fibers of its bark are strong, and may be wrought into a fine
thread. The SILK GRASS, another species of the asclepias, bears a pod,
containing a down, which may be carded and spun into candle wicks.

The WICTH HAZEL ( hamamelis) was much used by the Indians, as a remedy for
inflammations.

We have at least three species of the lobelia; one of which is a strong
emetic; another ( lobelia cardinalis) is employed in the cure of a disease,
with the name of which I will not stain my page.

The vine, called BUCK BEAN ( menyanthes) is said to be a rare plant in this
country, and of singular use in medicine. It grows at Jaffrey, near the grand
Monadnock.

The arum, or skunk cabbage, has been found very efficacious in asthmatic
complaints.

It may be proper to close this account of indigenous vegetables, with the
names of those plants, which, under certain circumstances, operate as poisons;
some of which, however, have been brought into medicinal use, and are in repute
for the cure of disorders, attended with spasmodic affections. Of this latter
sort, are the HEMLOCK ( cicuta) the THORN APPLE ( datura stramonium) the
HENBANE ( hyoscyamus niger) and the NIGHT SHADE ( solanum nigrum.) Other
poisonous plants, are the IVY ( bedera helix) the CREEPING IVY, or, as it is
called by some, MERCURY ( rhus radicans) the juice of which stains linen a deep
and indelible black; the SWAMP SUMACH ( rhus toxico dendrum) the WATER ELDER (
viburnum opulus) the HERB CHRISTOPHER ( actoea spicata) the STINKING SNAKEWEED
( cliffortia trifoliata) and the WHITE HELLEBORE ( veratrum album.)

CHAP. IX. Soil, Cultivation and Husbandry.
THERE is a great variety of soil in New Hampshire. The intervale lands on the
large rivers, are accounted the most valuable, because they are overflown and
recruited every year by the water from the uplands, which brings down a fat
slime or sediment, of the consistence of soap. These lands produce every kind
of grain in the utmost perfection; but are not so good for pasture as the
uplands of a proper quality. The wide spreading hills of a moderate elevation,
are generally much esteemed, as warm and rich; rocky moist land is accounted
good for pasture; drained swamps have a deep mellow soil, and the valleys
between hills are generally very productive.

In the new and uncultivated parts, the soil is distinguished by the various
kinds of woods which grow upon it, thus: White oak land is hard and stony, the
under growth consisting or brakes and fern; this kind of soil will not bear
grass till it has been ploughed and hoed; but it is good for Indian corn, and
must be subdued by planting, before it can be converted into mowing or pasture.
The same may be said of chestnut land.

Pitch pine land is dry and sandy; it will bear corn and rye with ploughing;
but is soon worn out, and needs to lie fallow two or three years to recruit.

White pine land is also light and dry, but has a deeper soil, and is of course
better; both these kinds of land bear brakes and fern; and wherever these grow
in large quantities, it is an indication that ploughing is necessary to prepare
the land for grass.

Spruce and hemlock, in the eastern parts of the State, denote a thin, cold
soil, which, after much labor in the clearing, will indeed bear grass without
ploughing, but the crops are small, and there is a natural tough sward commonly
called a rug, which must either rot or be burned before any cultivation can be
made. But in the western parts, the spruce and hemlock, with a mixture of
birch, denote a moist soil, which is excellent for grass.

When the white pine and the oyl-nut are found in the same land, it is commonly
a deep moist loam, and is accounted very rich and profitable.

Beech and maple land is generally esteemed the most easy and advantageous for
cultivation, as it is a warm, rich, loamy soil, which easily takes grass, corn
and grain without ploughing; and not only bears good crops the first year, but
turns immediately to mowing and pasture; that soil which is deepest, and of the
darkest color, is esteemed the best.

Black and yellow birch, white ash, elm and alder, are indications of good
soil, deep, rich and moist, which will admit grass and grain without ploughing.

Red oak and white birch are signs of strong land, and generally the strength
of land is judged of by the largeness of the trees which it produces.

There are evident signs of a change in the growth on the same soil, in a
course of time; for which no causes can be assigned. In some places the old
standing trees, and the fallen decayed trees, appear to be the same, whilst the
most thriving trees are of a different kind. For instance, the old growth in
some places is red oak, or white ash; whilst the other trees are beech and
maple, without any young oak or ash among them. It is probable that the growth
is thus changed in many places; the only conclusion which can be drawn from
this circumstance, is, that the same soil is capable of bearing diverse kinds of
trees; but still there is a difference sufficient to denominate the soil from
the growth.

Several way of raising a crop on new land have been practiced. The easiest and
cheapest method was originally learned of the Indians, who never looked very
far forward in their improvements. The method is that of girdling the trees;
which is done by making a circular incision through the bark, and leaving them
to die standing. This operation is performed in the summer, and the ground is
sowed in August, with winter rye, intermixed with grass. The next year, the
trees do not put forth leaves, and the land having yielded a crop, becomes fit
for pasture. This method helps poor settlers a little the first year; but the
inconvenience of it is, that if the trees are left standing, they are
continually breaking and falling with the wind, which endangers the lives of
cattle; and the ground being constantly encumbered by the falling trees, is
less fit for mowing; so that if the labor be not effectually done at once, it
must be done in a succession of time.

Some have supposed, that the earth, being not at once, but by degrees exposed
to the sun, preserves its moisture, and does not become so hard; but the
experience of the best husbandmen has exploded this opinion. The more able sort
of husbandmen, therefore, choose the method of clearing the land at first, by
cutting down all the trees without exception. The most eligible time for this
operation, is the month of June, when the sap is flowing, and the leaves are
formed on the trees. These leaves will not drop from the fallen trees, but
remain till the next year, when, being dry, they help to spread the fire, which
is then set to the trees. This is done in the first dry weather of the
succeeding spring, and generally in May; but if the ground be too dry, the fire
will burn deep, and greatly injure the soil. There is therefore need of
judgment, to determine when the wood is dry enough to burn, and the soil wet
enough to resist the action of the fire. Much depends on getting what is called
a good burn, to prepare the ground for planting. To ensure this, the fallen
trees are cut and piled; and the larger the pile, the better chance there is
for its being well burned. But if the land be intended for pasture only, the
trees are cut down, and after the fire has destroyed the limbs, grass is sown,
and the trunks of the trees are left to rot, which, in time, turn to good
manure, and the pasture is durable.

Some husbandmen prefer felling trees in the winter, or very early in the
spring, before the snow is gone. The advantage of this method is, that there
are fewer shoots from the stumps of the felled trees, than if they are cut in
the summer; these shoots encumber the ground, and must be cut out of the way,
or destroyed by fire. The disadvantage of cutting trees in the winter is, that
they will not dry so soon, nor burn so well, as those cut in the summer, with
the leaves on. Besides, the month of June is a time when not only the trees are
easiest to be cut, but the seed is in the ^round, and people can better attend
to this labor, than when they are preparing for their spring work, or have not
finished their winter employments. The days too are then at their greatest
length, and more labor can be done in the course of a day. This labor, however,
is often paid for by the acre, rather than by the day; and the price of felling
an acre, is from one to two dollars, according to the number and size of the
trees.

The burning of trees generally destroys the limbs and smaller trunks; the
larger logs are left scorched on the ground, and sometimes serve to fence the
field. After the fire has had its effect, and is succeeded by rain, then is the
time for planting. No plough is used, nor is it possible for one to pass among
the roots and stumps; but holes are made with a hoe in the loose soil and
ashes; in which, the seed being dropped and covered, is left to the prolific
hand of nature; no other culture being necessary or practicable, but the
cutting of the fireweed, which spontaneously grows on all burnt land. This
fireweed is an annual plant, with a succulent stalk and long jagged leaf; it
grows to the height of five or six feet, according to the strength of the
ashes. It bears a white flower, and has a winged seed, which is carried every
where by the wind, but never vegetates, except on the ashes of burnt wood. It
exhausts the ground, and injures the first crop, if it be not subdued; but
after the second year disappears. About the second or third year, another weed,
called pigeonberry, succeeds the fireweed, and remains till the grass overcomes
it. It rises to the height of three feet, spreads much at the top, and bears
bunches of black berries, on which pigcons feed.

When the trees are burnt later in the summer, wheat or rye is sown, mixed with
the seeds of grass, on the new land. The seed is scattered on the surface, and
raked in with a wooden or iron tooth rake, or a hoe. The husbandman knows on
what kind of land to expect a crop, from this mode of culture; and is seldom
disappointed. Sometimes a crop of Indian corn is raised the first year, and
another of rye or wheat, the second year, and the land is sown with grass,
which will turn it into pasture or mowing the third year. The first crop, in
some land, and the two first crops in any good land, will repay the expense of
all the labor. It is not an uncommon thing for people, who are used to this
kind of husbandry, to bring a tract of wilderness into grass for the two first
crops; the owner being at no expense but that of felling the trees and
purchasing the grass seed. Many husbandmen, in the old towns, buy lots of new
land, and get them cleared and brought into grass, in this way, and pasture
great numbers of cattle; the feed is excellent, and the cattle are soon fatted
for the market.

Husbandmen differ in their opinions concerning the advantages of tilling their
new land the second year. Some suppose that mixing and stiring the earth, does
it more good than the crop injures it; others say, that one crop is sufficient
before the land is laid down to grass; and that if it be sown with grain and
grass, as soon as it is cleared, the large crops of grass which follow, will
more than compensate for one crop of grain. When the seeding with grass is
neglected, the ground becomes mossy and hard, and must be ploughed before it
will receive seed. Land, thus sown, will not produce grass so plentifully, as
that which is seeded immediately after the fire has run over it. Besides, this
neglected land is generally overspread with cherrytrees, rasp-berry bushes, and
other wild growth; to subdue which, much additional labor is required. In good
land, the first crops of hay are, on an average, a ton to an acre. That land
which is intended for mowing, and which takes the common grass well at first,
is seldom or never ploughed afterward; but where ^^^ver is sown, it must be
ploughed and seeded every fourth or fifth year; good land, th^^ managed, will
average two tons of clover to the acre.

In the intervale land on Connecticut river, wheat often yields forty, and
sometimes fifty bushels, to the acre; but in common upland, (...) it produce
twenty bushels, it is reckoned profitable, though it often falls short of that.
Indian corn will sometimes average thirty or forty; but it is to be observed
that this latter grain does not produce so largely, nor is the grain so heavy
on new as on the old lands well cultivated. This however is owing much (...)
the lateness of the season in which it is planted; if planted as early on the
newly burnt land as on the old, it will be nearly as good. Of all grains,
winter rye thrives best on new lands, and Indian corn, or barley, on the old.
Bar^^^ does not succeed well in the new land; nor (...) flax raised with any
advantage, until the land has been cultivated for some years. The same may be
said of oats and peace; but (...) kinds of esculent roots, are much larger and
sweeter in the virgin soil, than in any other.

The mode of clearing and cultivating new lands, has been much improved within
the last thirty years. Forty years ago it was thought impossible to raise
Indian corn without the plough and the hoe. The mode of planting it among the
burnt logs, was practiced with great success at Gilmantown, about the year
1762, and this easy method of culture soon became universal in the new
plantations. It is now accounted more profitable for a young man to go upon
new, than to remain on the old lands. In the early part of life, every day's
labor employed in subduing the wilderness, lays a foundation for future profit:
Besides the mode of subduing new land, there has been no improvement made in
the art of husbandry. The season of vegetation is short, and is almost wholly
employed in preparing, planting and tilling the land, in cutting and housing
fodder, and gathering in the crops. These labors succeed invariably, and must
be attended to in their proper season; so that little time can be spared for
experiments, if the people in general were disposed to make them. Indeed, so
sudden is the succession of labors, that upon any irregularity in the weather,
they run into one another; and, if help be scarce, one cannot be completed
before the other suffers for want of being done. Thus hay is often spoiled for
want of being cut in season, when the English harvest is plentiful. It is
partly from this cause, partly from the ideas of equality with which the minds
of husbandmen are early impressed, and partly from a want of education, that no
spirit of improvement is seen among them, but every one pursues the business of
sowing, planting, mowing, and raising cattle, with unremitting labor and
undeviating uniformity.

Very little use is made of any manure except barn dung; though marl may be had
in many places, with or without digging. The mixing of different strata, is
never attended to, though nature often gives the hint by the rain bringing down
sand from a hill on a clay bottom; and the grass growing there in greater
beauty and luxuriance than elsewhere. Dung is seldom suffered to remain in a
heap over the summer, but is taken every spring from the barn, and either
spread over the field and ploughed in, or laid in heaps, and put into the holes
where corn and potatoes are planted.

Gardens, in the country towns, are chiefly left to the management of women,
the men contenting themselves with fencing and digging them; and it must be
said, to the honor of the female sex, that the scanty portion of earth,
committed to their care, is often made productive of no small benefit to their
families.

As the first inhabitants of New Hampshire came chiefly from the southwestern
counties of England, where cider and perry were made in great quantities, they
took care to stock their plantations with apple trees and pear trees, which
throve well, and grew to a great size. The first growth is now decayed or
perished; but a succession has been preserved, and no good husbandman thinks
his farm complete without an orchard. Perry is still made in the old towns,
bordering on Pascataqua river; but in the interior country the apple tree is
chiefly cultivated. In many of the townships, which have been settled since the
conquest of Canada, young orchards bear well, and cider is yearly becoming more
plentiful.

Other fruits are not much cultivated, but from the specimens which some
gardens produce, there is no doubt that the cherry, the mulberry, the plum and
the quince, might be multiplied to any degree. The peach does not thrive well;
the trees being very short lived. The apricot is scarcely known. The white and
red current grow luxuriantly, if properly situated and cultivated. The
barberry, though an exotic, is thoroughly naturalized, and grows spontaneously
in hedges or pastures.

The following remarks are suggested by an ingenious friend: Dr. Samuel Tenne^,
of (...)


'In regard to tree-fruit, we are in too northern a climate to have it of the
first quality, without particular attention. New York, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania, have it in perfection. As you depart from that tract, either
southward or northward, it degenerates. I believe, however, that good fruit
might be produced even in New Hampshire, with suitable attention. A proof of
this is, that sometimes we have it by mere chance. In theorizing on the
subject, three things appear to me particularly necessary, all which are
totally neglected by the generality of our husbandmen. The first, after
procuring thrifty young trees of the best kinds, and grafting such as require
it, is, to choose a situation for them, where they may have the advantage of a
warm rich soil, and be well sheltered from the chilling blasts of the ocean.
The second is to keep the trees free from superfluous branches, by a frequent
use of the pruning-hook, and the earth always loose about their roots. The
third is to defend the trees from insects, particularly those which by feeding
on the fruit, render it small and knotty, as we frequently find apples and
pears; or by depositing their eggs in the embryo, occasion its falling off
before it comes to maturity, as is observable in the various kinds of plums.
But the most of our farmers go on in the path traced out by their ancestors,
and are generally averse to making experiments, the result of which is
uncertain, or to adopting new modes of husbandry, the advantages of which, are
in the smallest degree problematical. There are few cultivators among us who
theorize and still fewer who read.'

It has often been complained that grain, flax, and esculent vegetables,
degenerate. This may be ascribed to the seed not being changed, but sown
successively, on the same soil, or in the same neighborhood, for too long a
time. The Siberian wheat, for several years, produced good crops; but becoming
at length naturalized to the climate, it shared the fate of the common kind of
wheat, and disappointed the expectations of the farmer. Were the seed renewed
every five or six years, by importations from Siberia, it might be cultivated
to advantage. It must be observed that the Siberian wheat which was sown in
New Hampshire, about twelve years ago, was brought hither from England, where
it had been sown for several preceding years. Whether an intermediate stage is
favorable to the transplantation of seed from north to south, and the success
of its cultivation, may be worthy of inquiry. With respect to plants, which
require the whole season to grow in, it is observed that the removal of them
from south to north ought to be by short stages; in which case they accommodate
themselves, by insensible degrees, to the temperature and length of the
vegetating term, and frequently acquire as good a degree of perfection in
foreign climes, as in their native soil. Such are the resources of nature!

Agriculture is, and always will be, the chief business of the people of
New Hampshire, if they attend to their true interest. Every tree which is cut
down in the forest, opens to the sun a new spot of earth, which, with
cultivation, will produce food for man and beast. It is impossible to conceive
what quantities may be produced of beef, pork, mutton, poultry, wheat, rye,
Indian corn, barley, pulse, butter and cheese, articles which will always find
a market. Flax and hemp may also be cultivated to great advantage, especially
on the intervale lands of the large rivers. The barley of New England is much
esteemed in the middle States, and the demand for it is so great, as to
encourage its cultivation. It is, besides, a kind of grain which is not liable
to blast. Hops will grow on almost any soil; and the labor attending them is so
inconsiderable, that there can be no excuse for neglecting the universal
cultivation of them. The consumption of them, and consequently the demand for
them as an article of commerce, is continually increasing.

The first neat cattle imported from Europe into New Hampshire, were sent by
Captain John Mason and his associates, about the year 1633, to stock their
plantations, and to be employed in drawing lumber. These cattle were of a large
breed, and a yellow color, procured from Denmark. Whilst the business of
getting lumber was the chief employment of the people, the breeding of large
cattle was more attended to than it is now. Calves were allowed to run with the
cows, and suck at their pleasure. Men were ambitious to be distinguished by the
size and strength of their oxen. Bets were frequently laid on the exertions of
their strength, and the prize was contended ^or as earnestly as the laurel at
the Olympic games. This ardor is not yet wholly extinguished in some places;
but, as husbandry has gained ground, less attention is paid to the strength,
and more to the fatness of cattle for the market, and calves are deprived of
part of their natural food, for the advantage of butter and cheese.

As the country becomes more and more cleared, pasture for cattle increases,
and the number is continually multiplied. From the upper parts of
New Hampshire, great herds of fat cattle are driven to the Boston market;
whence the beef is exported fresh to Nova Scotia, and salted to the West and
East Indies.

At what time and by whom the horse was first imported does not appear. No
particular care is taken by the people in general, to improve the breed of this
majestic and useful animal, and bring it to that perfection of which it is
capable. The raising of colts, i^ not accounted a profitable part of husbandry,
as the horse is but little used for draught, and his flesh is of no value. The
proportion of horses to neat cattle, is not more than one to twenty. Few live
and die on the plantations where they are bred; some are exported to the
West India islands; but the most are continually shifted from one owner to
another, by means of a set of contemptible wretches called horse-jockies.

Asses have been lately introduced into the country; the raising of mules
deserves encouragement, as the exportation of them to the West Indies, is more
profitable than that of horses, and they may be used to advantage in traveling
or carrying burdens in the rough and mountainous parts of our wilderness.

Sheep, goats and swine, were at first sent over from England, by the
associates of Laconia Sheep have greatly multiplied, and are accounted the most
profitable stock which can be raised on a farm. The breed might be renewed and
improved by importing from Barbary* the mufflon, which is said to be the paren^
stock of the European, and consequently of the American sheep. Goa^^ are not
much propagated, chiefly because it is difficult to confine them in pastures.
Swine are very prolific, and scarcely a family is without them. During the
summer, they are either fed on the waste of the dairy and kitchen, or ringed
and turned into fields of clover; or permitted to run at large in the woods,
where they pick up nuts and acorns, or grub the roots of fern; but after
harvest they are shut up, and fatted on Indian corn. The pork of New England is
not inferior to any in the world.

Domestic poultry of all kinds, is raised in great plenty and perfection in
New Hampshire. In some of the lower towns they have a large breed of dunghill
fowls, which were imported from England about twenty years past; but this breed
is permitted to mix with the common sort, by which means it will, in time,
degenerate. The stock of all domestic animals, ought frequently to be changed,
if we would preserve them unimpaired, or restore them to their original
perfection.

CHAP. X. Native Animals.
AS the animals of this part of America have not been accurately examined by
naturalists, neither a complete description, nor even a perfect catalogue, can
be expected. The greater part are known by vernacular names, and some of these
are adopted from the Indians; but so variously, and often erroneously, are
these names applied, that the information derived from them, is to be received
with caution. Formal descriptions, even those which are diffuse, sometimes
prove defective, from the want of a knowledge of those essential characters by
which the arrangement of animals is made. The following catalogue, arranged in
the order of Linnaeus, is intended to give a general idea of this branch of our
natural history. Some remarks are added, which may elucidate the qualities of
some of the animals, together with the manner of rendering them subservient to
the purposes of human life, or of guarding ourselves against the noxious
dispositions with which some of them are endowed. Those animals which have not
been particularly examined, or in which the characters do not appear to accord
with the Linnaean description, are distinguished by the note (...) of
interrogation. Specific names are given to such as evidently appeared to be new
species, and these names, by the express desire of Dr. ^word ^* are printed in
italic capitals.


QUADRUPEDES.
SEAL ( phoca vitulina.)

WOLF ( canis lupus.) This animal is very common, and very noxious. A bounty of
twenty dollars is, by law, paid for his head, and if it were doubled, the breed
of sheep would be augmented sufficiently to make up the difference. He is
frequently taken in log traps, and, to decoy him, the hunters scent the ground
with a drug, of which they affect to make a secret. Josselyn tells of another
method of destroying wolves by binding four mackarel hooks with thread, and
wrapping some wool about them, and then dipping them in melted tallow till a
ball be formed as big as an egg. These balls are scattered by a dead carcass on
which the wolf has once preyed, and when he returns the next night, the first
thing he ventures upon will be these balls of fat. He also speaks of two
species of wolves, one with a round balled foot, the other with a flat foot;
and of a mongrel between the wolf and the fox, which the Indians used as dogs.

RED FOX ( canis alopex?)

GRAY FOX ( canis --.)

Foxes are generally found in those woods which are not remote from houses.
They are commonly taken in steel traps, but are sometimes dug out of their
burrows. Formerly the head of a cod was used as a bait for the fox. It was laid
in considerable quantities on the shady side of a fence, in a moon light night;
and the gunner placed himself in ambush to shoot the fox at his approach. The
silver gray and cross streaked fox skins, are accounted the most valuable, but
the common red fox skin is in much demand.

WILD CAT ( felix lynx.) Of this species, the mountain cat is the largest; but
the black cat has the most valuable skin. Some authors have pretended, that the
wild cats of America, are a degenerate breed of the European cat imported
hither. This opinion does not coincide with their own hypothesis, that the
animals of the old world are dwindled in size, and less ferocious since their
transportation to the new. It is certain, however, that neither of these
opinions has any just foundation.

SKUNK ( viverra pulorius.) There is no stronger or more volatile odor in all
nature, than the substance which this animal ejects when pursued or in danger.
The 'diabolical scent,' as Buffon calls it, does not proceed from 'its urine,'
but from a small bag which is attached to its skin, and comes off with it. The
flesh is white and sweet, and is, by some people, relished as food. The fat is
much esteemed as an ointment in pains and swellings of the joints. Goldsmith
says, that this animal is often kept tame about the houses of the planters in
America, and in the next paragraph, that it steals into farm yards, and kills
poultry. The truth of this latter assertion is often experienced; but no
American is fond of such company. The skunk sometimes burrows under our barns,
but is always an unwelcome intruder.

OTTER ( mustela lutra?) Some of these have been tamed, and taught to catch
fish for their owners.

MARTIN ( mustela --.) This animal keeps itself remote from human habitations.
Its skin is much valued, that of the darkest shade is prefered.

WEASEL ( mustela martes?)

ERMINE ( mustela ^^^nin^a.) This beautiful little animal is red, like a fox in
summer, and white in winter. It is distiuguished from the common weasel by the
tip of its tail, which is always black. It is not common, but some of this
species have been found in New Hampshire.

BEAR ( ursus arctos.) Buffon speaks of two species of bears, the brown and the
black, and he denies that the latter is carnivorous. The black bear only is
known in this part of America, and he is one of the most noxious animals of our
forest. In the months of August and September, he makes great havoc in the
fields of Indian corn, in the new settlements. He places himself between two
row^ of corn, and with his paws breaks down the stalks of four contiguous
hills, bending them toward the center of the space, that the (...) may lie near
to each other, and then devours them. Passing in this manner through a field,
he destroys the corn in great quantities. To prevent this, the fields are
sometimes guarded, by night; but this method is too tedious to be constant.
Another is, to place a loaded gun, and stretch a line, connected with the
trigger, across the field, so that the bear in his walk, by pressing against
the line, may draw the trigger, and kill himself. This practice has sometimes
been attended with success; but there is danger that people, who are not
apprized of the design, may, in passing through a field, kill or wound
themselves; and in fact this mode of setting guns, has, in some instances,
proved fatal. Another way of taking the bear, is by setting log traps; but this
is uncertain. A good dog is the safest defense, if he could be induced to
remain by night in the field. In the autumn of some years, the bears come down
into the old settlements, and they have been seen in the maritime towns; but
now, their appearance in these places, is extremely rare. They are very fond of
sweet apples, and will sometimes devour young swine, but very seldom attack
mankind. An affecting instance of a child falling a prey to one of them,
happened at Moultonborough, in the month of August, 1784. A boy of eight years
old, son of a Mr. Leach, was sent to a pasture, toward the close of the day, to
put out a horse, and bring home the cows. His father being in a neighboring
field, heard a cry of distress, and running to the fence, saw his child lying
on the ground, and a bear standing by him. He seized a stake, and crept along,
with a view to get between the bear and the child. The bear took the child by
the throat, and drew him into the bushes. The father pursued till he came up,
and aiming a stroke at the bear, the stake broke in his hand; and the bear,
leaving his prey, turned upon the parent, who, in the anguish of his soul, was
obliged to retreat, and call for help. Before any sufficient help could be
obtained, the evening was so far advanced, that a search was impracticable. The
night was passed by the family in the utmost distress. The neighbors
assembled, and at break of day, renewed the pursuit. The child's hat, and the
bridle, which he had dropped, were found, and they tracked his blood about
forty rods, when they discovered the mangled corpse. The throat was torn, and
one thigh devoured. Whilst they were standing round the body, the bear rose
from behind a log. Three guns were fired at the same instant, which dispatched
him; and a fire was immediately kindled, i^ which he was consumed. This was a
male bear, of about three years old.

I have met with but one other instance of the same kind; it happened in the
year 1731, at a new plantation on Suncoock river. A man being at work in a
meadow, his son, of about eight years old, was sent to call him home to dinner.
On their return, there being (...) paths through the woods, the son going
first, took one, and the father the other. At dinner the child was missing, and
after waiting some time, the father went to seek him, in the path which it was
supposed he had taken. To his inexpressible surprise, a bear started up from
among the bushes, with the bleeding corpse between his teeth.

The RACOON ( ursus lotor) lives in hollow trees, and sometimes feeds on corn
in the fields. Its flesh is excellent food. Its fur is valued next to the
beaver for hats. Buffon says that the racoon is found only in the southern
countries of America. It is certainly found in New Hampshire, and in the
eastern division of Massachusetts.

The WOLVERINE ( ursus luscus) is a mischievous animal. He sits on the bough of
a tree, near the paths of the deer and the moose, and jumps on their back, to
which he clings by his claws till he has torn a hole in their neck and killed
them. He enters the cabins of (...) Indians in their absence, and plunders them
of eatables. Gyles, in his memoirs, tells a story of a wolverine, which, in one
of these depredations, happened to throw a bag of gunpowder into the fire, by
which means he lost his eyes, and became the sport of the Indians at their
return.

The WOODCHUCK ( ursi vel musteloe species) is a small animal which burrows in
the earth. It is generally fat to a proverb; and its flesh is palatable food.

MOLE ( ^aipa europea.)

SHREW MOUSE ( sorex cristatus.) GROUND MOUSE ( sorex murinus.) FIELD MOUSE (
so^^i ara^^us.)

PORCUPINE ( hystrix dorsata.) This animal is dangerous to dogs, for on seizing
it they are tormented with its quills, which quills are of the size of pigeon's
quills. The Indians dye them of various colors, and work them into various
figures to adorn their ^elts, pouches, mockaseens, and birchen dishes.

HARE ( lepus timidus?)

RABBIT ( lepus cuniculus.)

The BEAVER ( castor siber) is one of the most useful as well as sagacious
animals of our wilderness. It is now become scarce in New Hampshire, but the
vestiges of its labors are very numerous.

The beaver is not only an amphibious animal, but is said to form a connecting
(...) between quadrupeds and fishes. It delights in still water, of which it
must have full (...) undisturbed possession. The depth of the water must be
such as that it must have sufficient room to swim under the ice. The male and
female, with their young of one year old (called by the Indians peoys) form a
family which consist generally of six. These inhabit one cell; but when come to
the age of two years ( paylems) they go off and build for themselves.

They sometimes choose a natural pond for the scene of their habitation and
amusement; in which case they dig a hole in the earth, near the edge of the
pond, and line it with sticks; to this they have a subterraneous passage from
the water. Sometimes they reside on the coves or eddies of great rivers, where
the water is still; but it is more usual for them to construct a dam, which by
stopping the course of a stream, may overflow a piece of ground, and form a
pond to their liking. In the choice of a spot for a dam they have sagacity to
judge whether it will confine and raise the water to answer their purpose. They
take advantage of wind-fallen trees, of long points of land, of small islands,
rocks and shoals; and they v^ry the shape of their dam according to these
circumstances, making it either circular, direct or angular; and the best human
artist could neither mend its position or figure, nor add to its stability. It
is constructed entirely of sticks and earth; the sticks are for the most part
placed up and down the stream, seldom across, but always closely interwoven and
cemented by mud, brought on their tails, which being broad and flat, answer the
purpose of a trowel as their teeth do that of a saw. They have four incisive
teeth, two in the forepart of the upper, and two of the under jaw, sharp and
curved like a carpenter's gouge; with these they cut off trees and bushes of
the softest wood, white maple, white birch, alder, poplar and willow; with
these kinds of wood they construct their dams, and of these they always have a
sufficiency sunk under the water to serve them for food in the winter.

With respect to the size of the trees which they fell, and some other
circumstances relative to their labors and habits, many mavelous stories
have been published. La Hontan says they will cut off a tree as big as a
hogshead. Buffon, and after him Raynal (...) Goldsmith, speak of their
sharpening stakes, and driving them into the ground. Others have asserted
things much more incredible. The beaver is in reality a sagacious, laborious
and patient animal, and makes great use of his teeth in felling many small
trees, and cutting them into pieces convenient for his use; but he has no
instrument with which to drive them into the ground. The size of the trees
which he generally chooses, is from one to ten inches in diameter; these are
young trees, tender and sweet for food. Necessity sometimes obliges a number of
them jointly to attack a tree of larger size. The largest of which I have any
certain information is from fifteen to eighteen inches in diameter; but this is
rare, and the felling of such a tree must require much labor, since those of
but one inch have eight or ten strokes, distinctly marked, and a very good kerf
is allowed.

Some accounts mention several hundred beavers assembling and holding a council
previously to beginning a dam; but I am assured that a single family, and even
a single beaver, when he has left his partners, will go regularly to work
either in building or repairing a dam as there may be occasion. I have myself
taken sticks newly cut, from a dam, where a solitary beaver was at work.
Josselyn tells of a beaver which was domesticated at Boston, and ran freely
about the streets, retiring at night to the house of his owner.

The beaver's dam is from six to ten feet thick at the bottom, according to the
breadth of the stream or the quantity of water. It slopes but little on the
lower, and much on the upper side, and is from two to four feet wide at the
top. It is always of such height as will confine a sufficiency of water for
their purpose. After it is constructed, they place sods of wild grass upon it,
so that in the course of a year it becomes swarded over like a portion of
meadow. Those parts which are in the shoalest water, near the banks, are so
consolidated, that after the middle of the dam is broken, these will remain
like natural points of firm earth. On the top of the dam, in the middle, they
always leave a sluice or passage of eighteen inches wide, and as many deep; and
when the stream is large, they leave two or three, which the hunters call
sliding-places. In these they divert themselves by sliding or swimming down the
stream. It is not inconvenient for this animal to be long under water; nor is
he wet when he leaves it to take the land; his coat is so well oiled that no
water adheres to it.

When the dam is built, the house is begun. It is in the form of a hay cock,
and of a size proportioned to the number of the family. The walls are two or
three feet thick at the bottom, and are formed of the same material^ as the
dam. The door is not only under water, but below, where the water freezes. The
lower story is about two feet high, and a floor of sticks, covered with mud,
composes the second story. At the same distance a third story is formed, and
then the roof is raised in an arched form. It is smooth on the inside, and
above the water, always dry and clean. Through each floor there is a
communication and the upper floor is always above the level of the water when
at the highest. The outside of the house is rough but ^ight; and if it ever
decays, it is repaired. When the hunters find the houses out of repair, they
conclude that the beavers have forsaken the pond.

In the winter it is necessary for them to keep one or more breathing holes in
the ice constantly open, near the houses; for which purpose they break the ice
every night. It is confidently asserted by the hunters, that all their work is
done by night, and that they are never seen in the day unless it be cloudy and
dark. During the winter, they live on the wood which they have previously sunk
under the water, and in the summer they are employed in repairing their houses
and dams, or gathering their food in the neighboring woods, to which they
travel in narrow, beaten paths.

In these paths, or in the water where the path ends, or in the sliding places
of the dam, the hunter sets his steel spring trap, which is previously scented
with beavers oil. Sometimes he raises a heap of mud, or peels little sticks,
and having scented them, sets them up at the edge of the pond, placing the trap
under water, near the mud or sticks. The trap is secured by a chain, or the
beaver would draw it after him. He often escapes with the loss of a foot.
Sometimes he is shot in the water, or on the land. When a beaver discovers an
enemy, he strikes the water with his tail; the noise alarms the whole family,
and they are in a moment under water. The best fur is (...) which is taken in
February and March; in the summer, their fur is not good. The way of preserving
the skins, is by salting and packing them in a close bundle, with the flesh
sides together.

One valuable purpose which the beaver serves, is not mentioned, by any of the
writers of natural history, which I have had opportunity to consult; but I
shall give it, in the words of a friend, to whom I am indebted for several
communications respecting the original and cultivated state of the country. MS.
letter of Joseph Peirc^, Esquire.
The beavers, in building their dams, have no other design than that of making
a habitation agreeable to the natural bias, with which they are formed; but, I
conceive, that Being, by whom the universe is so wisely governed, has a farther
design in this little animal, who with unwearied labor builds a dam, which
stops the water from pursuing its natural course, and makes it spread over a
tract of land from five to five hundred acres in extent; and most commonly the
worst of land, a mere alder swamp or bog, and the larger the tract, the more
likely is it to be the worse. By means of the waters continuing on this tract,
more than half the year, for many years together, every thing which grew upon
it is drowned; all trees, bushes and shrubs are killed. In a course of time,
the leaves, bark, rotten wood and other manure, which is washed down, by the
rains, from the adjacent high lands, to a great extent, spread over this pond,
and subside to the bottom, making it smooth and level.

It is now that the hunter, ferreting the innocent beaver, is also made
subservient to the great design of Providence; which is, by opening the dam,
and destroying the beaver, so that it is not repaired. Of consequence, the
water is drained off, and the whole tract, which before was the bottom of a
pond, is covered with wild grass, which grows as high as a man's shoulders, and
very thick. These meadows doubtless serve to feed great numbers of moose and
deer, and are of still greater use to new settlers, who find a mowing field
already cleared to their hands; and though the hay is not equally as good as
English, yet it not only keeps their cattle alive, but in tolerable order; and
without these natural meadows, many settlements could not possibly have been
made, at the time they were made. Such as are not fenced, afford the cattle
good pastures in the beginning of the year, as the grass shoots very early. It
is observed that those meadows which are mowed constantly, produce less at
every mowing; but will always hold out, where settlers are industrious, till
they have cleared ground enough to raise English hay. I have more than two
hundred acres in one body, made by several dams, across one brook, at various
distances from each other.

The MUSQUASH ( castor zibethious) builds a cabin of sticks and mud in a
shallow pond. He is not so shy of man as the beaver; but is frequently found in
the cultivated parts of the country. The oil-bag of the musquash, wrapped in
cotton, affords a perfume, grateful to those who are fond of musk.

The MINK ( --) is an amphibious animal, and burrows in the earth by the side
of rivers and ponds. Its fur is more valuable than the musquash.

The BLACK RAT ( mus --) is a native, but it retires back into the country as
the gray rat, which is imported in vessels from abroad, advances. The town of
Hampton, though adjoining the sea, and one of the earliest settlements in
New Hampshire, had no gray rats till the year 1764, when an English mast ship
was wrecked on the beech. This species of rat has advanced about thirty miles
into the country, and farther, along the great roads. To prevent the entrance
of this noxious animal into corn houses, the sills are laid on short posts,
each of which is capped with a broad flat stone, over which the animal cannot
pass.

Of SQUIRRELS we have four species. The BLACK ( sciurus niger) and the GRAY (
sciurus cinereus) though distinguished by Linnaeus, differ here only in color;
the former is very rare, the latter very common. This is the largest species of
squirrels. It builds its nest in the crotch of a tree, generally a white oak,
and there breeds and nourishes its young. I^ feeds on acorns and nuts, and lays
up its winter food in the hollow parts of old trees.

The RED SQUIRREL ( sciurus flavus?) the next in size, and its habits are
nearly the same.

The STRIPED SQUIRREL ( sciurus striatus) is smaller. It provides its winter
food from the cornfields, and deposits it in holes in the earth, after having
deprived each kernel of its germe, that it may not sprout.

The FLYING SQUIRREL ( sciurus volans) is the least and most beautiful. Its fur
is the most fine and delicate of any quadruped. It feeds on the buds and seeds
of vegetables.

The MOOSE ( cervus tarandus?) is the largest animal of our forest. His
palmated horns extend from four to six feet in breadth, and are from thirty to
fifty pounds in weight. He has hair on his neck resembling the mane of a horse.
His hoof is cloven, and when he trots, the clattering of it is heard at a great
distance. His course through the woods is straight, to a proverb. He feeds on
the wild grass of the meadows* or on the leaves and bark of a species of the
maple, which is called moose-wood. When vexed by the flies in summer, he takes
to the water, where he feeds on the wild oats or pond lilies. His flesh is of a
coarser grain than beef, but sweet and tender. His lip, which is broad and
cartilaginous, is accounted by the Indians and by our own huntsmen a dainty,
and his tongue is 'a dish for a saga^^o^e.' The hide is thick and firm, and is
made into soft and durable leather. When the Indians kill a moose or a deer,
they cut off the hoof and draw out the sinews, of which they make the strongest
cords.

The DEER ( cervus dama?) was formerly found in very great plenty; but having
been wantonly destroyed at improper seasons of the year, is now become scarce.
The best time to hunt this animal for the facility of taking it, is in the
winter, when there is a deep snow with a crust on its surface; but its skin i^
most valuable when killed in the warm months.

Hunting is an employment followed by some people, who prefer rambling, to a
life of settled industry. The moose and the deer are tracked and pursued by
dogs; or the huntsman lies in wait for them, at certain defiles, where they are
known to pass, or near waters in which they bathe. The bear is sometimes
unkennelled when retired to his den; or when ranging, if he take to a tree, he
is a fair mark.

A new mode of driving away the wolf has been attempted with success. The town
of Amherst was a few years ago much infested with this noxious intruder. On a
day appointed, the inhabitants, by general consent took their arms, and
surrounded a large swamp which they penetrated in every direction, as far as it
was practicable; and kept up an incessant firing of guns and beating of drums
through the day. In the following night the wolves quitted the swamp with a
dismal howling, and have never since done any mischief in that town.

The only mamillary biped which we have, is the BAT ( vespertilio murinus)
which forms the connecting link between the beasts and the birds.

Of BIRDS we have a great variety. The following catalogue is the most full,
which has been collected, but cannot boast of perfection.

BALD EAGLE, Falco leucocephalus. BROWN EAGLE, Falco fulvus. LARGE BROWN HAWK,
Falco hudsonius? HEN HAWK, Falco sparverius? PIGEON HAWK, Falco columbarius.
WHITE OWL, Strix nyctea. SPECKLED OWL, Strix aluco. BARN OWL, Strix passerina.
BIRD HAWK, Lanius canadensis. KING BIRD, Lanius tyrannus? GROW, Corvus corax.
BLUE JAY, Corvus ^ristatus. HANG BIRD, Oriolus icterus. RED WINGED BLACK BIRD,
Oriolus phoeniceus. GOLDEN ROBIN OR GOLD FINCH, Oriolus baltimore? CROW BLACK
BIRD, Gracula quiscula. CUCKOO, Cuculus americanus? GREAT RED CRESTED WOOD
PECKER, Picus pileatus? SWALLOW WOODPECKER, Picus hir^^den^^^^s. RED HEAD
WOODPECKER. Picus erythroceph^^^^. WHITE BACK WOODPECKER, Picus auratus.
CAROLINA WOODPECKER, Picus carolinus. WOOLY BACK WOODPECKER, Picus pubescens.
WHITE TAIL WOODPECKER, Picus villosus? SPECKLED WOODPECKER, Picus maculosus.
Since the printing of the note page 147, I find that the request of Dr. CUTLER,
respecting the new specific names was, that they should be distinguished by a
character different from the others. It was at first thought that Italic
capitals would be as proper a distinction as any other; but this is found, on
further inquiry, to be contrary to the practice of that class of authors. A
smaller type is therefore used by way of distinction.
NUT HATCH, Silla canadensis. KINGFISHER, Alcedo alcyon. CREEPER, Certhia
pinus? HUMMING BIRD, Trochilus colubris. SWAN, Anas cygnus.
The SWAN is the largest of the aquatic tribe which is seen in this country.
One of them has been known to weigh 36 lb. and to be six feet in length from
the bill to the feet, when stretched. Naturalists have different opinions
respecting the music of the swan. The tame swan of England is said to be
silent; and Dr. Goldsmith seems to think the accounts of the music of the wild
swan fabulous. What is deemed fabulous in Europe, is often realized in America.
It is certain that our swan is heard to make a sound resembling that of a
trumpet, both when in the water and on the wing.

WHITE HEAD COOT, Anas spectabilis. BROWN COOT, Anas fusca. BLACK DUCK, Anas
nigra. WHITE GOOSE, Anas crythropus. BLUISH GOOSE, Anas cae^ulescens. BRANT or
BRENT, Anas bernicla. WILD or BLACK GOOSE, Anas canadensis.
This is the bird which Dr. HILL calls the Swan goose. It is a bird of passage,
and gregarious; the form of the phalanx, when on the wing, is that of a wedge.
By the mixture of this with the common goose, a mongrel breed is produced,
which is more valuable than either of them singly. The wild goose, though it
migrates from one part of the continent to the other yet has its local
attachments. One of them, which was caught in the spring, and kept in a farm
yard with a flock of domestic geese, when the time of its migration arrived,
took the first opportunity to join a flock in their passage to the southward;
but* at the return of spring, came back and alighted in the same yard with four
young ones, which she had produced in her absence.

The BRANT is rare in New Hampshire* but in the bay of Massachusetts, is found
in great abundance.

SEA DUCK, Anas mollissima. DIPPER. Anas al^eola. OLDWIFE, Anas strepera?
QUINDAR, Anas bu^^phala? WHISTLER, Anas clangula? WIDGEON, Anas penelope?
MALLARD, or SPRIGTAILED DUCK, Anas acuta. LORD and LADY, or SEA PIGEON, Anas
histrionica? BLUE WINGED TEAL, Anas discors? GREEN WINGED TEAL, Anas --. GRAY
WOOD DUCK, Anas sponsa. WOOD DUCK, Anas arborea. CREAM COLORED SHELLDRAKE,
Mergus merganser? RED BELLIED SHELLDRAKE, Mergus serrator? PYED SHELLDRAKE,
Mergus castor? PENGUIN, Alea impennis. WATER HEN, or WATER WITCH, Alea artica?
PELICAN, Pelicanus on^crotalus occidentalis.
The Pelican migrates from its native country, the Missisippi, far to the
northward. It has been seen in New Hampshire. The American Pelican is not a
distinct species from the Pelican of Asia and Africa but, a variety only.

SHAG, Pelecanus graculus? GANNET, Pelecanus cassanus? LOON, Colymbus immer.
WHITE GULL, Larus canus. GRAY GULL, Larus fuscus? MACKEREL GULL, Larus
ridibundus. TEE-ARR, or FISHING GULL, Sterna minuta. CRANE, Ardea canadensis.
STORK, Ardea ciconia. BLUE HERON, Ardea coerulea. SKOUK, Ardea virescens. WHITE
HERON, Ardea alba. WOODCOCK, Scolopax rustica. WOOD SNIPE, Scolopax fedoa. GRAY
CURLEW, Scolopax totanus. LARGE SPECKLED CURLEW, Scolopax lapponica. HUMILITY,
Tringa interpres? MARSH BIRD, Tringa morinella? ROCK BIRD, Tringa ^aculata.
OX-EYE, Tringa fulicaria? BEACH-BIRD, Tringa arenaria. BLACK BREASTED PLOVER,
Charadrius hiaticula. KILDEE, Charadrius vociferus? PYED PLOVER, Charadrius
apricarius. LARGE SPOTTED PLOVER, Charadrius maculatus. PEEP, Rallus carolinus.
WILD TURKEY, Meleagris gallopavo.
WILD TURKIES were formerly very numerous. In winter they frequented the sea
shore, for the sake of picking small fishes and marine insects, which the tide
leaves on the flats. Josselyn, who resided eight years in the Province of
Maine, and wrote in 1672, says, that he had eaten part of one, which, when
prepared for the spit, weighed thirty pounds; and Wood, who visited the country
earlier, and wrote in 1639, speaks of some which weighed forty pounds. They are
now retired to the inland mountainous country. Dr. Goldsmith doubts whether any
of this breed have been tamed in America. They certainly have been tamed; but
they are degenerated in size by their domestication, scarcely any being more
than half so heavy as those above mentioned. The turkey is a rambling bird, and
runs with great speed on the ground. The tame flocks frequently wander, and
cannot be fatted till the snow prevents their excursions.

GROWSE, Tetrao --.
The GROWSE is rarely seen, as there are no dry heaths in New Hampshire, but on
the tops of the largest mountains, which are seldom visited by man. This bird
has a red head, is larger than the partridge, and its flesh, though red and
dry, has a high flavor, and is very tender.

(...) (...) virginianus. PARTRIDGE, Te^r^o marilandious.
The PARTRIDGE is very common in our woods. Some of our epicurean gentry, have
begun to fear, that its race will be too soon extinct; but there is no danger.
This bird is very prolific; it is common to find twenty of its eggs in a nest;
and it has several coveys in a season. QUAILS are equally prolific. In the
southern and middle States, the quail is called a partridge, and the partridge
a pheasant. The true pheasant is not a native of our wilderness. The late
Governor Wentworth brought several pairs of pheasants from England, and let
them fly in his woods, at Wolfborough; but they have not since been seen.

WILD PIGEON, Columba migratoria.
Wild PIGEONS come in the spring, from the southward, in great flocks, and
breed in our woods, during the summer months. They choose the thickest parts of
the forest, for the situation of their nests. Josselyn says they join nest to
nest, and tree to tree, by their nests, many miles together, on the pine trees.
In the journal of Richard Hazzen, who surveyed the Province line, in 1741,
there is this remark; for three miles together, the pigeons nests were so
thick, that five hundred might have been told on the beech trees at one time;
and could they have been counted on the hemlocks, as well, I doubt not but five
thousand, at one turn round. This was on the western side of Connecticut river,
and eastward of Deerfield river. Since the clearing of the woods, the number of
pigeons is diminished.

TURTLE DOVE, Columba carolinensis. SKY LARK, Alauda alpestris. MARSH LARK,
Alauda magna. ROBIN, Turdus migratorius. THRUSH, Turdus rufus. THRASHER, or
MOCKBIRD, Turdus orphcus? CHERRY BIRD, Ampelis garrulus. CROSSBILL, Loxia
curvirostra?
The CROSS BILL is a bird rather larger than the sparrow; it is common in the
western and northern parts of the State. The upper and lower parts of its beak
cross each other like a pair of shears, by which means it cuts off the stalks
of wheat and rye, and then lays the side of its head to the ground to pick the
kernels. The female is of a shaded olive color. The male is of the same, but
tinged with red.

SNOW BIRD, Emberiza hyemalis?
The SNOW BIRD is smaller than a sparrow, and appears in little flocks, in the
winter, enlivening the gloom of that dreary season. They perch on the tops of
the spires of dead grass, above the snow, or on spots of bare ground, or on the
bushes and trees. They are seldom molested, as one of them is scarcely a
mouthful; but they have the same delicate taste as the quail. Besides the snow
bird, the crow, the blue jay, the wood pecker and the partridge, have a degree
of hardiness, equal to the severity of our winters, and are then seen flying;
all others avoid it, by seeking a timely retreat.

BOBLINCOLN, Emberiza oryzivora. RED LINNET, Tanagra rubra. CHEEWEEH, Fringilla
erythrophthalma? YELLOW BIRD, Fringilla tristis? WINTER SPARROW, Fringilla
grisea. CHIPPING BIRD, Fringilla? SPRING BIRD, Fringilla. Several species of
SPARROWS, Fringilla. CRESTED FLYCATCHER, Muscicapa crinita. HEDGE BIRD,
Muscicapa canadensis. CAT BIRD, Muscicapa carolinensis. BROWN FLYCATCHER,
Muscicapa fusca. YELLOW CROWN, Muscicapa flava. GRAPE BIRD, Motacilla
icterocephala. BLUE BIRD, Motacilla sialis. CRESTED WREN, Motacilla regulus.
COMMON WREN, Motacilla trochilus. CRESTED TITMOUSE, Parus bicolor. BLUE
TITMOUSE, Parus americanus. TOM TEET, Parus atricapillus. YELLOW RUMPED TOM
TEET, Parus virginianus. LITTLE HANG-BIRD, Parus pendulinus? BANK SWALLOW,
Hirundo riparia. BLACK MARTIN, Hirundo purpurea. BARN SWALLOW, Hirundo subis.
The SWALLOW appears in April, and disappears in August. It was formerly
supposed to migrate, but the evidences of its retiring to the water, or marshy
ground, and there remaining torpid, during the winter, are so many, that this
opinion is now generally received.

CHIMNEY SWALLOW, Hirundo pelasgia. WHIP-POOR-WILL, Caprimulgus europoeus. B.
NIGHT HAWK, Caprimulgus americanus.
AMPHIBIOUS REPTILES.
MUD TURTLE, Testudo denticulata. SPECKLED TURTLE, Testudo carolina? TOAD, Rana
bufo? POND FROG, Rana occellata. GREEN FOUNTAIN FROG, Rana ^s^ulanta. S^^CKLED
FROG, Rana maculata. TREE FROG, Rana arborea. BULL FROG, Rana boans. SWI^T,
Lacerta sus^ia^a? BROWN LIZARD, Lacerta punc^^ta.
AMPHIBIOUS SERPENTS.
RATTLE SNAKE, Crotalus ho^^^^us.
The RATTE SNAKE is the most venomous of all the serpent tribe, in this part of
America; but its motion is so slow, and the sound which it gives by rattling
its tail, before it darts on its prey, is so distinguishable from the very few
other noises which are heard in the woods, that it is easily avoided. The
rattle snake of New Hampshire is of a darker color, and less variegated than
that which is found about the blue hills, in Suffolk county, Massachusetts.
There are certain boundaries, beyond which, to the northward, none have been
seen in New Hampshire. These are on the western side of the country, Sugar
river, a branch of the Connecticut, and Sawyer's river, a branch of the Saco.
They have been very common about the shores, and on the islands of Winipiseogee
lake; but as the country is settled, the number decreases: In the autumn they
retire to their dens, in the cavities of rocks, which are open to the south;
where they remain till the warmth of the summer sun invites them to bask in its
beams. During their torpid state, some persons make a practice of drawing them
from their dens, with hooks, and destroying them. In the hottest weather, they
resort to meadows, and other watery places. Some years ago, in a dry summer, a
number of people from Rochester, went to a meadow in the woods with an
intention to mow it, but found it so full of rattle snakes, that they set fire
to the grass and quitted the place. The following singular fact deserves to be
remembered. A dog, belonging to a Mr. Wormwood, of Durham, being bitten by a
rattlesnake, immediately went in search of a soft loamy spot of earth, in which
he scratched a hole and buried himself all over, excepting his head. Here he
remained, refusing all nourishment, till the earth had extracted the venom.
This fact was certified to me by John Smith, Esquire. of Durham, lately deceased.

SMALL BROWN ADDER, Coluber striatulus. HOUSE ADDER, Coluber punctatis? WATER
ADDER, Coluber fasciatus. BROWN SNAKE, Coluber sipedon. GREEN SNAKE, Coluber
saurita? BLACK SNAKE, Coluber constrictor. WHITE NECK BLACK SNAKE, Coluber
constrictor. STRIPED SNAKE, Anguis eryx?
AMPHIBIOUS FISHES.
LAMPREY, Petromyzon fluviatalis?
The LAMPREY frequents most of our rivers, especially where the passage is not
interrupted by dams. In Merrimack, they ascend to the waters of Pemigewasset,
and are found in plenty as far as Plymouth. That part which is below the air
holes, is salted and dried for food. After the spawning season is over, and the
young fry have gone down to the sea, the old fish attach themselves to the
roots and limbs of trees, which have fallen or run into the water, and there
perish. A mortification begins at the tail, and proceeds upward to the vital
part. Fish of this kind have been found at Plymouth, in different stages of
putrefaction.

DOG FISH, Squalus catulus. SHARK, Squalus carcharias? STURGEON, A^ipens^^
stu^io. LUMPFISH, (...) lumpus.
FISHES.
EEL, Muroena anguilla. CONGER EEL, Muroena conger. CAT FISH, Anarhichas lupus.
SNAKE FISH, Ophidium imberbe. HADDOCK, Gadus oeglesinus. COD, Gadus morhua.
The COD comes into the river Pascataqua, in the spring and fall, and is taken
at sea, in all months of the year. The best are caught in the winter. The next
in quality are taken in the spring and beginning of summer; the third kind in
the latter end of summer and beginning of antumn.

FROST FISH, Gadus luscus. POLLACK, Gadus pollachius. SMALL POLLACK, Gadus
virens. HAKE, Gadus molva.
The HADDOCK, HAKE and POLLACK are taken at sea, in the spring and summer, and
being dried, are sold under the denomination of scale fish.

SCULPION, Cottus quadricornis. ^LAISE, Pleuronectes platessa. ^LOUNDER,
Pleuronectes flesus. HOLIBUT, Pleuronectes maximus?
The HOLIBUT is the largest fish which is taken for food. When full grown, it
exceeds 500lb, in weight; those of 200lb. are frequently brought to market.

DAB, Pleuro^^^^^s p^pillosus. RED PERCH, Perca fl^^iatalis. WHITE PERCH, Perca
lu^ioperca? WHITING, Perca al^urnus. SEA PERCH, Perca un^ulat^? BASS, Perca
o^^ata.
The BASS was formerly taken in great plenty, in the river Pascataqua; but by
the injudicious use of nets, in the winter, this fishery was almost destroyed.
After the mischief was done, a law was made against it; but the bass have never
since resorted to this river in any great numbers. It is said by some, that
fish which are spawned in rivers, and descend to the sea, return to those
rivers, only where they are spawned. If this principle be true, the breed might
be renewed by bringing some of the bass, which are caught in Merrimack river,
alive, over the land, to the nearest part of the waters of Piscataqua, a
distance not more than twelve miles. This must be done before the spawning
season, and might very easily be accomplished.

SHINER, Perca nobilis? CHUB, Perca philadelphica. BREAM, Perca chrysoptera?
STICKLE BACK, Gasterosteus a^uleatus. SKIP JACK, Gasterosteus salt^trioe.
MACKREL, S^^mber sc^mber. POU^, Silurus felis. SALMON. Salmo salar?
The SALMON formerly frequented the river Pascataqua; but the numerous dams
built across its branches, have obstructed the course of this valuable fish,
and it has, for many years, totally forsaken the river. It still ascends the
Saco, Merrimack and Connecticut; in the two last, to their farthest head; in
the former, a projecting rock, in the great fall, near Sunday's rocks, forms an
insurmountable obstruction; but there is a free course for this fish up the
branch called great Ossapy.

SALMON TROUT, Salmo tructa?
The TROUT is found in all the streams which flow from the mountains, and very
near their summits. The same is observed concerning this fish, in other
countries. Sir W. Hamilton, describing the Appennines, in Italy, says the road
follows the windings of the Garigliano, which is a beautiful clear trout
stream, with a great variety of cascades and cataracts. Philos. transact. Vol.
67. anno. 1786, p. 369.
And Swinburne, in his account of the Pyrenees says trouts are often seen
swimming down the stream; but if disturbed, retire into the bowels of the
mountain, Travels through (...), Vol. ^. p. 3^^.
In some of the bays of Winipiseogee lake and river, very large trouts are
taken with the hook. Those from 6 to 10 lb, are common, and some have been
caught of 20 lb. weight.

SMELT, Salmo epe^l^^^^. PICKEREL, or PI^F, Esox lucius. ATHERINE, Atherina
menidia. HERRING, Clupea harengus. SHAD, Clupea alosa.
The SHAD ascend at the same time with the salmon, and are taken frequently in
the same nets. The salmon fishery is so regulated by law, that three days only,
in the week, are allowed to catch them.

HARD HEAD, Clupea dura. ALEWIFE, Clupea serrata. BRET, Clupea minima. SUCKER,
An cyprinus? MENOW, An cyprinus?
There are many other fresh and salt water fishes, not sufficiently known to be
arranged.

INSECTS.
HORNED BEETLE, Scaraboeus simson. CAROLINA BEETLE, Scaraboeus carolinus.
DUNGHILL BEETLE, Scaraboeus stercorarius. APPLE BEETLE, Scaraboeus horticola?
GOLDEN BEETLE, Scaraboeus lanigerus. Several new species, and others that have
not been arranged.
STAG BEETLE, Lucanns cervus. FLUTED BEETLE, Lucanus interruptus. Dermestes
lardarius. Dermestes typographus.
WATER FLEA, Gyrinus natator. FETID BEETLE, Silpha vespillo. LADY FLY,
Co^^inella 2 -- pus^ulata. Several species. Chrysomela -- many species.
WEEVIL, Bruchus pisi. SNOUTED WEEVIL, Curculio quercus. Many species.
GOAT CHAFFER, Cerambyx cortarius. Many species.
FIREFLY, Lampyris lucida. Several species.
SKIPPER, Elater oculatus. Many species.
GLOWWORM, Cicindela carolina. One or two other species.
CANTHARIDES, Buprestris mariana Two or three other species.
WATER BEETLE, Dytiscus piceus. Dytiscus marginalis. Dytiscus striatus. Several
other species.
BLACK BEETLE, Carabus americanus. Numerous species.
BLOSSOM EATER, Meloe nigra. Staphylinus maxillosus. Forficula. -- Two species.
COCKROACH, Blatta americana, (non indigenus.) GRASSHOPPER, CRICKET, LOCUST,
Grillus. -- Numerous species. MOLE CRICKET, Grillus gryllotalpa. ^ROGHOPPER,
BALM CRICKET, Cicada. -- Many species. Large and small WATER FLY, ^O^T FLY,
Notonecta. -- Several species.
BUG, Cinex. -- Numerous species. LOUSE, on cabbages, Aphis bra^^icoe. LOUSE,
on leaves of trees and plants, Aphis. -- Numerous species. BUG on plants and
trees, Chermes. -- Many species. BUTTERFLY, Papilico, Numerous species, and
several non-descript. NIGHT FLUTTERER, OWL MOTH, Sphinx. Many new species.
MOTH, or MILLER, Phaloena. -- Numerous species.
APPLE MOTH, or CANKER WORM, Phaloena wauaria? DRAGON FLY, ADDER FLY,
Libellula. -- Several species. Hemerobius pectinicor^is. Several species.
OAK APPLE FLY, Cynips. -- Several species. SAW FLY, Tenthredo betuloe. WASP,
HORNET, Vespa. -- Many species. BUMBLE BE, WILD BE, Apis. -- Several species.
AUNT, ^ormica. -- Several species. BLACK FLY, BROWN FLY, Mus^a. -- Numerous
species. HORSE FLY, Tabanus. -- Several species. MOSQUITO, Culex pipi^us.
^T^NGING FLY, Conops calcitrans. SNOW FLEA, Podura nivalis. FATHER LONG LEGS,
Phalangium. Several species.
SPIDER, Aranca. -- Many species. CRAB, LOBSTER, SHRIMP, HERMIT CRAB, SLENDER
CRAB, Cancer. -- Many species. KING CRAB, or HORSE SHOE, Monoculus polyphemus.
Monoculus piscinus. Monoculus pulex. Monoculus quadricornus.

VERMES.
SEA CLAM, Holothuria phantaphus. SQUID, Sepia media. Sepia coligo.
SEA LUNGS, Medusa pilearis. STAR FISH, or FINGER FISH, Asterias. -- Three or
four species, SEA EGG, Echinus. -- Several species. BARNACLE, Lepas anatisera.
HOG CLAM, Mya arenaria. RAZOR SHELL CLAM, Solen ensis. LONG SHELL CLAM, Solen
radiatis. OYSTER, Ostrea --. MUSCLE, Mytilus edulis. COCKLE, Nerita litteralis?
LIMPETS, Patella susca. SAND SHELL CLAM, Sabella granulata. SEA ANE^ONE A^^mon^
marina locomotiva.
There is a tradition, grounded on a passage (...) Josselyn's voyage to New
England, and repeated by Gordon, in his geographical grammar, of a scarlet
muscle, found in the river Pascataqua, in which is a vein, yielding a scarlet
liquor, which affords an indelible stain to line^. Having made inquiry, I have
not heard of this muscle, nor the place (Baker's cove) whe^^ it is said to have
been found. Mr. PECK* who is curious in his inquiries into the natural history
of the country, has assured me, that the sanies of many testaceous marine
animals will give the same tint. There is a species of the buccinum, or white
cockle, which is very commonly found on the shore, and not confined to any
particular place, which being broken, and the sanies taken up with a hair
pencil, will mark linen with a fine and durable crimson. The color is observed
to vary from its original yellow, to green, blue, purple, and crimson, which is
its ultimate change.

Vast beds of muscles appear in the river at low water, which are never used;
but might be taken out, and laid as manure on the adjacent lands.

Of the immense variety of insects, with which both the land and sea abound, it
is impossible to give a particular description. There is an ample range for the
curious naturalist, both on the sea shore, in the open land, and in the thick
woods; but if he engages earnestly in the pursuit, it may be advisable to
defend himself, after the manner of the Indians, by ^^^earing the exposed parts
of his body with the oil of the beaver.

The common BLACK FLY is not a native of the country* but was brought in ships
from the West Indies. The same may be said of the COCHROCH, which has not yet
^^itted the maritime towns. The BUMBLE (...) is undoubtedly a native; but it
has been doubted whether the HONEY BE is, or is (...). That several species of
the honey be ^^re known in Mexico, before the Spanish invasion, appears from
the tribute-rolls, and other historical paintings of that empire; but it is
probable that bees were first brought into these northern parts, from Europe.
Josselyn i^ the only writer who mentions them, and this was his opinion, with
which tradition concurs. They have multiplied exceedingly, and are frequently
found in a wild state, enclosed in the trunks of hollow trees, in all parts of
New Hampshire as far northward as the State is inhabited, which is 44 40 of
north latitude. They chiefly delight in the neighborhood of cultivation, as
they derive their principal food from the labors of man.

The Caterpillars lay their eggs on the branches of apple trees, and, being
hatched by the warmth of the spring, they form clusters, and enclose themselves
in a web, whence they (...) forth in quest of food, and destroy the leaves of
this and other trees; but the most formidable enemy to the apple tree, is the
(...) worm. It comes out of the ground early i^ the spring, and ascends the
tree in the shape of a white winged insect, where it deposits in eggs, which,
being hatched by the (...) warmth of the season, are converted into m^^^ions of
black worms, about an inch in length. These strip the tree of its verdure, and,
by the middle of June, it has the appearance of autumn. While engaged in this
mischief, if the tree be struck or shaken, each worm descends to the ground by
a thread, spun instantly from its bowels, and ascends, by the same rout, when
the danger is over. By the 21st of June, they disappear; the tree puts forth
new leaves, but bears no fruit. The best way of guarding against them, is by
putting a circle of warm tar round the trunk of the tree, and renewing it every
day, during the time of their ascent; this arrests and confines them, till they
perish. They were not known in New Hampshire till about twenty years past, and
there are some parts which they have not yet reached. They do not appear every
year, but there is no regular interval between their appearances, nor is the
cause of the interruption known.

Beside these, there is another species, which comes but once in many years,
and destroys the corn and grass, as well as leaves of trees. Their last
appearance was in 1770. It was observed that they did not touch the leaves of
elder. From observations of this kind, a hint was taken to make use of elder,
and especially the dwarf elder, as a means of preserving the seeding leaves of
young esculent vegetables, and even the branches of trees, from being destroyed
by insects.

CHAP. XI. Caverns, Stones, Fossils, and Minerals.
THIS chapter must be extremely imperfect, as many parts of the country (...)
yet unexplored; and of those which are known the knowledge, is mostly confined
to the surface and its vegetation. Such things how (...) as have occurred,
shall be noticed.

Among the many rocky mountains and precipices, some openings appear, which are
generrally supposed to be the haunts of bears and rattle snakes; and are rather
objects of dread than of curiosity. A particular description of one of these
caverns in the township of Chester, by Peter French, an ingenious young
gentleman, deceased, shall be given in his own words.

At about five miles distance from Chester meeting house, and very near the
road leading to Concord, is an eminence called rattle snake hill. Its base is
nearly circular, and about half a mile in diameter. It is very ragged,
especially on the southern side; where it is almost perpendicular; and its
summit frowns tremendous, about 400 feet high. In this side, at the height of
ten yards, is an aperture in the rocks, of about five feet high, and twenty
inches broad; which is the entrance to what is called the Devil's den;
concerning which, many frightful stories are told, to increase the terrors of
the evening, among the children of the neighboring villages; and indeed I have
observed the eyes of men assume a peculiar brightness, while recounting the
imaginary dangers which they had there fortunately escaped.

This entrance is about six feet long; it then contracts its height to two feet
and a half, and displays its breadth horizontally on the right, fifteen feet;
where it is irregularly lost among the contiguous rocks. This form of the
cavity continues about ten feet; when it suddenly becomes about eight feet
high, and three wide; the sides nearly perpendicular, continuing thus about
nine feet. In the midway of which, on the same plane, and nearly at right
angles on the left, is an aperture of five feet high and four wide, which
continues ten or twelve feet, where it is lost irregularly among the rocks.
Opposite to this, on the right, lies a spacious chamber, parallel to the said
plane; elevated about four feet, fifteen or twenty feet square, and about three
feet high; floored and ceiled by a regular rock, from the upper part of which
are dependent many excresences, nearly in the form of a pear, some of which are
more than an inch long; but there is a much greater number of every possible
inferior size; these are easily separable from the rock, and several of them
are deposited in the museum at Cambridge, where they are shown for petrified
water. Their color and consistence are those of a common stone; but when
approached in the cave with a flambeau, they throw about a sparkling luster of
almost every hue. This appearance is caused by a large drop of water, which
hangs about the end of each; and when the echo of its fall has reverberated
round the vault, another begins to kindle in succession.

At the end of the above mentioned nine feet, is a perpendicular descent of
about four feet; where the passage, becoming not more than eighteen inches
wide, but at least fifteen feet high, and still nearly perpendicular, bends
gently to the right, in an arch of a very large circle, for about thirty feet;
where eight or nine feet of the height falls into breadth, and all in seven or
eight feet more is lost among the rocks, in inconsiderable chinks.

The general direction of this cave is nearly north, and upon an ascent of
about three degrees. The cavity is terminated by rocks, on all sides; save that
the above mentioned thirty feet has a gravelly bottom, at the farther end of
which rises a small rivulet, strongly impregnated with sulphur. This rivulet
increases imperceptibly in its descent, along the thirty feet; when it falls
suddenly into a transverse chink, about three inches wide, which receives it
perpendicularly about ten feet; when the little subterraneous cascade is
intercepted by some thin lip of a rock, and thrown about in quite a merry
strain, for such a solitary mansion.

The rocks which wall this narrow passage, are cased with a shell of a reddish
color, about half an inch thick; which is easily separable from the rock, in
flakes as large as a man's hand. These flakes emit a strong scent of sulphur,
when thrown into the fire; and this circumstance has given rise to a
conjecture, that subterraneous fires have formerly raged here; but whatever
truth there may be in this opinion, the cave is now exceedingly cold, and a
more gloomy situation is scarcely imaginable.

In the town of Durham there is a rock, which is computed to weigh sixty or
seventy tons. It lies so exactly poised on another rock, as to be easily moved
by one finger. It is on the top of a hill, and its situation appears to be
natural. Many other singular appearances among the rocks and mountains attract
the attention of the curious, and serve as objects of amazement to the vulgar.

Of the different kinds of EARTHS and CLAYS, which are found in New Hampshire,
it would be endless to give an account. The towns of Exeter, Newmarket, Durham
and Dover, abound in clays. The same may be said of several towns on
Connecticut river. In many of the new townships, clay does not appear till
after the earth has been opened and cultivated. MARLES, though found in great
plenty in some places, are seldom used. Immense treasures of this precious
manure will be reserved for future generations.

Red and yellow OCHRES are found in Sommersworth, Chester field, Rindge and
Jaffrey. It is observable that in several places, a stratum of yellow is found
under one of red ochre, without any intervening substance. These have been
purified and used with success in painting.

At Oxford on Connecticut river, is found the SOAP-ROCK, ( Steatites). It has
the property of fuller's earth, in cleansing cloths. It is of a consistence
between earth and stone. It may be sawn or cut with carpenter's tools, into any
form whatever. To determine its capacity of enduring heat, I carefully measured
and weighed a piece of it; and having kept it for one hour, in a glowing fire
of coals, and cooled it gradually, I found its size was not in the least
diminished. It lost a sixty-fifth part of its weight. It was evidently cracked,
and was easily broken, by the hand. It was equally soft as before, and as
capable of being cut or scraped. Its color was changed from a light gray, to a
micaceous yellow. The piece on which this experiment was made, weighed between
seven and eight ounces.

In various parts of the country is found that transparent substance, which is
commonly called ISING-GLASS, ( Lapis specularis.) It is a species of TALC; and
is found adhering to rocks of white or yellow quartz, and lying in laminoe,
like sheets of paper. The most of it is white, some is yellow, and some has a
purple hue. The largest leaves of this curious substance are found in a
mountain, in the township of Grafton, about twenty miles eastward of Dartmouth
college. It was first discovered in the following manner. A hunter took shelter
for the night in a cavern of the mountain; and in the morning found himself
surrounded with this transparent substance; a large leaf of which he fastened
to the branch of a tree, near the cave, as a mark by which he might again find
the place. This happened during the late war, when window-glass could not be
imported. The scarcity of that convenient article brought the tale into repute.
Many persons employed their time in blowing the rocks, separating the laminae,
cutting them into squares, and vending them about the country. This substance
is particularly valuable for the windows of ships, as it is not brittle but
elastic, and will stand the explosion of cannon. It is also used to cover
miniature paintings, and to preserve minute objects for the microscope. The
disadvantage of it for windows is, that it contracts dust, and is not easily
cleaned; but for lanterns* i^ is preferable to glass.

CHRYSTALS and CHRYSTALLINE SPARS have been found at Northwood, Rindge and
Conway. They are of various sizes, generally hexagonal, and terminating in a
point. The largest which has fallen under my knowledge, was found at Conway. It
was six inches in length, eight in circumference, and weighed thirty two
ounces; but it was not throughout pellucid.

ALUM ore has been found at Barrington, Orford and Jaffrey. VITRIOL at
Jaffrey, Brentwood and Rindge. It is generally combined in the same stone with
SULPHUR. Those stones which I have seen are shelly, and the vitriol exudes at
the fissures. I have one, which has been kept perfectly dry, for above twelve
years; and it produces the white efflorescence as plentifully as ever. It was
taken from Lebanon, in the county of York; where there is an immense quantity.

FREESTONE has been discovered at Hanover and Piermont. At Orford are many
SLATE rocks, and a gray stone, which may be wrought to great perfection, either
for building or for MILLSTONES. It is said to be nearly equal to the imported
burr stones; and is in great demand.

IRON ore is found in many places; most commonly in swamps. It generally
discovers itself by the color and taste of the water, which runs through it;
and there are many springs in almost every part of the country which are
impregnated in different degrees with it. BLACK LEAD ( plumbago) is found in
large quantities about the grand Monadnock, in the township of Jaffrey. In the
same neighborhood, some small specimens of COPPER and LEAD have been seen.
There is also an appearance of copper in some rocks at Orford; but no metal
except iron has been wrought to any advantage.

FOSSIL SHELLS have been found near Lamprey river, in Newmarket, at the depth
of seventeen feet; and in such a situation as that the bed of the river could
never have been there. The shells were of oysters, muscles and clams,
intermixed. Clam shells have also been discovered at the depth of twenty feet,
in the neighborhood of Dartmouth college.

FOSSIL TREES are sometimes found in the intervale lands, adjoining the great
rivers.

Mineralogy is a branch of science which is but little cultivated. Men of
genius and science have not leisure to pursue objects from which present
advantages cannot be drawn. The disappointments which have attended some
expensive attempts; the air of mystery thrown over the subject by ignorant
pretenders; and the facility with which every mineral may be imported from
abroad, have discouraged inquiries. But from the specimens which have appeared,
there can be no doubt of the existence of mineral and fossil treasures, in the
search of which, future generations will find employment.

CHAP. XII. Description of the Harbor and River of Pascataqua.
THIS is the only seaport in New Hampshire; its latitude is 43 5 N. and its
longitude 70 41 W. from the royal observatory at Greenwich. It is known to
seamen by the following marks. Agamenticus, a remarkable mountain in the county
of York, lies four leagues due north. Pigeon hill, on Cape Anne, bears due
south, distant ten leagues; and the highest of the isles of shoals bears S. E.
by S. distant three leagues from the entrance of the harbor.

In the middle of the harbour's mouth, lies Great-Island, on which the town of
Newcastle is built. On the N. E. point of this island a light house was erected
in 1771, at the expense of the province; but it is now ceded to the United
States. The directions for entering the harbor are these: Ships coming from
the East, should keep in twelve fathom, till the light bears N. half a point E.
or W. distant three miles; (to avoid a ledge of rocks which lies off the mouth
of the harbor;) then bear away for the light, keeping the western shore on
board, and coming no nearer that shore, than the depth of nine fathoms; giving
the light a proper birth, and standing over to the northern shore of the river;
where they may anchor in nine fathoms, abreast of Sparhawk's point. Ships
coming from the southward, should observe the same directions, respecting the
light, and keep (...) nine fathoms on the western shore.

Between the north side of Great-Island and Kittery shore, is the main
entrance, about a mile wide, nine and ten fathoms deep. The anchorage is good;
the shore is lined with rocks; the harbor is land-locked on all sides, and
perfectly safe. The tides rise from ten to fourteen feet. The other entrance on
the south side of Great-Island, is called Little Harbor; the water here is
shoal, and the bottom sandy.

There are several islands in the river, between which and the shores are
channels for small vessels and boats. Between the upper end of Great-Island,
and the town of Portsmouth, on the southern side of the river, is a broad,
deep, still water called the Pool; where the largest ships may lie very
conveniently and securely. This was the usual station for the mast-ships, of
which seven have been loading at one time. In this place the Astraea ship of
war of twenty guns, was burnt, on a severely cold morning, January 17, 1744.
She had been captured from the Spaniards at Porto Bello; and was taking in a
load of naval stores, for the British fleet at Jamaica, when this accident
happened.

The main channel lies between Peirce's island and Seavey's; on each of which,
batteries of cannon were planted, and entrenchments formed in 1775. Here the
stream is contracted to a very narrow passage, and the tide is extremely rapid;
but the water is deep, with a bold rocky shore on each side. The rapidity of
the current prevents the river from freezing in the severest winters.

The town of Portsmouth lies about two miles from the sea, on the south shore
of the river. The number of dwelling houses at present is about 640, and of
other buildings 620. The public buildings are three Congregational churches,
one Episcopal, one Universalist, a State-house, a Market-house, four
School-houses, and a Workhouse. The town has convenient wharves, and the
anchorage before it is good. There is depth of water sufficient for the largest
ships; and there are such natural advantages, for all the purposes of building
and docking them, and the harbor is so capable of defense, against any sudden
attack by sea, that it might be made a very safe and commodious port, for a
navy.

Ships of war have been built here, both in former and later times, viz. the
Faulkland, of 54 guns, in 1690; the Bedford-galley, of 3^, in 1696; the
America, of 40, in 1749; th^^ Raleigh, of 32, in 1776; the Ranger, of 18, in
1777; and a ship of 74 guns, called the America, was launched the 5th of
November, 1782, and presented to the King of France, by the Congress of the
United States.

Three leagues from the mouth of the harbor lie the isles of Shoals, which are
sever in number. On Star-island, the town of Gosp^^ is built, which belongs to
New Hampshire. The dividing line runs between that and the next island to the
northward, which belongs to Massachusetts. Here is a good road, with moorings;
and an artificial dock has been constructed with great labor and expense, by
Mr. Haley, for fishing vessels. Ships sometimes take shelter here in bad
weather, but it is not then safe for those of large bulk. These islands, being
of solid rock, with but little earth, are incapable of any improvement by
tillage, though they afford some pasturage and gardens. The inhabitants have
formerly carried on the cod fishery to great advantage; but it has been for
some years declining. Salt-works have been erected on one of the islands, which
have yielded salt of a superior quality, excellently adapted to the curing of
fish.

The Pascataqua is the only large river whose whole course is in New Hampshire.
Its head is a pond in the N. E. corner of the town of Wakefield, and its
general course thence, to the sea, is S. S. E. about 40 miles. It divides
New Hampshire from York county, in Massachusetts, and is called Salmon-fall
river, from its head, to the lower falls at Berwick; where it assumes the name
of Newichawannock, which it bears till it meets with Cochecho river, which
comes from Dover, when both run together in one channel, to Hilton's point,
where the western branch meets it. From this junction to the sea, the river is
so rapid that it never freezes; the distance is seven miles, and the course
generally from S. to S. E. The western branch is formed by Swamscot river which
comes from Exeter, Winnicot river which comes through Greenland, and Lamprey
river which divides Newmarket from Durham; these empty into a bay, four miles
wide, called the Great Bay. The water in its further progress is contracted
into a lesser bay, and then it receives Oyster river, which runs through
Durham, and Back-river, which comes from Dover, and at length meets with the
main stream at Hilton's point. The tide rises into all these bays and branches,
as far as the lower falls in each river, and forms a most rapid current,
especially at the season of the freshets, when the ebb continues about two
hours longer than the flood; and were it not for the numerous eddies, formed by
the indentings of the shore, the ferries would then be impassable.

At the lower falls in the several branches of the river, are landing places,
whence (...) and other country produce is transport^^, (...) vessels or boats
from below discharge their lading: So that in each river there is a convenient
trading place, not more than twelve or fifteen miles distant from Portsmouth,
with which there is constant communication by every tide. Thus the river, from
its form, and the situation of its branches, is extremely favorable to the
purposes of navigation and commerce.

At Dover is an high neck of land between the main branch of Pascataqua and
Back river, about two miles long, and half a mile wide, rising gently along a
fine road, and declining on each side like a ship's deck. It commands an
extensive and variegated prospect of the rivers, bays, adjacent shores, and
distant mountains. It has often been admired by travelers as an elegant
situation for a city, and by military gentlemen for a fortress. The first
settlers pitched here, but the trade has long since been removed to
Cochecho-falls, about four miles farther up; and this beautiful spot is almost
deserted of inhabitants.

CHAP. XIII. Trade, Navigation, Fishery and Manufactures.
THE first species of traffic which was known in this country was the fur
trade, with the Indians; the next object was fish; and the third was lumber.

Formerly the banks of the river Pascataqua were covered with fine timber,
which was cut or split into any form, and easily conveyed on board ships. The
first settlers erected sawmills, on the branches of the river; and a great
trade in lumber was driven, for many years. When the neighboring lands were
cleared of the first growth, it was supposed that the lumber trade would
decline; but it was, and is still kept up by many of the people, and is drawn
from the distance of thirty or forty miles, to the heads of the tide, in the
branches of the river. It is then conveyed in rafts, or on board large
gondolas, to the ships, in different parts of the river, or to the wharves at
Portsmouth.

The mast trade was formerly confined to England; all white pine trees of
certain dimensions being deemed the King's property. The contractors and agents
made large fortunes by this traffic; but the laborers who spent their time in
the woods, and were supplied with provision and clothing for themselves and
their families, anticipated their earnings, and were generally kept in a state
of poverty and dependence.

Ship building has always been a considerable branch of business. European
traders often came hither to build ships, which they could do much cheaper than
at home, by the profit made on the goods, which they brought with them. Our own
merchants also built ships of two and three hundred tons; which were employed
in voyages, to the British suga^ islands, with a lading of lumber, fish, oil
and live stock. The cargo was sold, and the produce of the island was sent
hither in smaller vessels, for home consumption; whilst the ships took a lading
of sugars for England, where they were sold; and with the freight a remittance
(often unprofitable) was made to the merchants of England, for goods imported
on credit the preceding year. Other vessels laden with timber and spars
proceeded directly for the British ports, and were sold with their cargoes, for
the same purpose. The coasting trade at the Southward, was an exchange of
West India commodities for corn, rice, flour, pork, and naval stores; a part of
which being re-exported to New foundland and Nova Scotia, produced bills on
England for remittance. This was the common routine of trade, before the late
revolution; by which the profit of our labor centered with the merchants of
England.

The foreign trade, as distinguished from national, was very inconsiderable.
Two or three vessels in a year would go to the free ports of the French and
Dutch West Indies with cargoes of lumber, fish oil and provisions, and bring
home molasses to be distilled into rum, in the only distil-house in
New Hampshire. One vessel in a year would go to the Azores or the Canaries with
pipe staves, fish, and other provisions, and return with a cargo of wine, the
blance of which was paid in cash or bills, and sometimes a ship which had been
to England, would get a freight to Lisbon or Cadiz, and return with salt and
fruit. This was the sum total of our foreign commerce. Port of Pascataqua.
Foreign Entries in the following years. Foreign Clearances in the following
years. 1764 -- 112 1764 -- 150 1765 -- 115 1765 -- 199 1766 -- 113 1766 -- 136
1767 -- 112 1767 -- 170 1768 -- 124 1768 -- 183 1769 -- 128 1769 -- 1^^ 1770 --
114 1770 -- 14^ 1771 -- 104 1771 -- 135 1772 -- 108 1772 -- 136 1773 -- 92 1773
9 months. -- 88

N. B. By foreign Entries and Clearances, are meant all, except the coasting
and fishing vessels.

From Eleazer Russell, Esquire. Naval-Officer.




Since the revolution, the trade to the British West Indies has ceased; but the
French (...) Dutch ports in that quarter, are frequented by our lumber vessels;
though the restrictions laid upon certain articles of their produce, render the
voyages thither less profitable.

For several years succeeding the late war, the partial imposts and impolitic
restrictions of our own government, prevented foreign vessels from loading in
our port, and a want of capital or of enterprise in the merchants of
Pascataqua, has hitherto kept them from exploring the new sources of commerce
which are opened to America by her independence, and which the merchants of
other America^ ports are seeking with avidity. Since the operation of our
general government, an equal system of impost has been introduced; and trade is
regulated so as to serve the general interest of the union. The officers of the
customs are appointed by the Executive of the United States; and the revenue
arising from trade and navigation, is applied to national purposes.

That such an alteration was wise and salutary, may be evident from considering
the situation of New Hampshire, as well as of some other States in the union.

New Hampshire is seated in the bosom of Massachusetts with a narrow strip of
sea coast, and one only port. Her inland country extends so widely as to cover
a great part of the neighboring States, and render a commercial connection with
them absolutely necessary. All the towns which are situate on the southern, and
many of those on the western borders of New Hampshire, find it more convenient
to carry their produce to market, either at Newbury-port, Salem, Boston or
Hartford. The towns on Saco and the northern parts of Connecticut river will
necessarily communicate with the ports, in the eastern division of
Massachusetts. The lumber which is cut on the upper part of the Merrimack, is
rafted down that river, and is exported from Newbury-port; whilst that which is
cut on Connecticut river is carried down to Hartford. The greater part of
New Hampshire is by nature cut off from any commercial intercourse with the
only port in the State. Lumber being a bulky article, must be transported to
the most convenient landing. Wagons or sleys carrying pot and pearl ashes,
pork, beef, butter, cheese, flax and other less bulky commodities, and droves
of cattle, sheep and swine, will always be conveyed to those places where the
vender can find the most advantageous market.

For these reasons it never was in the power of the government of
New Hampshire, either before or since the revolution, ^o reap the proper
advantage, or even ascertain the (...) of its own productions. When the (...)
Governor Wentworth was called upon by the British Ministry for an account of
the Trade, n^tt produce and staple commodities, of the then Province, he was
obliged to make an exception of the articles carried out by land, it being
impracticable to ascertain their value. The same inconvenience was experienced
d^^ing the continuance of our late partial imposts; and there could be no
proper remedy for it, but the union of the States under (...) general
government, with respect to trade and revenue.

To attempt a particular detail of the ^^^ber and value of articles of commerce
produced in New Hampshire, and exported from the various ports of Massachusetts
and Connecticut, is impracticable. To confine the detail to the port of
Pascataqua alone, gives but an imperfect idea of the produce of the whole
State; besides, a part of what is exported thence is produced in the adjoining
county of York, which belongs to Massachusetts. Such accounts, however, as have
been obtained from the custom-house, and from the merchants of Portsmouth, are
exhibited at the end of this chapter.

The staple commodities of New Hampshire may be reduced to the following
articles, viz. ships, lumber, provisions, fish, horses, pot and pearl ashes,
and flax-seed.

Ships are built in all the towns contiguous to the river Pascataqua, and its
branches. They are generally set up on the banks of the river, but sometimes
vessels of an hundred tuns and upwards, have been built at the distance of one
or two miles from the water, and drawn on strong sledges of timber, on the
snow, by teams of two hundred oxen, and placed on the ice of the rivers so as
to float in the spring. They have also been built at the distance of seven or
eight miles; then taken to pieces, and conveyed in common team loads to the
sea. Fishing schooners and whale-boats are often built at the distance of two
or three miles from the water.

There are no workmen more capable of constructing good ships, than the
carpenters of New Hampshire. But the goodness of a ship ever did and will
depend on the quality of the materials, the nature and promptitude of the pay,
and the constant attention of the person whose interest it is that the ship
should be good.

The number of ships built in the river in 1790, was eight. In 1591, twenty.
The price of building is generally from eleven to twelve dollars per tun for
the carpenters work, and less than one third more for iron and other work.

The number of ships and other vessels belonging to the port of Pascataqua in
1791, it as follows: Above 100 tuns, 33 Under 100 tuns, 50 83

The white pine of the forest is the strongest and most durable timber which
America affords for masts. It is often advanced by Europeans, that the pines of
Norway exceed those of America in strength. This is acknowledged to be true
whilst the Norway wood retains its natural juices; but these being soon
exhausted by the heat and dryness of the air, leave the wood less firm, and a
decay commences much sooner than in the white pine of America. The Norway pine
begins to decay in five or six years; but the American, with proper care to
defend the mast head from moisture, will last unimpaired for twenty years.

The British navy for eighty years before the late war, received its masts
wholly from America; which is a proof that our pines are preferable to those of
Norway. Several of the French ships of war which were much damaged, in the
naval engagement of 1782, in the West Indies, came hither for new masts; and
have had sufficient opportunity to try the strength of our wood. When proper
persons are employed, and sufficient time is given to provide suitable
materials, the forest of America can supply any demands which may be made of
timber, either for building, for naval stores or cabinet work. But a cargo
prepared in an injudicious, hasty or fraudulent manner, may give a bad name to
the American timber in foreign markets; and prejudice whole nations against us.

Contracts for timber should always be made so as to give time to look for the
requisite sticks, and cut them in the proper season of the year. If the trees
were girdled and left to die standing, the timber would be much superior to any
which is cut whilst alive. Trees cut in the sap should be stripped of their
bark as soon as possible; or they will be damaged by the worm. But after all
the care and attention which can be bestowed on them, many trees which are
intended for masts on the strict examination which they must pass, prove unfit
for service, and sometimes the labor of a whole season is lost.

It is therefore accounted more profitable to get the smaller species of
lumber, and especially those which do not interfere with husbandry; which,
after all, is much preferable to the lumber business, both in point of gain,
contentment and morals.

Nothing is more convincing than fact and experiment. During the late war the
trade in lumber was suspended, and the people were obliged to attend to
husbandry. They were then able to export large quantities of corn, though for
several years before the war, it was imported for necessary consumption. The
following statement obtained from the naval office will place this matter in
its just view.

Corn imported into the river Pascataqua.
Bushels. 1765 -- 6498 1769 -- 4097 1770 -- 16587 1772 -- 4096 4)31278 Average
p. ann. 7819 Corn exported from the river Pascataqua.
Bushels. 1776 -- 2510 1777 -- 1915 1778 -- 5306 1779 -- 3097 1780 -- 6711 1781
-- 5587 6)25126 Average per ann. 4185

To the above account of exports the following note is added by the naval
officer. It is likely near half as much has been smuggled out of the State and
not accounted for. The smuggled corn, during the war, went chiefly to
Nova Scotia: the country, which by Lord Sheffield's calculation, was to supply
the West Indies with provision!
It must also be remembered that great quantities were carried out by land into
the eastern countries of Massachusetts. If these be added to the list of
exports, the average will come very little short of the average of corn
impo^^ed before the war; and thus it is demonstra^^ that even those towns
adjoining the river, in which lumbering was formerly the chief employment, and
into which much corn was imported, are fully capable of raising, not only a
sufficiency of provisions for their own support, but a surplus for exportation,
equal to what they formerly imported, and paid for, in the hard, dangerous and
unprofitable labor which always attends the getting of lumber.

At the close of the war the high price of lumber induced many people to resume
their old employments; but there has been so much fluctuation in the demand for
that article of late, that no dependence can be placed on it, and for this
reason as well as others, husbandry is daily growing more into use. A careful
inspection of provisions salted for exportation, would tend to establish the
character of them in foreign ports, and greatly encourage the labors of the
husbandman.

The cod fishery is carried on either by boats or schooners. The boats, in the
winter season, go out in the morning and return at night, in the spring and
summer they do not return till they are filled. The Schooners make three trips
to the Banks in a season. The first, or spring fare, produces large thick fish,
which after being properly salted and dried, is kept alternately above and
under ground, till it becomes so mellow as to be denominated dumb fish. This
fish, when boiled, is red, and is eaten generally on Saturdays, at the best
tables in New England.

The fish of the summer and fall fares is divided into two sorts, the one
called merchantable, and the other Jamaica fish. These sorts are white, thin,
and less firm. The Jamaica fish is the smallest, thinnest, and most broken. The
former is exported to Europe, the latter to the West India Islands.

The places where the cod fishery is chiefly attended to are the Isles of
Shoals, Newcastle, Rye and Hampton; but all the towns adjoining the river are
more or less concerned in it. The boats employed in this fishery are of that
light and swift kind called whaleboats. They are rowed either with two or four
oars, and steered with another; and being equally sharp at each end, move with
the utmost celerity on the surface of the ocean.

Schooners are generally from twenty to fifty tuns, and carry six or seven men,
and one or two boys. When they make a tolerable fare, they bring home five or
six hundred quintals of fish, split, salted, and stowed in bulk. At their
arrival, the fish is rinsed in salt water, and spread on hurdles, composed of
brush, and raised on stakes, about three or four feet from the ground; these
are called flakes. Here the fish is dried in clear weather, and in foul weather
it is put under cover. It ought never to be wet, from the time that it is first
spread, till it is boiled for the table.

Besides the fleshy parts of the cod, its liver is preserved in casks, and
boiled down to oil, which is used by curriers of leather. The tongues and
sounds are pickled in small kegs, and make a luxurious, viscid food. The heads
are fat and juicy; but most of those which are caught at sea are thrown away.
Of those which are caught near home, the greater part become the food of swine.

The fishery has not of late years been prosecuted with the same spirit as
formerly. Fifty or sixty years ago, the shores of the rivers, creeks and
islands were covered with fish flakes; and seven or eight ships were loaded
annually for Spain and Portugal; besides what was carried to the West Indies.
Afterward they found it more convenient to make the fish at Canseau; which was
nearer ^o the banks. It was continued there to great advantage till 1744, when
it was broken up by the French war. After the peace it revived, but not in so
great a degree as before. Fish was frequently cured in the summer on the
eastern shores and islands, and in spring and fall, at home. Previously to the
late resolution, the greater part of remittances to Europe was made by the
fisheries; but it (...) not yet recovered from the shock which it received by
the war with Britain.

It is, however, in the power of the Americans to make more advantage of the
co^ fishery than any of the European nations. We can fit out vessels at less
expense, and by reason of the westerly winds, which prevail (...) our coasts,
in February and March, they (...) go to the banks earlier in the season, than
the Europeans, and take the best fish. We can dry it in a clearer air, than the
foggy shores of Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. We can supply every necessary
from among ourselves* vessels, spars, sails, cordage, anchors, line^^ hooks and
provisions. Salt can be imported from abroad cheaper than it can be made at
home; if it be not too much loaded with duties. Men can always be had to go on
shares, which is by far the most profitable method, both to the employers and
the fishermen. The fishing banks are an inexhaustable source of wealth; and the
fishing business is a most excellent nursery for seamen. It therefore deserves
every encouragement and indulgence from an enlightened national legislature.

The manufacture of pot and pearl ashes affords a valuable article of
exportation. In the new townships, where vast quantities of wood are burnt on
the land, the ashes are collected and boiled, and the salts are conveyed to
certain places, where works are erected, and the manufacture is perfected.
This, like many other of our articles of exportation, has suffered much in its
reputation, from an injudicious, or fraudulent survey. It is a lesson which
ought to be deeply engraven on the minds of Legislators as well as
Manufacturers and Merchants, that honesty at home is the only foundation for
credit abroad.

An attempt has been made to manufacture (...) cloth; and the proprietor of the
works, Thomas Odiorne, Esquire. of Exeter, has received some small encouragement
from the Legislature of the State. Such a bounty as is allowed in Massachusetts
would give a spring to this business, and encourage the erection of other works
of the same kind.

The manufacture of iron both in forges and ^umaces might be rendered vastly
more profitable than it is at present. This necessary metal instead of being
imported might become an article of exportation.

Flax seed is produced in large quantities. Some of it is manufactured into
oil; and some is exported.

The manufacture of leather and shoes is not so extensive as to produce
articles of exportation; but may be considered among the domestic manufactures.

In most of our country towns considerable quantities of tow-cloth are made,
some of which is exported to the southern States, to clothe the Negroes, who
labor on the plantations.

The manufacture of bricks and potter's ware may be extended to any degree.
Several species of clay being found in great abundance, in the towns, at the
heads of the several branches of the river Pascataqua; in places which (...)
very convenient for water carriage. Bric^^ might be carried as ballast in every
(...) which goes to ports where they are saleable. In this article, however, as
well as (...) others, a regulation is needed; most of the bricks which are made
are deficient in size; and much of the clay which is used in making them is not
sufficiently mellowed by the frost of winter, or by the labor of the artificer.

TABLE of Exportation from the port of Pascataqua, from October 1, 1789, to
October 1, 1791.
Articles exported To Europe. W.Ind. N.Sco. Africa. Tot^^. 1000 feet of Pine
Boards 6247 11622 96 69 18034 Do. feet of oak plank 378 26 404 Do. staves and
heading 1317 1608 44 2969 Do. clapboards 2 19 21 Do. shingles 2689 2689 Do.
hoops 79 7 86 Feet of oar rafters 47000 950 47950 (...) of pine timber 88 86
174 (...) oak timber 251 20 271 Frames of houses 12 12 F^ne masts 41 4 45
Sp^ace spars ^3 72 85 Shock hogsheads 2079 2079 Wagons 2 2 (...) of cart
wheels 14 14 Sets of yokes and bows 28 28 (...) 30 30 ^^^dspikes 80 80 Quintals
of dry Fish 250 26,207 26,457 (...) of pickled fish 501 501 Do. (...) Whale oil
120 120 Do. (...) Tar 1613 60 1673 Casks of flax seed 1798 1798 Barrels of beef
2775 2 2777 Do. 9 1 10 Do. 2 2 Bushels of Indian corn 391 2000 2391 Oxen and
cows 577 33 610 Horses 207 2 209 Sheep 261 229 490 Gallons of N. E. rum 150
1449 1599 Do. Madeira wine 845 845 Thousands of bricks 129 129 Tons of pot ash
88 88 Do. pearl ash 30 30 Boxes of candles 28 28 Total value of exportation for
two years 296, 839 dollars 51 cents. TABLE of Importation into the port of
Pascataqua, from October 1, 1789, to October 1, 1791.
Articles imported from Europe. W.Indies. Nova Scotia. Total. Gallons of rum
138,911 138,911 Ditto gin 22 22 Ditto molasses 270,785 270,785 Ditto wine from
Madeira 4721 Ditto Porter 457 457 lbs of unrefined sugar 546,648 546,648 Ditto
loaf sugar 77 77 Ditto coffee 68,633 68,633 Ditto cotton 17,564 17,564 Ditto
cocoa 27,944 27,944 Ditto cheese 1056 1056 Ditto tea 2696 86 2782 Ditto twine
2204 2204 Ditto nails 16890 16890 Hundreds of cordage 17,1,7 17,1,7 Ditto hemp
940 -- 940 -- Bushels of salt ( part) ( part) 98,336 Ditto sea coal 3131 3131
lbs of steel unwrought 16527 16527 Ditto barand sheet lead 4336 4336
Grindstones ( a few not ascertained)

N. B. "What comes coast ways from any of the United States cannot be
ascertained; as no regular entries are made where only the produce of the
United States is on board; except accompanied with more than two hundred
dollars value of foreign articles. The value of imported articles is generally
governed by the Boston market."

PRICES CURRENT at Pascataqua, A. D. 1791.
Pine Masts hewn Spruce and Pine Yards hewn in 8 square. Pine Bowsprits hewn in
8 square. inches price inches price inches price 36 L147 PINE 24 L34 38 L64 35
117 23 27 37 56 34 96 22 23 36 48 33 75 21 20 35 44 32 60 20 16 34 42 31 47 19
12 33 32 30 38 18 9-10 32 31 29 30 17 8 31 27 28 25 16 6 30 21 27 20 SPRUCE 15
1-10 29 16 26 17 14 1-8 28 9 25 14 13 1-6 27 7 24 12 12 1-4 26 6 23 10 11 1-2
^^ 22 9 10 1- and all below at 3^ per inch. 21 8 9 -18 20 6

and all below 20 at ^s per inch.

TIMBER. Quality, dimensions and price.
Oak from 15 to 50 feet in length and from 10 to 20^ inches square, each forty
cubic feet Oak white 20 s to 24 s red 12 s black 16 s to 18 s Maple 20 s Beech
16 s Black birch 1^ s to 18 s White pine 1^ s to 1^ Oak ship timber measured at
end of the arm. 1 spr inch Ash timber per cord 24 s Lath wood per cord 24 s
BOARDS, PLANK and JOIST Each superficial square foot, one inch in thickness is
called a foot.
Pine per 1000 feet 36 s to 42 s Hemlock generally 2 s less N. B. The price of
these articles is frequently varying. Oak plank per (...) L8

Other species of LUMBER. Quality, and price.
Clapboards per thousand 48 s Shingles ditto 10 s Hoops ditto L4 White oak pipe
staves per thousand L30 Ditto hogshead ditto L4 Ditto barrel ditto L2 Red oak
hogshead ditto L2 Ditto barrel ditto L1 10s Anchor-stocks per inch at diameter
of the nut 1 s Handspikes in the rough 1 s Shook hhds white oak 6 s red ditto 3
s Spruce spars per inch 4d Oar rafters per 1000 ft. L4

ARTICLES and price.
Fish per quintal Merch. ^^ Jamaica SCALE ^word Pork per barrel L3 1^ s Beef
ditto L ^^ s Corn per bushel 3 s Rye ditto ^^ Barley ditto ^ s Flax, seed ditto
3^^^ Oxen, each L4 ^^ COWS L2^ Horses L6 to ^^ Sheep 6 s to ^^ Bricks per
thousand ^^^ Cider per barrel ^^ s Seamen's wages per month 7 dollars
Chartering of vessels per ton, per month 1 dollar

TABLE of ENTRIES at the port of Pascataqua from October 1, 1789, to October 1,
1791.
Ships and Snows Brigantines Schooners Sloops Total of vessels American tonnage
French ditto British ditto Total of tonnage (...) 1 3 4 732 732 (...) West
Indies 12 42 13 5 72 9402 264 9666 Peter's and Miquelon 5 5 192 34 226 (...) 12
15 27 4119 570 4689 (...) 4 4 464 464 (...) 1 4 5 859 859 (...) West Indies 6 2
1 1 10 2005 2005 (...) Scotia 1 14 ^5 85^ 856 (...) 1 1 293 293 (...) Islands 1
1 1 3 341 341 (...) and Plantations 15 9 1 25 2996 2996 (...) and Islands 1 1 2
155 155 (...) (...) and cod fishery 40 10 50 1166 1166 (...) 34 87 84 18 223
20719 298 3431 24448

TABLE of CLEARANCES at the port of Pascataqua from October 1, 1789, to October
1, 1791.
Ships and Snows Brigantines Schooners Sloops Total of vessels American tonnage
French ditto British ditto Portuguse tonnage Total of (...) France French West
Indies 17 70 39 10 136 16616 264 ^^^ St. Peter's and Miquelon 8 1 9 428 34
(...) England 16 25 1 42 6725 441 7^^ Scotland 4 4 616 ^^^ Ireland 1 3 4 666
^^^ British West Indies 8 3 4 1 16 3134 ^^^ Nova Scotia 12 12 502 (...)
Portugal Portuguese Islands 1 1 162 (...) Holland and Plantations 2 2 233 (...)
Denmark and Islands Africa 1 1 110 ^^^ Coasting and cod fishery 40 10 5^ 1166
^^^ Total 43 107 105 22 277 26560 298 4077 162 3^^^

TABLE of the VALUE of SILVER in the currency of Newhampshire, since the
beginning of the present century.
Silver per oz. years. value. Silver per oz. years. value. Silver per oz.
years. value. DOLLARS years. value. s d s d s d s d 1700 10 1732 19 6 1745 35
1751 51 6 1704 7 20 6 36 1752 55 1705 10 1733 21 37 1753 57 1710 8 25 1746 37
1754 60 1711 8 4 26 38 1755 70 1712 8 6 27 40 1756 80 1713 8 6 1734 24 45 90
1714 9 25 48 100 1715 9 26 50 1716 10 27 1747 53 1757 100 1717 10 1735 27 6 55
to 1718 11 1736 27 6 58 110 1719 12 26 6 60 1720 12 4 1737 26 6 58 1758 120
1721 12 6 27 1748 58 1759 120 13 6 27 6 56 1760 120 1722 14 28 55 120 to 130
and 140 14 6 1739 29 54 1761 120 to 130 and 140 1723 14 6 29 6 55 1762 120 to
130 and 140 15 6 29 56 1763 120 to 130 and 140 1724 16 1740 28 6 58 120 to 130
and 140 16 6 29 56 1725 16 28 1749 56 1764 120 15 29 58 1765 to 1776 6 1726 16
1741 28 6 60 1775 to 1776 1727 28 58 1765 to 1776 1728 16 6 174^ 28 1750 51 6
17 27 6 50 1729 19 28 54 19 6 29 1730 20 1743 30 1730 21 32 1731 18 6 1744 32
1^ 33 34

Scale of depreciation of one hundred dollars.
years. mon. equal to years. mon. equal to years. mon. equal to 1777 Jan. 100
1779 Jan. 742 1781 Jan. 7500 Feb. 104 Feb. 868 Feb. 7500 March 106 March 1000
March 7500 April 110 April 1104 April 7500 May 114 May 1215 May 7500 June 120
June 1342 June 12000 July 125 July 1477 Aug. 150 Aug. 1630 dol. value. Sept.
175 Sept. 1800 Oct. 275 Oct. 2030 Nov. 300 Nov. 2308 1781 to 1791 1 6 s Dec.
310 Dec. 2393 1781 to 1791 1 6 s 1778 Jan. 325 1780 Jan. 2934 Feb. 350 Feb.
3322 March 37^ March 3736 April 400 April 4000 May 400 May 4800 June 400 June
5700 In American national currency, one dollar is equal to 100 cents. July 425
July 6000 Aug. 450 Aug. 6300 Sept. 475 Sept. 6500 Oct. 500 Oct. 6700 Nov. 545
Nov. 7000 Dec. 634 Dec. 7300

TABLE of the weight and value of GOLD and SILVER established by law 1785.
COINS weight. value. L s d dwt. gr. L s d Gold per ounce 5 6 8 English or
French Crown 6 8 Silver per ounce 6 8 Spanish Dollar 6 English Guinea 5 6 -1 8
1 French ditto 5 6 -1 7 4 Copper 3 farthings of English coin 1 Johannes 18 -4
16 Half ditto 9 -2 8 Moidore 6 18 -1 16 Doubloom 16 12 -4 8 P^stole 4 3 -1 2

Statement of the FISHERY at Pascataqua and its neighborhood.
Schooners 27 employed in the Cod and Scale Fishery annually. Boats 20 Tonnage
630 Seamen 250

The Schooners, Boats, and Seamen belonging to the Isles of Shoals are not
included in the above estimation.

Product of the Fishery in the year 1791.
Quintals made Merchantable fish 5170 Jamaica ditto 14217 Scale ditto 6463
total, 25850

The fish made at the Isles of Shoals are included in this statement.

The success of the fishery in this season has been uncommonly good.

Estimate of Seamen belonging to New Hampshire in 1791.
In foreign trade 500 Coasting ditto 50 Fishery 250

N. B. Some of the Seamen who in summer are employed in the fishery, are in the
winter employed in the coasting business, or in foreign voyages.

CHAP. XIV. Effect of the Climate and other causes on the human Constitution.
Remarks on Population. Tables of Births, Deaths and Casualties.
IT has been confidently asserted by European writers, and by some of great
reputation, that the climates of America, under similar latitudes to those of
Europe, are unfriendly to health and longevity; that the general period of
human life is from forty-five to fifty; and these pernicious effects are
ascribed to putrid exhalations from stagnant waters; to a surface uncleared,
uncultivated, and loaded with rank vegetation, which prevents it from feeling
the purifying influence of the sun. Robertson's History America, Vol. II. p. 17.

King's thoughts on Emigration to America, Political Magazine, 1783. p. 261.




If such remarks were intended to be confined to the low plains in the southern
States, the propriety of them might not perhaps be disputed; but a distinction
ought to be made between those parts of America and others in far different
circumstances. If authors profess to write as philosophers they should seek for
information from the purest sources, and not content themselves with theorising
on subjects, which can be determined only by fact and observation; or with
forming general conclusions from partial reports. If they write as politicians,
their aim may indeed be answered by stating facts in a delusive light; and by
representing America as a grave to Europeans, they may throw discouragement on
emigration to this country. It is at the same time amusing to observe the
inconsistent conclusions of these theorising philosophers; for whilst one
condemns the air of woodland as destructive to life and health, another
celebrates it as containing nutritive particles, and asserts that men who live
in the woods consume less food than those who dwell in open countries. Abb^
Raynal. History Indies. Vol. III. p. ^^8.
But notwithstanding the dreams of European philosophers, or the interested
views of European politicians, America can best be described by those who have
for a long time resided in it. Those who have not seen it at all, and those who
have passed through it with the rapidity of a traveller, can be very inadequate
judges; yet unhappily there are many of both these classes of writers, whose
accounts have gained more credit than they deserve.

In that part of America which it falls to my lot to describe, an uncleared and
uncultivated soil is so far from being an object of dread, that there are no
people more vigorous and robust than those who labor on new plantations; nor
in fact have any people better appetites for food. This is true not only of the
natives of the country, but of emigrants from Europe. It has been a general
observation that the first planters in new townships live to a great age. It is
also true that the air of our forest is remarkably pure. The tall and luxuriant
growth which an European might call 'rank vegetation,' not only indicates
strength and fertility of soil; but conduces to ab^orb noxious vapors; and
when the soil is once cleared, if man neglect his duty, nature, with her
bountiful hand, produces a second growth of 'rank vegetation,' for the same
benevolent purpose. A profusion of effluvia from the resinous trees imparts to
the air a balsamic quality which is extremely favorable to health, and the
numerous streams of limpid water, some of which fall with great rapidity from
the mountains, cause currents of fresh air which is in the highest degree
salubrious, to those who reside on their banks. To these observations it may be
added, that the northwest wind is the grand corrector of every noxious quality
which can exist in the air of America; and whilst that wind prevails, it
diffuses health and imparts vigor to the human frame.

There are, indeed, some few situations, even (...) New Hampshire, where vapor
arising from (...) overflowed with fresh water, produces bilious and nervous
diseases, and the inhabitants are subject to an early lassitude and debility;
which is often increased by an injudicious use of spirituous liquors for
medical purposes; but by the removal of such persons to the purer air of the
mountains, and a change to a more temperate regimen, these complaints cease,
and the constitution is reinvigorated.

There have also been some instances in the neighborhood of Connecticut river,
of swellings in the throat similar to the goitres among the inhabitants of the
Alps. Women have chiefly been affected in that way. A removal to the sea shore,
and constant bathing with salt water have contributed to reduce these tumors.
A free use of salted fish and vegetable acid, particularly cider, has also been
found beneficial, and by the best and latest information which I have been able
to obtain, this disorder is now less frequent, and more easily controled than
it was a few years past.

From the tables of mortality which I have collected and which are here
exhibited, it appears that a very large proportion of people live to old age,
and that many of them die of no acute disease but by the gradual decay of
nature. The death of adult persons between twenty and fifty years of age is
very rare, when compared with the bills of mortality from European countries.
It is computed that nearly one twentieth part of the inhabitants of London
perish, one year with another; Rush's Medical (...), page 47.
it is certain that not more than one in seventy of the inhabitants of
New Hampshire dies in a year unless when some epidemic disorder prevails, which
very seldom happens.

From the tables of casualties it also appears that the most mortal of the
prevailing disorders of this country is the pulmonary consumption. This malady
is universally allowed to be more frequent of late years than formerly. I
cannot find that it is less common in the new, than in the old towns. It is
certainly in some instances hereditary; and it is believed by many to be
contagious. Fevers of several kinds are much less malignant than formerly. The
chronic rheumatism is very common, but seldom proves mortal. It is often caused
by the changes from heat to cold, to which people who labor and travel in all
weathers, are exposed.

Patients from the southern States and the West India islands with bilious
complaints and intermittent fevers, soon recover their health on their arrival
to our shores. A regular intermittent, or what is commonly called the sever and
ague is extremely rare, unless it be contracted in some other climate.

It is thought by some that the exhalations from salt marshes are injurious to
health. This may be the case where the air is prevented from circulating
freely, by the vicinity of high ridges of land; but the town of Hampton, which
is almost uniformly level, though it contains a very extensive marsh, is as
healthy (...) as favorable to longevity as any town in the State; as may be
evident from an inspection of the tables of mortality for that place.

The natives of foreign countries who remove to this part of America, generally
live to a great age; if they do not impair their constitutions by spirituous
liquors. There are, indeed, some veteran sots, natives of this as well as other
countries; who render themselves burdensome to society, and contemptible in
their advanced age. The purity of our air, and plenty of food, are doubtless
the causes of their surviving such frequent draughts of liquid poison.

Attempts have been made at several times to ascertain the number of people in
New Hampshire. The late Governor Wentworth was ordered by the British ministry
to take an exact survey; but 'having no fund to pay the expense, and no law to
compel obedience' to the order, he was subjected to the inconvenience of delay
and disappointment. The number of the people however, in 1767, was estimated at
52,700. Another estimate was made in 1774, of which I have met with no official
account; but have been informed that it was 85,000. This was too high. The
estimate given to Congress by the delegates of New Hampshire, at the
commencement of the ^^^lution, was still more extravagant. A survey taken in
1775, partly by enumeration and partly by estimation, for the purpose of
establishing an adequate representation of the people, made the whole number
82,200.

I have taken much pains to collect from the several towns the numbers lost by
means of the late war. By accounts received from 27 towns in different parts of
the State, (...) number lost amounts to 377. These twenty seven towns,
according to the survey in 1775, contained 22,749 inhabitants. If a comparison
be made, by the rule of proportion, between these and the other towns in the
State; the number lost out of the whole, will amount to 136^^; and if a farther
allowance be made for the maritime towns, the number may fairly be estimated at
1400. As these were mostly men in the prime and vigor of life, we ought to
take into the account not only the simple loss of so many lives, but a decrease
of population, equal to the increase which probably would have been made, had
they lived to this time. If we reckon this increase in the proportion of three
to one, it will produce the sum of 4200, which, added to the original number,
will make 5600. But allowing the 600 for casualties, we may moderately compute
5000 persons, less than the number would have been, had the last fifteen years
been all years of peace.

The census taken by order of Congress in 1790, is the most correct account
which has ever been made. The whole amount is 142,018. If this be compared with
the number in 1775, and the difference divided, by the number of intervening
years, without any reference to the loss sustained by the war; the average of
increase will be 3987 per annum, for the last fifteen years. If the number in
1775 be compared with the number in 1767, and the difference divided by the
number of intervening years, the average per annum, for those eight years, will
be 3687. If a mean between these two, viz. 3883, be taken for the increasing
ratio per annum, since the year 1767, it will produce a number very nearly
corresponding with the number taken by the census in 1790. If this mode of
computation be just, the number of people in New Hampshire has actually doubled
in less than nineteen years, notwithstanding that seven of those nineteen were
years of war.

This may more clearly appear from the following table; in which the first
column contains the years; the second column shows the number in each year, by
the ratio of 3883; and the third the numbers by the ratio of 3687 for the first
eight years, and 3987 for the last fifteen.

TABLE of POPULATION.
1767 52700 52700 increasing by 3687. 68 56583 56387 69 60466 60074 1770 6^319
63761 71 68232 67448 72 7211^ 71135 73 75998 74822 74 79881 78509 75 83764
82196 76 87647 86183 increasing by 3987. 77 91530 90170 78 95413 94157 79 99296
98144 1780 103179 102131 81 107062 106118 82 110945 110105 83 114828 114092 84
118711 118079 85 122594 122066 86 126477 126053 87 130360 130040 88 134243
134027 89 138126 138014 1790 142009 142001

In both columns, the half of the number taken by the (...), viz. 7100^, (...)
between the years 1771 and 1772; a period (...) of nineteen years, from 179^.

This rapid increase of population, is partly (...) and partly adventitious.
The dis^^^ction between these two causes is evident; (...) to ascertain the
precise limits of their respective operations, is impracticable, without a more
minute survey than has ever yet been taken. Large emigrations have been made
face the peace of 1763, from the neighboring States, into the new townships of
New Hampshire. Those from the old towns to (...) new, have been also very
considerable; and though at first view these latter may not (...) to have
augmented the number of the people; yet upon a more close attention to the
subject, it will be found that even in them there is a productive cause of
increase. Where land is cheap, and the means of subsistence may be acquired in
such plenty, and in so short a time as is evidently the case in our new
plantations, encouragement is given to early marriage. A young man who has
cleared a piece of land, and built a but for his present accommodation, soon
begins to experience the truth of that old adage, It is not good for man to be
alone. Having a prospect of increasing his substance by labor, which ^he knows
himself able to perform, he attaches himself to a female earlier than prudence
would dictate if he had not such a prospect. Nor are the young females of the
country averse to a settlement in the new plantations; where, after the second
year's labor, by which the land is brought into pasture, there is a necessity
for beginning the work of a dairy; an employment which always falls to their
lot, and is an object of their ambition, as well as interest.

TABLE of BAPTISMS and DEATHS in Hampton, collected from the church records of
the Rev. WARD COTTON.
Years. Deaths. Baptisms. Ages. Male. Female. under 2 years. 6^ 1735 15 19 21
between 2 and 5 3^ 36 69 22 28 5 10 1^ 37 16 21 23 10 20 23 38 19 27 22 20 30
24 39 25 26 15 30 40 9 1740 14 20 15 40 50 7 41 ^^ 15 27 50 60 8 42 21 ^0 ^^ 60
70 9 43 ^^ 17 17 70 80 13 44 9 19 19 80 90 5 90 100 8 Total 216 206 199 Deaths
21^ Adults 19 Baptisms 424 under 2 years. ^^ 1745 32 22 20 between 2 and 5 26
46 13 23 16 5 10 23 47 16 25 15 10 20 26 48 19 22 19 20 30 10 49 26 14 22 30 40
13 17^0 17 16 17 40 50 5 51 15 18 1^ 50 60 10 52 16 11 ^0 60 70 13 53 14 18 15
70 80 16 54 53 19 21 80 90 16 90 100 3 Total 221 188 178 Deaths 221 Adults 5
Baptisms 371

TABLE of BAPTISMS and DEATHS in Hampton, continued.
Years. Deaths. Baptisms. Ages. Male. Female. under 2 years. 44 1755 32 13 17
between 2 and 5 7 56 36 19 16 5 10 14 57 13 20 16 10 20 13 58 23 20 12 20 30 16
59 21 14 18 30 40 13 1760 19 23 21 40 50 11 61 12 19 18 50 60 5 62 15 13 18 60
70 21 63 16 16 14 70 80 30 64 no record. 18 22 80 90 9 90 100 4 187 175 172
Deaths 187 Adults 10 Baptisms 357

TABLE of BAPTISMS and DEATHS in Hampton, by the Rev. EBENEZER THAYER.
Years. Deaths. Baptisms. Ages. Male. Female. under 2 years. 23 1767 7 30 14
between 2 and 5 6 68 10 13 13 5 10 2 69 10 15 15 10 20 7 1770 14 20 16 20 30 13
71 7 8 11 30 40 5 72 11 9 15 40 50 7 73 12 19 17 50 60 9 74 8 15 14 60 70 8 75
12 11 7 70 80 17 76 24 16 13 80 90 15 90 100 3 115 156 135 Deaths 115 Adults 3
Baptisms 294

TABLE of BAPTISMS and DEATHS in Hampton, continued.
Years. Deaths. Baptisms. Ages. Male. Female. under 2 years 26 1777 9 14 9
between 2 and 5 7 78 11 10 17 5 10 6 79 11 18 5 10 20 4 1780 9 11 13 20 30 7 81
7 16 8 30 40 2 82 6 17 4 40 50 6 83 14 14 16 50 60 4 84 9 12 10 60 70 8 85 12 7
8 70 80 16 86 11 9 8 80 90 10 90 100 3 99 128 92 Deaths 99 Adults 2 Baptisms
228 under 2 years 9 1787 13 13 11 between 2 and 5 1 88 12 10 15 5 10 2 89 13 8
9 10 20 ^ 90 5 10 12 20 30 7 91 3 9 5 30 40 1 to October -- -- -- 40 50 2 31.
46 50 52 50 60 ^ 60 70 3 70 80 8 80 90 11 90 100 2 Deaths 46 Baptisms 102

TABLE of CASUALTIES in Hampton.
Casualties. 1735 to 1744 1745 to 1754 1755 to 1763 Accident 6 4 1 Apoplexy 2 2
Asthma 1 Cancer 3 2 4 Childbed 12 5 ^ Cholic 2 3 3 Consumption 15 26 21
Convulsions 8 15 11 Dropsy 3 2 Dysentery 1 4 7 Fevers 16 30 41 Jaundice 1 1
King's evil 2 The term long sickness is peculiar. It probably means the same
with consumption.
Long sickness 5 2 1 Mania^ 2 1 Measles 3 Mortification 1 2 Old age 1^ 12 9
Palsy 2 9 8 Pleurisy 2 1 2 Quinsy 1 1 2 Rheumatism 1 Smallpox 4 Sore mouth 1 3
3 Strangury 2 3 2 Suddenly 7 2 11 Throat distemper 91 60 30 In the class
unknown are included the nameless disorders of young children* and the
still-born.
Unknown 28 28 13 Whooping cough 2 Total 2^6 221 187

TABLE of CASUALTIES in Hampton, continued.
Casualties. 1767 to 1776 1777 to 1786 1787 to 1791 Accident 7 1 2 Asthma 1
Bleeding 1 Cancer 2 1 Childbed 1 ^ Cholic 1 Consumption 27 21 9 Convulsions 5
13 2 Dropsy 1 5 Dysentery 9 2 ^ Fevers 12 9 ^ Gravel 1 1 Jaundice 2 3 Lethargy
1 Measles 1 Mortification 4 4 2 Nervous head ach 1 Old age 14 6 7 Palsy 6 7 3
Quinsy 1 1 Rheumatism 1 Schir^us 1 Smallpox 1 Scrophula 2 Sore mouth 1 Suddenly
3 3 6 Throat distemper 3 7 Violence 1 Whooping cough 2 3 Worms 6 2 ^ Unknown 7
3 ^1 115 99 46

TABLE of BAPTISMS and DEATHS in Newmarket, collected from the Records of the
Rev. JOHN MOODY, by WENTWORTH CHESWILL, Esquire.
Years. Deaths. Baptisms. Ages. 1731 7 30 under 5 37 32 9 14 between 5 and 10 7
33 1 21 10 20 3 34 1 18 20 30 1 35 18 20 30 40 1 36 11 31 40 50 2 37 7 22 50 60
1 38 4 19 60 70 5 39 4 28 70 80 2 1740 1 22 80 90 1 90 100 above 100 1 age
unknown 2 63 225 63 1741 9 29 42 9 44 under 5 63 43 33 44 between 5 and 10 17
44 11 26 10 20 7 45 3 23 20 30 4 46 11 22 30 40 5 47 4 26 40 50 5 48 8 17 50 60
5 49 14 28 60 70 2 1750 12 24 70 80 2 80 90 90 100 age unknown 4 114 ^^3 114

TABLE of BAPTISMS and DEATHS in Newmarket, continued.
Years. Deaths. Baptisms. Ages. 1751 25 27 under 5 98 52 47 36 between 5 and 10
32 53 32 17 10 20 21 54 21 23 20 30 19 55 19 24 30 40 11 56 13 26 40 50 8 57 18
29 50 60 16 58 24 24 60 70 16 59 21 20 70 80 5 1760 19 20 80 90 7 90 100 1 age
unknown 5 239 246 239 1761 23 34 under 5 53 62 8 25 between 5 and 10 5 63 8 28
10 20 6 64 13 24 20 30 12 65 12 16 30 40 5 66 25 19 40 50 8 67 18 16 50 60 7 68
8 7 60 70 13 69 9 13 70 80 17 1770 14 12 80 90 8 90 100 age unknown 4 138 194
138

TABLE of DEATHS in Dover, by JEREMY BELKNAP.
Years. No. of Deaths. Ages. No. 1767 9 under 2 years 46 68 17 between 2 and 5
9 69 19 5 10 14 1770 16 10 20 6 71 23 20 30 10 72 17 30 40 15 73 15 40 50 13 74
10 50 60 6 75 12 60 70 22 76 47 70 80 28 80 90 13 185 90 100 2 abroad in the
war 8 above 100 1 193 185 1777 29 under 2 years 47 78 16 between 2 and 5 20 79
9 5 10 7 1780 20 10 20 12 81 8 20 30 14 82 22 30 40 9 83 23 40 50 14 84 24 50
60 13 85 33 60 70 15 86 8 70 80 20 to Sept. 80 90 18 192 90 100 3 abroad in the
war 21 192 213

Of unmarried females between 15 and 25 years of age, eight died in 20 years.

Of married females of the same age, four.

Still-born children are not reckoned in this table.

No account of Births could be obtained. Many of the inhabitants being Quakers;
and of the others, many did not bring their children to Baptism.

TABLE of CASUALTIES in Dover.
Casualties. 1767 to 1776 1777 to 1786 Accidents 11 10 Apoplexy 1 3 Asthma 3
Bleeding 2 Cancer 1 1 Childbed 7 3 Cholic 3 1 Cough and fever 5 Whooping cough
1 10 Consumption 26 34 Convulsions 5 3 Decay of nature 19 16 Dropsy 6 14
Drunkenness 1 Dysentery 2 17 Felones de fe 2 Fevers 25 17 Gravel 1 Jaundice 4 3
Iliac passion 1 King's evil 2 Mania 1 2 Measles 1 Children in the month 20 17
Mortification 5 Nervous head ach 3 1 Palsy 5 6 Quinsy 1 7 Ricke^s 2 Rheumatism
1 Strangury 3 Suddenly 4 ^ Throat distemper 1 11 Thrush 1 (...) Worm^ 19 4 185
19^

TABLE of DEATHS in East-Kingston, collected from the records of the Rev. PETER
COFFIN, by the Rev. ISAAC MANSFIELD.
Years. No. of Deaths. Ages. No. 1740 4 under 1 year 19 41 5 between 1 and 3 20
42 6 3 5 8 43 8 5 10 6 44 21 10 20 8 45 6 20 30 7 46 18 30 40 3 47 6 40 50 5 48
14 50 60 8 49 6 94 94 1750 5 under 1 year 25 51 6 between 1 and 3 14 52 6 3 5 8
53 13 5 10 6 54 13 10 20 10 55 20 20 30 5 56 12 30 40 5 57 7 40 50 13 58 11 50
60 4 59 6 60 70 2 70 80 6 80 90 ^ 99 99

TABLE of DEATHS in East-Kingston, continued.
Years. No. of Deaths. Ages. No. 1760 14 under 1 year 20 61 8 between 1 and 3
10 62 2 3 5 63 3 5 10 5 64 10 10 20 6 65 6 20 30 14 66 5 30 40 1^ 67 4 40 50 4
68 6 50 60 4 69 4 60 70 7 1770 15 70 80 5 71 13 80 90 4 90 90

TABLE of BIRTHS and DEATHS in Wilton, by the Rev. ABEL FISKE.
Years. Deaths. Births. Excess of births. 1784 11 47 36 85 7 49 42 86 6 3^ 32
87 11 49 38 88 14 29 15 89 2 37 35 90 20 32 12 71 281 210

Progress of POPULATION in Wilton.
Years. Numbers. 1739 2 families. 1755 70 persons. 1763 240 1775 623 1786 1013
1790 1105

TABLE of DEATHS and CASUALTIES in Conway, by the Rev. NATHANIEL PORTER.
From Oct. 1778, to Oct. 1790.
under 9 years, chiefly Throat distemper 37 Fevers 3 Mortification 2 Dropsy 2
Asth^^ 1 Sudd^^ 2 Decay of nature AEt. 90 1 Consumption, AE. 48 1 Canker 2 Felo
de se 1 Accidents 3 Total 55

TABLE of DEATHS in Exeter, by the Rev. ISAAC MANSFIELD.
Years. Deaths. 1784 22 85 27 86 26 87 31 88 20 126

under 1 year 18 between 1 and 3 9 3 5 5 5 10 5 10 20 9 20 30 17 30 40 10 40 50
10 50 60 6 60 70 11 70 80 12 80 90 12 90 100 2 Total 126

TABLE of CASUALTIES in Exeter, by the Rev. ISAAC MANSFIELD.
Casualties. No. Accident 6 Apoplexy 1 Asthma 2 Cancer 4 Childbed 5 Cholera
morbus 1 Complication of disorders 1 Consumption 39 Convulsions 4 Decay of
Nature 12 Diarrhaea 1 Dropsy 5 Epilepsy 1 Fever-nervous 7 -- mixed 2 --
pulmonic 2 -- putrid 1 Gravel 1 Mortification 1 Palsy 5 Quinsy 3 Scarlet fever
4 Schirrus 1 Scrophula 1 Throat distemper 6 Whooping cough 3 Unknown 7 Total
126

Remarkable instances of Longevity.
In DOVER, Howard Henderson died in 1772, aged upwards of 100 years. In the
former part of his life he was a seaman, and served on board the fleet of Sir
Clondesly Shovel, at the taking of Gibraltar from the Spaniards in 1704.

In DURHAM, John Buss, a preacher of the gospel for 33 years, but not ordained,
also a practitioner of physic, died in 1736, at the age of 108. He was
remarkably active and vigorous at a very advanced age.

The family of Col. James Davis, whose name is mentioned in the preceding
History, (pages 274, 332, 347) was remarkable for longevity as well as superior
stature.

His children
The father died in 1749, aged 88 James 93 Thomas 88 Samuel 1788, 99 Daniel 65
Sarah 91 Hannah 77 Elizabeth 79 Ephraim 1791, 87 Phebe AEt. 85, and the widow
of Samuel AEt. 102, are yet living.
In LONDONDERRY, the first planters lived, on an average, to 80 years; some to
90, and others to 100. Among the last was William Scoby, who died at the age of
104. The two last heads of the sixteen families who began the planting of that
town, died there in 1782, aged about 93 years each. They were women.

In CHESTER, James Wilson died in 1739, aged 100 years.

James Shirley in 1754, aged 105.

Another person of the same name, aged 91, was living in 1790.

William Craigie and his wife died in 1775, each aged 100.

In NEWMARKET, William Perkins died in 1732, aged 116. He was born in the West
of England. Governor Burnet visited him at Newmarket, and examined him
respecting many facts and occurrences during the civil wars in England in the
last century. His son died in 1757, aged 87. Several of his grand children have
lived above 70 years.

In BARRINGTON, fourteen of the first planters were living in 1785, who were
between 80 and 90 years of age. The settlement began in 1732.

In ATKINSON, Ebenezer Belknap died at the age of 95, and his wife at the age
of 107.

In WAKEFIELD, Robert Macklin, a native of Scotland, died in 1787, at the age
of 115* He lived several years in Portsmouth, and followed the occupation of a
Baker. He frequently walked from Portsmouth to Boston, 66 miles, in one day,
and returned in another. This journey he performed, the last time, at the age
of 80.

In SALEM (a town adjoining the southern boundary) Abiel Asten, one of
Lovewell's brave company, who behaved gallantly at the Battle of Pigwacket, in
1725, was living in 1790, aged 86.

The two eldest, Ministers of the gospel now living, are the Rev. James Pike of
Somersworth, aged 88, and the Rev. Ebenezer Flagg of Chester, aged 87.

CHAP. XV. Political Character, Genius, Manners, Employments and Diversions of
the People.
IT is much less difficult and dangerous to describe the character of the dead
than of the living; but in so great (...) variety as the inhabitants of a whole
State, there cannot but be some general traits which all must allow to be just;
and which, however disagreeable, if applied particularly, yet will no^ be
disrelished by any, when delivered only in general terms* it is not my wi^h to
exaggerate either the virtues or defects of my countrym^n; but as a^ American,
I have a right to speak the truth, concerning them, if my language be within
the limits of decency.

The genius and character of a community are in some measure influenced by
their government and political connexions. Before the Revolution, the people of
the different parts of New Hampshire, had but little connection with each other.
They might have been divided into three classes. Those of the old towns, and
the emigrants from them. Those on the southern border, most of whom were
emigrants from Massachusetts; and those on Connecticut river, who came chiefly
from Connecticut.

Of the first class the people might be subdivided into those who, having been
trained in subjection to Crown Officers, were expectants of favors from
government, and ready to promote the views of the aristocracy; and those who,
from principle or habit, were in opposition to those views. A long and
intin^^^e connection with Massachusetts, both in peace and war, kept alive a
democratic principle; which, though it met with the frowns of men in office,
yet when excited to action, could not be controled by their authority. The
people of the second class were naturally attached to Massachusetts, whence
they originated, and where they were connected in trade. Some towns had
suffered by the interference of grants made by both governments and by
controversies concerning the line; which gave birth to law suits, carried on
with great acrimony and expense for many years. Those of the third class
brought with them an affection and respect for the colony whence they
emigrated, and where the democratic principle had always prevailed. They
entertained an inferior idea of the people in the maritime parts of the State;
whilst these in return looked with an envious eye on those emigrants to whom
were sold the lands which had been promised to be given (...) them as a reward
for the exertions and sufferings of their parents and themselves in de^er^ing
the country against its enemies.

Another (...) of disunion was the unequal representation of the people in the
General Assembly. As late a^ the year 1773, of one hundred and forty-seven
towns, forty-six only were represented, by thirty-four members; and several
towns were classed, two or three together, for the choice of one. The towns of
Nottingham and Concord, though full of people, and of above forty years
standing, had not once been admitted to the privilege of representation; and
this was the case with many other towns; which, though not of so long
settlement, yet contained more inhabitants than some others, which had always
enjoyed the privilege. No uniform system of representation had been adopted.
None could be established by law, because it was claimed by the Governor as
part of the royal prerogative to call Representatives from new towns; and this
prerogative was exercised without any regard to the rights, the petitions, or
the sentiments of the people.

Before the year 1771 the Province was not divided into counties; but every
cause from even the most remote parts was brought to Portsmouth, where the
courts were held and the public offices were filled by a few men, most of whom
were either members of the Council, or devoted to the interest of the Governor,
or personally related to him. In the administration of justice, frequent
complaints were made of partiality. Parties were sometimes heard out of court,
and the practice of watering the jury was familiarly known to those persons who
had much business in the Law. The dernier resort was to a court of appeals,
consisting of the Governor and Council; of whom seven were a quorum and four a
majority. Here the final sentence was often passed by the same persons who had
been concerned in the former decisions; unless the cause were of such value as
to admit of an appeal to the King in Council. During the administration of the
last Governor, some of these sources of disaffection were removed; but others
remained, for an experiment, whether a cure could be effected, by a change of
government.

The Revolution which called the democratic power into action, has repressed
the aristocratic spirit. The honors and emoluments of office are more generally
diffused; the people enjoy more equal privileges, and, after a long dissension,
are better united. Government is a science, and requires education and
information, as well a^ judgment and prudence. Indeed there are some who have
struggled through all the disadvantages arising from the want of early
education, and by force of native genius and industry, have acquired those
qualifications which have enabled them to render eminent service to the
community; and there are others who have been favored with early education,
and have improved their opportunity to good purpose. Notwithstanding which, the
deficiency of persons qualified for the various departments in Government, has
been much regretted, and by none, more than by those few, who know how public
business ought to be conducted. This deficiency is daily decreasing; the means
of knowledge are extending; prejudices are wearing away, and the political
character of the people is manifestly improving.

But however late the Inhabitants of New Hampshire may be, in political
improvement; yet they have long possessed other valuable qualities which have
rendered them an important branch of the American union. Firmness of nerve,
patience in fatigue, intrepidity in danger and alertness in action, are to be
numbered among their native and essential characteristics.

Men who are concerned in traveling, hunting, cutting timber, making roads and
other employments in the forest, are inured to hardships. They frequently lie
out in the woods several days or weeks together in all seasons of the year. A
hut composed of (...) and bark, suffices them for shelter; and on the open side
of it, a large fire secures them from the severity of the weather. Wrapped in a
blanket with their feet next the fire, they pass the longest and coldest
nights, and awake vigorous for labor the succeeding day. Their food, when thus
employed, is salted pork or beef, with potatoes and bread of Indian corn; and
their best drink is water mixed with ginger; though many of them are fond of
distilled spirits, which, however, are less noxious in such a situation than at
home. Those who begin a new settlement, live at first in a style not less
simple. They erect a square building of poles, notched at the ends to keep them
fast together. The crevices are plaistered with clay or the stiffest earth
which can be had, mixed with moss or straw. The roof is either bark or split
boards. The chimney a pile of stones; within which a fire is made on the
ground, and a hole is left in the roof for the smoke to pass out. Another hole
is made in the side of the house for a window, which is occasionally closed
with a wooden shutter. In winter, a constant fire is kept, by night as well as
by day; and in summer it is necessary to have a continual smoke on account of
the musquetos and other insects with which the woods abound. The same defense
is used for the cattle; smokes of leaves and brush are made in the pastures
where they feed by day, and in the pens where they are folded by night. Ovens
are built at a small distance from the houses, of the best stones which can be
found, cemented and plaistered with clay or stiff earth. Many of these first
essays in housekeeping, are to be met with in the new plantations, which serve
to lodge whole families, till their industry can furnish them with materials,
for a more regular and comfortable house; and till their land is so well
cleared as that a proper situation for it can be chosen. By these methods of
living, the people are familiarised to hardships; their children are early used
to coarse food and hard lodging; and to be without shoes in all seasons of the
year is scarcely accounted a want. By such hard fare, and the labor which
accompanies it, many young men have raised up families, and in a few years have
acquired property sufficient to render themselves independent freeholders; and
they feel all the pride and importance which arise from a consciousness of
having well earned their estates.

They have also been accustomed to hear their parents relate the dangers and
hardships, the scenes of Blood and desolation through which they and their
ancestors have passed; and they have an ambition to emulate their hardy
virtues. New Hampshire may therefore be considered as a nursery of stern
heroism; producing men of firmness and valor; who can traverse mountains and
deserts, encounter hardships, and face an enemy without terror. Their martial
spirit needs only opportunity to draw it into action; and when properly trained
to regular military duty, and commanded by officers in whom they can place
confidence, they form a militia fully equal to the defense of their country.

They are also very dextrous in the use of edge tools, and in applying
mechanical powers to the elevation and removal of heavy bodies. In the
management of cattle they are excelled by none. Most of their labor is
performed by the help of oxen; horses are seldom employed in the team; but are
used chiefly in the saddle, or in the winter season, in sleighs.

Land being easily obtained, and labor of every kind being familiar, there is
great encouragement to population. A good husbandman, with the savings of a few
years, can purchase new land enough to give his elder sons a settlement, and
assist them in clearing a lot and building a hut; after which they soon learn
to support themselves. The homestead is generally given to the youngest son,
who provides for his parents, when age or infirmity incapacitates them for
labor. An unmarried man of thirty years old is rarely to be found in our
country towns. The women are grandmothers at forty, and it is not uncommon for
a mother and daughter to have each a child at the breast, at the same time; nor
for a father, son and grandson, to be at work together in the same field. Thus
population and cultivation proceed together, and a vigorous race of inhabitants
grows up, on a soil, which labor vies with nature to render productive.

Those persons, who attend chiefly to husbandry, are the most thriving and
substantial. Those who make the getting of lumber their principal business,
generally work hard for little profit. This kind of employment interferes too
much with husbandry. The best season for sawing logs is the spring, when the
rivers are high; this is also the time for ploughing and planting. He who works
in the saw-mill at that time, must buy his bread and clothing, and the hay for
his cattle, with (...) lumber; and he generally anticipates the profit of his
labor. Long credit is a disadvantage to him; and the too free indulgence of
spirituous liquor, to which this class of people are much addicted, hurts their
health* their morals and their interest. They are always in debt, and
frequently at law. Their families are ill provided with necessaries, and their
children are without education o^ morals. When a man makes husbandry his
principal employment, and attends to lumber only a^ seasons of leisure; and can
afford to keep it for a market, and be his own factor, then it becomes
profitable. The profits of the other generally goes into the hands of the
trader, who supplies him with necessaries at an advanced price, and keeps him
in a state of dependence.

Where husbandry is the employment of the men, domestic manufactures are
carried on by the women. They spin and weave their own flax and wool; and their
families are clad in cloth of their own making. The people of Londonderry, and
the towns which are made up of emigrants from it, attend largely to the
manufacture of linen cloth and thread, and make great quantities for sale.
These people are industrious, frugal and hospitable. The men are sanguine and
robust. The women are of lively dispositions, and the native white and red
complexion of Ireland is not lost in New Hampshire. The town is much indebted
to them for its wealth and consequence. MS. (...) of the Rev. William. (...) of
Londonderry.


The people of New Hampshire, in general, are industrious, and allow themselves
very little time for diversion. One who indulges himself in idleness and play,
is stigmatized according to his demerit. At military musters, at Judicial
Courts, at the raising of houses, at the launching of ships, and at the
ordination of Ministers, which are seasons of public concourse, the young
people amuse themselves with dancing. In some towns they have a practice, at
Christmas, of shooting geese for wagers; and on many other occasions, the
diversion of firing at marks is very common, and has an excellent effect in
forming young men to a dexterous use of arms. The time of gathering the Indian
corn is always a season of festivity. The ears are gathered and brought home by
day; and in the evening a company of neighbors join in husking them, and
conclude their labor with a supper and a dance. In the capital towns they have
regular assemblies for dancing; and sometimes theatrical entertainments have
been given by the young gentlemen and (...). In Portsmouth, there is as much
elegance and politeness of manners* as in any of the capital towns of
New England. It is often visited by strangers, who always meet with a friendly
and hospitable reception.

The free indulgence of spirituous liquors, has been, and is now, one of the
greatest faults of many of the people of New Hampshire; especially in the
neighborhood of the river Pascataqua, and its branches, and wherever the
business of getting lumber forms the principal employment of the people. If the
reader is curious to form an estimate of the quantity of distilled spirits
consumed in the State, he may satisfy himself, partly by inspecting the Table
of importation; partly by inquiring the number of barrels of Rum manufactured
at the only distill house in the State; partly by considering the quantity
transported by land from the different seaports of Massachusetts, and partly by
knowing the allowance which is usually given to laboring people in the
neighborhood of the river Pascataqua; and which is obstinately persisted in,
notwithstanding the remonstrances and endeavors of some worthy characters to
abolish it.

In traveling up the country it affords pleasure to observe the various
articles of produce and manufacture coming to market; but in traveling down
the country, it is equally disgustful to meet the same teams returning, loaded
with casks of rum, along with fish, salt and other necessary articles.

Before the Revolution it was customary to give drams at funerals, and in some
towns to repeat the baneful dose two or three times. During the war, a scarcity
of materials gave opportunity to put a check on this pernicious practice. It is
now less common in most places, and in some it is wholly disused.

Among husbandmen, cider is their common drink. Malt liquor is not so frequent
as its wholesomeness deserves; and as the facility with which barley and hops
may be raised, seems to require. In some of the new towns a liquor is made of
spruce twigs, boiled in maple sap, which is extremely pleasant. But after all,
there are no persons more robust and healthy, than those, whose only or
principal drink is the simple element, with which nature has universally and
bountifully supplied this happy land.

CHAP. XVI. Constitution, Laws, Revenue and Militia.
THE form of government, established in 1784, is founded on these two grand
principles, viz. 1. That the people have the sole and exclusive right of
governing themselves, as a free, sovereign and independent State; exercising
and enjoying every power, jurisdiction and right pertaining thereto, which is
not, or may not hereafter be by them expressly delegated to the United States
of America, in Congress assembled. And 2. That the three essential powers of
government, the legislative, executive and judicial ought to be kept as
separate from, and independent of each other, as the nature of a free
government will admit; or as is consistent with that chain of connection which
binds the whole fabric.

The rights of the people are particularly declared in thirty-eight articles
prefixed to the form of government. The objects of this declaration are
personal freedom, the security of property, and the peace and order of human
society.

By this constitution, the legislative power is vested in a GENERAL COURT,
consisting of a Senate and house of Representatives, each of which has a
negative upon the other. The SENATE consists of twelve persons chosen by the
several counties in the following proportions; five for Rockingham; two for
Strafford; two for Hillsborough; two for Cheshire, and one for Grafton. But the
General Court may divide the State into different districts, and assign the
number of Senators, in proportion to the public taxes, paid by each district.
The Senate, therefore, may be considered as representing the property of the
State.

The qualifications of a Senator are these. He must be thirty years of age; he
must have been resident in the State for seven years; and at the time of his
election, must be an inhabitant of the district for which he is chosen; he must
possess in his own right, a freehold of two hundred pounds value, within the
State, and he must be of the protestant religion.

The number of the house of REPRESENTATIVES is not limited; but the principles
on which it is professedly regulated, are population and equality. Every town
containing 150 rateable polls of twenty-one years of age, may elect one
representative. Every town containing 450 may choose two; the mean increasing
number for every representative being 300. This proportion is said to be as
equal as circumstances will admit. Towns which have less than 150 polls, are
generally classed for the choice of a representative.

The qualifications of a representative are two years' habitancy; an estate of
L100, one half of which is a freehold in the town he represents; actual
residence within the same, and a profession of the protestant religion.

Money bills originate in the house of Representatives; but may be amended by
the Senate. Impeachments are made by the house, and tried by the Senate. The
journals of both houses are printed; and upon the motion of any one member, the
yeas and nays on any question are taken and entered on the journals.

The executive power is vested in a PRESIDENT and COUNCIL. The PRESIDENT is
annually elected by the people in the same town-meetings where the Senators and
Representatives are chosen; but if there be not a majority in favor of one
person, the election is made by the General Court. The Representatives nominate
two out of the persons who have the highest number of votes, of which two, the
Senate by ballot, elect one to be President for the year.

The qualifications of the President are these. He must have been an inhabitant
of the State for seven years next preceding his election; he must be thirty
years of age; he must have an estate of L500 value, one half of which is a
freehold within the State, and he must profess the protestant religion.

The President of the State is also President of the Senate; having an equal
vote in legislation with any other member, and a casting vote in case of an
equal division

The COUNCIL consists of five persons, of whom two are chosen out of the Senate
and three out of the Representatives, by the joint ballot of both houses. Their
qualifications are the same as those of Senators.

Representatives to CONGRESS are chosen by the inhabitants in town meetings,
and the votes of each town are returned to the Secretary's office and laid
before the General Court. Those who have a majority of the votes are declared
duly elected; but if there be a deficiency, the General Court make a list of
such persons as have the highest number of votes, equal to double the number
wanting; this list is sent to the towns, and out of it they make the choice.
The votes then are returned as before; and the person or persons who have the
highest number are elected. If there be an equality it is decided by the
Secretary, who draws one of the two names.

In case of a vacancy, in the representation of the State in Congress, the
votes are taken in the same mannner, and returned to the President and Council.

By the constitution of the United States, the number of Representatives to
Congress is three. But according to the late census and the determination of
Congress that one Representative shall be chosen for every 30,000 inhabitants,
the State at the next election will be entitled to six.

The number of ELECTORS for the President and Vice President of the United
States is five; who are chosen in the same manner as the Representatives to
Congress. The two SENATORS in Congress are chosen by the General Court.

The Secretary, Treasurer and Commissary General of the State, are chosen by
the General Court. County Treasurers and Recorders of deeds, by the people in
town meetings; the votes are returned to the Courts of Sessions, and the person
who has the highest number of votes is declared elected; but in case of an
equality, the Justices present determine the choice. Clerks of courts are
appointed by the Justices, and no clerk can be of council to the parties.

The oath of fidelity to the State is as follows:

I, A B, do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare, that
the State of New Hampshire is and of right ought to be a free, sovereign and
independent State; and do swear that I will bear faith and true allegiance to
the same; and that I will endeavor to defend it against all treacherous
conspiracies and hostile attempts whatever. And I do further testify and
declare that no man or body of men has or can have a right to absolve me from
the obligation of this oath, declaration or affirmation; and that I do make
this acknowledgment, profession, testimony and declaration, honestly and truly,
according to the common acceptance of the foregoing words, without any
equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation whatever. So help me GOD.

The enacting style is By the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled. All indictments and informations conclude against the peace
and dignity of the State.

The seal of the State is, a field encompassed with laurels; on the field, a
ship on the stocks with American colors flying, and a pine tree fallen. In the
back ground, a rising ^un and a view of the ocean. The legend round the field
is in these words: SIGILLUM REIPUBLICAE NEO HANTONIENSIS, 1784.

All Judges, Sheriffs, Recorders of deeds, the Attorney and Commissary-General,
Secretary, Treasurer and continental military officers, the President,
Professors and Instructors of colleges, and officers of the customs are
incapable of having a seat in the legislature.

All judicial officers hold their places during good behavior; but are
removeable on the address of both houses of legislature, by the President, with
consent of the Council.

No person is capable of holding more than two offices of profit at the same
time; and no judge of the superior court can hold any other office than that of
justice of the peace, nor receive any pension or salary from any other State or
power whatever.

To preserve an adherence to the principles of the constitution, and to make
such alterations as experience may render necessary, provision was made, that
at the end of seven years, a convention should be called to revise the form of
government. The year 1791 being the seventh year, a Convention was called, and
is now subsisting by adjournment. Any alteration which may be proposed by them
must be laid before the towns and approved by two thirds of the qualified
voters present, before it can be established.

The judicial department consists of, 1st. A SUPERIOR COURT, in which a Chief
Justice presides, and three other Justices assist. This court has cognizance of
high crimes and misdemeanors. It receives appeals from the inferior courts and
courts of probate, and determines causes of marriage, divorce and alimony. It
has two circuits in a year, through the several counties. 2d. An INFERIOR COURT
in each county, where civil actions of a certain value originate; but no
criminal causes are tried. This court has four Justices, and is holden four
times in a year. 3d. A COURT of GENERAL SESSIONS of the peace, holden in each
county the same week as the inferior courts. It consists of the Justices of the
peace in the county. It has cognizance of smaller crimes and breaches of the
peace; and takes care of various occasional and prudential matters. 4th. A
COURT of PROBATE of wills in each county holden once in a month by one Judge
assisted by a Register. This court has cognizance of all matters relative to
the settlement and descent of estates, testate or intestate; the care of widows
and orphans, idiots and persons insane, and the management of confiscated
estates.

Civil actions of more than ten pounds value are brought first before the
Inferior Courts; from the judgment of which, either party may appeal to the
superior Court; where a new trial is had; and if either party think himself
aggrieved, he may within three years bring a writ of review, and have another
trial at the same court, which is final.

In all these courts, causes are determined by a jury of twelve freeholders;
who are chosen in the following manner. The Selectmen of the several towns make
a list of the names of all persons within their limits, who in their opinion
are qualified, and have an estate of fifty pounds value. One third of these
names are put into one box, and two thirds into another. Out of the former,
which is supposed to contain the names of the best qualified, are drawn jurors
for the superior, out of the other for the inferior court. This is done in
public town meeting, by the town clerk, or one of the selectmen; and a summons
having been previously sent, by the constable, to the persons thus chosen,
their names are returned to the clerk of the court. Grand jurors are also
chosen by the inhabitants assembled in town meeting. Before the year 1758,
jurors were appointed by the sheriff according to the custom in England.

In criminal causes, a grand jury consisting of any number, between twelve and
twenty-four, find a bill of indictment; which is afterward tried, by a petit
jury of twelve, who must be unanimous in their verdict. In the trial of
criminals, the courts proceed with great tenderness. The system of penal laws
is mild. Six offenses only are capital; arson, burglary, murder, robbery,
sodomy and treason. During the last twenty-five years, there have been no more
than two capital executions in the State, both of which were for murder.

A collection of the laws was made and printed in 1771, to which were prefixed
the commissions of President CUTTS, and of the then Governor; and several acts
of Parliament which related to the colonies were intermixed. The laws made
after the revolution were printed in 1780. To this edition was prefixed the
temporary constitution during the war; and subsequent acts were printed in a
similar page till the year 1789, when a new edition was printed containing the
perpetual laws, passed since the revolution. To this edition is prefixed the
present form of government, and bill of rights. Another and more perfect
edition is now in the press.

It is difficult for any person, but one whose professional business leads him
to a practical acquaintance with the laws, to give a just and comprehensive
view of the whole system; dispersed as it is in several books, and many loose
papers; some of which are confessed to be imperfect. Such particulars as can be
supposed of any importance, to persons not residing in the State, shall be
briefly mentioned. The inhabitants may easily obtain more exact information.

CONVEYANCE of real estate is made by deeds signed, sealed and acknowledged
before a justice of the peace, and recorded in the office of county register. A
conveyance is not valid against any other person but the grantor, unless it be
thus acknowledged and recorded. Powers of attorney, by which a conveyance is
made, and affidavits in perpetuam rei memoriam may also be recorded; and a copy
from the record is legal evidence.

DEBTS, not exceeding ten pounds value, may be recovered before a single
justice of the peace; who may grant a rule to refer the same to persons
mutually chosen, and upon their reward may enter judgment and issue execution.
If a debtor confess before a justice a debt not exceeding ten pounds, a record
is made, and execution is issued or stayed by consent of the parties. Mutual
debts and executions may be set off against each other, and the balance, if
any, may be levied by the sheriff. Prisoners sor debt are allowed a chamber in
the jailor's house, and liberty of the yard. They may employ themselves in the
business of nail-making, the materials for which are provided by the county;
and the labourer is allowed one fourth part of the nails which he makes. If he
make oath that he is not worth more than six pounds and one suit of clothes, he
may be discharged from confinement; but not from his obligation to the creditor.

Criminal prisoners may be sentenced by the courts to make nails; which are to
be taken in payment of the fines, damages or costs to which they are by law
subjected for their offenses.

ESTATES may be devised by will, attested and subscribed in the presence of
three witnesses. Posthumous children, and children for whom no legacy is
devised in the will of the parent, have the same right in the estate, as if the
devisor had died intestate. Probate of wills must be made within thirty days;
and executors must give bond, for the faithful performance of duty Division of
estates is ordered by the judge of probate, on the application of the heirs;
and where an estate lies in common with others, partition is made by the same
authority.

ESTATES INTESTATE descend in equal shares, to children or their legal
representatives, and the dower to widows. Personal estate is liable for debts;
and, if insufficient, real estate is also chargeable; provision to be first
made for the widow out of the personal estate, by the judge. Administration is
granted to the widow, or next of kin, or to both, at the discretion of the
judge, within thirty days after the decease; and if the widow or next of kin
neglect or refuse to administer, then letters of administration may be granted,
to one or more of the principal creditors, upon giving bond with sureties. The
judge also appoints guardians for minors (...) persons non compos, and
representatives for absent heirs.

The husband during his life is heir to his wife as tenant by courtesy.

If creditors living within the State neglect to exhibit demands beyond two
years, or ^^^ing without the State, beyond three years, after a will be proved
or administration be taken, the debt is extinguished.

Executors and administrators are exempt from personal arrests, unless in case
of waste and embezzelment.

ESTATES INSOLVENT are distributed in average among creditors, by commissioners
appointed by the judge of probate. The reversion of widow's dower is subjected
to the payment of debts; and may be sold as the rest of the estate.

Proprietors of LANDS, holden in common, and undivided, may agree upon methods
of calling proprietary meetings; but where no particular mode has been agreed
on, the owners of one sixteenth part of the whole interest may obtain a
warrant, from a justice of the peace, to call a meeting; which warrant must be
printed in the New Hampshire gazette. The share of every proprietor is charged
with the payment of any sums, voted at a legal meeting, and of all public
taxes. The collectors have a right to ^ell the shares for non payment;
reserving to the proprietor, liberty of redemption, within two months*

Tretpassers on common lands are liable to the payment of heavy fines, if
convicted on positive proof; but when circumstantial evidence only appears,
they have the liberty of clearing themselves by oath.

Partition of common lands may be ordered by the judge of probate in the county
where the land lies.

Grants of land cannot be forfeited for nonperformance of conditions, but by
the verdict of a jury, after a solemn hearing in the superior court, at the
prosecution of the attorney general. After a verdict of forfeiture, the judges
have a power of chancery, in favor of individual grantees.

The dimensions of the different kinds of LUMBER are regulated by law.
Surveyors were formerly chosen by the towns; but are now appointed by the
President and Council, at those places where lumber is delivered. The penalty
for delivering or receiving lumber without a survey, is a forfeiture of one
fourth part.

MARRIAGES were formerly solemnised, by virtue either of a publishment, or of a
license from the Governor. The granting of these licenses was accounted part of
the royal prerogative; but this practice ceased at the revolution. The
intention of the parties is now uniformly published three times, within the
towns where they reside. Ministers of the gospel and justices of the peace may
perform the marriage ceremony, within the limits of the county. Any other
person, presuming to do it, is subjected to a fine of one hundred pounds;
saving to the people called Quakers, their peculiar custom. A return of
marriages is made to the town-clerks, and recorded.

On the SABBATH, all unnecessary traveling, loitering and indecent behavior
are forbidden, under certain penalties. Tything men in the several towns are to
see this law executed.

SLAVERY is not prohibited by any express law. Negroes were never very numerous
in New Hampshire. Some of them purchased their freedom, during the late war, by
serving three years in the army. Others have been made free by the justice and
humanity of their masters. In Massachusetts, they are all accounted free, by
the first article in the dec^^^^tion of rights. All men are born free and
equal. In the bill of rights of New Hampshire, the first article is expressed
in these words, All men are born equally free and independent; which, in the
opinion of most persons, will bear the same construction. But others have
deduced from it this inference, that all who are born, since the constitution
(...) made, are free; and that those who were in slavery before, remain so
still. For this reason, in the late census, the blacks, in New Hampshire, are
distinguished into free and slaves. It is not in my power to apologize for this
inconsistency. However, the condition of most of those who are called slaves,
is preferable to that of many who are free in the neighboring State. They are
better provided with necessaries; their labor is not more severe than that of
the white people in general; and they are equally under the protection of the
law. By a law made in the 4th of George I. and still in force, it is enacted;
that if any man smite out the eye or tooth of his man servant or maid servant,
or otherwise maim and disfigure them, he shall let him or her go free from his
service; (...) shall allow such further recompense as the court of quarter
sessions shall adjudge. Also, that if any person kill his Indian or negro
servant* he shall be punished with death.


Slitting and rolling mills for iron, linseed oil mills, and sail cloth
manufactories, are exempted from taxes for ten years.

Flax-seed is put up in casks of seven bushels, or three bushels and a half.
Inspectors of flax-seed, and of pot and pearl-ashes, are appointed by the
president and council, who are to examine the contents of each cask, and brand
it for exportation.

Every township in New Hampshire is a distinct corporation, having a power of
choosing all town officers, which are named in the laws, and of raising money
by taxes for the support of ministers, schools, bridges, highways, the
maintenance of the poor, and other public purposes. Three or five SELECTMEN are
annually chosen in each town, who are entrusted with its general concerns, and
are commonly styled FATHERS of the town, a name expressive of their prudential
character, and of the confidence which is reposed in them by the people.

Before the assumption of the State debts by the Congress, the public revenue
of the State arose from three sources; an impost, an excise, and a tax upon
polls and estates. Since the assumption, the two former are levied by the
general government throughout the union. The sum allowed to be received in the
certificates of New Hampshire, is three hundred thousand dollars. If this whole
sum be subscribed, the domestic debt of the State will be reduced to a trifle;
but whether New Hampshire be a debtor or a creditor State, cannot be known till
a final adjustment of the public accounts be made, by the commissioners
appointed by Congress.

Taxation by polls and estates, is conducted in the following manner. Once in
several years, an act is passed by the General Court, specifying the proportion
which each town shall pay to one thousand pounds. When any sum is voted for a
State tax, each town immediately knows its proportion, and a warrant is issued
from the treasurer to the selectmen to levy it. They then proceed to tax every
inhabitant, by an invoice of rateable estate, which is taken annually in the
month of April.

In this invoice, every male poll between eighteen and seventy years of age, is
estimated at ten shillings. The several kinds of rateable estate, are estimated
as follows, viz.

Horses and oxen of five years old at 3 s. Cows of five years old 2 s. Horses
and cattle of four years 1 s6 Ditto of three years 1 s. Ditto of two years 6 d.
Orchard land per acre 1 s6 Arable ditto 1 s. Mowing ditto 1 s. Pasture ditto 5
d.
Mills, wharves and ferries at one twelfth part of the neat yearly income. All
other buildings, and all uncultivated land at half of one per cent. of the real
value.

Stock in trade according to its real value.

Money at interest, at three fourths of one per cent.

If any person refuse to give an invoice of his rateable estate, it is in the
power of the selectmen to set down to such person as much as they judge
equitable, by way of doomage; from which there is no appeal.

County taxes are laid by the justices of the quarter session, and the county
treasurer issues his warrant to each town, specifying its proportion.

Town taxes are either voted by the inhabitants in town meetings, or laid by
the selectmen, at their discretion.

Every town chooses one or more collectors, to whom the several tax bills are
committed, with sufficient warrant to take property by distraint, or commit
delinquents to prison.

The State tax for the year 1790, amounted to L1050, of which the several
counties paid the following proportions.

Rockingham L349 1 Strafford 165 19 7 Hillsborough 266 15 10 Cheshire 181 13 11
Grafton 85 15 Locations 14 8 L1050

By the constitution, the President is captain general and commander in chief
of the militia. In his military character he acts without the advice of the
executive council, excepting when he grants commissions for executing martial
law.

The President and Council appoint general and field officers of the militia.
Major Generals appoint their Aids, and Brigadiers their Majors of brigade.
Field officers recommend Captains and subalterns to the President, from whom
they receive their commissions. Commanding officers of regiments constitute
Adjutants and Quarter Masters; Captains and subalterns appoint their
non-commissioned officers.

All able bodied men from sixteen to forty years of age, are enrolled in the
training band; excepting members of Congress and the legislature; civil
officers; clergymen; deacons; church wardens; instructors, graduates and
students of colleges and academies; schoolmasters; quakers; selectmen;
commissioned officers and non-commissioned officers of more thirty-five years
of age; ship masters; physicians and surgeons; ferrymen; millers; indians,
negroes and mulattoes.

Each regiment has one colonel, one lieutenant colonel, and two majors. Each
company consists as nearly as may be of sixty-eight rank and file; commanded by
one captain, two lieutenants, and one ensign.

Men capable of bearing arms, from forty to sixty years of age, and who are
exempted from the training band, are called the alarm list; excepting members
of Congress, and the legislature, clergymen, officers and students of colleges
and academies, quakers, ferrymen, indians, negroes and mulattoes. These are
formed into companies; the officers are elected by the companies, and have the
rank of field officers.

By the militia law, every non-commissioned officer and private, both of the
alarm list and training band, is to have in readiness a musket and bayonet,
with all the necessary appendages, accoutrements and ammunition, suitable for a
marching soldier. The training band is to be mustered four times, and the alarm
list twice in a year.

Courts martial are instituted for the trial of disobedience and other
offenses. In time of invasion or of war, draughts are made from the militia,
unless a sufficient number appear as volunteers, which is generally the case.
The forces when drawn into actual service are subjected to the regulations of
the late continental army.

The militia at present is formed into twenty five regiments of infantry, which
are divided into five brigades; three regiments of cavalry, which make another
brigade; one independent corpse of light horse; and one regiment of artillery.

The staff consists of one captain general, two major-generals; six
brigadier-generals; one adjutant-general, and one commissary general.

The forces of the state are computed as follows: Twenty-five regiments of
training band at 750 each 18750 Total of the alarm list 7500 Three regiments,
and one independent corpse of cavalry 1000 One regiment of artillery 300 Total
27550

CHAP. XVII. Education, Literature, Religion.
THE old laws of New Hampshire required every town of one hundred families to
keep a grammar school; by which was meant a school in which the learned
languages should be taught, and youth might be prepared for admission to a
university. The same preceptor was obliged to teach reading, writing and
arithmetic; unless the town were of sufficient ability to keep two or more
schools, one of which was called a grammar school by way of distinction.
Formerly, when there were but few towns, much better care was taken to observe
the law concerning schools than after the settlements were multiplied; but
there never was uniform attention paid to this important matter in all places.
Some towns were distinguished for their carefulness, and others for their
negligence. When the leading men in a town were themselves persons of knowledge
and wisdom, they would provide the means of instruction for children; but where
the case was otherwise, methods were found to evade the law. The usual way of
doing this, was to engage some person to keep a school, for a few weeks before
the court term, and discontinue it soon after. It was the interest of ignorant
and unprincipled men, to discourage literature; because it would detract from
their importance, and expose them to contempt. The people in some places, being
thus misled, thought it better to keep their children at work, than provide
schools for their instruction.

Several instances occur in the public records, as far back as the year 1722,
just at the beginning of an Indian war; that the frontier towns petitioned the
assembly, for a special act, to exempt them from the obligation to maintain a
grammar school, during the war. The indulgence was granted them, but only on
this condition, that they should keep a school for reading, writing and
arithmetic, to which all towns of fifty families were obliged. In later times
the conduct of the same towns has been very different. During the late war with
Britain, not only those, but many other towns, large and opulent, and far
removed from any danger by the enemy, were, for a great part of the time*
destitute of any public schools; not only without applying to the legislature
for permission; but contrary to the express requirements of law, and
notwithstanding courts of justice were frequently holden, and grand jurors
solemnly sworn and charged to present all breaches of law, and the want of
schools in particular. This negligence was one among many evidences of a most
unhappy prostration of morals during that period. It afforded a melancholy
prospect to the friends of science, and of virtue; and excited some generous
and philanthropic persons to devise other methods of education.

Among these the Honorable JOHN PHILLIPS, Esquire. of Exeter, was the first to
distinguish himself, by founding and endowing a seminary of learning in that
town; which, in the year 1781, was by an act of assembly incorporated by the
name of Phillips's Exeter academy. It is placed under the inspection of a board
of trustees; and is governed by a preceptor and an assistant. In this academy
are taught the learned languages, the principles of geography, astronomy,
mathematics, and logic; besides writing, music, composition and oratory.
Particular attention is given to the morals of the students and their
instruction in the principles of natural and revealed religion, and the
exercises of piety and virtue. The fund belonging to this institution, is
valued at nearly ten thousand pounds. About one fifth part of this fund, lying
in lands, is at present unproductive; but the actual income amounts to L480 per
annum. The appropriations are as follows. To the support of a preceptor L133 6
8 -- ditto of an assistant 70 Intended for a professor of divinity 133 6 8 To
the maintenance of indigent scholars 120 L456 13 4 The first preceptor was Mr.
William Wood-bridge. The present preceptor is Mr. Abbot.

In the following table the number of scholars belonging to this academy in
each of the four last years is noted in the second column; and of them, the
number whose parents reside in Exeter is noted in the third column.

Years. No. of Students. Residents in Exeter. 1787 24 14 1788 30 14 1789 50 27
1790 53 29

It has been thought by some, that the tendency of such institutions is to
discourage Grammar Schools in their vicinity. In support of this sentiment it
is alleged that before this academy was founded, the town of Exeter supported
two grammar schools; and that now it supports but one. In answer to this
argument it is observed, that though one grammar school is discontinued, yet
its place is supplied by a school for reading, writing and arithmetic; and
there have been, during the last and present year, six schools kept in the most
populous part of that town, for the instruction of small children, besides
those which are supported in the extreme parts. In addition to this observation
it ought to be remembered that the academy was first instituted, at a time,
when there was a general neglect of town schools in many places; and had it not
been for this and other similar institutions, the neglect might have increased
by insensible degrees, till ignorance had overspread the country.

Since the establishment of this academy several others have been erected. One
of which is at New Ipswich. It was incorporated in 1789. Its fund is about one
thousand pounds. The number of students is generally between forty and fifty.
The price of tuition is one shilling per week and of boarding five shillings.
The preceptor is Mr. John Hubbard. This academy is so far from discouraging
town schools, that the sum of one hundred pounds is annually raised in the same
town for that purpose.

There is another academy at Atkinson, founded by the Honorable NATHANIEL
PEABODY Esquire. and incorporated by the General Court in the year 1790. The
preceptor has been chiefly supported by Mr. Peabody, and he has endowed the
academy with a donation of one thousand acres of land.

Similar institutions have been begun at Amherst, at Charlestown and at
Concord; which though at present in a state of infancy, yet afford a pleasing
prospect of the increase of literature in various parts of the State.

A law has been lately made which enforces the maintenance of schools by a
peculiar sanction; the selectmen of the several towns are liable to have the
same sum distrained out of their estates, which would be sufficient to support
a school, during the whole time in which they neglect to make that provision.
This law is so recer^, that no judgment can as yet be formed of its operation.
It shows however that the legislature are attentive to this most important
branch of their duty, the education of children.

As a farther evidence of the progress of science, social libraries are
established in several towns; and within the year past a medical society has
been incorporated by an act of assembly. The President of the State being a
gentleman of the faculty, is at the head of this society.

By an article in the constitution of the State it is declared to be the duty
of legislators and magistrates, to cherish the interest of literature and the
sciences, and all seminaries and public schools; to encourage private and
public institutions, rewards and immunities for the promotion of agriculture,
arts, sciences, commerce, trades, manufactures and the natural history of the
country* to countenance and inculcate the principles of humanity and general
benevolence, public and private charity, industry and economy, honesty and
punctuality, sincerity, sobriety, and all social affections, and generous
sentiments among the people. As far as public rulers conform to this article,
they promote in the most effectual manner, the true interest and prosperity of
their country.

The establishment of DARTMOUTH COLLEGE in the western border of the State, has
proved a great benefit to the new settlements and to the neighboring State of
Vermont. During the late war, like all other seminaries of literature, it lay
under discouragement; but since the peace, it is in a more flourishing
situation.

Its landed interest amounts to about eighty thousand acres, of which twelve
hundred lie contiguous, and are capable of the best improvement. Twelve
thousand acres are situate in Vermont. A tract of eight miles square beyond the
northern line of Stuart town was granted by the assembly of New Hampshire in
1789; and in the act by which this grant was made, the President and Council of
the State for the time being are incorporated with the trustees of the college,
so far as to act with them in regard to the expenditures and application of
this grant, and of all others which have been or may be hereafter made by
New Hampshire.

The revenue of the college arising from the lands, amounts to one hundred and
forty pounds per annum. By contracts already made it will amount in four years
to four hundred and fifty; and in twelve years to six hundred and fifty pounds.
The income arising from tuition money is about six hundred pounds per annum.

The first building erected for the accommodation of the students was a few
years since burned. A lottery was granted by the State for raising the sum of
seven hundred pounds; which has been applied to the erection of a new building,
much more convenient than the former. It is constructed of wood, and stands in
an elevated situation, about half a mile eastward of Connecticut river in the
township of Hanover; commanding an extensive and pleasant prospect to the west.
It is one hundred and fifty feet long, fifty feet wide, and thirty six feet
high; and contains thirty six chambers for students. The number of students who
were graduated in the first nineteen years amounts to two hundred and
fifty-two, among whom were two Indians. In the year 1790 the number of
undergraduates was about one hundred and fifty.

The students are divided into four classes. The freshmen study the learned
languages, the rules of speaking and writing, and the elements of mathematics.

The sophomores attend to the languages, geography, logic and mathematics.

The junior sophisters, beside the languages, enter on natural and moral
philosophy and composition.

The senior class compose in English and Latin; study metaphysics, the elements
of natural and political law.

The books used by the students are Lowth's English Grammar, Perry's
Dictionary, Pike's Arithmetic, Guthries Geography, Ward's Mathematics
Atkinson's Epitome, Hammond's Algebra, Martin's and Enfield's Natural
Philosophy, Ferguson's Astronomy, Locke's Essay, Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws,
and Burlemaqui's Natural and Political Law.

Besides these studies, lectures are read to the scholars in theology and
ecclesiastical history.

There is an examination of each class once in the year, and those who are not
found qualified for their standing are put into a lower class.

The annual commencement is held on the fourth Wednesday in August. There are
two vacations, one following commencement and continuing six weeks and two
days; the other beginning on the fourth Monday in February, and continuing five
weeks and five days. Among the benefactors to Dartmouth College, (...) the
following names are conspicuous.

His Majesty George III. King of Great Britain. The Earl of Dartmouth. The late
Countess of Huntingdon, The Prince of Orange, The Baron of Hasarswoode, The
late Grand Pensionary of the United Netherlands, The late Governor Benning
Wentworth, The late Governor John Wentworth,
of London Paul Wentworth, Esquire. Dr. Rose, John Thornton, Esquire. Mr. Forsyth, Dr.
Ralph Griffith, The late Dr. Franklin,
of the United States. John Adams, Vice President John Jay, Chief Justice The
Hon. John Phillips, of Exeter.

The late and present officers and trustees of the college are as follows:
Presidents.
1770. Rev. Eleazer Wheelock, D. D. died 1779, Aet. 69. 1779. John Wheelock, L.
L. D.
Professor of History. John Wheelock, L. L. D. -- of Mathematics, and Natural
Philosophy, Beza Woodward, Esquire. -- of Languages and Librarian. Rev. John Smith,
Trustees.
His Excellency John Wentworth, Esquire. removed. *Hon. Theodore Atkinson, *Hon.
Daniel Pierce, Hon. George Jaffrey, resigned. *Hon. Peter Gilman, *Hon. William
Pitkin, *Rev. Benjamin Pomeroy, D. D. *Rev. James Lockwood, Rev. Timothy
Pitkin, resigned. Rev. John Smalley, resigned. *Rev. William Patten, Hon. John
Phillips, Beza Woodward, Esquire. Hon. John Sherburne, resigned. Hon. Elisha Pain,
Rev. Eden Buroughs, Hon. Samuel Phillips, resigned. Rev. David Mc Clure, Rev.
Joseph Huntington, D. D. resigned. Hon. Simeon Olcott, Rev. Levi Heart,
resigned. Hon. John Langdon, *Rev. Sylvanus Ripley. Moses Fisk, A. M. Rev.
Bulkley Olcott. Hon. Peter Olcott. Rev. John Smith. Rev. Job Swift.


An Alphabetical TABLE of the Towns in each County of New Hampshire,

With the dates of their incorporation: The names of the several MINISTERS of
the GOSPEL of every denomination, the times of their settlement, death or
removal, and their age at the time of their death as far as either can be
ascertained. Also,

The number of people in each town in the years 1775 and 1790. The number lost
out of each town in the late war, as far as it could be collected. The
proportion which each town pays to L.1000 tax. The Literary Academies in each
county, and some historical and topographical remarks.

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled. names. died or removed. age. 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L1000 Remarks. L. s. d. (...) town 149 254 1 8 (...) (...) 1^72
Stephen Peabody 575 479 4 10 part of Haverhill cut off by the line. (...) (...)
350 568 3 4 6 Indian name Penacook. (...) (...) 1752 (...) Trask 1789 67 1100
976 12 10 17 5 part of Exeter. (...) 1775 Samuel (...) Q 176^ Candia 1771 David
Jewett r. 1780 744 1040 8 2 4 part of Chester. 1782 Joseph Prince r. 1789 1790
Jesse Remington (...) Can^erbury 1761 Abiel Foster r. 723 1038 8 4 7 1791
Frederick Parker 172^ Chester 1731 Moses Hale r. 1734 1599 1902 26 16 2 10 1736
Ebenezer Flagg P 1734 John Wilson 1780 76 1727 Chichester 1791 Josiah Carpenter
418 491 3 4 9 1765 CONCORD 1780 Timothy Walker 1782 78 105^ 1747 12 7 1^ Indian
name Penacook, granted by Massachusetts, and called Rumford. 1789 Israel Evans

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns. Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war.
Taxes to L1000. L. s. d. Remarks. 1766 Deerfield 177^ Timothy Upham 929 1619 12
6 2 part of Nottingham. 1738 East-Kingston Peter Coffin r. 1772 428 358 4 2 4
part of Kingston. 1741 Epping -- Cutler r. 1569 1233 13 3 11 part of Exeter.
1758 Josiah Stearns 1799 1727 Epsom 1761 John Tucke r. 177^ 387 799 5 12 8
Ebenezer Hasletine 1638 EXETER 1638 John Whelewright r. 1643 1741 1722 38 15 10
2 first called Swams^ot falls. 1650 Samuel Dudley 1683 77 School John Clarke 170^
35 1706 John Odlin 1754 72 174^ Woodbridge Odlin 1776 57 177^ Isaac Mansfield
r. 1787 1790 William Fred. Rowland 2d Parish 174^ Daniel Rogers 178^ 79 A
fishing town on the Isle of Shoals, formerly called Appledore.
Gosport 173^ John Tucke 1773 44 93 Greenland 171^ William Allen 1760 84 759
634 6 6 part of Portsmo^th. 1756 Samuel Macclintock, D.D.

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1749 (...) 1752 Henry True 1782 768 724 5 19
1638 Hampton 1638 Stephen Bach^lor r. 1641 862 853 6 8 19 7 Indian name
Winicum^t, first settled under Massachusetts. 1639 Timothy Dalton 1661 1647
John Whelewright r. 1660 Seaborn Cotton 1686 53 1696 John Cotton 1710 57 1710
Nathaniel Gookin 1734 48 1734 Ward Cotton r. 1765 1766 Ebenezer Th^yer
Hampton-falls 1712 Theophilus Cotton 1726 45 645 541 5 19 5 part of Hampton.
1727 Joseph Whipple 1757 57 1757 Josiah Bailey 1762 29 1763 Pain Wingate r.
1771 1780 Samuel Langdon, D. D. 1760 Hawke 1763 John Page 1783 43 504 420 4 17
3 part of Kingston. 1737 Kensington 1737 Jeremy Fogg 1789 78 797 800 8 16 9
part of Hampton.

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns Ministers Numbers Prop. Of Historical and topographical incorporated
names. settled names. died o^ removed age 1775 1790 lost in war Taxes to L.1000
Remarks. L. s. d. 1694 Kingston 1725 Ward Clarke 1737 34 961 90^ 8 11 1 1737
Joseph Secombe 1762 Amos Tappan 1771 Elihu Thayer 1722 Londonderry P. 1719
James Mc Gregore 172^ 52 2590 2622 19 20 15 3 1729 Matthew Clarke 1732
Alexander Thompson 173^ 1740 William Davidson 1791 81 ^d Parish 1737 David Mc
Gregore 1777 67 1783 William Morrison 1773 ^oudon 1789 Jedediah Tucker ^49 1084
6 14 8 part of Canterbury. 1693 Newcastle 1704 John Emerson r. 1712 449 534 1 5
9 1712 William Shurtle^^ r. 1732 1732 John Blunt 1750 Stephen Chase 1775 1784
Oliver Noble r.

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. Newington 1715 Joseph Adams 1783 93 532 542 4
17 9 part of Portsmouth and Dover. 1787 Joseph Langdon 1727 Newmarket 1730 John
Moody 1778 73 1289 1137 9 16 part of Exeter. Nathniel Ewer 17^9 Newtown 1759
Jonathan Eames r. 1791 540 530 3 16 9 1780 Northfield 606 3 18 1 part of
Canterbury. 1742 North-Hampton 17^9 Nathaniel Gookin 1766 652 657 6 2 11 part
of Hampton. 1767 Joseph Stacy Hastings r. 1774 1776 David Mc Clure r. 1784 1784
Benjamin Thurston 1773 Northwood B. 1779 Edmund Pillsbury 313 744 ^ 5 ^9 3 part
of Nottingham* 1722 Nottingham. 1742 Stephen Emery r. 99^ 1068 8 13 6 1758
Benjamin Butler r. 1770 1746 Pelham 1765 Amos Moody 749 79^ 7 4 6

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. 17^9 Pembroke 1736 Aaron Whittemore 1767 744 956 7 10
11 Indian name Sun^ook, granted by Massachusetts 1728 and called Lovewells
town. 176^ Jacob Emery ^acheus Colby P. 1760 -- Mitchel 1749 Plastow 1730 James
Cu^hing 575 521 4 5 5 part of Haverhill cut off by the line. 1765 Gyles Merrill
1764 Poplin 552 49^ 5 8 2 part of Exeter. 1633 PORTSMOUTH 1671 Joshua Moody
1697 65 4590 4720 26 15 ^ 1699 Nathaniel Rogers 1723 54 17^^ Jabez Fitch 1746
73 1747 Samuel Langdon, D.D. r. 1774 1779 Joseph Buckminster 2d Parish 1715
John Emerson 1732 62 1732 William Shurtleff 1747 1749 Job Strong 1751 1752
Samuel Haven D.D.

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns* Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. Portsmouth L. s. d. Episcopal 1736 Arthur Brown 1773
73 1787 John C. Ogden 3d Parish Samuel Drown 1770 49 Joseph Walton 1782
Pittsfield -- Page 888 5 7 2 part of Chichester. 1764 Raymond 683 727 6 4 8
part of Chester. 1719 Rye 1726 Nath. Morrill r. 1734 870 865 35 6 8 9 1736
Samuel Parsons 1789 78 1784 Hunting. Porter 1750 Salem 1740 Abner Bailey 1084
1218 31 9 2 1 cut off from Methuen and Haverhill by the^ line. B. 17^^ Samuel
Fletcher 1756 Sandown 1759 Josiah Cotton 1781 459 561 5 5 5 part of Kingston.
Samuel Collins r. 1768 Seabrook.P. 1765 S^^^^ Perl^y r. 1775 607 715 4 9 4
formerly part of Hampton. Q.

County of ROCKINGHAM.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1742 South-Hampton 174^ William Parsons r.
1762 498 448 5 5 12 6 formerly part of Hampton. 176^ Nathaniel Noyes 1693
Streatham 1718 Henry Russ 1749 63 ^137 88^ 17 9 11 Swams^ot patent, part of it
called by the Indians Wini^ot. 1756 Joseph Adams 1785 66 178^ James Miltimore
Windham P. 1760 -- Johnson r. 1741 1766 John Kinkeed Simon Williams r. 529 663
5 8 8

LITERARY ACADEMIES.
Date of institution. Towns. Value of Funds. Name of Preceptors 178^ Exeter
L.10,000* William Woodbridge Benjamin Abbott 1789 Atkinson 1790 Concord

County of STRAFFORD.
Towns. Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks L. s. d. 1727 Barnstead 252 807 4 18 ^ 172^ Barringham
1755 Joseph Prince r. 176^ 1655 2*170 4 14 6 ^ 1771 David Tenney 1778 Q. 1784
Benjamin Balch 176^ ^onway 1778 Nathaniel Porter 27^ 574 4 3 7 3 Indian name
Pigwacket. 163^ DOVER 1642 Daniel Maud 1655 1666 1998 29 14 13 2 Indian names
Winic^ahanat and Cochecho; by the first settlers called Northam. 1657 John
Reyner 1669 John Reyner, jun. John Pike 1710 1711 Nicholas Sever 1715 1717
Jonathan Cushing 1769 79 1767 Jeremy Belknap 1786 1787 Robert Gray Q.

County of STRAFFORD.
Towns. Ministers. Numbers. Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. Durham 1718 Hugh Adams 1750 74 1214 1247 20
10 16 2 formerly a part of Dover. Called Oyster river. 1741 Nicholas Gilman
1748 1748 John Adams r. 1778 1780 Curtis Co^ 1 16 2 1766 Eaton 253 E^^ington 83
154 1 12 5 formerly Leavit's town. 1727 Gilmantown 1774 Isaac Smith 775 2613 7
15 4 5 B. 1786 Walter Powers 1766 Lee Samuel Hutchins 954 1029 8 2 1 formerly
part of Dover and Durham. Locations S.Stark 51 3 A. Stark 2 5 H. Stark 2 175^
Mad^^ary B. William Hooper 677 592 5 8 9 formerly part of Dover. 1768 Meredith
B. Nicolas Folsom 259 881 6 7 first called New Salem* 1778 Middletown 1778
Nehemiah* Ordway r. 233 617 3 8 6

County of STRAFFORD.
Towns. Ministers. Numbers. Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1777 Moultonborough 1778 Samuel Perley r.
1779 272 565 5 4 10 10 1779 Jeremy Shaw (...) 1762 New Durham 1773 Nathaniel
Porter r. 1777 28^ 554 3 18 9 N. Durham Gore 100 445 3 1 2 1777 New Hampton 652
3 10 10 called at first Moultonboro' addition. 1785 Ossipee 2^ 339 1 12 6 first
called New Garden. 1722 Rochester 1737 Amos Maine 1760 51 1548 ^857 29 9 11
1760 Samuel Hill 1764 176^ Avery Hall r. 1775 1776 Joseph Haven 1770 Sanborn
Town 1771 Joseph Woodman 45^ ^587 16 11 14 5 1763 Sandwich B. -- Jewel 24^ 905
7 13 11 1764 addition B. -- Jewel 24^ 905 7 13 11 1754 Somersworth 1730 James
Pike 96^ 943 8 14 10 formerly part of Dover. 1766 Tamworth 151 266 2 3 2
Tuftonborough 1^^ (...) 7 County of STRAFFORD.
Towns Ministers. Numbers. Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. ^ettled names. died or removed age 1775 1990 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. 1774 Wakefield 1785 Asa Piper 320 646 2 4 16 2
formerly East-Town and Watertown. Wolfborough 211 447 3 14 3 N. B, The land
comprehended in Middletown, New Durham, N. Durham Gore, and part of Gilmantown,
Wake^ield and Wolfborough, is the tract which was called Kingswood, and which
Governor Belcher was probibited from granting before the settlement of the
boundary lines.
County of HILLSBOROUGH.
Towns. Ministers. Numbers. Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1762 AMHERST 1741 Daniel Wilkins 1784 73 1428
2369 16 4 4 originally granted by Massachusetts, and called Souhegan-west. 1779
Jeremiah Barnard 2d Parish 1786 John Bruce 3d Parish 1779 Andover 1783 Josiah
Badcock 179 645 3 15 7 1777 Antrim 528 3 6 8 1750 Bedford P. 1757 John Houston
r. 1778 495 898 6 15 9 1760 Boscaw^n Phinehas Stevens 585 110^ 7 11 4 1768
Nathaniel Merrill r. 1774 Samuel Wood Bradford 217 1 8 6 Campbell's gore 120 12
10 1774 Deering 928 4 13 4 1751 Derryfield 285 362 2 10 4 -- Gore 30 1765
Dunbarton 1789 Walter Harris (...) ^97 ^9^^ ^ 17 5 County of HILLSBOROUGH.
Towns Ministers Numbers Prop. of Historical and topographical incorporated
names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war Taxes to L.
1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1746 Dunstable 1739 Josiah Swan 70^ 632 5 3 2 Josiah
Goodhue r. 1767 Joseph Kidder 1763 Duxbury 83 169 1 3 6 First called Dantzick,
joined with Sutton in the enumeration of 1775. Fisherfield 130 331 2 1 First
called Dantzick, joined with Sutton in the enumeration of 1775. 1772 Frances
Town 1790 Moses Bradford 200 982 5 2 First called Dantzick, joined with Sutton
in the enumeration of 1775. 1761 Goff's Town 1771 Joseph Currier r. 1774 831
1275 12 7 17 7 1781 Cornelius Waters These three townships with Antrim, were
reckoned together in the enumeration of 1775 and 367 was the total. 1779
Hancock 1791 Reed Page 634 2 11 6 These three townships with Antrim, were
reckoned together in the enumeration of 1775 and 367 was the total. Henniker
1769 Jacob Rice r. 1782 367 1127 6 8 3 These three townships with Antrim, were
reckoned together in the enumeration of 1775 and 367 was the total. 1772
Hillsborough 1773 Jonathan Bar^es 798 4 9 4 These three townships with Antrim,
were reckoned together in the enumeration of 1775 and 367 was the total. 1746
Holles 1743 Daniel Emerson 125 1441 9 2 Indian name Nisitisset. 1765 Hopkinton
1757 Stephen Scales r. 1770 108^ 1715 12 19 7 First granted by Massachusetts.
1773 Elijah Fletcher 1786 1789 Jacob Cramm Kyasarge-gore 103 10 6 County of
HILLSBOROUGH.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L. 1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1749 Litchfield 1765 Samuel Cotton r. 1781
284 357 3 4 John Rand 1764 Lyndeborough 1768 Sewall Goodridge 713 1280 8 11 3
1768 Mason 1772 Jonathan Searle r. 501 92^ 6 2 8 1790 Ebenezer +Hill B. William
Eliot 1746 Merrimack 1772 Jacob Burnap 606 819 5 12 5 1763 New-Boston P. 1768
Solomon Moore 569 1202 7 5 9 176^ New-Ipswich 1760 Stephen Farrar 960 1241 9 14
7 1779 New London B. Job Scamans 311 2 11 6 first called Heidleburg 1746
Nottingham-west 1737 Nathaniel Merrill 649 1064 7 10 3 P. 177^ John Strickland
r. 1782 176^ Peterborough P. 1759 John Morrison r. 1773 546 861 7 7 1779 David
Annan Peterborough^^ip 107 1 18 1^ 176^ Raby joined with Mason in the
enumeration of 1775.
^3^ ^ ^9 ^ County of HILLSBOROUGH.
Towns Ministers Numbers. Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1768 Salisbury 1773 Jonathan Searle r. 1790
498 1372 10 4 9 Society land 177 319 1 4 10 1784 Sutton B. 1782 Samuel Ambrose
520 2 10 10 first called Perry's town, joined with Fishersfield in the
enumeration of 1775. 1768 Temple 1771 Samuel Webster 1778 35 491 747 4 18 7
1779 Noah Miles 1774 Warner 1772 William Kelley 262 863 4 18 7 First called
Almsbury. 1764 Wear B. 1789 Amos Wood 837 1924 12 17 7 Q. 1762 Wilton 1763
Jonathan Livermore r. 1777 623 1105 21 7 19 9 1778 Abel Fiske Land between
Peterborough and Lyndeborough. 38 5 9 County of HILLSBOROUGH.
LITERARY ACADEMIES. Date of institution Towns. Value of funds. Names of
Preceptors. Boarding per week. Tuition per week. 1789 New-Ipswich L.1000 John
Hubbard 5 f. 1 f. 1790 Amherst L.800 Daniel Staniford 5 f. 1 f. County of
CHESHIRE.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1766 A^worth 1789 Thomas Archibald 704 3 15
10 1763 ^^stead 1781 Jacob Mann r. 1788 317 1111 6 18 5 1789 Levi Lankton
Samuel Mead 1753 CHARLESTOWN John Dennis 594 1093 8 11 8 first granted by
Massachusetts and called Number four. 1760 Bulkley (...) 1752 Chesterfield 177^
Abraham W^^d ^^4 ^9^5 11 16 7 County of CHESHIRE.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled. names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1764 Claremont 1772 George Wheaton 1773 22 523
14^5 9 3 1774 Augustine Hibbard r. E. Ranna Cossit r. 1775 1763 Cornish 1768
James Welman r. 1785 309 982 10 5 17 1763 Croydon 1788 Jacob Haven 143 537 4 18
7 1771 Dublin 1772 Joseph Farrar r. 1776 30^ 90^ 1 5 8 6 1777 Edward Sprague
1773 Fitzwilliam joined with Swansey in the enumeration of 1775.
1771 Benjamin Brigham 1038 5 1^ 10 1753 Hinsdale 1763 Bunker Gay 5^^ 3 1 ^
joined with Chesterfield in ditto. 1763 Gils^m 178 298 1 15 7 1773 Jaffrey 1782
Laban Ainsworth 351 1235 7 12 5 1753 KEEN^ 1738 Jacob Bacon r. 1747 756 1314 9
19 6 first granted by Massachusetts, and called Upper Ashuelot. 1753 Ezra
Carpenter r. 1761 Clement Sumner r. 1772 177^ Aaron Hall 1787 L^ngdon 244 1 11
County of CHESHIRE.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1761 Lempster 1787 Elias Fisher 128 41^ 3 1
10 1776 Marlborough 1778 Joseph Cumming r. 1780 322 786 4 17 2 1761 Marlow B.
Eliezer Beckwith 207 313 1 18 1761 New Grantham 74 333 1 16 10 1761 Newport
John Ramele 157 780 4 18 1 1774 Packersfield 1781 Jacob Foster r. 1791 186 721
5 4 3 1761 Plainfield -- Carpenter r. 308 1024 5 17 1760 Protectworth 210 1 13
10 175^ Richmond B. Maturin Bellew 864 1380 8 7 4 B. -- Aldrich 1768 Rindge
1765 Seth Deane r. 1780 542 1143 16 7 14 7 1782 Seth Payson 1774 Stoddard 224
7^1 3 8 1 first called Limerick. 1769 Surry -- Dalling r. 1788 215 448 3 12
Sullivan 220 1 10 3 County of CHESHIRE.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1753 Swansey Timothy Harrington r. 617 1157 8
13 10 granted by Massachusetts and called Lower Ashuelot. 1753 Ezra Carpenter
r. 1769 Edward Goddard 1764 Unity 146 538 2 18 10 Walpole -- Leavitt r. 1752
1767 Thomas Fessenden 658 1245 9 4 11 1776 Washington 1779 George Lesslie 163
545 3 3 first called Cambden. 1781 Wendell B. Nehemiah Woodward 65 267 1 9 8
first called Saville. 1752 Westmoreland 1764 William Goddard r. 758 2018 10 4
11 B. Ebenezer Bailey B. Joseph Ashley 1753 Winchester 1764 Micah Lawrence r.
7238 ^209 9 (...) 4 1788 Ezra Conant County of CHESHIRE.
LITERARY ACADEMY. Instituted Town Value of funds. Preceptor Boarding per week.
Tuition. 1791 Charlestown Lemuel Hedge 4 s. for Children, 2 dollars per
quarter. 6 s. for Adults, County of GRAFTON.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1782 Alexandria Enoch Whipple 137 298 2 1 3
1790 Bartlett 248 Locations above Conway incorporated. 1769 Bath 144 498 2 11
11 Bridgewater 281 1 17 2 1766 Burton 141 13 6 1773 Cambridge 10 3 1761 Campton
-- Church 190 395 3 6 10 1761 Canaan B. 1783 Thomas (...) r. 17^0 ^67 48^ 2 6 ^
County of GRAFTON.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1767 Chatham 58 8 1 1770 Cockburne 14 26 10 3
1766 Cockermouth 1790 Thomas Page 118 373 2 11 6 1770 Colburne 4 29 10 3 1764
Coventry 80 15 6 1784 Dalton 50 14 10 3 first called Apthorpe. 1772 Dartmouth 4
111 10 3 1761 Dorchester 175 1 2 5 joined with Lime in the enumeration of 1775.
1773 Dummer 10 3 1761 Enfield 50 724 4 8 first called Relhan. 1774 Errol 10 3
1763 Fairfield 10 3 first called Peeling. 1764 Franconia 29 72 12 10 called
Morristown. 1778 Grafton B. Oliver Williams 1790 36 403 2 1768 Gunthwaite 47
147 2 3 now called New Concord. County of GRAFTON.
Towns Ministers Numbers Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1761 Hanover Eden Buroughs 434 1380 6 1 3
Samuel Collins 1769 Dartm. College John Smith 1763 ^AVERHILL 1765 Peter Powers
r. 1784 365 552 1 4 10 4 cal^ed Lower Cohos. 1761 Holdernesse E. Robert Foul
173 329 2 13 10 B. Jeremiah Ward 177^ Kilkenny 10 3 1763 Lancaster 61 161 18 1
called Upper Cohos. 1774 Landaff B. Stephen Royce 40 2^^ ^ 12 4 1761 Lebanon
1772 Josiah Potter 347 1180 6 4 B. Jedidiah Hibbard 1761 Lime 1773 William
Conant 25^ 816 7 3 17 9 1764 Lincoln 22 10 3 1785 Littleton 96 1 7 part of
Apthorpe. 1761 Lyman 202 1 5 9 1774 Millsfield County of GRAFTON.
Towns Ministers Numbers. Proportion of Historical and topographical
incorporated names. settled names. died or removed age 1775 1790 lost in war
Taxes to L.1000 Remarks. L. s. d. 1778 New Chester 196 3^^ 2 8 1779
Northumberland 57 11^ 10 3 called Upper Cohos. 1769 Orange 131 18 3 first
called Cardigan. 1761 Orford 1771 Obadiah Noble r. 1777 1787 John Sawyer 222
540 3 3 5 6 1774 Percy 4^ 10 3 1764 Piermont John Richards 168 426 2 16 6 1763
PLYMOUTH 176^ Nathan Ward 38^ 62^ 5 6 1767 R^mney Thomas Niles r. 237 411 2 16
B. Cotton Haynes 1769 Shelburne 35 10 3 1770 (addition) 1773 Stratford 41 14^
10 3 1773 Success 10 3 1781 Thornton Experience Esterbrook 2 8 10 Noah
Worcester 117 385 176^ Trecothick 10 3 1763 Warren joined with Piermont in the
enumeration of 1775.
2^^ 1 8 5 1760 Wentworth 24^ 1 8 5 joined with Orford in ditto. Locations 1^.
9^ f.8 s3 to 1 d

The principal denominations of christians in this State are five, viz.
Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Baptists and Quakers. The
distinguishing characteristics of these are so well known that a particular
description is needless; For an account of these distinctions see a "view of
religions" by H. ADAMS. lately reprinted in Boston.
the comparative numbers of each may be seen by an inspection of the preceding
table; in which the Presbyterians are marked by the letter P. the Episcopalians
by E. the Baptists by B. the Quakers by Q. Those without any mark are
Congregationalists; which is the most numerous denomination in this as well as
in the neighboring States of Massachusetts and Connecticut.

In the town of Portsmouth there is a society of Sandemanians and another of
Universalists* which are not noted in the table.

The people in general throughout the State are professors of the christian
religion in some form or other. There is, however, a sort of wise men, who
pretend to reject it; but they have not yet been able to substitute a better in
its place.

It has been a common practice, in all the grants of townships, which have been
made either by the Crown or the Masonian proprietors, to reserve one share,
equal to that of any other grantee, for the first settled minister, as his own
right; beside a parsonage lot. This has proved a great encouragement to the
settlement of ministers in the new towns; and it has been generally observed
that those towns are the most thriving, in which early care has been taken to
settle a prudent minister, and assist him in clearing and cultivating his land.

In some of the new towns, where the people are not able to support ministers,
it has been usual for the clergymen of the elder towns to make itinerant
excursions, of several weeks, to preach and baptize; whilst their places at
home have been filled, by the neighboring ministers in rotation. Such
itinerations are always acceptable, to the scattered people in the wilderness,
and serve to keep up a sense of religion in their families. By the constitution
of the State every denomination of christians is equally under the protection
of the law, and it is expressly provided, (...) no subordination of any one
sect or ^^omination to another, shall ever be established by law.

It is also claimed and allowed as a right of the people, to elect and support
their own teachers; and that no person of any one particular religious sect or
denomination shall ever be compelled to pay toward the support of the teachers
of any other sect or denomination. There is therefore as entire religious
liberty in New Hampshire, as any people can rationally desire.

CHAP. XVIII. Conclusion. Hints of Advice on several important Subjects.
CITIZENS OF NEW HAMPSHIRE,
HAVING spent above twenty years of my life with you, and passed through
various scenes of peace and war within that time; being personally acquainted
with many of you, both in your public and private characters; and having an
earnest desire to promote your true interest, I trust you will not think me
altogether unqualified to give you a few hints by way of advice. You are
certainly a rising State; your numbers are rapidly increasing; and your
importance in the political scale will be augmented, in proportion to your
improving the natural advantages which your situation affords you, and to your
cultivating the intellectual and moral powers of yourselves and your children.

The first article on which I would open my mind to you is that of education.
Nature has been as bountiful to you as to any other people, in giving your
children genius and capacity; it is then your duty and your interest to
cultivate their capacities and render them serviceable to themselves and the
community. It was ^e saying of a great orator and statesman of antiquity, (...)
that the loss which the Commonwealth sustains, by a want of education, is like
the loss which the year would suffer by the destruction of the spring. If the
bud be blasted the tree will yield no fruit. If the springing corn be cut down,
there will be no (...). So if the youth be ruined through a (...) in their
education, the community sus^^^ a loss which cannot be repaired; for it is too
late to correct them when they are spoiled. Notwithstanding the care of your
legislators in enacting laws, and enforcing them by severe penalties;
notwithstanding the wise and liberal provision which is made by ^^me towns, and
some private gentlemen in the State; yet there is still in many places a great
and criminal neglect of education. You are indeed in a very considerable degree
better, in this respect, than in the time of the late war; but yet much remains
to be done. Great care ought to be taken, not only to provide a support for
instructors of children and youth; but to be attentive in the choice of
instructors; to see that they be men of good understanding, learning and
morals; that they teach by their example as well as by their precepts; that
they govern themselves, and teach their pupils the art of self government.

Another source of improvement which I beg leave to recommend, is the
establishment of social libraries. This is the easiest, the cheapest and most
effectual mode of diffusing knowledge among the people. For the sum of six or
eight dollars at once, and a small annual payment beside, a man may be supplied
with the means of literary improvement, during his (...), and his children may
inherit the blessing. A few neighbors joined together in setting up a library,
and placing it under the care of some suitable person, with a very few
regulations, to prevent carelessness and waste, may render the most essential
service to themselves and to the community. Books may be much better preserved
in this way, than if they belonged to individuals; and there is an advantage in
the social intercourse of persons who have read the same books, by their
conversing on the subjects which have occurred in their reading and
communicating their observations one to another.

From this mutual intercourse another advantage may arise; for the persons who
are thus associated may not only acquire but originate knowledge. By studying
nature and the sciences, by practicing arts, agriculture and manufactures, at
the same time that they improve their minds in reading, they may be led to
discoveries and improvements, original and beneficial; and being already formed
into society, they may diffuse their knowledge, ripen their plans, correct
their mistakes, and promote the cause of science and humanity in a very
considerable degree.

The book of nature is always open to our new, and we may study it at our
leisure; It Is elder scripture, writ by God's own hand.' The earth, the air, the
sea, the rivers, the mountains, the rocks, the caverns, the animal and
vegetable tribes are fraught with instruction. Nature is not half explored; and
in what is partly known there are many mysteries, which time, observation and
experience must unfold. Every social library should be furnished with books of
natural philosophy, botany, zoology, chemistry, husbandry, geography and
astronomy; that inquiring minds may be directed in their inquiries; that they
may see what is known and what still remains to be discovered; and that they
may employ their leisure and their various opportunities in endeavoring to add
to the stock of science, and thus enrich the world with their observations and
improvements.

Permit me also to give you some hints in rural economy. Your lands often
suffer for want of manure, when you have vast quantities provided by the
bountiful hand of nature. The mixing of soils, and the draining of bogs might
yield immense profit. The labor, though formidable at first view, yet, being
resolutely entered upon and pursued, will be as satisfactory, as the effects
will be lasting and beneficial. You have in many places great quantities of
marle which (...) enrich your land for ages; your swamp mud, carried up to the
higher and lighter ground, and mixed with the dung of cattle, would increase
your quantity of manure in a most surprising degree. Many of you I presume have
yet to learn, that a great part of the nutriment of vegetable substances, is
derived from the air, and that the soil itself is enriched by that means. When
you lay down your worn out lands, if you sow them with clover or other grasses,
they will be sooner recruited, than if you leave them to bear only the weeds,
which may accidentally spring up; and if you plough in the green crop, you will
promote their fertility, in a much greater degree.

The tow which is made by the dressing of flax, and which children are indulged
in burning for their diversion, would furnish the papermills with useful
materials; and the skins of sheep and lambs which are often thrown away, would
contribute to the manufacture of woolcards and the binding of books. By an
attention to such comparatively small matters, great savings might be made, and
various kinds of artifi^ers might be supplied with the means of carrying on
their respective occupations.

Suffer me to add a few words on the use of spirituous liquor, that bane of
society, that destroyer of health, morals and property. Nature indeed has
furnished her vegetable productions with spirit; but she has so combined it
with other substances, that unless her work be tortured by fire, the spirit is
not separated, and cannot prove pernicious. Why should this force be put on
nature, to make her yield a noxious draught, when all her original preparations
are salutary? The juice of the apple, the fermentation of barley, and the
decoction of spruce are amply sufficient for the refreshment of man, let his
labor be ever so severe, and his perspiration ever so expensive. Our
forefathers for many years after the settlement of the country, knew not the
use of distilled spirits. Malt was imported from England, and wine from the
western or canary islands, with which they were refreshed, before their own
fields and orchards yielded them a supply. An expedition was once undertaken
against a nation of Indians, The (...), in 16^7.
when there was but one pint of strong water (as it was then called) in the
whole army, and that was reserved for the sick; yet no complaint was made for
want of refreshment. Could we but return to the primitive manners of our
ancestors in this respect, we should be free from many of the disorders, both
of body and mind which are now experienced. The disuse of ardent spirits would
also tend to abolish the infamous traffic in (...), by whose labor this
baneful material is procured.

Divine Providence seems to be preparing the way for the destruction of that
detestable commerce. The insurrections of the blacks in the West Indies have
already spread desolation over the most fertile plantations, and greatly raised
the price of those commodities which we have been used to import from thence.
If we could check the consumption of distilled spirits, and enter with vigor
into the manufacture of maple sugars, of which our forests would afford an
ample supply, the demand for West India productions might be diminished; the
plantations in the islands would not need fresh recruits from Africa; the
planters would treat with humanity their remaining blacks, and render them
sufficiently prolific to supply them with a succession of laborers; the market
for slaves would become less inviting; and the navigation, which is now
employed in the most pernicious species of commerce which ever disgraced
humanity, would be turned into some other channel.

Were I to form a picture of happy society, it would be a town consisting of a
due mixture of hills, valleys and streams of water: The land well fenced and
cultivated; the roads and bridges in good repair; a decent inn for the
refreshment of travelers, and for public entertainments: The inhabitants
mostly husbandmen; their wives and daughters domestic manufacturers; a suitable
proportion of handicraft workmen and two or three traders; a physician and
lawyer, each of whom should have a farm for his support. A clergyman of any
denomination, which should be agreeable to the majority, a man of good
understanding of a candid disposition and exemplary morals; not a metaphysical,
nor a polemic, but a serious and practical preacher. A school master who should
understand his business and teach his pupils to govern themselves. A social
library, annually increasing, and under good regulation. A club of sensible
men, seeking mutual improvement. A decent musical society. No intriguing
politician, horse jockey, gambler or sot; but all such characters treated with
contempt. Such a situation may be considered as the most favorable to social
happiness of any which this world can afford.

APPENDIX.
No. I. An original Letter of Doctor COTTON MATHER to GEORGE VAUGHAN, Esquire.
agent for New Hampshire in England; relating to Whelewright's Indian deed. Vol.
I. p. 10.
3 d. I mo. 1708. SIR,
YOU demand my thoughts upon the date of the instrument in which the Indian
Sachems of Pascataqua convey to Mr. Whelewright and his friends the country,
whereof your people are the present possessors. How a date in the year 1629
could consist with the true time of Mr. Whelewright's coming into this country?

I cannot but admire at the providence of heaven, which has all along strangely
interposed, with most admirable dispensations, and particularly with strange
mortalities, to stop the proceedings of the controversy about Mason's claim
upon you, just in the most critical moment of it. Referring to the death of
Robert Mason in 1688. and of Samuel Allen in 17^^.
There seems to have been as remarkable a display and instance of that
Providence, in the finding of this instrument just before the sitting of your
last court, about this affair; and after it had been, for very many years,
discoursed of among the good men who knew of such an instrument; but with
regret concluded it lost and gone beyond all recovery.

I suppose you are making your application to those, who will be far from the
opinion that dominion is founded in grace. Titles to lands are not more or less
valid according to the profession of christianity in the owners. There is no
protestant but what will acknowledge that pagans have titles that are
incontestable, and that they have not, by their paganism, forfeited their
titles to the first christians that shall therefore pretend to them.

Let the date of Whelewright's instrument be what it will, there seems to be an
instrument of some such importance on Mason's part, necessary to render Mason's
claim effectual.

When the Kings of England have given patents for American lands unto their
subjects, their virtue and justice has been such, that they have not therein
designed ever to give away the properties of the natives here; but always
intended that their subjects here should honestly agree with the natives, for
what lands they should get under the protection of these patents, before they
should call them their own. Briefly, you expect a decision of your case, where
Indian titles will have a due consideration.

I confess when I was first informed of the date which your instrument bears, I
thought that it must be a forgery, but I must now give you my second thoughts
upon it.

The very aged gentlewomen, his two daughters, I look upon as very incompetent
witnesses to determine the time of their father's first coming over into
America. I have discoursed the more sensible and capable of them, namely, Mrs.
Pierson, who tells me that her father's coming over with his family was in the
same ship with Mr. Samuel Whiting, the minister of Lynn, and others, who, we
are all sure, came in the year 1636, Mr. Whelewright is first mentioned in
Winthrop's journal in 1636, as brother to the famous Anna (...), the patroness
of (...).
but she tells me she is not sure her father never visited America before, only
she does not remember she never heard him speak of it. And yet there are shrewd
indications of the gentleman's being here, before the year which they tell us
of; I suppose you are furnished with them.

Your instrument cannot be invalidated, but by some demonstration that Mr.
Whelewright was at home in Lincolnshire, all the year 1629. We know there were
many voyages taken, between England and these parts of America, before that
year. In the year 1624, we find Mr. Roger Conant managing a plantation, very
little to the southward of Pascataqua. It is no improbable thing, that such an
active and lively man as Mr. Whelewright, might step over hither to see how the
land lay, before his transportation of his family. See Vol. I. Appendix p. ix.


The instrument of 1629, has upon it such irrefragable marks of antiquity, that
if it be a forgery, it must be a very ancient one. It has almost as many marks
of 1629 as there be years in the number, of which you need no recitation of
mine; you are much better able than I am, to amplify upon them.

About an hundred and twenty years ago, there were found certain manuscripts,
in some vaults, near Granada, in Spain, which, it was affirmed, were fifteen
hundred years old; and they sang te deum for the discovery. But the Dominicans
presently discovered them, from the language and the intent of them, to be a
modern fraud of the Franciscans. All the wit of man cannot perceive the least
symptom of a modern fraud in your instrument. The gentleman who litt upon it,
is as honest, upright and pious a man as any in the world, and would not do an
ill thing to gain a world. But the circumstances of the instrument itself,
also, are such, that it could not be lately counterfeited. If it were a
forgery, Mr. Whelewright himself must be privy to it. But he was always a
gentleman of the most unspotted morals imaginable; a man of a most unblemished
reputation. He would sooner have undergone martyrdom, than have given the least
connivance to any forgery.

There was a time, in the year 1637, when he was persecuted with too much
violence, in the Massachusetts Colony, but it was only for a disturbance made
about certain speculations, which were thought to be of an antinomian tendency.
His worst enemies never looked on him as chargeable with the least ill
practices.

The blinding heat of those troubles procured an order for his remove out of
the colony. It Is remarked in the books then published, that he did not go to
Rhode Island, the most inviting part of the country, whither all they went who
were censured at the same time with him. No, he removed then into Hampshire,
which would invite one to think that he had a peculiar interest in that
Province.

I have heard, that when he was a young spark at the University, he was noted
for a more than ordinary stroke at wrestling; and that afterward waiting on
CROMWELL, with whom he had been contemporary at the University, Cromwell
declared to the gentlemen then about him that he could remember the time when
he had been more afraid of meeting Whelewright at football, than of meeting any
army since in the field; for he was infallibly sure of being tript up by him.

I know not whether the instrument of his, now in your hands, will have as good
an efficacy as the owner had. You will doubtless think it has, if, in wrestling
with your adversaries, it trip up their cause, and give them a fall. I should
abhor, that the cause of my best friends, and a very good cause, ever should be
served by any indirect means; yet I verily think this instrument ought very
much to be considered, and to have a very great weight allowed unto it.

Sir, I wish you a good voyage, and a good issue, and subscribe,

Your sincere servant, CO. MATHER.
P. S. I forgot to tell you that when my parent lay at Plymouth, bound for
New England, on March 24, 1691-2, Mr. Sherwell, a minister then living there,
told him that his grandfather and one Mr. Coleman and another, had a patent for
that which Mr. Mason pretended unto at Pascataqua. You may do well to inquire
further concerning it.



No. II. Lieut. Governor VAUGHAN's Speech at the Council Board, Sept. 24, 1717.
(Vol. II, p. 22.)
GENTLEMEN,
YOU cannot but believe that I am informed of many things spoken to my
prejudice. When private whispers, defamatory to me are handed forward, I pass
them over with slight and disregard, and believe that every thing hitherto
designed against me has turned to my advantage, and will still do so. But when
matters are carried farther, wherein the honor of the Crown, and the interest
of the King's Majesty is especially struck at; when revenge's mother utters
bold challenges, raises batteries, and begins to cannonade the powers
established by my sovereign, I acknowledge myself alarmed, which I shall in no
wise tolerate or endure; as I am honored of the King, I will do my utmost to
support it, and not let his commission be vilified at the rate some will have
it. To have a due deference paid to it, is what the King requires and expects,
especially from his ministers; and to have them studious of lessening the
authority therein granted, is an aggravated fault, and I cannot but wonder at
the arrogance and pride of those who do not consider I am a superior match, as
being armed with power from my Prince, who does execution at the utterance of a
word, and I hope none will be so sturdy as to dispute it. If I soar too high,
the fall will not crush them: If they run too fast, their repentance may be
timely. What I have to say to you, Mr. Penhallow, is in gross, and is, that
your business, for a long time, has been to sow discord in the Commonwealth,
and your endeavors to propagate confusion and difference in each town within
the government; when avowed principles oblige you to fodder, as much as in you
lies, the affections of magistrates and people, thereby to divert all things
which naturally produce dissensions, tumult and feuds, the particulars I have,
and shall transmit to my Lord the King, in whose name, and by virtue of whose
power, I suspend you, Samuel Penhallow, from sitting, voting, and assisting at
the Council Board, till his Majesty's pleasure shall

No. III. An original Letter from Sir WILLIAM ASHURST to Doctor INCREASE
MATHER, (Vol. II. p. 25.)
REV. SIR,
I HAVE your letter of 12th August last, which I would have sooner answered,
but that I understood there has no ship gone to you this winter. I am pleased
at what you write of your Lieutenant Governor, that he acquits himself
worthily, and is a friend to the civil and ecclesiastical constitution. I
assure you, if I had not known this to be his character (not from your agent,
but from other impartial and disinterested hands) you had never seen him in
that station. I have no personal disrespect to Col. Tailer; on the other hand I
wish him in his private capacity much happiness and prosperity for his deceased
uncle's sake, whose memory I esteem and value; but when the interest and
welfare of the public is before me, I never suffer myself to be influenced by
any partial considerations; and who can think it proper, that the second post
in the government should be filled by one who, not content with dissenting from
the established churches by his constant practice, did engage, at the head of a
party in a concerted design, to subvert their foundations?

I do not know but such a procedure may recommend him to some people, but it
must needs disqualify him to you and me, who know on what principles
New England was first settled, and what were the pious motives which prevailed
on the first planters to forsake their native land, and plant a wilderness.

I hope I have done as well, in getting the Lieut. Governor of New Hampshire
displace^, who presented a memorial, when he was here, to the King and
Ministry, to bring New England into the land tax of Great Britain, and
proposed, that a receiver should be appointed by the Crown, to gather in the
money. For a native of New England to be the author of such a memorial, is a
monstrous offense; and if you suffer such people to be easy among you, yet they
shall never escape my resentment while I have any interest or power at Court.

I am very glad that you are still useful in your advanced age. To preach
constantly at fourscore and to so large an audience, and without notes, is a
rare example, and scarcely to be found in history. For myself, I am ten years
short of you, yet I think I have great acknowledgments to make to divine
Providence, for the measure of health I enjoy, and the opportunities I have of
being yet serviceable in several stations. I constantly attend at the excise
office, where I have the honor to sit as a commissioner, and at the court of
aldermen, where I am the senior in rank, though not in years. Besides these
employments, I have vacant hours for the service of my country in general, and
my friends in particular; but I can tell you with a great deal of truth that no
part of my life has given me more satisfaction than that wherein I have served
the interest of New England, especially my favorite work, the propagation of
the gospel among the natives, in which disposition I hope I shall continue to
my life's end.

I refer you to the prints for public news. You Will hear various reports about
the unhappy divisions in the royal family; which all good men are sorry for. I
have nothing to say upon that subject, only that the King acts in every thing
with a prudent and steady resolution becoming the character of a great and wise
prince.

I am, Sir, your affectionate friend, and servant, W. ASHURST.
London, March 10, 1717-18.
No. IV. The humble Apology of the People of Nutfield to his Excellency SAMUEL
SHUTE, General, Governor and Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Provinces of
the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire in New England. (Vol. II. p. 38 -- 41.)
May it please your Excellency,
THE subscribers having seen a copy of your Excellency's letter to Captain
White and Captain Kimbell, find themselves under a necessity of vindicating
themselves from the charges given in against them; it being allowable by the
law of nature and of nations, to the greatest criminals, to defend themselves
when they justly plead in their own vindication. We were surprised to hear
ourselves termed Irish people when we so frequently ventured our all for the
British crown and liberties against the Irish papists, and gave all tests of
our loyalty which the government of Ireland required, and are always ready to
do the same here when demanded. Though we settled at Nutfield, yet we used no
violence in the manner of our settlement, seeing no body in the least offered
to hinder us, to set down in a desolate wilderness; and we were so far from
hindering the English that really had a ^^^nd to plant with us, that many of
them are now incorporated with us. After our settlement we found that two or
three different parties claimed Nutfield, by virtue of Indian deeds, and we
were given to understand, that it was necessary for us to hold the soil by some
right purchased from the natives. Accordingly we made application to the Hon.
Col* Wheelwright of Wells, and obtained his Indian right; which we have to
show* His deed being of ninety years standing; and conveyed from the chief
Sagamores between the rivers of Merrimack and Pascataqua, with the consent of
the whole tribes of the Indian nation, and well executed; is the most authentic
we have seen; and the subscribers could not in reason think that a deed which
is not twenty years old; of land which is not sufficiently butted and bounded,
from an obscure Indian, could give any right to land which had been sold so
many years before, by the right owners. And the subscribers hope they will be
excused from giving away so good a title, for others that cannot pretend
rationally to be so well supported; and which they always refused to warrantee
and make good, against other claims. The dutiful applications which we have
made to both courts, if we be incorporated, in whatsoever province we fall to
be, will witness for our respect to his Majesty's government. If affidavits
have been given against one of our number as using some threatening
expressions, we hope it will not be imputed to the community. If our accusers
be permitted to come up in troops, as they have done, and violently demolished
one of our houses, and destroyed part of our hay, and threatened and insulted
us with impunity, to the great terror of our wives and children, when we
suffered patiently, and then accuse us to our rulers of violence, injustice,
fraud, force, insolence, cruelty, dishonor of his Majesty's government, and
disturbance of his Majesty's subjects, injuries and offenses to the English,
and the like, when we know ourselves to be innocent, we think it hard measure;
and must have recourse to God, who forbids to take up a bad report against
our neighbor, and will, we hope, bring forth our righteousness as the light,
and our judgment as the noon day. If we be g^^ty of these disorders, we know we
are liable to a legal trial, and are not so weak as to suppose ourselves to be
out of the reach of your Excellency's government. The subscribers hope that if
any other accusations come in against them, they will be allowed an equal
hearing before they be condemned; and as we enjoy the liberty of the gospel
here, which is so great a mercy, shall improve it, for God's glory; and as he
has taught us, be dutiful to his Majesty's government, set over us, and, if
possible, live peaceably with all men, shall be desirous of peaceable
neighbors, that want to settle with us, and to help us to subdue a part of
this vast and uncultivated wilderness; and shall not cease to pray for the
divine blessing on your Excellency's person and government.

Done at Nutfield, Feb. 27, 1719-20, and subscribed by JAMES Mc GREGORE, etc.

No. V. An original Letter of Governor SHUTE to Mr. PENHALLOW. (Vol. II. p. 42.)
Boston, Feb. 2, 1718-19. SIR,
DR. COOK having again over his cups treated me very scandalously, I have
complained to the council who I don't question will do me justice.

It will be of service to me to have a certificate to show how drunk he was
that night that he and Colonel Goff broke into our company at young Gerish's,
for I remember that you and Mr. Bridger told me that he stayed so long after we
were gone, as to get so drunk that he could neither go nor stand; if this be
strongly certified, I believe it will give him a good lift. Pray my service to
the Lieut. Governor, the council and your family.

I am, Sir, your humble servant, SAMUEL SHUTE.

No. VI. To his Excellency JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire. Captain General and Commander
in Chief in and over his Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, in New England.
To the Honorable the Council and Representatives in General Court assembled,
The Complaint and Petition of HUGH ADAMS, Clerk, the Gospel Minister and Pastor
of the Church at Durham within said Province,
HUMBLY SHOWS,
FORASMUCH as your complainant petitioner has been more than one and twenty
years last past a labourer in the word and doctrine of Christ sincerely to the
utmost of his ability amongst that people, although the good laws of this said
province so far have required of them; and their own contract or agreement with
him, voted by them in the first week of the month of April, anno 1717, as by a
copy of the record of Oyster river parish or said town, as also by the
evidences of some of their then select men and committee may appear in order
for his support, with a competent salary of one hundred and four pounds during
his ministry there, even then when silver money was not of more value than ten
shillings per ounce annually, to be paid as then understood in the real value
thereof, and not only in the bare name of so much, and unanimously agreed by
their then committee, to be paid punctually each year, one half of said salary,
i. e. L52 at the end of or within each six months, i. e. the first week in
October and April, with other material articles of said agreement for his
maintenance among them, which also has obliged them thereunto, yet have they
not in any one year of said time of three apprenticeships since their said
contract, been honest nor faithful by the payment thereof in the just value,
nor in due season, so as that the hire of his ministerial labors so much and
long being kept back by their sacrilegious fraud, has been crying in the ears
of Christ the Lord of sabbath, so to expose them and their covenant and silent
neighbors in this said province, unto the curse denounced which has been so
long and often executed in such a variety of destroying, terrifying and
impoverishing judgments of God, too many herein to be enumerated, and so much
thereof evidently occasioned by said parish and town, being therein so long
tolerated with impunity, as an Achan in the camp; and as the seven sons of
Saul, in the days of King David; and as Jonah in the ship of the commonwealth
of this province aforesaid. And especially whereas the principal article in the
said contract insisted on by their said minister, wherein their then select men
and com^^^^^^ agreed, by manual vote and voice (nemine contradicente) but was
not entered by their then parish clerk, John Smith, who deceased anno 1722,
with or after the other articles hereof in the record rolls of their then
parish of Oyster river, or since town of Durham, and since yearly on very
fervent entreaties to have the same articles entered upon their records and
observed for the yearly performance thereof for the future, whereunto
nevertheless they have been inexorable beyond all reason and justice, hitherto
in disregarding said above hinted article, viz. That each year one half of said
salary of L104, which is L52, should be paid in to him or his order at or
before the end of each six months or half year, i. e. the first week in October
and April, which committee vote or vow of theirs, has never yet, in any one
year of the twenty-one years of my ministry amongst them, been performed: But
mostly deferred until at least three months after said former half year's
harvest wa^ ended, when the price of provisions was raised at least twenty-five
per cent. dearer than at harvest or in gathering thereof; which delinquency of
theirs in said twenty-one years has been to the damage of said minister above
L520 in said parish and town, especially where he has been necessitated, ra^^er
than starve, to borrow considerable sums of money upon six, ten, fifteen and
twenty per cent. interest yearly, and running on interest upon interest, yet
unto this day, to his impoverishing oppression, and sinking discouragement; and
reduced his salary of L104 of late years to the name thereof, when in present
value as the altered prices of all necessaries for livelihood are about two
hundred per cent. dearer than when their said contract was made. His salary now
is scarce more in real worth than L36 each year, although their ra^eable heads,
families, cattle and lands have increased treble their ability more than at
first agreement. Also this year, 1738, the majority of said Durham inhabitants
have stopped their ears at the cry of the poor at their two public town
meetings, although it is threatened they shall cry themselves but shall not be
heard.

Therefore now the oppressing necessities of the complainant petitioner
constrain him to pray he may be regarded by this great and General* Court
assembled in these his following requests, as Christ Jesus Immanuel, to
encourage each of his faithful ministers, testifyeth saying, He that hears
you, hears me.

1. Request that the records of said parish, named Oyster river, and now
chartered town of Durham, may be so far impeached as that the said article may
be entered by the present town clerk, Lieut. Samuel Smith; and accordingly that
he may be summoned to bring Durham's town-book of rolls, and likewise Capt.
Francis Mathews, the former town clerk, to bring the record rolls of said
Oyster river parish if yet in his possession; and likewise Lieut. Abraham
Bennick and Mr. Sampson Do, then of the select men and committee for said
parish in that year 1717, to give in or renew their oath or affidavit, each of
them for confirming the truth of said article.

2. Request na^ he petitioner's said salary of L104 may be enacted for the
future during the remainder of his ministry in said town, to he made good in
full value as really as in name, and to be paid in due season according to the
request and article aforesaid, with sufficient penalty for any delinquency
thereof, which, as written in the divine law moral, is the fifth part of the
principal, to be added unto it as evident from Lev. v. 15, 16. Number. r. 6, 7, 8.

3. Request that delinquency from the payment of any lawful settled minister's
salary within said province, may be enacted a criminal case, or matter
presentable by any grand juror, upon complaint made to him at each or any court
of sessions quarterly, as in the Massachusetts province government, which I
perceive by Psalms xli. 1, 2, 3, is the principal reason why they have been
hitherto proportionably spared from the throat pestilence and other
impoverishing, more than New Hampshire.

4. Request that Daniel Davis of said Durham, may be summoned and judged by
this most Honorable Court of New Hampshire province aforesaid, for his sundry
years, trespassing upon and enclosing within his fence and detaining so
forcibly from said minister several years previous possession thereof, sundry
acres of upland, and salt marsh and thatch bed, belonging to the glebe land or
parsonage, possessed by, improved for, as also granted to, the minister of said
parish or town at least sixty years, and for evidence thereof, that Capt.
Francis Mathews and his next neighbor Jonathan Willey the eldest, and Joseph
Stephens, his son, and William Willey, may each of them be summoned. Moreover
the said robbed and defrauded minister prays that it may likewise be ordered,
that the select men of said each year may rescue said parsonage land from him
the said Daniel Davis and every other unjust incroacher thereon, and on each
other parcel of glebe land or parsonage (as viz.) the long marsh and that
parcel of ministerial land lying on the highway leading S. and W. toward
Lampercell river, and bounded E. and S. on Potter Mason's land, and S. and W.
on Richard Denbow's land, each of which is incroached upon by one or other of
the adjacent neighbors, and although their minister, as their spiritual
father, so long seeking their welfare in gathering of a church first amongst
them, on March 26, 1718, his prevailing as the dresser of their church
vineyard, with Immanuel Christ Jesus the Lord thereof, for his grant of four
years probation, whether the barren fig trees might, by a ministerial husbandry
expended on them, be prevailed with to bear fruit proportionably that it might
be well with them as in the gospel parable thereof, Luke xiii. 7, 8, 9, and
when the Indian war began, anno 1722, and that five persons were cut down
thereby, in our parish; who has likewise prevailed with the heavenly Prince of
Peace to make and keep his covenant of peace with and for us, as written in
Ezekiel xxxiv. 25, yearly pleaded and granted these thirteen years hitherto,
notwithstanding the so repeatedly many rumors of wars free from the reality
thereof. Likewise in the year 1729, when Captain Samuel Emerson and Lieut.
Jonathan Thompson and Hubbard Stevens had harrassed their minister with an
antichristian council ecclesiastical countenanced by the then Commander in
chief, after which the said Emerson and Ko^^te company, by their negative
clandestine votes robbed him of the L50 addition to his salary, they granted
him the preceding year 1728. In his so provoked subjection to passion* as Elias
in James v. 17, 18, he the said minister, while it was yet more than three
months to the harvest, prayed it might not rain, and it rained not until three
months after; when in regard to the importunity of some friendly brethren, he
appointed and conscientiously sanctified a church fast, from evening to
evening, abstained three meals from eating, drinking and smoking any thing; in
beginning of September that year 1729; and the Lord Christ was pleased to hear
in heaven and grant such repeated plentiful and warm rains, as recovered the
languishing corn* grass and fruits of the trees, unto a considerable harvest
thereof; so as was then remarkable. And in that year 1733, when the said
parish, by the General Court, was chartered into the township of Durham in
answer unto their said minister's petition, for its privileges and said name as
therein pleaded for, and the inhabitants of said town proceeded by their chosen
committee, at their most general meeting, to divide their commons, voting their
minister aforesaid, should, as he did draw lo^s for them all, yet he cannot
prevail with the lot layers to survey his lot of twenty-five acres, nor inform
him where he may have it laid out for him, neither have said inhabitants
fulfilled their condition of honorably supporting their minister. And since no
inferior Court in this said province hitherto could do justice to your
petitioner, he is therefore now necessitated to flee for refuge to this Supreme
Legislative Court of nursing fathers; in each of which requests, your so long
oppressed petitioner importunately asks for justice, firmly believing, after
that, God will be entreated for the land in New Hampshire.

So complains and prays the abovenamed petitioner.

HUGH ADAMS.

No. VII. The Opinions of John Read and Robert Auchmuty, on the case of JOHN
TUFTON MASON, 1738 (Vol. II. p. 160.)
1629, Nov. 7. THE President and Council established at Plymouth for the
planting and governing of New England, granted to Capt. John Mason, of London,
Esquire. all that part of the main land in New England from the middle of Merrimack
river, along the sea coast to Pascataqua river, up that river to the farthest
head thereof, and from thence northwestward till three score miles be finished
from the entrance of Pascataqua river, and from Merrimack through that river to
the farthest head thereof, and so forwards up into the land westward, till
three score mills be finished, and and from thence to cross over land to the
three score miles end, accounted from Pascataqua river, together with all the
islands within five miles of the premises, with the appurtenances which the
said John Mason, with their consent, intended to name New Hampshire, to hold to
the said John Mason and his heirs.

1635, April 22. The president and council aforesaid, grant to the said John
Mason, all that part of New England, from the middle of Naumkege river, along
the sea coast, round Cape-Ann to Pascataqua harbor, and up the river
Newichawannack, to the farthest head thereof, and from thence northwestward
till sixty miles be finished from the entrance Pascataqua harbor, and from
Naumkege through the river into the land west sixty miles, from which period,
to cross over land to the sixty miles end, accounted from Pascataqua aforesaid,
and the south half of the Isle of Shoals and all other islands within five
leagues of the premises, all to be called New Hampshire, also another parcel of
land lying on the south east side of Sagadahock, at the mouth of the river,
containing near ten thousand acres, to be called by the name of Masonia, to
hold to him and his heirs.

N. B. Sir William Jones, and Sir F. Winnington, attorney and solicitor-general
in their report in favor of Robert Mason, grandson of John Mason, his title to
New Hampshire, mention another grant from said president and council, to Capt*
John Mason, dated 9th March, 1620, which I have not seen.

1635, Nov. 26. Capt. John Mason, by his last will, devised to the mayor and
commonalty of Kingslynn, two thousand acres of land in his county of
New Hampshire, or manor of Mason hall in New England, which his executrix and
overseer should think most fit. Item to his brother-in-law John Wollaston,
three thousand acres of land in his county of New Hampshire or manor of Mason
hall, where his said brother and executrix should think fit; to hold to him and
his heirs. Item to his grand child Anne Tufton, Masonia, to hold to her and her
heirs. Item to his grandchild Robert Tufton, his manor of Mason hall, to hold
to him and his heirs, provided he alter his surname, and name himself Mason
first. Item to John Wollaston aforesaid two thousand acres of land in his
county of New Hampshire, in trust to convey one thousand to some feoffee in
trust toward the maintenance of a godly minister in New Hampshire, and the
other thousand to some feoffee toward the maintenance of a free grammar school
in New Hampshire. Item to his grandchild John Tufton, all the rest of his
manors, messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, in his county of
New Hampshire, or elsewhere in New England, to hold to him and the heirs of his
body. Remainder to his cousin Doctor Robert Mason, and the heirs male of his
body, and for want of such issue to revert to the donor and his heirs, provided
his grandchild John Tufton shall alter his surname, and surname himself Mason;
first provided also the said John Tufton shall pay his sister Mary Tufton out
of the manors messuages, lands and tenements aforesaid, L500 sterling for her
preferment in marriage, etc. and died, and on the second of December following,
his will was proved in the prerogative court of Canterbury and administration,
granted to Anne, his widow executrix.

1677. John and Anne, grandchildren, died without issue, and their estates came
to Robert Tufton Mason, accordingly for whom King Charles II. settled the bound
line between New Hampshire and the Massachusetts Bay, and he died leaving two
sons, John and Robert.

1691, April 27. John and Robert Tufton Mason bargained and sold to Samuel
Allen of London, merchant, for a sum of money, all New Hampshire, as bounded in
their great grandfather's grant of 1635, and Masonia, also part of the province
of Main, the country Mariana, province of Laconia, and several towns in
New Hampshire, as heretofore described with the appurtenances, deed and
charters thereof, to hold to him and his heirs. Then John died without issue.
That Robert Tufton Mason, surviving great grandson of Captain John Mason, lived
and died at Portsmouth, of Pascataqua, about forty years ago, leaving his
eldest son, John Tufton Mason and several other children; and this John Tufton
Mason, about twenty years after, died, leaving one only child, John Tufton
Mason, of Boston, mariner, who claims the province of New Hampshire, and would
compound with the province of the Massachusetts Bay all differences between
them.

Qu. Upon the whole, what interest has this John Tufton Mason in
New Hampshire, and to what purpose and effect can the province Of Massachusetts.
agree with him, and in what manner execute it?

Answ. So much as the President and Council aforesaid conveyed to Captain John
Mason for New Hampshire, except the lands southward of Merrimack river, and
within three miles of it on the northerly side, which was before conveyed to
the inhabitants of the colony of the Massachusetts, and except seven thousand
acres particularly devised, and the manor of Mason hall, the bounds and
contents whereof I know not. I say all the rest of New Hampshire, Captain John
Mason, by his will aforesaid, devised to his grandson, John Tufton Mason, in
tail, general. Remainder to his grandson, Robert Tufton Mason, in tail general,
with remainders over, and the right has properly remained descended, and come
to this John Tufton Mason, of Boston, mariner, the alienation of his great
uncle and grandfather aforesaid notwithstanding, which could be of no avail
after their death. But if at their death his father was of full age, it is so
many years ago, that his suit is effectually barred by statute 21, James I.
chap. xvi. which requires him or his heirs to bring it within twenty years
after the title accrued at farthest. And if he ever came of age, he or his
heirs could have but ten years after he was of age, or after his death, to
bring this suit, which must be elapsed in this time, and their suit entirely
barred, for which only reason I am of opinion this Province can neither get nor
lose by him and his title aforesaid.

JOHN READ.

I conceive the right properly descends to John Tufton Mason, of Boston,
mariner, the alienation aforesaid notwithstanding; and am of opinion the
statute of limitation aforesaid will not be held of itself to extend to
New England, being an act not affirmative of the common law in abridgment of
the general right the party has of pursuing, and beyond twenty years asserting
his property, and from the express words of the statute, the same appears to be
confined to the realm of England. John Tufton Mason cannot convey but for his
life, and not that, being out of possession, till he regains the same. Whatever
fruit the province may expect from his title must be by proper powers.

ROBERT AUCHMUTY.
Boston, June 16, 1738.
No. VIII. Copy of Queries stated by JEREMY GRIDLEY, Esquire. of Boston, and
answered by N. FAZAKERLEY, Esquire. of London. (Vol. II. p. 266.)
Qu. WHETHER a fine sur cognizance, etc. levied at Westminster, of lands lying
in New England, by fiction, supposed to be in England, will bar the heir in
tail by common or statute law?

I am of opinion that the heir in tail will not be barred or affected thereby.

Qu. Whether a common recovery suffered of such lands, will be a bar to the
heir in tail? N. B. There was a proper court in the plantation where a fine
might have been levied, and a recovery suffered, and the service of the writ in
the common recovery was upon the heir in tail then in England.

I think the heir in tail will not be barred or affected thereby.

Qu. Whether such a fine and recovery will bar the heir in tail in a plantation
where such heir has a right to the jurisdiction and prerogatives used by the
Bishop of Durham in the county palatine of Durham, though he did not exercise
his right at that time, and there were courts there under the appointment of
the crown?

If the facts relating to this question had been stated, I might have been able
to have given a direct answer to this question. However this general answer may
probably answer the intent of the question, for I am of opinion that a fine, or
recovery, cannot operate upon any real estate or interest lying out of the
jurisdiction of the court of common pleas, and consequently cannot bar or
affect any estate tail in any foreign colony or plantation. And in my opinion
such a law would be of most dangerous consequence to estates in those
countries, and introduce great uncertainty and confusion if the estates of the
inhabitants were to be affected by records privately made up in this country,
which may be laid in one county as well as another.

Qu. Whether any judgments have been given at Westminster, upon the validity
and force of such fines and recoveries, and what are they?

I know not that there has been any such judgment; but a few years ago, when
the present Lord Chancellor was Chief Justice of the King's Bench, there was a
writ of error brought to reverse a fine levied in the common pleas, and the
error assigned was that it appeared upon the face of the record, that the lands
lay in partibus transmarinis, and the defendant in error was so sensible of the
objection, that he moved the court of common pleas to amend by striking out the
words in partibus transmarinis, which put an end to the cause. And I do not
know of any other judgment. But as to recoveries, how can a writ of seizin be
awarded or returned? for the sheriff cannot give seizin of lands out of his
Bailiwick. The seizin of the Lands of New Hampshire, when ^old to Samuel Allen,
was given by the Sheriff of Kent, in England.


N. FAZAKERLEY.
May 21, 1754.
No. IX. An original Letter from GOV. WENTWORTH to GOV. SHIRLEY.
Portsmouth, 22 d March, 1754. (Vol. II. p. 281.) SIR,
IT gives me great concern to find by your Excellency's letter of the 18th
current, that the intelligencies you have from the eastward, confirm the report
of the Fort the French are building on or near Kennebeck river. This part of
the French policy, it concerns all his Majesty's colonies to defeat, as the
building forts within the undoubted limits of his Majesty's dominions, is not
only a violation of all treaties subsisting between his Britannick Majesty and
the French King, but has a fatal tendency to disturb the peace and quiet of all
his Majesty's colonies on the continent of America, and therefore I shall think
it my duty, if I can obtain assistance from the assembly, to prevent not only
the building this, but any other fort within the known limits of the King's
dominions, after they have been desired and required to desist.

In a postscript of my last letter, I advised your Excellency that the two
persons indicted for the murder of two Indians, the grand Jurors had found a
bill against, and on Monday they were put in irons, and to remain so until the
day appointed for their trial, but on Thursday morning about two of the clock,
a mob assembled, and with axes and crows broke open, and rent in pieces the
outer and inner doors of the prison, and rescued the prisoners, and in so
silent a manner, that the neighboring houses were not disturbed, until the
main body had got possession of the prisoners, and then they marched out of
town, firing guns, and in a most insolent manner. As to the numbers it is
variously reported, some say two hundred, and others three hundred, but it is
my opinion, they thought themselves strong enough to resist the town had they
been discovered; and it is generally supposed the far greater part of this
riotous gang came out of the country, and from the frontiers who will be most
exposed, if by their unprecedented conduct it should be the cause of a war; but
that a white man should not be hanged for killing an Indian, has taken such
deep root in the minds of the unthinking multitude, that it is impossible to
remove it.

I convened the council on this occasion, who advised me to issue a
proclamation, promising a reward for apprehending the prisoners, but they
desired to suspend their advice on the rioters, until the next week, alleging
that as there was so great a number concerned, it must be impossible but some
discovery must be made in a more easy way; so I have adjourned the
consideration thereof until next week, hoping some discovery may be made in the
mean time, of some of the leaders.

I am, with the greatest respect, Sir, your Excellency's most obedient, humble
servant, B. WENTWORTH.

No. X. A particular Account of the Captivity of Mrs. JEMIMA HOW, by the Rev.
BUNKER GAY, of Hinsdale, in a Letter to the Author. (Vol. II. p. 295.)
July 27, 1755. AS Messrs. Caleb How, Hilkiah Grout, and Benjamin Gaffield,
who had been hoeing corn in the meadow, west of the river, were returning home,
a little before sunset, to a place called Bridgman's Fort, they were fired upon
by twelve Indians, who had ambushed their path. How was on horseback, with two
young lads, his children, behind him. A ball, which broke his thigh, brought
him to the ground. His horse (...) a few rods and fell likewise, and both the
(...) were taken. The Indians in their savage manner, coming up to How,
pierced his body with a spear, tore off his scalp, stuck a hatchet in his head,
and left him in this forlorn condition. He was found alive the morning after,
by a party of men from Fort Hinsdale; and being asked by one of the party
whether he knew him, he answered, yes, I know you all. These were his last
words, though he did not expire until after his friends had arrived with him at
Fort Hinsdale. Grout was so fortunate as to escape unhurt. But Gaffield, in
attempting to wade through the river, at a certain place which was indeed
fordable at that time, was unfortunately drowned. Flushed with the success they
had met with here, the savages went directly to Bridgman's Fort. There was no
man in it, and only three women and some children, viz. Mrs. Jemima How, Mrs.
Submit Grout, and Mrs. Eunice Gaffield. Their husbands, I need not mention
again, and their feelings at this juncture I will not attempt to describe. They
had heard the enemies guns, but knew not what had happened to their friends.
Extremely anxious for their safety, they stood longing to embrace them, until
at length, concluding from the noise they heard without that some of them were
come, they unbarred the gate in a hurry to receive them; when lo! to their
inexpressible disappointment and surprise, instead of their husbands, in rushed
a number of hideous Indians, to whom they and their tender offspring became an
easy prey; and from whom they had nothing to expect, but either an immediate
death, or a long and doleful captivity. The latter of these, by the favor of
Providence, turned out to be the lot of these unhappy women and their still
more unhappy, because more helpless, children. Mrs. Gaffield had but one, Mrs.
Grout had three, and Mrs. How seven. The eldest of Mrs. Howe's was eleven
years old, and the youngest but six months. The two eldest were daughters,
which she had by her first husband, Mr. William Phipps, who was also slain by
the Indians, of which, I doubt not but you have seen an account in Mr.
Doolittle's history. It was from the mouth of this woman that I lately received
the foregoing account. She also gave me, I doubt not, a true, though to be
sure, a very brief and imperfect history of her captivity, which I here insert
for your perusal. It may perhaps afford you some amusement* and can do no harm;
if after it has undergone your critical inspection, you should not think it (or
an a^^eviation of it) worthy to be preserved among (...) records you are about
to publish.

*The Indians (she says) having plundered and put fire to the Fort, we marched
as near as I could judge, a mile and a half into the woods, where we encamped
that night. When the morning came, and we had advanced as ^^ch farther, six
Indians were sent back to the place of our late abode, who collected a little
more plunder, and destroyed some other effects that had been left behind; but
they did not return until the day was so far spent, that it was judged best to
continue where we were, through the night. Early the next morning we set off
for Canada, and continued our march eight days successively, until we had
reached the place where the Indians had left their canoes, about fifteen miles
from Crown Point* This was a long and tedious march; but the captives, by
divine assistance, were enabled to endure it with less trouble and difficulty,
than they had reason to expect. From such savage masters, in such indigent
circumstances, we could not rationally hope for kinder treatment than we
received. Some of us, it is true, had a harder lot than others; and, among the
children, I thought my son Squire had the hardest of any. He was then only four
years old, and when we stopped to rest our weary limbs, and he sat down on his
master's pack, the savage monster would often knock him off; and sometimes too,
with the handle of his hatchet. Several ugly marks, indented in his head by the
cruel Indians, at that tender age, are still plainly to be seen.

At length we arrived at Crown Point, and took up our quarters there, for the
space of near a week. In the mean time some of the Indians went to Montreal,
and took several of the weary captives along with them, with a view of selling
them to the French. They did not succeed, however, in finding a market for any
of them. They gave my youngest daughter, Submit Phipps, to the Governor, de
Vaudreuil, had a drunken frolic, and returned again to Crown Point, with the
rest of their prisoners. From hence we set off for St. John's, in four or five
canoes, just as night was coming on, and were soon surrounded with darkness. A
heavy storm hung over us. The sound of the rolling thunder was very terrible
upon the waters, which at every flash of expansive lightning, seemed to be all
in a blaze. Yet to this we were indebted for all the light we enjoyed. No
object could we discern any longer than the flashes lasted. In this posture we
sailed in our open tottering canoes, almost the whole of that dreary night. The
morning indeed had not yet begun to dawn, when we all went ashore; and having
collected a heap of sand and gravel for a pillow, I laid myself down, with my
tender infant by my side, not knowing where any of my other children were, or
what a miserable condition they might be in. The next day, however, under the
wing of that ever present and all-powerful Providence, which had preserved us
through the darkness, and imminent ^^^gers of the preceding night, we all
arrived i^ safety at St. John's.

Our next movement was to St. Francois, the metropolis, if I may so call it, to
which the Indians, who led us captive, belonged. Soon after our arrival at
their wretched capital, a council, consisting of the chief Sachem, and some
principal warriors of the St. Francois tribe, was convened; and after the
ceremonies usual on such occasions, were over, I was conducted and delivered to
an old squaw, whom the Indians told me, I must call my mother. My infant still
continuing to be the property of its original Indian owners. I was nevertheless
permitted to keep it with me a while longer, for the sake of saving them the
trouble of looking after it, and of maintaining it with my milk. When the
weather began to grow cold, shuddering at the prospect of approaching winter, I
acquainted my new mother that I did not think it would be possible for me to
endure it, if I must spend i^ with her, and fare as the Indians did. Listening
to my repeated and earnest solicitations, that I might be disposed of among
some of the French inhabitants of Canada, she, at length, set off with me and
my infant, attended by some male Indians, upon a journey to Montreal, in hopes
of finding a market for me there. But the attempt proved unsuccessful, and the
journey tedious indeed. Our provisions were so scanty as well as insipid and
unsavory, the weather was so cold, and the traveling so very bad, that it
often seemed as if I must have perished on the way. The lips of my poor child
were sometimes so benumbed, that when I put it to my breast, it could not, till
it grew warm, imbibe the nourishment requisite for its support. While we were
at Montreal, we went into the house of a certain French gentleman, whose lady,
being sent for, and coming into the room where I was, to examine me, seeing I
had an infant, exclaimed suddenly in this manner, Damn it, I will not buy a
woman that has a child to look after. There was a swill-pail standing near me,
in which I observed some crusts and crumbs of bread swiming on the surface of
the greasy liquor it contained: Sorely pinched with hunger, I skimmed them off
with my hands and eat them; and this was all the refreshment which the house
afforded me. Some where in the course of this visit to Montreal, my Indian
mother was so unfortunate as to catch the small pox, of which distemper she
died, soon after our return, which was by water, to St. Francois.

And now came on the season when the Indians begun to prepare for a winter's
hunt. I was ordered to return my poor child to those of them, who still claimed
it as their property. This was a severe trial. The babe clung to my bosom with
all its might; but I was obliged to pluck it thence, and deliver it, shrieking
and screaming, enough to penetrate a heart of stone, into the hands of those
unfeeling wretches whose tender mercies may be termed cruel. It was soon
carried off by a hunting party of those Indians, to a place called Messiskow,
at the lower end of Lake Champlain, whither, in about a month after, it was my
fortune to follow them. I had preserved my milk, in hopes of seeing my beloved
child again. And here I found it, it is true, but in a condition that afforded
me no great satisfaction; it being greatly emaciated, and almost starved. I
took it in my arms, put its face to mine, and it instantly bit me with such
violence, that it seemed as if I must have parted with a piece of my cheek. I
was permitted to lodge with it that, and the two following nights; but every
morning that intervened, the Indians, I suppose on purpose to torment me, sent
me away to another wigwam, which stood at a little distance, though not so far
from the one in which my distressed infant was confined, but that I could
plainly hear its incessant cries, and heart rending lamentations. In this
deplorable condition I was obliged to take my leave of it, on the morning of
the third day after my arrival at the place. We moved down the Lake several
miles the same day; and the night following was remarkable on account of the
great earthquake November ^8, 17^^
which terribly shook that howling wilderness. Among the islands hereabouts we
spent the winter season, often shifting our quarters, and roving about from one
place to another; our family consisting of three persons only, besides myself,
viz. my late mother's daughter, whom therefore I called my sister, her sanhop,
and a pappoose. They once left me alone two dismal nights; and when they
returned to me again, perceiving them smile at each other, I asked what is the
matter? They replied, that two of my children were no more: One of which, they
said, died a natural death, and the other was knocked on the head. I did not
utter many words, but my heart was sorely pained within me, and my mind
exceedingly troubled with strange and awful ideas. I often imagined, for
instance, that I plainly saw the naked carcases of my deceased children hanging
upon the limbs of the trees, as the Indians are wont to hang the raw hides of
those beasts which they take in hunting. It was not long, however, before it
was so ordered by kind Providence, that I should be relieved in a good measure
from those horrid imaginations; for as I was walking one day upon the ice,
observing a smoke at some distance upon the land, it must proceed, thought I,
from the fire of some Indian hut, and who knows but some one of my poor
children may be there. My curiosity, thus excited, led me to the place, and
there I found my son Caleb, a little boy between two and three years old, whom
I had lately buried, in sentiment at least; or rather imagined to have been
deprived of life, and perhaps also denied a decent grave. I found him likewise
in tolerable health and circumstances, under the protection of a fond Indian
mother; and moreover had the happiness of lodging with him in my arms one
joyful night. Again we shifted our quarters, and when we had traveled eight or
ten miles upon the snow and ice, came to a place where the Indians manufactured
sugar which they extracted from the maple trees. Here an Indian came to visit
us, whom I knew, and could speak English. He asked me why I did not go to see
my son Squire. I replied that I had lately been informed that he was dead. He
assured me that he was yet alive, and but two or three miles off, on the
opposite side of the Lake. At my request he gave me the best directions he
could to the place of his abode. I resolved to embrace the first opportunity
that offered of endeavoring to search it out. While I was busy in contemplating
this affair, the Indians obtained a little bread, of which they gave me a small
share. I did not taste a morsel of it myself, but saved it all for my poor
child, if I should be so lucky as to find him. At length, having obtained of my
keepers leave to be absent for one day, I set off early in the morning, and
steering, as well as I could, according to the directions which the friendly
Indian had given me, I quickly found the place, which he had so accurately
marked out. I beheld, as I drew nigh, my little son without the camp; but he
looked, thought I, like a starved and mangy puppy, that had been wallowing in
the ashes. I took him in my arms, and he spoke to me these words, in the Indian
tongue: 'Mother, are you come?' I took him into the wigwam with me, and
observing a number of Indian children in it, I distributed all the bread which
I had reserved for my own child, among them all, otherwise I should have given
great offense. My little boy appeared to be very fond of his new mother, kept
as near me as possible while I staid, and when I told him I must go, he fell as
though he had been knocked down with a club. But having recommended him to the
care of Him that made him, when the day was far spent, and the time would
permit me to stay no longer, I departed, you may well suppose, with a heavy
load at my heart. The tidings I had received of the death of my youngest child
had, a little before, been confirmed to me beyond a doubt, but I could not
mourn so heartily for the deceased, as for the living child.

When the winter broke up, we removed to St. John's; and, through the ensuing
summer, our principal residence was at no great distance from the fort at that
place. In the mean time, however, my sister's husband having been out with a
scouting party to some of the English settlements, had a drunken frolic at the
fort, when he returned. His wife, who never got drunk, but had often
experienced the ill effects of her husband's intemperance, fearing what the
consequence might prove, if he should come home in a morose and turbulent
humor, to avoid his insolence, proposed that we should both retire, and keep
out of the reach of it, until the storm abated. We absconded accordingly, but
so it happened, that I returned, and ventured into his presence, before his
wife had presumed to come nigh him. I found him in his wigwam, and in a surly
mood; and not being able to revenge upon his wife, because she was not at home,
he laid hold of me, and hurried me to the fort; and, for a trifling
consideration, sold me to a French gentleman, whose name was Saccapee. It Is an
ill wind certainly that blows no body any good. I had been with the Indians a
year lacking fourteen days; and, if not for my sister, yet for me, 'twas a
lucky circumstance indeed, which thus at last, in an unexpected moment,
snatched me out of their cruel hands, and placed me beyond the reach of their
insolent power.

After my Indian master had disposed of me in the manner related above, and the
moment of sober reflection had arrived, perceiving that the man who bought me
had taken the advantage of him in an unguarded hour, his resentments begun to
kindle, and his indignation rose so high, that he threatened to kill me if he
should meet me alone, or if he could not revenge himself thus, that he would
set ^^re to the fort. I was therefore secreted in an upper chamber, and the
fort carefully guarded, until his wrath had time to cool. My service in the
family to which I was now advanced, was perfect freedom, in comparison of what
it had been among the barbarous Indians. My new master and mistress were both
as kind and generous toward me as I could any ways expect. I seldom asked a
favor of either of them, but it was readily granted: In consequence of which I
had it in my power, in many instances, to administer aid and refreshment to the
poor prisoners of my own nation, who were brought into St. John's during my
abode in the family of the abovementioned benevolent and hospitable Saccapee.
Yet even in this family such trials awaited me as I had little reason to
expect, but stood in need of a large stock of prudence, to enable me to
encounter them. Must I tell you then, that even the good old man himself, who
considered me as his property, and likewise a warm and resolute son of his, at
that same time, and under the same roof, became both excessively fond of my
company; so that between these two rivals, the father and the son, I found
myself in a very critical situation indeed, and was greatly embarrassed and
perplexed, hardly knowing many times, how to behave in such a manner as at once
to secure my own virtue, and the good esteem of the family in which I resided,
and upon which I was wholly dependent for my daily support. At length, however,
through the tender compassion of a certain English gentleman, Col. ^^ter
Schuyler, th^n a prisoner.
the Governor de Vaudreuil being made acquainted with the condition I had
fallen into, immediately ordered the young and amorous Saccapee, then an
officer in the French army* from the field of Venus to the field of Mars, and
at the same time also wrote a letter to his father, enjoining it upon him, by
no means to suffer (...) to be abused, but to make my situation and service in
his family as easy and delightful as possible. I was moreover under unspeakable
obligations to the Governor upon another account. I had received intelligence
from my daughter Mary, the purport of which was, that there was a prospect of
her being shortly married to a young Indian of the tribe of Saint Francois,
with which tribe she had continued from the beginning of her captivity. These
were heavy tidings, and added greatly to the poignancy of my other afflictions.
However, not long after I had heard this melancholy news, an opportunity
presented, of acquainting that humane and generous gentleman, the commander in
chief, and my illustrious benefactor, with this affair also, who in compassion
for my sufferings, and to mitigate my sorrows, issued his orders in good time,
and had my daughter taken away from the Indians, and conveyed to the same
nunnery where her sister was then lodged, with his express injunction, that
they should both of them together, be well looked after, and carefully
educated, as his adopted children. In this school of superstition and bigotry,
they continued while the war in those days between France and Great Britain
lasted. At the conclusion of which war, the Governor went home to France, took
my oldest daughter along with him, and married her then to a French gentleman,
whose name is Cron Lewis. He was at Boston with the fleet under Count de
Estaing, [1778] and one of his Clerks. My other daughter still continuing in
the nunnery, a considerable time had elapsed after my return from captivity,
when I made a journey to Canada, resolving to use my best endeavors not to
return without her. I arrived just in time to prevent her being sent to France.
She was to have gone in the next vessel that sailed for that place. And I found
it extremely difficult to prevail with her to quit the nunnery and go home with
me. Yea, she absolutely refused, and all the persuasions and arguments I could
use with her, were to no effect, until after I had been to the Governor, and
obtained a letter from him to the superintendant of the nuns, in which he
threatened, if my daughter should not be immediately delivered into my hands,
or could not be prevailed with to submit to my parental authority, that he
would send a band of soldiers to assist me in bringing her away. Upon hearing
this she made no farther resistance. But so extremely bigoted was she to the
customs and religion of the place, that after all, she left it with the
greatest reluctance, and the most bitter lamentations, which she continued as
we passed the streets, and wholly refused to be comforted. My good friend,
Major Small, whom we met with on the way, tried all he could to console her;
and was so very kind and obliging as to bear us company, and carry my daughter
behind him on horseback.

But I have run on a little before my story, for I have not yet informed you of
the means and manner of my own redemption, to the accomplishing of which, the
recovery of my daughter just mentioned, and the ransoming of some of my other
children, several gentlemen of note, contributed not a little; to whose
goodness, therefore, I am greatly indebted, and sincerely hope I shall never be
so ungrateful as to forget. Col. Schuyler in particular was so very kind and
generous as to advance 2700 livres to procure a ransom for myself and three of
my children. He accompanied and conducted us from Montreal to Albany, and
entertained us in the most friendly and hospitable manner a considerable time,
at his own house, and I believe entirely at his own expense.

I have spun out the above narrative to a much greater length than I at first
intended, and shall conclude it with referring you, for a more ample and
brilliant account of the captive heroine, who is the subject of it, to Col.
Humphrey's history of the life of Genesis Israel Putnum, together with some
remarks upon a few clauses in it. I never indeed had the pleasure of perusing
the whole of said history, but remember to have seen, some time ago, an extract
from it in one of the Boston newspapers, in which the Colonel has extolled the
beauty and good sense, and rare accomplishments of Mrs. How, the person whom
he endeavors to paint in the most lively and engaging colors, perhaps a little
too highly, and in a style, that may appear to those who are acquainted with
her at this day, romantic and extravagant. And the Colonel must needs have
been misinformed with respect to some particulars that he has mentioned in her
story. Indeed, when I read the extract from his history to Mrs. Tu^e, (which
name she has derived from a third husband, whose widow she now remains) she
seemed to be well pleased, and said, at first, is was all true, but soon after
contradicted the circumstance of her lover's being so bereft of his senses when
he saw her moving off in a boat at some distance from the shore, as to plunge
into the water after her, in consequence of which he was seen no more. It is
true, she said, that as she was returning from Montreal to Albany, she met with
young Saccapee on the way, That she was in a boat with Col. Schuyler, that the
French officer came on board the boat, made her some handsome presents, took
his final leave of her, and departed, to outward appearance, in tolerable good
humor.

She moreover says, that when she went to Canada for her daughter, she met with
him again, that he showed her a lock of her hair, and her name likewise,
printed with vermilion on his arm. As to her being chosen agent to go to
Europe, in behalf of the people of Hinsdale, when Col. Howard obtained from the
government of New York a patent of their lands on the west side of Connecticut
river, it was never once thought of by Hinsdale people until the
abovementioned extract arrived among them, in which the author has inserted it
as a matter of undoubted fact.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. 315.) AT THE COURT AT ST. JAMES'S, The 20th Day of July,
1764,
PRESENT
THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, Lord Howard, Earl of Sandwich, Earl of
Halifax, Earl of Powis, Earl of Harcourt, Earl of Hillsborough, Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, Gilbert Elliot, Esquire. James Oswald, Esquire.
WHEREAS there was this day read at the Board a report made by the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Committee of Council for Plantation Affairs, dated
the 17th of this instant, upon considering a Representation from the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, relative to the disputes that have
some years subsisted between the Provinces of New Hampshire and New York,
concerning the Boundary Line between those Provinces. His Majesty taking the
same into consideration, was pleased, with the advice of his Privy Council, to
approve of what is therein proposed, and does accordingly hereby Order and
Declare, the western banks of the river Connecticut, from where it enters the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, as far North as the forty-fifth degree of
Northern Latitude, to be the Boundary Line between the said two Provinces of
New Hampshire and New York. Whereof the respective Governors and Commanders in
Chief of his Majesty's said Provinces of New Hampshire and New York, for the
time being, and all others whom it may concern, are to take notice of his
Majesty's pleasure hereby signified, and govern themselves accordingly.

W. BLAIR.

No. XII. Copy of a Report of a Committee of both Houses of the Massachusetts
Assembly, respecting the New Hampshire Line, December 1766. (Vol. III. p. 12.)
THE committee to whom was referred the affair of the line between the province
of Maine, now a part of the Massachusetts Bay, and that of New Hampshire, beg
leave to represent the facts as they appeared to them.

The commissioners appointed by his late Majesty, King George the second, to
settle the line between the two governments aforesaid, A. D. 1737, reported the
same to begin in the middle of the mouth of Pascataqua harbor, and up the river
Newichawanock, a part of which is called Salmon fall, and through the middle of
the same to the farthest head thereof; and from thence north two degrees west,
until one hundred and twenty miles be finished, from the mouth of Pascataqua
harbor aforesaid, or until it meets with his Majesty's other governments.
Governor Belcher, who was then at the head of both provinces, in the winter of
the year 1740-^* moved to the Assembly of the Massachusetts to appoint a
committee to join with those of New Hampshire, in order to run out and mark the
aforesaid line, agreeable to the determination of the commissioners aforesaid.
But the Assembly, after several motions made to them, referred the
consideration of this affair to the then next May session. Governor Belcher
soon after met the Assembly of New Hampshire, who, upon a motion made to them
of running the line aforesaid, complied, and in the month of March, 1741,
proceeded on the affair exparte, beginning at the head of the eastermost and
smallest branch of the aforesaid river, and run twenty-five or thirty miles
into the country; this was performed by Walter Bryant, by order from Governor
Belcher; and however imperfect this survey was, that government have returned
it, together with a plan thereof; but the royal approbation in Council is had
in the words of the commissioners report, abovementioned, without having any
regard to the survey aforesaid, and it has been found, by the most careful
examination, that the river is much larger than the branch from whence the said
Bryant then took his departure; and this appears by his own evidence, together
with Capt. Gowing's and Warren's. And your committee beg leave further to
observe, that, by the plan taken by Bryant, and by the government of
New Hampshire lodged with the board of trade, a copy of which we have received
from that Province, it appears that the eastermost branch of the River
aforesaid, which the surveyor then took, runs about north and by east; and by
the plan sent home by the commissioners, taken by Mr. Jeffrey, and which
accompanied their report of the settlement of the line, in 1737, it appears
that the river, there laid down, runs north northwest, (a copy of which is here
authenticated) which exactly agree^ with the middle or main branch, and is what
this Province claims to; so that by comparing the two plans, it appears Mr.
Bryant was mistaken in taking a pond at the head of the east branch, which he
called Lovell's pond, when he should, agreeable to the commissioners report,
have taken the middle or main branch of the river, where was a pond then (...)
and many years before and since, known by the name of Lovell's pond, and to
this pond Mr. Bryant himself carried our committee, in 1766, and declared that
was always called Lovell's pond, which lies at the head of the river, and as
those two branches are at six or seven miles distance, at right angles at the
head, a large tract of land near six miles wide, and sixty or seventy miles in
length, was taken into New Hampshire government, that ought to have remained to
the Massachusetts. Upon the whole it evidently appears to your committee that
there was a mistake made in the commencement of the line, in part pretended to
be run by Mr. Bryant in the year 1740-1, and that the same was not then run out
is as evident. And from the year 1763, all possible care has, by this
government, been taken to rectify this mistake. Committees have once and again
been appointed by this Court to join with New Hampshire in order thereto, but
without success. However, as to the propriety of this Court's pursuing the
controversy under its present circumstances, your committee having reported the
facts, submit to your honors consideration.

BENJA. LINCOLN,
per order.
No. XIII. A Letter from WALTER BRYENT, Esquire. to the Author, on the same subject.
New Market, Oct. 9, 1790.
REV. SIR,
YOURS of the 27th ult. received, and in answer to your request, I can inform
you, that about 1766, the Massachusetts General Court appointed a committee
(Col. Lincoln, Col. Bagley, and Esquire. Livermore) to inquire and examine into a
mistake, which some in that government supposed I had made, in running the
Province Line from the head of Salmon-falls river, which committee applied to
the then Governor, Benning Wentworth, of New Hampshire, to join in such
examination, who accordingly requested me to attend the committee, and also
appointed Col. John Wentworth of Somersworth, a Justice of quorum, to take my
deposition on the spot, if necessary, to give the committee full satisfaction.
Accordingly the said committee, with Col. Wentworth, myself, and about five or
six assistants, went up Salmon Falls river to where the branches met, and
viewed it well, and from thence we went up the westerly branch to the head
thereof; and from thence crossed over to the head of the eastermost branch, and
found to the committee's satisfaction, that the easterly branch was much the
largest of the two; vented much more water, and proceeded from a larger pond
than the westerly branch. At the pond at the head of the easterly branch,
called in the commissioners plan, Lovewell's pond, I showed them the tree from
which I formerly run the Province line, well spotted, with the letters on it,
according to my return of the Province line, and the line well spotted from it.
Some of the committee thereupon suggested, that possibly that might be the line
I run some years afterward, in laying out the patent for the Masonian
proprietors.

I replied I was ready to make oath tha^ that was the identical line I run for
the Province line, and of the certainty of which they might then easily be
convinced by examining the spots; for it having then been twenty-six years
since I run the Province line, and but seven years since I had run the Masonian
patent, if they would cut into a spot on a growing tree, they might then
examine whether there was seven years growth, or twenty-six years growth over
the spot. Accordingly we marched on the line till we found a large bass tree
spotted, and one of the company cut square into the tree against the spot to
the dead wood, and Col. Bagley began at the last years growth, and counted
aloud twenty-four years growth in the grain of the wood above or outside the
dead wood of the spot. Col. Bagley then turning to me said, 'Bryent, I Will swear
for you, that this tree was spotted more than twenty years ago;' Col. Wentworth
then asked the committee if they desired my deposition to be taken, they
answered 'No, we are all well satisfied without it' -- and thereupon we
returned. I can add no more respecting that line, only, being once at York,
during the sitting of the Superior Court, some of the Judges being informed
that I was the Surveyor that run the Province line, sent for me to come to
their lodgings. I attended, and after some conversation, Mr. Trowbridge, then
Attorney General, being present, asked me what variation was allowed in running
that line; I told him ten degrees; he replied, you allowed too much; and
observed to Governor Hutchinson, then Chief Justice, that the line ought to be
run anew; Governor Hutchinson replied, that it would be attended with cost, and
that it was not likely New Hampshire would consent and join. I told them
New Hampshire would readily enough join to run anew with less variation, if
requested. They all seemed surprised, and desired to know what reason I had to
think New Hampshire would consent, inasmuch as it would take off a large tract
of Pigwacket Intervales. I told them New Hampshire would gain much more, at
Dunstable and the other towns on the west line, for the same variation was
allowed on both lines. On which there was a great laugh in the company, and
nothing further said about the matter.

I am, Sir, with due respect, Your most humble servant, WALTER BRYENT.
Rev. Mr. BELKNAP.



No. XIV. Mr. SPROULE'S account of an examination of the south boundary of
New Hampshire. (Vol. III. p. 10.)
THE point at Hinsdale, where the southerly line of the Province of
New Hampshire strikes Connecticut river, lies in 42 43 59 north latitude, and
the pine tree from whence this line begins, lies in 42 41 2 (both latitudes are
deduced from accurate astronomical observations taken by Mr. WRIGHT) but had
this line been run on a due west course, deducting the variation of the needle,
the point where it meets Connecticut river, should lie in the same parallel of
latitude with the pine tree; now it appears the difference of latitude is 2
miles and 53 seconds of the equator, and the extent of the line from the pine
tree to Connecticut river, is found to be 55 statute miles, from an actual
survey; these lines form the base and perpendicular of a triangle, containing
59,872 acres, which quantity of land the Province of New Hampshire would have
gained, had that line been run on a due west course from the pine tree,
exclusive of variation.

GEO. SPROULE.
Portsmouth, April 8 th, 1774.
No. XV. Copy of the return of a survey of the northern part of New Hampshire,
1789. (Vol. III. p. 13.)
WE, the subscribers, a committee for ascertaining the waste lands in the State
of New Hampshire, have proceeded to run the line on the easterly side of said
State, the same In the orders given to WALTER BRYENT by Governor BELCHER, 1741,
it is said, 'The true north 2 degrees west, is by needle N. 8 E.'
course that the line was formerly run and spotted between this State and the
Massachusetts. We begun to measure and spot at the northeast corner of
Shelburne in this State, and measured on to the waters of Umbagog lake, which
is 16 miles and 240 rods, then across a branch of said lake 54 rods, then 14
rods on the land to a river that is 6 rods wide, and runs westerly into said
lake, then measured on the land 1 mile and 226 rods to said lake, then across
the water 40 rods, then over a neck of land 16 rods to an arm of said lake,
then across the water 235 rods, then we continued on our course 195 rods to
said lake, then across said lake about 3 miles, then we measured and spotted 2
miles and 226 rods to Margallaway river, that runs about south-west, and is
about 10 rods wide, and empties into Amoriscoggin river, a little below said
lake; then we measured on our course 1 mile and 70 rods, and crossed said
Margallaway river again, which will more fully appear by the plan herewith
exhibited; we continued on our line, measured and spotted to the high lands
that divide the waters that fall into the river St. Lawrance and the Atlantic
Ocean. From the north-east corner of Shelburne to said high lands is 54 miles,
and we marked a tree at the end of every mile, except where miles ended on
water, from one to 54 miles inclusive, where we marked a large birch tree that
stands on said high lands, thus N. E. 54 M. NEW HAMPSHIRE, 1789, for the
north-east corner of New Hampshire, and piled stones round said tree; then from
said north-east corner, where we marked the birch, we measured and spotted
southwesterly and westerly on said highlands about 6 miles, then we run about
west, measured and marked a tree at the end of every mile from said birch,
marked 54 miles, at the north-east corner of said State from 1 to 17 miles and
200 rods to to the head of the northwest of Connecticut river, and marked a fir
tree N. H. N. W. 1789, for the north-west branch corner of New Hampshire, then
down said river or north-west branch to the main river about half a mile below
latitude 45 north, which will more fully appear by the plan. The mountains,
streams and waters are laid down on the plan very accurate, where the line we
run crossed them, but where they were at some distance from our line we laid
them down by conjecture.

Surveyors. JOSEPH CRAMM, JEREMIAH EAMES.
Committee. JOHN SULLIVAN, EBENEZER SMITH, NATHAN HOIT, JEREMIAH EAMES.


A true copy.

-- Attest JOSEPH PEARSON, Secretary.
Portsmouth, January 6, 1790.


No. XVI. Description of a survey made by JAMES GRANT, one of Capt. HOLLAND'S
party, in 1773, or 1774, to explore the country, for a road, between the upper
part of Connecticut river, and the river of St. Francis.
course ^ist. FROM the mouth of Leach's river which falls into Connecticut
river on the west side near the 45th degree of latitude, up the eastern side of
Leach's river. N M. 1 Thence to cross said river among the mountains N 30 W 3
Thence to the height of Land N 30 W 3 Thence to a pond under the eastern side
of a mountain N 30 W 3 Thence to another pond N 10 W 5^/4 Thence on the same
course N 10 W 4 Thence to a small river which falls into Memphrimagog river N
21 W 16 Thence across said little river to the lower crotch of Memphrimagog
river. N 21 W 5 Thence crossing Memphrimagog river, a straight line on the N W
side, to its junction with the river of St. Francis* N 30 E 1 44

The country from Connecticut river to the Height of Land is very hilly, with
high mountains on the east and west of the line run, in the direction of which
a road may be conveniently made.

From the Height of Land to St. Francis river there is a gradual descent
through a plain country; the soil in general o^ a good quality, and in some
parts extraordinary ^ine; particularly for about four miles beyond the Height
of Land, and for twenty miles on this side of St. Francis river; which river,
with its branche^, are bordered with fine inter^ales.

The principal growth between the Height of Land and St. Francis River, is
beech, maple, birch, hemlock and fir; very few white pines, and no oak of any
sort; many cedar, spruce and hemlock swamps intervene; but none so morassy as
to impede a road, for which this extent of country in the direction above
described, is in general as well adapted as possible.

No. XVII. A REPORT from the LORDS COMMISSIONERS for TRADE and PLANTATIONS, on
a Complaint made by PETER LIVIUS, Esquire, against JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire,
Governor of the Province of NEW HAMPSHIRE. (Vol. II. P. 362.)
TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
May it please Your Majesty,
PETER LIVIUS, Esquire, one of your Majesty's Council for the Province of
New Hampshire, in North America, having, on the ninth of July, presented a
memorial unto us, complaining of the conduct of John Wentworth, Esquire, Your
Majesty's Governor of that Province, and charging him with Oppression and
Mal-administration in the government thereof: And it appearing, upon reference
to the papers and records in our office, that the journals of the Council of
said Province, as a Council of State, and to which the complainant referred for
proof of most of the facts stated in his memorial, had not been transmitted
since the commencement of Mr. Wentworth's ad^^^^tration: We thought it our duty
immed^^^^ to send to the said Governor, a copy of the memorial of complaint;
and to require him, to lose no time in transmitting to us a full and explicit
answer to the several charges alleged against him, accompanied with such
depositions and proofs in his own behalf as he should think proper; giving, at
the same time, full liberty to Mr. Livius, or any other person concerned, to
make affidavit, before any Judge or other Magistrate, of what they knew
concerning the subject matter of the said complaint; and that such Judge or
other Magistrate should be likewise enjoined, to summon such persons as the
complainant, or any other in his behalf, should name.

That the Secretary should be likewise enjoined to give attested copies (from
the records) of the minutes of the Council, and of any other concerned. And if
it should appear as alleged by Mr. Livius, that the said minutes o^ other
records were defective, in (...) matter required by him or them; or that those
transactions which were alleged to have passed at any meetings of the Council;
had been omitted to be entered on the journal; then that the Secretary should,
in such cases, be further enjoined to give evidence, upon oath, touching such
defect or omission.

That the said Governor and the complainant, or other person or persons, should
interchange the said proofs and depositions as soon as the same should have
been made; and that twenty days should be allowed, as well for himself, as the
complainant, or other person concerned, to make his or their reply by affidavit
or otherwise, to be in like manner interchanged, and afterward certified and
transmitted to us, under the seal of the Province; that we might be enabled to
represent to your Majesty, on the true state of this affair, pursuant to the
powers and directions contained in our commission under the great seal.

In consequence of the foregoing directions* your Majesty's Governor has
transmitted to us his answer to each article of complaint contained in Mr.
Livius's memorial, accompanied with attested copies of the Journals of the
Council, as a Council of State, from the commencement of his administration,
and of such depositions as have been taken to support the facts alleged by the
Governor in defense of his conduct. And we having taken the said complaint and
answer into our consideration, together with Mr. Livius's reply to the said
answer, copies of all which are hereunto annexed; and having heard counsel
learned in the law, as well in support of the complaint, as of the Governor's
defense; we humbly beg leave to represent to your Majesty thereupon:

That it does appear, upon full examination and clear evidence;

First, That your Majesty's Governor of New Hampshire has, in concurrence with
the Council for the said Province, composed almost altogether of his own
kindred or relations by blood or marriage, taken upon him to resume and
re-grant many large tracts within the said Province, the property of your
Majesty's subjects by virtue of several former grants; upon bare suggestion
only, that the conditions of such former grants had not been complied with, and
without the intervention of a Jury, or any proof or evidence whatever, to
establish the fact of such default,

Secondly, That these resumptions have been made without any notice (except in
one or two cases) to the proprietors of such tracts, so resumed; and that, in
some instances, in which the Governor and Council did think fit to allow time
to the proprietors of certain tracts to make good the conditions of their
grants, such grants were nevertheless resumed, and the lands re-granted, long
before the expiration of the time allowed, and without any notice given to the
parties,

Thirdly, That the said Governor did, without any legal process whatever,
resume and regrant several tracts of land reserved to the said late Governor
within each of the townships, granted by him, and which reservations he had, by
his will, devised to his widow; and that such resumption was made in
consequence of a resolution of the Council, That the said reservations did not
convey the premises, they being granted by the Governor to himself.

Fourthly, That, pending an action brought in the Inferior Court of Common
Pleas, in which your Majesty's Governor was interested, and which he admits was
brought for his benefit, the Judges were, in three successiv^ terms, changed,
and especial Judges appointed: That, in the standing Court of Common Pleas
which first sat in judgment upon the action brought by the Governor, a question
arising out of the action was decided against the Governor's interest: That in
the second term, two Judges were appointed, which, together with one of the
Judges of the standing Court abovementioned, adopted the decision of the former
court: That, in the third term, two of the Judges were again changed, when the
same question was again brought forward, and decided in the same manner as
above: That, in the fourth term, two of the Judges who sat in the former court
were removed, and a new bench appointed, consisting of Jacob Sheaffe and John
Philips, Esquires, who had not acted in that capacity in any of the preceding
Terms, and of Nathaniel Folsom, who had served in the terms, and who is stated
to have been uniformly of opinion for the Governor in the question that had
been agitated upon the action in which the said Governor was interested; and
that, in the last mentioned court, the said question was a fourth time brought
on to trial, and a Judgment obtained in favor of the Governor, though
afterward reversed in the Superior Court in consequence of a Writ of Error.

These, may it please your Majesty, are the material parts of the charge
exhibited against Mr. Wentworth; nor is there any other part of the complaint
exhibited by Mr. Livius, upon which any evidence has been produced to us, that
does, in our humble opinion, lay the foundation for censure upon the Governor's
conduct. What we have stated* with respect to the resumption and re-granting of
lands, is not, we think, to be justified, either by the plea of usage or
expediency, or by the opinionof the Attorney and Solicitor General in one
thousand seven hundred and fifty-two, upon which the Governor lays so great
stress; which opinion appears to us, upon full examination of it, to be
confined to a particular case stated to them, not corresponding with the cases
in which the conduct of Mr. Wentworth is complained of; and that, if it was
applicable to such cases, yet it does not, in our humble opinion, warrant any
resumption of lands, claimed as private property under grants from the crown,
upon bare suggestion only, that the conditions have not been complied with; but
on the contrary does, we humbly conceive, imply, that the fact of the default
should be first found in a regular course of law. We further crave leave humbly
to represent, that, admitting the said opinion did warrant such a proceeding,
in respect to grants, the conditions of which had not been complied with, which
we conceive it does not; yet it is certainly not applicable either to the case
of lands resumed and re-granted before the term allowed for fulfilling the
conditions of settlement were expired; or to the case of the reservations to
the late Governor, devised by him to his widow, the resumption and re-granting
of which, in manner above stated, upon an extrajudicial opinion of the Council,
was, in our judgment, unwarrantable and unjust. And we submit, whether the
misconduct of your Majesty's Governor, under these heads of complaint, is not
greatly aggravated by his having omitted, from the commencement of his
administration, to transmit the journals of the Council, as a Council of State;
a neglect for which he is certainly responsible, and by which transactions of
the greatest importance to your Majesty's interest and the right of your
Majesty's subjects have been concealed from your Majesty's knowledge; and the
Governor and his Council have gone on, for a series of years, in a course of
very irregular proceedings, without control.

With regard to what has been proved respecting the change of the Judges,
though asserted, in a great number of depositions transmitted by the Governor,
to have been consonant to the usage and practice in the Colony; it is yet, in
our humble opinion, a proceeding that, under all the circumstances attending
it, is of a very extraordinary nature, and does lead to the suspicion and
presumption of very unworthy conduct on the part of your Majesty's Governor.
And, upon the whole, we humbly submit, That the complaint against Mr.
Wentworth, so far as it regards the facts above stated, has been fully
verified; At the same time it is our du^y to represent, that the reports which
we have received, through different channels, of the situation of affairs
within your Majesty's government of New Hampshire, do all concur in
representing the Colony to have been, ever since Mr. Wentworth's appointment,
in a state of peace and prosperity; that its commerce has been enlarged and
extended, the number of its inhabitants increased* and every attempt made to
excite the people to disorder and disobedience has been, by the firm and
temperate conduct of Mr. Wentworth, suppressed and restrained. But upon the
whole, we humbly submit, whether Mr. Wentworth's conduct, in the instances of
the mal-administration with which he has been charged, has been such as renders
him a fit person to be entrusted with your Majesty's interests in the important
station he now holds.

All which is humbly submitted. Signed, W. JOLIFFE. SOAME JENYNS. BAMBBER
GASCOYNE. GREVILLE. GARLIES.

Whitehall, May the 10th, 1773.
No. XVIII. Report of the Committee of the Privy Council, and its acceptance by
the King. (Vol. II. p. 363.)
(Copy.) At the Court at St. James's the 8th Day of October, 1773.
(L.S.) Present
THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. Earl of SUFFOLK, Earl of SANDWICH, Vis.
BARRINGTON, LORD NORTH, RICHARD RI^BY, GEORGE ONSLOW,
WHEREAS there was this day read at the board, a report from the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Committee of council (...) plantation affairs, Lords
of the Committee.
Lord Suffolk President, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Sir Fletcher Norton, Sir
Eardly Wilmot, Sir Thomas Parker.

dated the 26th of August last, in the words following; viz.

Your Majesty having been pleased, in consequence of a memorial presented to
your Majesty from Sir Thomas Wentworth Baronet, Paul Wentworth, Esquire, and
Thomas Macdonagh, secretary to John Wentworth, Esquire, Governor of the
Province of New Hampshire, to refer unto this committee representation from the
Lords Commissioners for trade and plantations, dated the 10th of May last, upon
a complaint exhibited to the said Lords Commissioners against the said Governor
Wentworth, by Peter Livius, Esquire, one of your Majesty's Council for the said
province, together with several other papers transmitted by the Earl of
Dartmouth, one of your Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, to the Lord
President of the Council, relative to the said complaint: The Lords of the
committee, in obedience to your Majesty's said order of reference, have met
several times, and taken the said matters into consideration, and have heard
Counsel on both sides, And, having maturely weighed and considered the
complaint against the said Governor, the answer of the said Governor, and the
reply of the said Peter Livius, Esquire, together with the proofs on all sides,
and the said representation of the Lords Commissioners for trade and
plantations; the Lords of the committee do humbly represent to your Majesty,

That the first article of Charge, contained in the above mentioned
representation of the Lords Commissioners for trade and plantations, sets
forth, That your Majesty's Governor of New Hampshire has, in concurrence with
the Council for the said Province, composed almost altogether of his own
kindred, or relations by blood or marriage, taken upon him to resume and
re-grant many large tracts of lands within the said Province, the property of
your Majesty's subjects, in virtue of former grants, upon bare suggestion only,
that the conditions of such former grants had not been complied with, and
without the intervention of a jury, or any proof or evidence whatsoever, to
establish the fact of such default.

With respect to which article, the Lords of the Committee do humbly report to
your Majesty, That, by the law of England, when lands are granted to a man and
his heirs, upon condition, the breach of the condition must be found by a jury,
under a commission, issuing out of the Court of Chancery, before your Majesty
can seize and re-grant the same: But, in the Province of New Hampshire, there
is no Court of Chancery, or other court, empowered to issue such a commission;
and though the general rule is, that the law of England takes place in your
Majesty's Colonies, yet it must be always understood to mean such part of the
law as is suited and adapted to the state of the Colony, and to the frame and
nature of the constitution established there; and though the Governor, in
concurrence with the Council for the said Province, has resumed and re-granted
many tracts of lands within the said Province, which had been formerly granted
to other persons, yet no evidence has been laid before the committee of any
such resumptions and re-grants having been made, without proof or public
notoriety that the conditions of such former grants had not been complied with;
and no complaint has been, or is now made by any person supposed to be injured
by such resumptions and re-grants.

The second article states, That these resumptions have been made without any
Notice (except in one or two cases) to the proprietors of such tracts so
resumed; and that in some instances, in which the Governor and Council did
think fit to allow time to the proprietors of certain tracts to make good the
conditions of their grants, such grants were nevertheless resumed, and the
lands re-granted, long before the expiration of the time allowed, and without
any notice given to the parties.

As to which article, the Lords of the Committee do humbly report to your
Majesty, That it has not been proved that any resumptions have been made,
without notice to the proprietors of such tracts so resumed; and it is no part
of the original complaint made by Mr. Livius, that in any instance, in which
the Governor and Council thought fit to allow time to the proprietors of lands
to make good the conditions of their grants, such grants were resumed, and the
lands re-granted, before the expiration of the time allowed; and the Governor
not having had an opportunity of answering that complaint, the Lords of the
committee are humbly of opinion, no notice can be taken of it.

The third article represents, That the said Governor did, without any legal
process whatsoever, resume and re-grant several tracts of land, reserved to the
late Governor, within each of the townships granted by him, and which
reservations he had by his will devised to his widow; and that such resumption
was made in consequence of a resolution of the Council, that the said
reservations did not convey the premises, they being granted by the Governor
himself*

With respect to this article, the Lords of the committee do humbly report,
That the lands were granted, but not reserved to the late Governor and his
heirs in each of the townships granted by him; but being granted by your
Majesty, in your Majesty's name, and not in the Governor's name, the grants
were sufficient to convey the lands so granted to him, and the Council was
mistaken in thinking them insufficient; and the Lords of the Committee find,
that after such an opinion given by the Council, the Governor did, with their
advice, resume and re-grant several tracts of lands, which had been granted by
the late Governor within each of the townships, as aforesaid; But it has not
been proved that the said lands were re-granted in trust for himself; and in
many instances it has been proved, that such lands were re-granted to
different inhabitants in the said Province, for their own use and benefit; and
the representatives of the late Governor's widow to whom he had devised the
same, have not complained of any injury or oppression by such resumption and
re-grants.

And the fourth article alleges, That pending an action brought in the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas, in which your Majesty's Governor was
interested, and which he admits was brought for his benefit, the Judges were in
three successive terms, changed, and special Judges appointed: That, in the
standing Court of Common Pleas, which first sat in judgment upon the action
brought by the Governor, a question arising out of the action, was decided
against the Governor's interest: That, in the second term, two new judges were
appointed, which, together with one of the Judges of the standing Court above
mentioned, adopted the decision of the former Court: That, in the third term,
two of the Judges were again changed, when the same question was again brought
forward, and decided in the same manner as above; that, in the fourth term, two
of the Judges, who sat in the former Court, were removed, and a new Bench
appointed, consisting of Jacob Sheaffe and John Phillips, Esquires, who had not
acted in that capacity in any of the preceding terms, and of Nathaniel Folsom,
who had served in the two preceding terms, and who is stated to have been
uniformly of opinion for the Governor, in the question that had been agitated
upon the action in which the said Governor was interested; and that in the last
mentioned Court, the said question was a fourth time brought on to trial, and a
judgment obtained in favor of the Governor, though afterward reversed in the
Superior Court in consequence of a Writ of Error.

With respect to this fourth article; the Lords of the committee do humbly
report to your Majesty, That it appears in evidence to have been the constant
practice, when any of the standing Justices of the Court were interested in any
suit there depending, either by being related to any of the parties, or
otherwise, for special Judges to be appointed; that there were other causes
depending at the same time in the Inferior Court of Common Pleas, wherein the
standing Justices were either interested or akin to the parties; and there is
no proof that the special Judges were appointed on account of the particular
cause wherein the Governor was concerned; but by many depositions, and
particularly by the deposition of the defendant in the said cause, it appears
that the special commissions were solicited in the common form and manner as is
usual in the Province of New Hampshire; and the question debated in the said
cause, being a mere collateral question, not respecting the merits of it, was
determined three times for the defendant in the Inferior Court; but being
determined a fourth time for the plaintiff, a Writ of Error was brought into
the Superior Court, and was finally determined there for the defendant: And the
defendant in the said cause swears, that he, neither at that time, nor since,
had any objections either to the said commissions, or to the Justices therein
named and appointed, or to either of them.

And as to what is submitted in the said representation of the Lords
Commissioners for trade and plantations, That the Governor omitted, from the
commencement of his administration, to transmit the journals of the Council as
a Council of State;

The Lords of the Committee do humbly report to your Majesty, That this
practice was begun in the late Governor's time; who acquainted the proper
officer, on his delivering a copy of the said journals in the month of June,
1760, that he need not give himself the trouble to make out such copies for the
future, without his special directions; and from that time the practice has
been discontinued both by the late and present Governor. But the Lords of the
Committee are of opinion, that it may be proper to revive that practice, and to
have a regular transmission of such copies to the Lords Commissioners for trade
and plantations.

Upon the whole, therefore, the Lords of the Committee submit it to your
Majesty, THAT THERE IS NO FOUNDATION FOR ANY CENSURE UPON THE SAID JOHN
WENTWORTH, ESQUIRE. YOUR MAJESTY'S GOVERNOR OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, FOR ANY OF THE
CHARGES CONTAINED IN MR. LIVIUS'S COMPLAINT AGAINST HIM; whose general conduct,
in the administration of affairs within your Majesty's government of
New Hampshire, is represented to have tended greatly to the peace and
prosperity of the said Province.

His Majesty, taking the said report into consideration, is pleased, with the
advice of his Privy Council, to approve thereof, and to order, as is hereby
ordered, That the said complaint of the said Peter Livius be dismissed this
board. And his Majesty does hereby further order, That the Governor, or
Commander in Chief of the Province of New Hampshire, for the time being, do not
fail, on any pretense whatever, punctually and regularly to transmit to the
Lords Commissioners for trade and plantations, authentic copies of the journals
of the Council, as a Council of State.

Signed, G. CHETWYND.

No. XIX. Extract of a Letter from Governor Wentworth, to the Earl of
Dartmouth, dated New Hampshire, 8th of June, 1774. (This and the following
Letters are taken from the Parliamentary Debates, 1775.)
IN my letter No. 59, I had the honor to write to your Lordship, that the
General Assembly of this province stood prorogued to the 10th of May, at which
time they met and proceeded upon business, I took great pains to prevail on
them not to enter into any extra Provincial measures, yet one of the members
for Portsmouth read in his place the enclosed letter, No. 1. to the committee
of correspondence of Portsmouth, but the House then declined considering it. On
Friday, 27th of May, it was moved to appoint committees of correspondence, and,
after a warm debate, carried by a majority of two only: The next morning it was
reconsidered, and carried by a majority of one only and passed as by the
enclosures No, 2, and 3. Immediately after this, the supply bill was passed and
sent up to the Council, being withheld, as I imagine, for time to effect the
other measure. --

I directly adjourned the Assembly, and kept them under short adjournments till
this day, in hopes to obtain a suspension of these votes; but finding there
were two letters in town for the speaker, which, some of those who were most
active, said, were to appoint a Congress of the Colonies, I considered it to be
improper to admit their proceedings, and therefore immediately put an end to
the committees (who have not as yet wrote or acted) and to the Assembly, by a
dissolution in a message (No 4, herewith transmitted) cautiously expressed, in
such general terms, as to prevent any misrepresentations. The mode of
dissolution after such short adjournments, which are attended by a few members,
precluded any meeting of those persons to contrive undesirable measures, or
pursue those in their private capacity, that were attempted as an Assembly,
which has extremely disconcerted, and I hope will counteract, the efforts of
those who strive to lead this Province into combinations with the
Massachusetts Bay. Before the dissolution, all the usual and necessary business
of the Province was completed, that no detriment can arise from my delaying to
call an Assembly, in expectation that a few weeks will convince those who may
be members, of the imprudence and error of measures that tend to weaken or
subvert the subordination of the Colonies*

No. XX. Extract of a Letter from Governor WENTWORTH to the Earl of DARTMOUTH,
dated New Hampshire, 4th July, 1774.
ON the 25th of June, at night, arrived here the Grosvenor mast-ship, from
London, with 27 chests of bohea-tea, consigned to a merchant in Portsmouth;
sometime before the arrival of the ship, it was reported that a quantity of
bohea tea was expected. Hereupon I took effectual precautions to counteract the
universal disquiet of America from* contravening the acts of Parliament in this
instance, or destroying the property. By my desire the consignee wrote a letter
to the master of the ship, with directions how to proceed on his arrival. This
letter I gave to captain Cochran of his Majesty's castle William and Mary, who
effected my orders in delivering it at sea. The 26th, being Sunday, nothing was
done. On the 27th the merchant and master went early to the custom-house, and
entered the ship and cargo. At noonday the ship's boats came to the wharf with
twenty-seven chests of tea, carts were prepared, and the tea immediately
carried to the custom-house, and there stored, before any people could assemble
to obstruct it. The town not suspecting any movement until my return from
Dover, about ten miles off, where I purposely staid during this first operation
to secure this event, which I foresaw would be carried quietly, by withdrawing
suspicion, having confided my plan to proper magistrates, who I knew would not
be disappointed. In the afternoon a townmeeting was convened upon the occasion.
I came to town and passed on horseback through the concourse, who treated me
with their usual kindness and respect. At the meeting, it was represented to
the people, that the tea being now lodged in the custom-house, the question was
totally changed, that nothing could be done, but by consent of and agreement
with the merchant. The meeting proceeded with coolness and temper beyond almost
my hope. It was proposed that a committee should be chosen, and invested with
powers to treat with the merchant. In this committee of eleven, were many
principal gentlemen, discreet men, who I knew detested every idea of violating
property: Men disposed to prevent mischief. The town also chose a guard of
freeholders, to protect and defend the custom-house and the tea from any
attempt or interruption, which being sincerely intended, was faithfully
executed. On the ^8th, the consignee accepted and agreed to the proposals of
the committee, to export the tea to any market he chose, upon condition the
town should re-ship and protect it while in the harbor. This they gladly
acceded to, and the town upon adjournment confirmed the proceedings;
accordingly the committee and the consignee together were at the custom-house,
where the duty was openly and regularly paid, and the tea again carted through
the streets publicly in the day time, without noise, tumult, or insult. About 9
O'clock P. M. three overheated mariners (two of them strangers) endeavored to
excite a mob, to destroy the tea and vessel hired to export it. Whereupon I
sent for Colonel Fenton, who gathered a few gentlemen, repaired to the vessel,
and with laudable spirit and prudence they personally guarded both vessel and
cargo in safety till the next morning. On the 29th, A.M. the Comptroller of the
Customs informed me, that these mariners had got drums, and were assembling
thoughtless people to destroy the tea and sloop. At the same time I received a
letter, No. 1, a copy herewith enclosed, from the consignee, desiring my aid
and assistance, to take possession of the sloop and cargo. Hereupon I directed
the sheriff instantly to summon the Council, and every Magistrate and
peace-officer to meet me forthwith on the wharf where the vessel lay,
determining to disperse any riotous attempts, and order the vessel to the
castle: While I was going out on this my duty, a messenger came to tell me,
that some magistrates and two of the Council, Mr* Warner and Mr. Rindge, who
happened to be in the way, hearing the noise, had repaired to the place, and,
with many other freeholders, silenced the drums, and prevailed on the people to
disperse without any outrage. At this time I received a second letter (No. 2,
herewith) from the consignee, to the same purport as the first. I lost no time
in writing an order to captain Cochran, immediately to take possession, defend,
protect, and safely deliver the said vessel and cargo to the merchant, or to
his orders; and the sheriff, John Parker, Esquire. to take command of the castle in
his absence, as will appear fully by the enclosure, No. 3. In the evening,
about half past 6, observing the wind to be contrary, I dispatched a second
order to captain Cochran, still to continue in the orders of the morning, as by
the enclosure, No. 4. These orders were directly carried into effect, with a
prudence and firmness that does honor to both the officers. On the 30th, the
owner of the sloop, the master, and the supercargo, to whose care the consignee
committed the tea, came on board, with proper custom-house clearances, and
authority from the consignee. Captain Cochran examined the twenty-seven chests
of tea, found them perfectly safe, and in good order; desired the three last
mentioned persons to examine the same, which they did, and then received both
vessel and cargo into their possession, and forthwith sailed for Halifax. Mr.
Parker, the sheriff, and captain Cochran, returned to their respective duties,
and have made return of their doings, on my orders, as in the enclosures, No. 5
and 6. During these transactions, viz. on the evening of the 27th, and morning
of the 28th, I told the collector and comptroller, also the consignee, that if
they wanted any aid or assistance, or were apprehensive of danger, I was ready,
whenever they would apply to me, and would not only issue orders, but in person
defend them; that I was confident, the magistrates and freeholders would not
desert me: But they would not apply, declaring they then apprehended no danger.

No. XXI. Copy of a Letter from Governor WENTWORTH to the Earl of DARTMOUTH,
dated NewHampshire, the 6th of July, 1774.
May it please your Lordship,
UPON hearing the committee of correspondence, chosen by the late Assembly of
this Province, had issued letters to those members, to meet this day in the
Representatives chamber in Portsmouth, there to deliberate and act,
particularly to choose delegates for a general American Congress, and that some
of the said persons were convened. I have considered it to be my duty to his
Majesty to use my endeavors to disperse and separate so illegal and
unwarrantable an attempt. I have therefore convened his Majesty's Council,
ordered the sheriff to attend me, and requiring their attendance on me, I went
into the room, and immediately read the enclosed speech to them; afterward I
directed the sheriff to make open proclamation, for all persons to disperse and
keep the King's peace, which was done before they had entered on any business,
and I expect will be obeyed, as this letter must be forwarded by express 66
miles to Boston, and reach there tonight, in hopes to save conveyance by
admiral Montague. Whatever further may occur, I shall take due care to transmit
to your Lordship as soon as possible, all which is most humbly submitted,
dutifully hoping your Lordship's favorable representation of my best zeal,
unremitted diligence and fidelity in discharge of my duty, may happily be
honored with his Majesty's approbation. I have the honor to be, with the most
perfect respect, etc.

J. WENTWORTH.

No. XXII. Extract of a Letter from the Honorable Governor WENTWORTH to the
Earl of DARTMOUTH, dated New Hampshire, 13th July, 1774.
THE convention mentioned in my dispatch, No. 63, immediately dispersed,
without attempting to enter into any measures. Those gentlemen with some others
dined at a tavern, and there in private agreed to recommend to the several
parishes in the Province, that they choose persons to meet at Exeter on the
21st instant, for the purpose of appointing delegates to attend, and be part of
an American Congress, intended to assemble the 1st of September next, in
Pennsylvania or New Jersey. The towns were desired to collect voluntarily, and
send by their agents to Exeter, certain sums of money in proportion to their
province-tax, amounting to three hundred pounds sterling, to pay the delegates.
It was also recommended to the parishes, that the 14th instant be observed as a
day of fasting and prayer. It is yet uncertain how far these requisitions will
be complied with; but I am apt to believe the spirit of enthusiasm, which
generally prevails through the colonies, will create an obedience that reason
or religion would fail to procure.

No. XXIII. Extract of a Letter from Governor WENTWORTH to the Earl of
DARTMOUTH, dated New Hampshire, August 29th, 1774.
SINCE, my letter, No. 64, the convention of persons chosen by many towns, in
consequence of the invitation in that letter referred to, met at Exeter, and
elected Colonel ^olsom and Major Sullivan to be delegates for this Province, at
the Congress to be held in Philadelphia, on the first day of September next.
The paper, No. 1, herewith enclosed, is a copy of the instructions given to
those gentlemen, and is the best explanation of their service and employment
that I can obtain. I am informed that this convention collected and brought
from their respective towns, about one hundred and twenty guineas, which was
paid into the hands of John Giddinge, Esquire (who they elected Treasurer) to
defray the expense incurred by the delegates aforementioned, who set off on their
journey to Philadelphia, on the 10th instant.

The committee of correspondence elected by the late Assembly, and of course
dissolved with them, wrote circular letters to all the towns in this Province,
copy of which, and printed form of the non-importation and non-consumption
agreement, recommended in that letter and accompanying it, are herewith
transmitted, No. 2. Some few towns generally subscribed, many others totally
rejected. The committee appear conscious that their powers (if any they ever
had) ceased with the Assembly that elected them, for they do not date the day
of the month, because it succeeded the dissolution; it is certain they had not
acted, nor even met together before that.

I think this Province is much more moderate than any other to the southward,
although the spirit of enthusiasm is spread, and requires the utmost vigilance
and prudence to restrain it from violent excess; this will appear by the
enclosure, No. 3, which was carried ^emine contradicente in this town, upon an
attempt some few nights preceding, by a parcel of boys and sailors, to insult a
woman who sold tea. Since this vote, the town has been perfectly quiet, those
who had tea have sold it without molestation. The inhabitants have now almost
universally discontinued the use of Bohea tea, and I apprehend will entirely
within three months of this date.

The town clerk of Boston, who is said to be a zealous leader of the popular
opposition, has been in this town about a week; immediately appears a
publication in the New Hampshire Gazette, The publication here referred to was
written by a person whom the Governor did not ^^^pect, and the town clerk knew
nothing of it.
recommending donations for Boston, which has been followed by a notification
to convene in town-meeting to grant relief to the poor of the town of Boston,
on the 12th of September next. It is probable no town grant will be made, and
the meeting issue in appointing a committee to receive and transmit voluntary
donations, Which I believe will not afford much comfort to them, or greatly
credit the charitable munificence of these town-meetings; grants are always and
ever will be greater on popular pretenses than private subscriptions, because
those that vote in public pay by far the least part of the grant; as is ever
the case with select men, who having power over the apportionment of rates,
probably do not exercise it to their own detriment, and thence more easily join
in facilitating and augmenting such gifts, which, from the nature of the
office, they have great influence upon. It is greatly to be wished, that
gentlemen of property, experience and education, could be persuaded to accept
the office of select men; but it is impracticable, if they are disinterested,
and without other views than the public good, it is very laborious and
unprofitable employment: And as I have nothing in my power whereby to reward
such good men, they all decline, and the interior regulation of the capital
falls into the hands of those who can submit to make it worth their attention.

I beg leave to assure your Lordship of my most faithful diligence in his
Majesty's service; and, with the greatest deference, to hope for such
favorable representation thereof.

I am, etc.

J. WENTWORTH.
P. S. The enclosure, No. 4, met with very little encouragement, and obtained
but few signers (except two or three) who were only among the lower order of
people, who signed before they were divided to, and on the same invitation
would sign any other paper. J. W.



No. XXIV. Extract of a Letter from Governor WENTWORTH to the Earl of
DARTMOUTH, dated New Hampshire, 13th September, 1794.
ON the 8th instant, about sunset, arrived in the port of Piscataqua the Fox
mast-ship, having on board 30 chests of bohea tea, consined to Mr. Edward Parry
of this town. Previous to this arrival it had been reported that such an event
was expected: I therefore early instructed captain Cochran of his Majesty's
castle, William and Mary, in this Province, to render all the aid and
assistance in his power upon the first application, as by the copy, No. 1.
which I beg leave to enclose to your Lordship herewith. Accordingly captain
Cochran, always indefatigable in his duty, went off to the ship while at sea
and proffered his service. Some few days before this arrival, letters were
received from London, mentioning the shipping of the tea to sundry persons,
whence it became very public. A ship last week arrived at Salem with a
quantity of tea on board, also confirmed the expectation of the like here.
These things, added to a report from Salem that the people would not admit the
tea to be landed, entered, or pay the duty there, and the enthusiastic spirit
of that Province daily gaining ground both there and here, notwithstanding my
utmost efforts and vigilance, rendered the event of this importation more
precarious than the former, and raised almost insurmountable obstacles against
its preservation.

As soon as it was generally known that tea was arrived here, the disquiet
broke forth among the populace, and at a quarter past ten at night I received a
letter, No. 2, from Mr. Parry, informing of his windows being broken by a mob,
and desiring protection. At half past ten I sent Mr. M'Donah, my private
Secretary, and my brother, who happened to be at my house, to inquire of Mr.
Parry what was necessary, and, if any danger, to offer him the protection of my
house, which they did; but the attempted mob having subsided, he saw there was
no danger, and remained quietly and safely in his own lodgings. At three
quarters past 9 A. M. of the 9th instant, Mr. Parry brought me a petition to
the Governor and Council, praying the protection of government, as in the
enclosed copy, No. 3. Whereupon I convened the Council within an hour, and
received advice from them to call in the Justices that were in town, and
require their execution of their duty, which they, with laudable prudence and
firmness immediately proceeded upon, and with desirable success.

Mr. Parry and Captain Norman were informed of these proceedings, and by me
told at the Council Board, that the Governor, Council and Magistrates, would,
upon the least notice, support and protect them and their property, and that we
should all be in readiness. At six P. M. I adjourned till nine o'clock next
morning, and sent for the Chief Justice, Sheriff and Attorney General, from
Exeter, where the Superior Court was and is sitting. Also Mr. Gilman and
Waldron from Exeter and Dover, to make a full Council. That nothing might be
wanting to execute the law, and preserve the public peace, the Council sat till
two o'clock; and no further application made nor any appearance of riot or
violence whatever. I proposed to the Council to consider and advise me what
further was needful to be done upon the petition; this was referred to a
committee to report upon, and I adjourned 'till Monday, the twelfth instant,
ten o'clock, A. M.

During this period, viz the 9th and 10th instant, the town meetings were
agitated. At length a committee were chosen to consult with Mr. Parry and the
Captain, who agreed to export the tea to Halifax, after being duly entered, and
paying the duty. About five o'clock P. M. of 10th, Mr. Parry and Captain Norman
came to me, and informed me of this agreement, and that they were obliged to
the government for their protection, which they imagined was no longer
necessary on this occasion. However, I judged it prudent to meet the Council on
the adjournment, and to have the Council convened again in the afternoon, as
there was a town meeting sitting, and I could not be certain of established
quiet 'till that was over. The vessel with the tea sailed the 11th instant,
with a fair wind, for Halifax, and the town is in peace. The whole proceedings
of Council affair I beg leave herewith to transmit to your Lordship in the
paper No. 4.

Notwithstanding, I can still have the pleasure to represent to your Lordship
that this Province continues more moderate than any to the southward; yet, at
the same time, truth requires me to suggest, that the union of the colonies in
sentiment is not divided nor lost in New Hampshire, although they have hitherto
been prevailed upon to abstain from acts of general violence and outrage, and
the laws have their course. How long it will remain so is impossible to
foresee; I confess much good may not reasonably be counted upon, while the
unhappy distractions in the Massachusetts bay gain ground and spread with such
violence as cannot but be extremely deplored by every considerate man.

No. XXV. Extract of a Letter from Governor WENTWORTH to the Earl of DARTMOUTH,
dated New Hampshire, 15th November, 1774.
AT an adjournment of a town meeting in Portsmouth, in October last, fifty-two
voters reconsidered a vote of fifty-six voters in a previous meeting, "not to
grant the town moneys for a donation to Boston; but that a voluntary
subscription be opened for that purpose." This lesser number granted two
hundred pounds proclamation money, which is near four times their Province tax.

They also proceeded to choose a committee of forty-five persons, chiefly out
of the number then present, who style themselves, "A Committee of Ways and
Means." I hear one half the number refused to act. The remainder convened
together, and prevailed on Mr. Wentworth, an old gentleman of seventyeight
years, and lately extremely impaired by frequent epileptic fits, to be their
chairman. General Gage having desired me to furnish some carpenters to build
and prepare quarters for his Majesty's troops in Boston, the carpenters there
being withdrawn, and the service much distressed; I immediately engaged and
sent him a party of able men, which arrived to the General, and are very
useful. However, this committee considered it as very obnoxious, and chose a
sub-committee from among their acting members, to draw up resolves relative to
this matter, which I am informed they did, and were accordingly published in
the enclosed New Hampshire Gazette, No. 940, which excited the designed madness
through the interior part of the Province, and solely gave rise to the
proceedings at Rochester, as published in the Gazette, No. 942, herewith
transmitted. Indeed, had not the Rochester committee acted with great prudence,
and consented to call Mr. Austin before them, it is greatly to be apprehended
very essential outrages would have been committed on his estate, and his person
endangered through the violence of a deluded populace. From these motives only
were those three gentlemen in Rochester prevailed on to act in a business the
whole of which they publicly disapproved, but had not power to suppress. During
these agitations Captain Holland, by desire of Brigadier General Robinson, had
purchased some blankets for the army. The committee forbad him to ship any, and
he immediately sent them all to my house for safety, whence I directly shipped
them for Boston, and they are safely delivered. In the counties of Hillsborough
and Cheshire I have heard there have been several reprehensible violences
committed, under popular pretenses of liberty; nevertheless I took such
measures, that I am informed by the magistrates of those counties, the
difficulties begin to subside. But I cannot flatter myself with any reasonable
hopes of the legal establishment of the powers of government in this Province,
until they are effectually restored in the Massachusetts Bay. I have been
successful in prevailing on soldiers deserted from the King's troops at Boston,
to return to their duty, through the spirited and prudent activity of Major
Thompson, a militia officer of New Hampshire, whose management, the General
writes me, promises further success. The town of Exeter have followed the
example of Portsmouth, and granted one hundred pounds to Boston, and I
apprehend many other towns will do the like.

No. XXVI. Extract of a Letter from Governor WENTWORTH, to the Earl of
DARTMOUTH, dated New Hampshire, December 2, 1774.
THE forming a continental Congress was so universally adopted by the other
Colonies, that it was impossible to prevent this Province from joining therein,
and accepting the measures recommended, which are received implicitly: So great
is the present delusion, that most people receive them as matters of obedience,
not of considerate examination, whereon they may exercise their own judgment.
Accordingly on their first publication, the acting part of the committee
mentioned in my dispatch, No. 69, forbad an exportation of fifty sheep, the
adventure of a shipmaster, bound to the West Indies, and caused him, at some
loss, to dispose of his sheep, and unlade the provision made for them.

This day the Provincial committee nominated at Exeter by the electors of the
delegates to the Congress, have published their mandate, herewith enclosed, for
a general submission to the resolves of the Congress, signed by their chairman,
who was speaker in the late General Assembly.

It is much to be wished the Colonies had pursued the mode of representation
your Lordship is pleased to mention. At present I apprehend, the respective
Assemblies will embrace the first hour of their meeting, formally to recognize
all the proceedings of the Congress, and if they should superadd, it will not
probably be less violent than the example which will be their foundation.

No. XXVII. Copy of a letter from Governor WENTWORTH, to Governor GAGE, Dated
14th of December, 1774.
Portsmouth, New Hampshire. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to receive your Excellency's letter of the 19th inst. with
the letter from the Secretary of State, which were both delivered to me on
Monday evening last by Mr. Whiting.

It is with the utmost concern I am called upon by my duty to the King, to
communicate to your Excellency a most unhappy affair perpetrated here this day.

Yesterday in the afternoon, Paul Revere arrived in this town, express from the
committee in Boston to another committee in this town, and delivered his
dispatch to Mr. Samuel Cutts, merchant of this town, who immediately convened
the committee of which he is one, and, as I learn, laid it before them. This
day before noon, before any suspicions could be had of their intentions, about
four hundred men were collected together, and immediately proceeded to his
Majesty's Castle, William and Mary, at the entrance of this harbor, and
forcibly took possession thereof; notwithstanding the best defense that could
be made by Captain Cochran (whose conduct has been extremely laudable, as your
Excellency will see by the enclosed letter from him) and by violence carried
away upwards of 100 barrels of powder belonging to the King, deposited in the
castle. I am informed that expresses have been circulated through the
neighboring towns, to collect a number of people tomorrow, or as soon as
possible, to carry away all the cannon and arms belonging to the castle, which
they will undoubtedly effect, unless some assistance should arrive from Boston
in time to prevent it. This event too plainly proves the imbecility of this
government to carry into execution his Majesty's order in Council, for seizing
and detaining arms and ammunition imported into this Province, without some
strong ships of war in this harbor: Neither is the Province or
customhouse-treasury in any degree safe; if it should come into the mind of the
popular leaders to seize upon them.

The principal persons who took the lead in this enormity are well known. Upon
the best information I can obtain, this mischief originates from the publishing
the Secretary of State's letter, and the King's order in council at Rhode
Island, prohibiting the exportation of military stores from Great Britain, and
the proceedings in that Colony in consequence of it, which have been published
here by the forementioned Mr. Revere, and the dispatch brought, before which
all was perfectly quiet and peaceable here. I am, etc.

(Signed) J. WENTWORTH.

No. XXVIII. Copy of a Letter from Captain COCHRAN, Commander of Fort William
and Mary, in New Hampshire, to Governor WENTWORTH, dated the 14th of December,
1774.
May it please your Excellency,
I RECEIVED your Excellency's favor of yesterday, and in obedience thereto
kept a strict watch all night, and added two men to my usual number, being all
I could get* ^^^ing material occurred till this day one o'clock, when I was
informed, there was a number of people coming to take possession of the Fort,
upon which, having only five effective men with me, I prepared to make the best
defense I could, and pointed some guns to those places where I expected they
would enter. About three o'clock the Fort was beset on all sides by upwards of
four hundred men. I told them, on their peril not to enter: They replied they
would. I immediately ordered three four pounders to be fired on them, and then
the small arms, and before we could be ready to fire again, we were stormed on
all quarters, and they immediately secured both me and my men, and kept us
prisoners about one hour and a half, during which time they broke open the
powder-house, and took all the powder away except one barrel, and having put it
into boats and sent it off, they released me from my confinement. To which can
only add, that I did all in my power to defend the fort but all my efforts
could not avail against so great a number. I am your Excellency's. etc.

(Signed) JOHN COCHRAN.

No. XXIX. Copy of an Extract of a Letter from Governor WENTWORTH, to Governor
GAGE, dated Portsmouth, New Hampshire, the 16th of December, 1774.
ON Wednesday last after twelve o'clock, an insurrection suddenly took place in
this town, and immediately proceeded to his Majesty's castle, attacked,
overpowered, wounded and confined the Captain, and thence took away all the
King's powder. Yesterday numbers more assembled, and last night brought off
many cannon, etc. and about sixty muskets. This day the town is full of armed
men, who refuse to disperse, but appear determined to complete the dismantling
the fortress entirely. Hitherto the people abstain from private or personal
injuries; how long they will be so prevailed on, it is impossible to say, I
most sincerely lament the present distractions which seem to have burst forth
by means of a letter from William Cooper to Samuel Cutts, delivered here on
Tuesday last, P. M. by Paul Revere. I have not time to add further on this
melancholy subject.

P. S. The populace threaten to abuse Colonel Fenton, because he has to them
declared the folly of their conduct, and that he will do his duty as a Justice
in executing the laws. They will never prevail on him to retract, if all the
men in the Province attack him. If I had had two hundred such men, the castle
and all therein would yet have been safe. At this moment the heavy cannon are
not carried off, but how soon they may be, I cannot say.

No. XXX. The publication in the New Hampshire Gazette referred to in No.
XXIII. TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE PROVINCE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
Remember them that are in hands as bound with them, and them that suffer
adversity, as being yourselves also in the body Let us consider one another to
provoke to love and to good works.
MY DEAR BRETHREN,
OUR late House of Deputies, which met at Exeter, having recommended it to the
several towns in this Province, to consider the distressed situation of our
poor oppressed Brethren in Boston, who are suffering the rigor of a cruel and
unjust Act of Parliament which deprives them of the means of subsistence for an
indefinite time, and lend them what help we can afford, to support them in
their sufferings: I beg leave to lay before you some considerations, which may
serve to show you not how much they need(for that your own humanity must inform
you) but how much they deserve your assistance.

The people of that Town and Colony have ever been remarkable for their
humanity and generosity to the distressed. Their bounty has been extended to
Jamaica, Nevis, Carolina and other places which have suffered by fires,
hurricanes, earthquakes and other calamities, yea, London itself has
experienced their kindness, when by the fire in 1666, great numbers there were
reduced to poverty. To their tender and benevolent hand this Province in
particular is greatly indebted if not for its existence, yet certainly for its
protection and support, both in matters of civil government and in the furious
Indian Wars during those forty years we were united to that Colony. The
settlements here must have been broken up had we been left to stand alone,
vexed as we were by intestine divisions, and the want of an orderly government,
laboring under poverty, and attacked by a savage enemy whose tender mercies
were cruelty. The sense of their kindness was most gratefully expressed in a
letter written by President Cutts and his Council in 1680, to that Colony, upon
the separation which then took place by the King's Authority. And since that
time, every one that is acquainted with the state of this Province, knows that
it owes much of its importance to the neighborhood of the Massachusetts
government.

Though the Town of Boston have themselves suffered greatly by fire, and by the
frequent spreading of the small pox among them, yet they have always been at a
prodigious expense of supporting the poor, most of whom are not natives of the
place, but strangers, who have fallen in among them. For several-years past, as
I have it from the best authority, their annual poor's bill has amounted to
about two thousand pounds sterling; besides which, there is a voluntary
quarterly contribution for the poor at a public evening-lecture in Faneuil-Hall.

Distressed persons of all sorts have ever found Boston the best place to go to
for relief. Prisoners of war have there found the kindest treatment, and
returned captives have been received with the tenderest commiseration. Mr.
Williams of Deerfield, in the narrative of his captivity, bears them this
testimony, The charity of the whole country of Canada, though moved with the
doctrine of merit, does not come up to the charity of Boston alone, where
notions of merit are rejected.

Now, shall such a people as this suffer unpitied, unassisted? He who has
established this rule The liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal
things he shall stand, has disposed the hearts of our brethren in the southern
Colonies to contribute handsomely already, and when the crops come in, we
expect they will do much more. And shall not we, though our ability is but
small in proportion to theirs, do what we can to enable our brethren, who are
foremost in the conflict, to maintain the cause in which they are engaged, by a
firm and manly perseverance? Will not such communications of charity strengthen
the bonds of society, and endear us to each other? And when a firm union is
thus cemented, happy in our mutual affection, in the increased cultivation of
our lands, in our frugality and economy, we shall securely bid defiance to all
the enemies of our peace, and, leave this land of LIBERTY a sacred legacy to
posterity.

'Terra -- potens armis, atque ubere glebae.'

AMICUS PATRIAE.

No. XXXI. On the migration of Fishes. (Vol. III. p. 176.) A letter from the
Hon. General LINCOLN to the Author.
Hingham, Dec. 12, 1791. Reverend and dear Sir,
SINCE I saw you last, I have found some parts of the copy of a letter I wrote
to Mr. Little, with a design to convince him, that the river fish never forsake
the waters in which they were spawned, unless some unnatural obstructions are
thrown in their way: That when obstructed, they do not seek new sources in
which they may lodge their spawn; but that they are so strongly allured to the
same rout, that they annually return to their natural river, pressing
constantly for a passage into their mother pond. That the quiet waters of the
lake can alone give that nourishment and protection necessary to the existence
of the egg; the preservation of which is indispensible, if an extinction of the
schull is to be prevented.

The practice is not novel in this State, when from some unnatural
obstructions, the fish have been totally expelled from a river, to reestablish
them in their former numbers. About fifty years since, it was known, that at
the first settlement of this town, the Alewives had a passage through it, into
Accord pond, and were in such plenty as to give a full supply to the
inhabitants. This induced the people at that time to attempt the
re-establishment of them, in which they succeeded by opening proper fish ways
through the mill dams, and conveying the fish, in the spring of the year, in a
proper vehicle into the pond; this was done by keeping it near the bank of the
river, and frequently shifting the water in the vessel. After this, the fish
increased annually until there was a pretty good supply; but as there were many
shoal places in the river, which required very constant attention, the expense
of which and loss sustained by stopping the mills, exceeded, in the opinion of
the town, the advantages of the fish, the business was neglected; so that for a
number of years they have been perfectly cut off from the pond. Notwithstanding
some of the fish annually return to the mouth of the river urging a passage up;
but they are decreased in number and reduced in size.

We shall find on examination, that the fish though of the same kind, in one
river are much larger and fatter than in any other river in its vicinity. If
these fish were suffered to intermix, the difference now so very apparent would
not exist. If the fish are not directed by some laws in nature, to the rivers
in which they were spawned, how shall we account for the Salmon being in
Connecticut river, and in Merrimack, and the rivers lying between, perfectly
destitute of those fish? Was there not something irresistibly enchanting, in
the waters in which they respectively originated, we should probably find some
straggling Salmon in the intermediate rivers.

Whilst I resided in Philadelphia in 1782 and 1783, I discovered that the Shad
brought to market from the Schuylkill were about one third part better than
those taken in the Delaware. These fish come up the bay together in the spring,
and take, each schull its proper river, about five miles below the city; they
are caught but a few miles above it, so that in a few hours after they divide,
they fall into the nets of the fishermen. Were there not something in the
nature of the waters of these rivers, by which the fish are allured to them
respectively, we certainly should find the fish in the different rivers exactly
alike, for we cannot suppose that they experience any material change between
the time of their separation and the time of their being caught. As the Shad
taken in the Schuylkill are and always have been of a much superior quality to
those taken in the Delaware, we must suppose that there is, in the river first
mentioned, food for the fish more nutritive than there is in the latter. I
cannot think it a very romantic idea, that the waters are so impregnated with
certain particles which shall be sufficient to allure the fish to those rivers
in which they were spawned, or that they are invited to them by the returning
fry, on which they have been accustomed to feed. That they do feed differently,
some on food more nutritive than others, cannot be denied; to this is owing the
different size of the fish. They leave the rivers under different
circumstances, and so return to them again.

The shad and alewife frequent the same waters in which they drop their spawns.
The shad, prior to this, work up a little circular sand bank, on which the
spawns are lodged, and are guarded from that destruction to which they would be
exposed from the small fish, did not the male constantly play around the
deposit. While the eggs or spawns of the alewife are secured by being deposited
in shoal water, which prevents their being annoyed by the large fish.

The idea that fish always return to the same rivers in which they are spawned,
will not appear improbable when we consider what are the general laws which
seem to control the whole finny tribe; and what would be the probable
consequences should they be thrown down.

On the shores of the United States we find fish of different kinds, each
supplying a certain proportion of the inhabitants. These are restrained by some
laws in nature to their own feeding ground; they do not invade the rights of
others, nor are their rights infringed by any. New York is in the neighborhood
of Rhode Island, and that State is in the neighborhood of this, yet each State
has a very different fish-market. So it is with Pennsylvania and the States
south of it. Notwithstanding this, all are supplied, and with kinds of fish
peculiar to each. The Cod-fish which occupy the banks lying between the
latitudes of 41 and 45, are very different on the different banks, and are kept
so distinct, and are so similar on the respective banks, that a man acquainted
with the fishing business, will separate those caught on one bank from those
caught on another, with as much ease as we separate the apple from the pear.

It will be acknowledged that there can exist but a certain number only of fish
in any given space; was not this the case, as they are so prolific in their
nature they would, from their natural increase, soon so multiply, as that the
world, if I may be allowed the expression, would not contain them.

On the banks there appears nearly as many fish as ever, notwithstanding the
great numbers annually taken. The grand bank was, three years ago, manifestly
over stocked, there were more fish on it than could find support; those taken
were evidently on the decline, they were very thin, the substance tender; it
could not be hardened and preserved by salt; many of them would yield before
the knife in splitting and fall to pieces before they could be conveyed to the
flakes. The cause is not known, probably the spawns of that season were better
preserved than they had usually been.

Were those restraining laws of nature, which now confine the different schulls
of fish to their own limits, thrown down, and all could wander without control
there would be the most iminent danger of a total destruction of nearly the
whole kind, as well in the rivers as on the banks, for, as was said before,
there can but a certain number exist in a given space.

Permit me father to request, in support of the doctrine advanced, an attention
to that system and order so conspicuous in the operations of nature, and the
great regularity preserved among the things of creation, animate and inanimate,
by the Wisdom which made and governs the world.

Let us take a view of the different nations dispersed over the face of the
earth, by Him who originally fixed bounds to the habitations of men, and as a
restraint to them, and that each tribe should retain its own limits, he gave to
each nation a different language: We find the different nations and tribes,
though possessing very different climates, and if we were to judge, enjoying
the means of different degrees of happiness, severally tenacious of the limits
assigned them, and where a God is acknowledged, they very sincerely and
universally thanks him that they are favored above their fellow men.

Was it not for the superintending care, and the influence of the Governor of
the universe, who scatters in the paths of men such motives as fall with weight
and conviction on their minds, and lead them to prefer their climate above any
other, no inhabitants would be found in the burning sands under the torrid, nor
on the frozen cragged mountains under the frigid zones: We find however under
each, multitudes of people, who are so fitted for their respective situations,
that they are not only happy, but are really partial to the place assigned
them, and envy not the dominion of others, and seldom or never invade them, but
from motives of avarice, pride and ambition.

We find that the people who inhabited the American shores on the first
discovery of them, were divided into little kingdoms or tribes, each speaking a
different language, and were enemies one to the other; hence they were
preserved from famine and want, for they depended principally upon the
spontaneous growth of the earth, and upon fishing and hunting for their
support. Whatever kept them asunder was an act of mercy; with their ideas, they
could not have lived compactly, ruin must have been the necessary consequence
of the attempt.

What short of that influence necessary to preserve the natural order of
things, could have prevented mankind from abandoning the more inhospitable
parts of the globe, running together and uniting in climes the most friendly
and pleasant, and much the greater part of them becoming thereby their own
executioners. Although from an high cultivation of theearth, food may be drawn
for a great multitude of people, yet population cannot exceed certain bounds;
whenever that takes place, the salubrity of the air is destroyed, contagion
rages, the people sicken and die.

Let me now point you to the birds of passage, and ask that you would permit
your ideas to follow them in their flight from south to north, in spring, and
from north to south, in autumn, and you will find that they are annually
pointed to the same objects, and are as constant in their flight and as regular
in their course as are the seasons. We may, at a particular time of the year,
trace the swallow into its hiding place, and the robin and the lark to to the
forests, where they retire for shelter from the inclemency of an approaching
winter, and see them in the morning of spring returning to the same habitations
and branches, and often to the same nests they occupied before, and which from
necessity they had abandoned, Different fowls, natives of different climes, are
so fitted to their native air, that many of them cannot exist out of it.

The rattle snake, the most poisonous reptile in this part of the country, is
circumscribed in his limits, and cannot exist beyond a certain degree of
northern latitude, nor can he be transported across the Atlantic. By what laws
in nature he is restrained we know not; that he is restrained is a fact, and is
not known in one part of this Commonwealth while much dreaded in another. The
same restraint lies on different reptiles in the southern States, and though
one part are in a degree endangered by them, yet others are perfectly free from
their poisonous stings. These animals, necessary on the whole, as are the
flies, which multiply in proportion to the impurity of the air by which they
are surrounded, make a part of the great whole, and have, I doubt not, a
benevolent commission, in the execution of which the happiness of man is
materially concerned

Beasts of the most ferocious kind, necessary in the chain, are peculiar to
certain climates, and are the least dreaded where most known: A belief that
they will not exceed the limits assigned them, prevents their giving terror to
others; while those of a different kind serve for our use, are fitted to live
in the various climates in which they have been placed, and seem, by some
instinct of nature to be perfectly submissive; and are bound with much ease to
the limits assigned them.

When we take a view of the whole of the order established originally, and
which has been preserved in the world; when we see man dispersed over the face
of the earth, and an evident design that he should remain so dispersed, and
when we behold, that in consequence thereof, care has been taken that under
every circumstance of civilization, or barbarism, a full supply of food can be
obtained by each, in a way best fitted to themselves; when we see the birds of
passage, anxious to perform their part, and (which is important indeed to some
of the inhabitants in the higher latitudes) taught to fly in winter to climes
more friendly to their existence, and led back to nourish the waking Laplander,
after a winter of retirement and sleep. When we see the care exercised toward
man evinced in the existence of even the most poisonous animals, fitted to
inhale the more subtle and pointed particles floating in air, which are too
keen for our habits, and observe the irritating fly, busily employed in sipping
the putrid matter, in the first stages of it, which otherwise would float
incompatible with a salubrious atmosphere, necessary to our happiness. When we
see the natural timidity implanted in the nature of the most ferocious animals,
fleeing at the approach of man; and the docility of those more immediately
intended for our use. When we carefully review these things, and study with
attention the works of nature, the great book of GOD, which if understood
cannot mislead, and our minds are guided by proper considerations, we shall be
freed from all anxious fears, lest one part of the system should clash with
another, but instead thereof we shall find ourselves perfectly satisfied in the
belief that each will occupy its own orb until the whole shall be dissolved.

I have little doubt in my own mind but that every river whose source is in a
lake or pond, where the waters are quiet, might with great ease be replenished
with some kind of fish or other. I think there was a time when they were
filled. Could we succeed in this measure the advantages would be important, for
it would multiply our cod and other ground fish about our shores, in proportion
as we increase the small river fish, for they are the proper food of the ground
fish, which in pursuit thereof, are allured quite into our harbors, and give
us a more easy supply. We have undoubtedly been criminally inattentive to the
propagation of the oyster, in different parts of our shores; we can probably
fill our channels with these shell fish with much more ease than we can fill
our pastures with herds and flocks.

I have a satisfaction in submitting these observations to you, which is seldom
to be enjoyed, viz. that I shall receive a full compensation -- one smile will
do it, that I am sure they will beget, for you must long since have been taught
that we had better smile than weep at the vanity of others.

With esteem and affection,

I am always your friend, B. LINCOLN.

Rev. Mr. BELKNAP.
No. XXXII. On the same subject. A Letter from the Reverend DANIEL LITTLE of
Wells, to the Author.
Wells, Dec. 13, 1791. DEAR SIR,
GENERAL LINCOLN's letters contain many curious and pleasing arguments to prove
that "river fish always return to the rivers and ponds where they were
spawned." The thought was perfectly new to me, till I met with it, about three
years ago in a manuscript of the General's, which I had the honor of perusing,
and which gave rise to a correspondence on that and some other subjects. I wish
your inquiries may occasion some useful publication on this head.

In the course of my information since, I have met with nothing that militates
against the General's arguments; but rather the contrary.

Some time ago, I lodged at the house of Col. Baldwin of Woburn, and spent the
evening with his aged father; who, in the course of conversation, informed me,
that a canal was made, within the limits of his acquaintance, extend the
feeding ground of the river fish from one pond to another; but that the fish
never removed from their original and native pond; though the communication was
short and the waters plenteous.

When in the county of Lincoln, the last summer, I spent several days among the
people settled on the banks of the Sebasteecook, ten miles from its junction
with the Kennebeck. The streams that fall into Sebasteecook are numerous, and
abound with the small river fish, such a alewives, etc. The people say that at
the time of the running of these fish, they ascend the streams at distinct
periods in succession; and that the schulls never separate, interfere or
transgress in their way to their respective ponds or lakes.

The fish ponds and the river fish might be greatly improved, by removing the
natural obstructions in some rivers and carrying into the distant ponds live
fish to generate a new class. By that means new settlers might conduct the fish
to the doors of the present and succeeding generations.

I am, dear Sir, Your sincere friend and brother, DANIEL LITTLE.

No. XXXIII. ON POPULATION. A Letter from the Rev. JAMES FREEMAN, (who had seen
this work in manuscript) to the Author.
Boston, Feb. 29, 1792. DEAR SIR,
THE principles, upon which you have calculated your Table of Population, for
the State of New Hampshire (page 236) appear to me not to be just. Supposing
that the annual increase of inhabitants is the same, you conclude that their
number has doubled in less than nineteen years. It is said to be a good rule,
which works both ways. But if the number of people in New Hampshire increased
by the same ratio previous to the year 1767, it doubled in less than seven
years; for diminishing 52700 by 3883, your mean number, it is reduced in the
year 1760 to 25519. And, on the other hand, should the annual increase be no
more in future than 3883, above six and thirty years will elapse before the
inhabitants of New Hampshire will be double the number they were in 1790.

The inhabitants of a country augment, as far at least as depends upon natural
increase, in the same manner as a sum of money put out upon compound interest.
A hundred pounds at 6 per cent. at the end of the year, become L106, which new
principal, at the end of the second year, produces more than L6 Professor
Wigglesworth, in his Calculations of American Population, has explained the
manner of constructing tables, from which the annual increase of inhabitants,
by natural population, may be estimated for a series of years, provided their
number at the beginning and end of the series, be ascertained by actual
enumeration, or by any other accurate mode.

The number of inhabitants in New Hampshire in the year 1767 was 52700, and in
the year 1790, 141885. Here we have the number ascertained at the beginning and
end of a period of 23 years. Suppose 52700 to be equal to 1. Then we have this
series in geometrical progression, as 1:a::a:a2::a2:a3:a4^^ a23. That is, As
the number of inhabitants in the year 1767 is to their number in the year 1768,
so is that number to their number in the year 1769, and so on in the same
proportion to the year 1790.

But a23=2,692315; the root of which or a is equal to 1,044001. By involving
the value of a to its 23d power, we have the amount of unity to the 23d year:
the index of the power denoting the particular year.

The value of a being thus involved we have the following: TABLE 1.
years amounts of unity 1768 1,044001=a 1769 1,089939=a2 1770 1,137898=a3 1771
1,187967=a4 1772 1,240239=a5 1773 1,294812=a6 1774 1,351785=a7 1775 1,441126=a8
1776 1,473364=a9 1777 1,538194=a10 1778 1,605877=a11 1779 1,676538=a12 1780
1,750308=a13 1781 1,827324=a14 1782 1,907729=a15 1783 1,991672=a16 1784
2,079309=a17 1785 2,170802=a18 1786 2,266320=a19 1787 2,366042=a20 1788
2,470151=a21 1789 2,578842=a22 1790 2,692315=a23

If the number corresponding to any particular power of a be multiplied by
52700, the product will be the amount of the inhabitants of New Hampshire, for
the year denoted by the index of the power of a, and which in the table is
placed in the same line. For example, if we multiply 52700 by 1,351785, which
in the table is placed in the same line with 1774, the product, rejecting the
decimal parts, will be 71239, which is a little more than one half of 14188^.
Consequently, upon the supposition, that the increase of inhabitants in
New Hampshire was uniform, during the period included in this table, it may be
concluded, that their number was doubled in a little more than sixteen years.

But from the survey taken in the year 1775, it appears that the increase was
not uniform. At that time the number of inhabitants in New Hampshire, was found
to amount to 82200, whereas, if it be calculated by the table, it will be no
more than 74373. It is evident therefore, that the augmentation of the people
was more rapid between the years 1767 and 1775, than between the years 1775 and
1790. This difference can easily be accounted for. The late war undoubtedly
checked the progress of population, as you have clearly shown, page 234.

To ascertain at what rate the inhabitants of New Hampshire increased between
1767 and 1775, a period of 8 years, let us suppose, as before, 52700 to be
equal to 1. Then a8=1,559772, that is, the root of which, or a, is 1,056928,
which being involved to its 13th power, will give the amounts of unity, as in
the following: TABLE II.
years amounts of unity 1768 1,056928=a 1769 1,117098=a2 1770 1,180692=a3 1771
1,248908=a4 1772 1,320007=a5 1773 1,395153=a6 1774 1,474577=a7 1775 1,559772=a8
1776 1,648568=a9 1777 1,743418=a10 1778 1,842669=a11 1779 1,948012=a12 1780
2,058910=a13

From this table it is evident, that the people of New Hampshire, if the
progress of population had not been checked by the war, would have doubled
their numbers in less than thirteen years; for 2,058910, which corresponds to
the 13th power of a, multiplied by 52700, will produce 108504.

The peace of 1783 prevented the further destruction of men. It may therefore
be presumed that the progress of population was the same, or nearly the same,
between that year and the year 1790, as between the years 1767 and 1775.
Allowing it to be the same, it will be easy to determine the number of people
in New Hampshire in 1783. The difference between 1783 and 1790 is 7. If
therefore we divide the number of inhabitants in the year 1790 by the sum
corresponding to the 7th power of a, the quotient will be the number in 1783;
but ^=96220.

We have here found a 4th number, from which may determine the progress of
population from 1775 to 1783, a period of 8 years. Suppose 82200, the number in
1775, to be equal to 1. Then a3=^=1,170559, the root of which, or a, is
1,019880, which being involved to the 8th power, will give the amounts of
unity, as in the following: TABLE III.
years amounts of unity 1776 1,019880=a 1777 1,040156=a2 1778 1,060832=a3 1779
1,081924=a4 1780 1,103433=a5 1781 1,125370=a6 1782 1,147742=a7 1783 1,170559=a8

Calculating the number of inhabitants from 1767 to 1775, and from 1783 to
1790, by Table II, and from 1775 to 1783 by Table III, we may form the
following Table of Population for New Hampshire.

From this table it appears, that the number of inhabitants in New Hampshire
has doubled in less than eighteen years; for the half of the number taken by
the census, viz. 70942, falls between the years 1772 and 1773.

TABLE of Population
1767 52700 1768 55700 1769 58871 1770 62222 1771 65817 1772 69564 1773 73524
1774 77710 1775 82200 1776 83834 1777 85500 1778 87200 1779 88934 1780 90702
1781 92505 1782 94344 1783 96220 1784 101696 1785 107485 1786 113606 1787
120170 1788 127061 1789 134241 1790 141885

This conclusion may be considered as very near the truth. But it ought to be
observed, that this table of population is not perfectly exact; for the
augmentation of numbers in New Hampshire has undoubtedly arisen, in part, from
immigration. It is impossible to determine with precision, what the amount of
this immigration is. But we may give a probable conjecture as to the accession
of inhabitants, which it has eventually produced. For if we can ascertain the
number of years, in which the inhabitants of the United States, collectively
taken, have generally doubled their numbers by natural increase, we shall be
furnished with data, by which we may estimate the natural increase of
inhabitants in New Hampshire from the year 1767 to the year 1790, which number
being subtracted from the number taken by the census, the remainder will be
immigrants and the natural increase which has arisen from them.

Dr. Wigglesworth supposes ( Calculations, page 21) that the number of people
in the United States is doubled by natural increase in 25 years. Multiplying,
therefore, 52700 by 1,89211529=a23 in his Table (page 14), the product is
99714, the difference between which and 141885 is 42171.

But I have reason to believe, that the inhabitants of the United States double
their numbers, by natural increase, in a less period of time than Dr.
Wigglesworth imagines. In a Table, which I have calculated for eight of the
United States, viz. New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Maryland and Virginia, including Kentucky, I have made
a22 equal to 2,0291905; that is, by this Table, the number of inhabitants in
these States, collectively taken, doubled in less than 22 years, during a
period ending in the year 1790. Pennsylvania, one of the States not included in
the calculation, estimating by the increase of its rateable polls from 1770 to
1786, doubles its numbers in less than 22 years. If this State, therefore, were
added, it would render the period of doubling still shorter, as Massachusetts,
Rhode Island and Connecticut, compared with the other States contained in the
calculation, increase very slowly, on account of the perpetual emigrations
which are made from them. The other States not included in the calculation are
Vermont, Delaware, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, beside the
Western Territory. I do not possess sufficient materials, to estimate with
accuracy, the progress of population in these States. But it is well known that
Vermont, North Carolina, and Georgia are rapidly increasing. If a calculation
could be formed upon the whole of the United States, I am of opinion that it
would be found, that, by natural increase, and by emigration from foreign
countries, they have actually doubled their numbers in 21 years,
notwithstanding the destruction of men by the late war. The accession of
foreigners bears no perceptible proportion to the natural increase of nearly
four millions of people. Making however a very liberal allowance for it, I
think I am justified in concluding, that the natural increase of inhabitants in
the United States, may be estimated by the Table above mentioned. In this table
a22 is equal to 2,02919050, and a is equal to 1,03296843, consequently a23 is
equal to 2,09608972. If, therefore, we multiply this number by 52700, the
number of inhabitants in New Hampshire, in 1767, the product will be 110463,
the number they would have been, by natural increase* in the year 1790; which
being deducted from the number taken by the census, the remainder is 31422,
which may be considered as the stock formed by immigration and the natural
increase arising from it. Making use of the same Table which I have just
mentioned, there is no great difficulty in determining the number of
immigrants, which New Hampshire has received, one year with another, for the
period of 23 years, ending in 1790. Let (...) represent this number.

Then z+z a+z a2+z a3+z a4+z a5+z a6+z a7+z a8+z a9+z a10+z a11+z a12+z a13+z
a14+z a15+z a16+z a17+z a18+z a19+z a20+z a21+z a22=31422.

That is, in numbers, 33,53096515 z=31422.

Consequently z=^=937^

Multiplying this number by 23, the product is 21553, the amount of
immigrations into New Hampshire in 23 years. As it is your opinion, that the
emigrations from the neighboring States were not so large during the five
first years of the war, as before or since, for the sake of a round number, I
will suppose that New Hampshire, during the remaining 18 years, annually
received an addition of 1000 persons, beside the children who were born in the
course of the year. From these data a more accurate Table of population might
be constructed, than that which I have given; but it would not differ so
materially from it, as to affect my general conclusion; for the half of the
number taken by the census in the year 1790 would still fall between the years
1772 and 1773. I would therefore consider it as an established fact, that the
number of people in New Hampshire has actually doubled in less than eighteen
years.

It is a sentiment which I have heard you express, that there will still
continue to be a rapid population in New Hampshire for many future years. The
State at present is thinly settled in proportion to its extent, containing not
quite fifteen inhabitants to one square mile. In Connecticut, which is
increasing in numbers, there are fifty-one inhabitants to a square mile; and
probably as many in Rhode Island. But there is not so much water and
unimproveable land in Connecticut as in New Hampshire. The latter State you
inform us, page 13, contains 9491 square miles; from which, if we deduct 156
square miles for water, and 480 square miles, for uninhabitable mountains, the
remainder is 8855, by which, if we divide 141885, the quotient is 16. The
habitable parts of New Hampshire then contain sixteen inhabitants to a square
mile. You have therefore reason to conclude, that the rapidity of its
population will not be checked for many years. Presuming that the State will
annually receive a thousand immigrants, I will venture to calculate its
population from the year 1790 to the year 1800, at or before which time a new
census will be taken, by which it will be discovered whether my predictions be
just or not.

TABLE of Population.
Calculated by the Table referred to above, in which a is equal to 1,03296843,
and 1000 added annually for immigrants. 1790 141885 1791 147562 1792 153426
1793 159484 1794 165742 1795 172206 1796 178883 1797 185780 1798 192904 1799
200263 1800 207865

I fear that your patience is now exhausted with my tables. I will not
therefore trespass no further upon your time, than to add by way of apology,
that no calculations can be too minute, which tend to demonstrate the
increasing prosperity of a State, the inhabitants of which have so long been
distinguished for their bravery and love of freedom.

With sincere respect, I am, dear Sir, your affectionate brother, JAMES FREEMAN.
Rev. Jeremy Belknap.




N. B. Since the foregoing letter was received, inquiry has been made of the
Secretary whether there be any documents in his office from which the number of
people in New Hampshire, previous to 1767 can with any probability be
ascertained. After spending several days in searching the books and files, the
Secretary writes that The only numbers of rateable polls to be found in his
office from 1742 to 1767 were as follows: 1742 -- 5172, no returns from
Nottingham, Barrington and Gosport. 1753 -- 6392. 1767 -- 11964.


It may be asked, what is the proportion between rateable polls and
inhabitants? If the number of inhabitants as estimated in 1767, viz. 52700 be
divided by 11964, the rateable polls, the quotient will be nearly 4, which
gives the proportion for that year. But whether the same will hold for other
years is uncertain. New Hampshire was peculiarly circumstanced in respect of
population, for fifteen years proceeding and fifteen years succeeding the
conquest of Canada in 1760. During the former period the population was very
slow, excepting by the natural increase. During the latter the immigration was
extremely rapid. It is also to be noted that in the old towns there is a much
greater proportion of old men, women and children, than in the new settlements;
consequently the new have more rateable polls in proportion to their numbers
than the old towns.

Additions to the Table of Longevity, p. 252, lately received.
Since that Sheet was printed, the Rev. Mr. PIKE of Somersworth died, in the
89th year of his age; and the Rev. PEARSON THURSTON is ordained in that place.

Of the first settlers in Rochester who have died within sixteen years last
past the ages were as follows: Above 100 years -- 1 between 90 and 100 -- 2 80
and 90 -- 14 70 and 80 -- 20 60 and 70 -- 4 41 Now living.
between 90 and 100 -- 1 80 and 90 -- 9 70 and 80 -- 5 15 Males 7. Females 8

Of the first settlers in Barrington the number now living and their ages are
as follows: between 90 and 100 -- 1 between 80 and 90 -- 10 between 70 and 80
-- 3 14 Males 11. Females 3.

END
A CATALOGUE of SUBSCRIBERS to this Work.
GEORGE WASHINGTON L. L. D. PRESIDENT of the United States.

JOHN ADAMS, L. L. D. VICE PRESIDENT of the United States.

SENATORS of the United States.
New Hampshire. John Langdon, Esquire. Pain Wingate, Esquire.
Massachusetts. George Cabot, Esquire. Tristram Dalton, Esquire. Caleb Strong. Esquire.
Rhode Island. Theodore Foster, Esquire. New York. Philip Schuyler, Esquire. William S.
Johnson, L. L. D. Rufus King, Esquire.
Pennsylvania. Robert Morris, Esquire. Virginia. James Munroe, Esquire. North Carolina.
Benjamin Hawkins, Esquire. Samuel Johnston, Esquire.
Clerk of the Sen^ie. Samuel A. Otis, Esquire.
In NEW HAMPSHIRE.
His Excellency JOSIAH BARTLETT, President, 2 s. Joshua Atherton, Esquire. William
Atkinson, Esquire. Thomas Bartlet, Esquire. Wiliam Boyd Joshua Bracket, Esquire. James
Bracket Dr. James Bracket Samuel Brooks, Esquire. John Calef, Esquire. Moses Carr, Esquire.
John Chase, Esquire. M. Genesis Joseph Cilley Bradbury Cilley. Thomas Crawford A. R.
Cutter, Esquire. Wentworth Cheswill, Esquire. Theophilus Dame, Esquire. Thomas Dickman
Moses Dow, Esquire. John Duncan, Esquire. Dartmouth C. Library Noah Emery, Esquire. Mrs.
Sarah Fisher Moses Fisk, A. M. Moses Fisk, A. M. for a private library at
Dartmouth College. Abiel Foster, Esquire. Eliphalet Giddings John T. Gilman, Esquire.
Nicholas Gilman, Esquire. Nathaniel Gilman, Esquire. Dr John Goddard Rev. Robert Gray
Dr. Ezra Green John Hale, Esquire. Nathaniel Ham Richard Heart Robert Harris, jun.
Rev. Joseph Haven Ezekiel Hayes James Hill, Esquire. Lemuel Holmes, Esquire. Daniel
Humphreys, Esquire. Dr. Hall Jackson Dr. John Jackson James Jewett John Kielle,
Esquire. Sandford Kingsbury, Esquire. Col. Eliphalet Ladd Henry S. Langdon, A. M.
Thomas Leavitt Samuel Lane. Esquire. Jabez Lane Jeremiah Libbey, Esquire. Samuel
Livermore, Esquire. Arthur Livermore, Esquire. Rev. S. Macclintock, D.D. Capt. John
Mackay James M'Gregore, Esquire. Thomas Martin, Esquire. Stephen March, Esquire. Henry
Mellen, Esquire. Rev. William Morrison Capt. Ichabod Nichols Rev. Bulkley Olcott
William Parker, Esquire. John Parker, Esquire. Elisha Pain, Esquire. Nathaniel Peabody,
Esquire. Oliver Peabody, Esquire. Rev. Stephen Peabody Joseph Pearson, Esquire. John
Pierce, Esquire. John Phillips, L. L. D. John Pickering, Esquire. John Pinkerton
William Plummer, Esquire. John Plummer, jun. Rev. Huntington Porter John Porter
Esquire. Portsmouth Social Lib. John Prentiss, Esquire. Henry Prescott, Esquire. George
Reid, Esquire. Nathaniel Rogers, Esquire. Ephraim Robinson Eleazer Russell, Esquire. Samuel
Shackford Jacob Sheafe, jun. Esquire. James Sheafe, Esquire. Capt. Thomas Shannon
Reuben Shapley Amos Shephard John S. Sherburne, Esquire. E. Smith, Esquire. Meredith E.
Smith, Esquire. Durham Jeremiah Smith, Esquire. Theophilus Smith, Esquire. Rev John Smith,
S. T. P. Major Ebenezer Tebbets William Tarlton Dr. Samuel Tenney Rev. Ebenezer
Thayer Col. Benjamin Titcomb Christopher Toppan, Esquire. M. Toscan, Vice Consul of
France John Waldron, Esquire. Robert Wallace, Esquire. Charles Walker, A. B. John
Wheelock, L. L. D. Ebenezer Webster Phillips White, Esquire. Amos White Joseph
Whipple, Esquire. Capt. John Wier Bezaleel Woodward, Esquire.
In MASSACHUSETTS.
John Q. Adams, Esquire. Fisher Ames, Esquire. Jonathan Amory John Amory John Amory
jun. Rufus G. Amory, Esquire. Dr. N. W. Appleton. Jonathan L. Austin, Esquire.
Nathaniel Austin Joseph Barrel, Esquire. Joseph Barrel, jun. A. M. Luke Baker
Samuel Barrett, sen. Josiah Bartlet, M. B. Nathaniel Balch John Barrett William
Baylies, Esquire. Rev. William Bentley Abraham Biglow Mrs. Esther Black Samuel
Blagge, Esquire. Samuel Blodget, Esquire. Nathan Blodget Boot and Pratt Rev. John
Bradford Alden Bradford A. M. Thomas Brattle, Esquire. Martin Brimmer Andrew
Brimmer T. Bradbury Esquire. John W. Blanchard Samuel Brown Nathan Bond James
Bowdoin, Esquire. Thomas Bulfinch, M. D. Moses Brown Jonathan Burrows Samuel Breck,
Esquire. Ebenezer Bradish, Esquire. Major Aaron Brown Matthew Bridge Edmund Bridge
Andrew Cabot, Esquire. Capt. John Cathcart Rev. Thomas Carey J. C. Chadbourne, Esquire.
Rev. John Clarke George Claghorne William Cooper David Cobb, Esquire. Joseph
Coolidge Capt. Joseph Cordis John Coats Adam Colson William Cushing, Esquire. Rev.
Jacob Cushing Nathan Cushing, Esquire. Rev. M. Cutler, L. L. D. Francis Dana, Esquire.
Thomas Dawes, Esquire. Thomas Dawes, jun. Esquire. Caleb Davis, Esquire. Daniel Davis Esquire.
William Dall Moses Davidson M. Deletombe Consul of France. George Deblois Aaron
Dexter, M. D. Davenport and M'Lean Ebenezer Dorr John G. Doubleday Capt.
Nathaniel Dowse William B. Eaton Rev. Joseph Eckley Samuel Eliot Esquire. 4 sets
Rev. John Eliot, 2 sets Simon Elliot Edward Edes Edward Emerson Rev. Moses
Everrett Rev. Oliver Everrett Moses Frazier, Esquire. Thomas Fleet Dr. Joshua
Fisher Rev. James Freeman, 2 s. A Friend, 20 sets Rev. Jonathan French Rev. Eli
Forbes Bossenger Foster, Esquire. John Gardner, Esquire. John Gardener William Gamage,
A. M. Caleb Gannett, Esquire. Moses Gill, Esquire. Samuel Glyde Daniel Greenleaf David
S. Greenough, Esquire. John Gregory Nathaniel Gorham, Esquire. Stephen Gorham, Esquire.
Benjamin Goodhue, Esquire. John Gore, Esquire. Christo. Gore, Esquire. 2 s. Capt. Nath.
Goodwin, Christian Gullager Capt. John Haggens Capt. David Hatch, Jonathan
Hamilton, Esquire. Samuel Hewes, jun. Joseph Henderson, Esquire. Rev. S. Howard, D. D.
Stephen Higginson, Esquire. Henry Hill, Esquire. Alex. Hodgdon, Esquire. Ed. A. Hoylyoke M.
D. Rev. Jonathan Homer Capt. Russell Hubbard Ipswich Social Library Leonard
Jarvis, Esquire. Dr. Charles Jarvis Patrick Jaffrey, Esquire. Jonathan Jackson, Esquire.
Rev. Joseph Jackson John Coffin Jones, Esquire. Edward Jones John Joy Thomas K.
Jones Rev. Samuel Kendal Joseph Kettell John Kneeland Bartholomew Kneeland
Capt. Thomas Knox Rev. John Lathrop D. D. Edward M'Lane Capt. George Lane James
Lamb Thomas Lamb Andrew Leach Zephaniah Leonard, Esquire. M. General B. Lincoln
William Little, Esquire. James Lovell, Esquire. John Lowell, Esquire. Theodore Lyman
Timothy Lyman Capt. William Mackay Jonathan Mason, Esquire. Jona. Mason, jun. Esquire.
Capt. James Magee Ephraim May Joseph May Samuel May Rev. Joseph M'Kean G. R.
Minot, Esquire. Charles Miller Rev. Jedediah Morse Rev. John Murray Henry Newman,
Esquire. Timothy Newell, Esquire. Rev. Jonathan Newell Harrison G. Otis, Esquire. T.
Parsons, Esquire. Capt. William Parsons John Parker Major William Perkins Thomas H.
Perkins William D. Peck, A. M. William Phillips, Esquire. Samuel Phillips, Esquire.
William Phillips, jun. Samuel Parkman Rev. Phillips, Payson William Powell,
Esquire. Capt. Thomas Powars Oliver Prescott, Esquire. Eliphalet Pearson, A. M.
Nicholas Pike Esquire. Thomas Pons Edward Pope Esquire. Benjamin Pickman, jun. Rev.
Eliphalet Porter Josiah Quincy, A. B. Dr. Isaac Rand John Read. jun. Edward H.
Robbins, Esquire. T. Russell, Esquire. 6 sets. James Russell, Esquire. Joseph Russell
Thomas Robbins William Rotch. jun. Nathaniel Ruggles, A. B. N. P. Sargeant,
Esquire. Dr. Micajah Sawyer Samuel Salisbury Jonathan Sayward, Esquire. David Sewall,
Esquire. Samuel Sewell, Esquire. Theod. Sedgwick, Esquire. Joseph Shed Samuel Shaw, Esquire. 2
sets William Scollay, Esquire. Nathaniel Sigourney Abiel Smith William Smith Rev.
Isaac Smith Samuel Smith Jonathan Simson, Esquire. William Stevenson John Sweetser
Russell Sturges William Stackpole Rev. John Simpkins James Sullivan, Esquire.
Increase Sumner, Esquire. Caleb Swan Samuel Swan, jun. Mrs. Elisabeth Sparhawk
David Stearns William Spooner, M. D. Ebenezer Storer, Esquire. Rev. P. Thacher, D.
D. Rev. Thomas Thacher, for Social Library in Medfield. George Thatcher, Esquire.
John Templeman James Tisdale Thomas Thompson Joshua Thomas Rev. Charles Turner
Samuel Treat Edward Tuckerman Cotton Tufts, M. D. Samuel Torrey Israel
Thorndike Dr. Larkin Thorndike William Tudor, Esquire. Dudley A. Tyng, Esquire.
Ebenezer Wales Joseph Ward, Esquire. Thomas Walcutt John Warren, M. D. Rev. Samuel
West Samuel Williams Josiah Waters, Esquire. Rev. Anthony Wibird Redford Webster
Francis Wright James Winthrop, Esquire. William Winthrop, Esquire. T. L. Winthrop, Esquire.
John Wiswall Benj. Waterhouse, M. D. Robert Wier, A. M. Rev. J. Willard, D. D.
Samuel Webber, A. M. Joshua Witherlee David Wood, Esquire.
In RHODE ISLAND.
Welcome Arnold George Benson Jabez Bowen. Esquire. Moses Brown Nicholas Brown John
I. Clarke Stephen Dexter John Francis Rev. E. Hitchcock, D. D. Jacob
Richardson, Esquire. J. and W. Russell,
In CONNECTICUT.
Ebenezer Byles, Esquire. John Chester, for Library in Weathersfield. Rev. T.
Dwight, D. D. Rev. Andrew Eliot Rev. David Mc Clure for Library in
East-Windsor. Timothy Pitkin Nathaniel Terry, jun. John Trumbull, Esquire. N.
Webster, jun. Esquire. J. Wadsworth, Esquire. Daniel Wadsworth
In NEW YORK.
Egbert Benson, Esquire. Richard Carry, Esquire. John Pintard, Esquire.
In PENNSYLVANIA.
Dr. Barton Rev. A. Green, D. D. Ebenezer Hazard, Esquire. F. A. Muhlenburg, Esquire.
Benjamin Rush, M. D. John Vaughan, Esquire. Timothy Pickering, Esquire. William Martin
William Young
In VIRGINIA.
John Beckley, Esquire. James Madison, Esquire.
In SOUTH CAROLINA.
Rev. Thomas Adams.
In NOVA SCOTIA.
William J. Allmon, Esquire. S. S. Blowers, Esquire. 3 sets Rev. A. Brown, D. D. James
Clarke, Esquire. Rev. Charles Inglis, D. D. Charles Morris, Esquire. Richard J. Uniack,
Esquire. James Putnam, Esquire. Jonathan Stearns, Esquire. G. Townshend, Esquire. J. WENTWORTH,
L. L. D. 3 sets.
ERRATA.
Page 270 line 11 for six read four. 276 18 reward r. award. 308 2d column,
Barringham r. Barrington. 309 2d column, Effington r. Effingham. 478 line 18
dele no.
Corrections to the Botanical and Zoological catalogue, by the Rev. Dr. CUTLER.

Page 100, line 3 YELLOW oak makes good pipe Staves. WHITE makes the best ship
timber.

100 10 Quercus prinus 112 18 Populus balsamifera 121 18 GOOSEBERRY grossularia
125 19 sambucus 22 adianthum pedatum 127 1 arum americanum betoe folia 148 13
felis 253 14 after species add? 254 fiber 168 2d col. line 16 17 alca 169 2
bassan^^ 182 3 cimex 7 papilio 183 9 quadricornis 13 loligo ult. Anemone marina
(locomotiva.)
Additions to the zoological catalogue by Mr. PECKS.
Falco Subbuteo. PIGEON HAWK Falco Halioetus. FISH HAWK Strix Bubo. HORNED OWL
Anas Hyemalis. OLD WIFE Alca Torda. MURR Prbcellaria Pelagica. PETTERIL
Colymbus Glacialis. LARGE SPOTTED LOON Colymbus Podiceps. DOBCH^C^ O^ NO TA^^
Petromyzon Marinus. SEA SUCKER Raja Fullonica? THORNBACK Squalus Acanthias.
DOGFISH Squalus Stellaris? SHARK ^ophius P^s^atorius. MONKFISH Pleuronictes
Hippoglossus. HALIBUR
District of Massachusetts, to wit:
L. S.

BE it remembered, that on the thirty-first day of August, in the sixteenth
year of the Independence of the United States of America, JEREMY BELKNAP of the
said district has deposited in this Office the titles of three Books and a
Map, the right whereof he claims as author, in the words following, to wit:
"The History of New Hampshire, Vol. I. Comprehending the events of one complete
century from the discovery of the river Pascataqua. By Jeremy Belknap, A. M.
Member of the American Philosophical Society held at Philadelphia for promoting
useful knowledge."

"The History of New Hampshire, Vol. II. Comprehending the events of
seventy-five years, from MDCCXV to MDCCXC, illustrated by a Map." And

"The History of New Hampshire, Vol. III. Containing a a geographical
description of the STATE, with sketches of its natural history, productions,
improvements, and present state of society and manners, laws and government. By
Jeremy Belknap, A. M. Member of the Philosophical Society in Philadelphia and
of the Academy of Arts and Sciences in Massachusetts." And the title of the Map
in the words following: "A new Map of New Hampshire, by Jeremy Belknap."

In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States, entitled "An
Act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts
and books to the authors and proprietors, of such copies, during the times
therein mentioned."

N. GOODALE, Clerk of the District of Massachusetts.
A true copy of Record,

attest, N. GOODALE,




