MR. BIRD'S SERMON. M, DCC, XCII.

THE PARABLE OF THE UNCLEAN SPIRIT, OPENED AND APPLIED, IN TWO DISCOURSES, ON
MATH. XII: 43, 44, 45. DELIVERED AT DURHAM, IN FREEHOLD, JULY 8th, 1792.

BY JONATHAN BIRD, A. M. CANDIDATE FOR THE GOSPEL MINISTRY.

-- For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, --

ST. PAUL. PRINTED AT CATSKILL, BY M. CROSWELL, and CO. M, DCC, XCII.

THE PARABLE OF THE UNCLEAN SPIRIT, OPENED AND APPLIED.
MATTHEW, XII. 43, 44, 45. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of the man, he
walks through dry places seeking rest, and finds none. -- Then he says, I
will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he
finds it empty, swept, and garnished. -- Then goes he, and takes with
himself seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in, and
dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first.


IN this chapter, we have an account of a blind and deaf Devil being cast out
of a man, by our Savior: upon which, the people were greatly amazed, and cried
-- is not this the son of David? -- The Scribes and Pharisees, seeing their
wealth and reputation at stake, suffered their malice to cast Reason out of its
seat; and boldly accused Christ of casting out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince
of the Devils. This assertion, was such a palpable contradiction in its nature,
that it needed no refutation. He only observed, by way of reproof, that as the
house, or kingdom, divided against itself could not stand; so Satan, if
divided, could not stand.

Nothing short of the Spirit of God, can cast out Satan; as they acknowledged
in the exorcises of their sons: hence says Christ, they shall be your judges.
But if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come
unto you.

The casting out of Devils, argued superior power, and divine authority.
Consequently, the imputation of that power to Beelzebub, involved them in the
predicament of blasphemy; which occasioned Christ to close his reproof, by
observing, that whosoever speaks a word against the son of man it shall be
forgiven him: but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

Instead of accepting this reproof, and returning to right reason, they
violently cast off conviction, and demanded a sign. They denied credit to the
miracles he had wrought; unless he would submit to prove them divine, by
another miracle, according to their prescription: and his refusal, they made
the ground, or pretense, of final rejection.

This was such a flagrant act of spite and malice against Christ, and his
works, that he called them a generation of vipers; reminded them of a day of
judgment, and certain condemnation. And finally, in the words of our text,
characterised their vile temper of mind; their restless and fruitless search of
rest against light; and their miserable end.

When the unclean Spirit is gone out of the man, he walks through dry places
seeking rest, and finds none. Then he says, I will return into my house from
whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and
garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other Spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state of
that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked
generation.

Whether we consider these words as plain and direct matter of fact, in the
cavilling Scribes and Pharisees; or as a mere parable, directly applied to
them, will be of no material consequence. They are doubtless a description of
the unpardonable sin, with the several steps leading thereto, and deplorable
consequence: and as such, demand our most solemn attention.

My design is, to consider these words in an explanitory manner, and then apply
them: -- Therefore,

Firstly, Let us enquire what this unclean Spirit is, and how it goes out of
the man. -- Whether we consider these words as a parable, or otherwise; they
must refer to that wicked disposition, with which these Scribes and Pharisees
went out against Christ. It is not the Devil, but the temper and conduct of the
man, which is here condemned. That unclean Spirit, is used here in opposition
to moral purity; to a pure and upright heart. It implies a heart wickedly and
perversely set against the truth.

In this sense, the Jews had accused Christ of having an unclean Spirit;
because he cast out Devils, and condemned their traditions. So again, Paul
calls that spirit of strife and dissension, with which many went out against
Christ, a witchcraft -- Galat. 3.4. In like manner, Christ compares these very
Scribes and Pharisees, to whited sepulchers, full of all uncleanness: because
they appeared outwardly righteous unto men; but inwardly, were full of
hypocrisy and iniquity -- Math. 23: 27. Thus, the unclean Spirit, is a temper
of wilful resistance, and stubborn perverseness, against the light of evidence
and good conscience. And such, in fact, was the case of the Jews: to whom these
words were applied, as I shall show further on.

Now, this unclean Spirit goes out of the man, whenever he, in words or
actions, opposes Christ, the doctrines of the gospel, or the influences of the
Spirit of God: he then scatters abroad. Hence Christ, when he reproves the
Pharisees for rejecting him, and perversely adhereing to the doctrines and
traditions of men, says, hear and understand: not that which goes into the
mouth, defiles a man: but that which comes out of the mouth defiles a man,
such as evil thoughts, adulteries, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, debate, blasphemy, pride, foolishness. And to persons of these
characters, he says, ye are of your father the Devil, and his works ye will do.
These are not the work of the Spirit of God, but of the flesh: they proceed
from an impure heart, and defiled conscience: they despise Christ, and resist
the Holy Ghost.

Thus, the unclean Spirit goes out of the man, when he purposely opposes the
gospel of Christ: especially so, when, against light, he denies the divinity of
Christ, the gospel revelation, and method of salvation: or, when he broaches
doctrines, which render the death of Christ of non effect, and the influences
of the Spirit, a mere delusion; imputing the works of the Spirit of God, unto
Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils. -- This leads me,

Secondly, To consider the effects of this going out of the Spirit, viz: -- He
walks through dry places seeking rest, and finds none.

It is observable, that the man, having set out against Christ, and his way of
salvation, can have no assistance from the Spirit of God, or a revelation: but
he trusts to his own beclouded reason, against infinite wisdom. Therefore, like
a man seeking sustenance, in a dry and thirsty desert, he will be constantly
disappointed. Human reason, cannot obtain peace against God: there is no rest,
in an opposition to the author and giver of rest.

The conduct of the Scribes and Pharisees, to whom these words were applied,
will be our best example. They, as Rulers and Teachers in Israel, had, for a
long time, acquired great esteem and respect. And, by their adherence to the
ceremonial law, and traditions of the fathers, which they strenuously
inculcated on the people, they supported their pride and enriched their
pockets. Therefore, so soon as Christ declared his mission, and reproved them
of self-righteousness and neglect of the moral law, they cried out against him;
-- that he was a babbler, a wine-bibber, impostor and friend of publicans and
sinners. They did every thing in their power, to irritate the minds of the
people, and cast contempt on Christ; well knowing, that his increase, would be
their decrease: for he constantly opposed, and openly rebuked them out of the
law of God. Therefore, so far as the people received Christ, so far their self
righteousness and traditional religion would fall.

This excited them to make a further attempt for rest. They now denied that
Christ had fulfiled the prophesies concerning the Messiah. But this deceived
their hope, as defamation had done before. The people were divided. Some cried
that a great Prophet had arisen among them: others, that he deceived the
people. Instead of rest, they found confusion and disappointment. And in
addition to their anxiety, Christ produced infallible evidence of his divine
mission. He wrought miracles publicly, tending to the glory of God, and good of
man: and these, unattended with art and juggling. By a word, he restored a
withered hand: by a voice, he raised the dead: and by authoritive command, he
cast out a blind and dumb Devil. At this the people were amazed, and said -- is
not this the son of David? They acknowledged him the Messiah, the seed of
David, prophesied of.

The Scribes and Pharisees were now more offended than ever: ye see, said they,
how we gain nothing, the world has gone out after him. Their religion, riches
and honor, were at stake; and must necessarily give place to the reception
given to Christ. Therefore, although they acknowledged the power of God, in
casting out Devils, by their sons; yet they disallowed it in Christ; and arose
as one man, and came forward among the people, crying -- This fellow does not
cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils.

Here they seek rest, but find none. This is such a barefaced piece of spite
and malice, that Christ calls them a generation of vipers. Reason, was cast off
her seat: and they were conedmned out of their own mouths. If an house or
kingdom be divided against itself, how can it stand? If Satan be divided, how
shall his kingdom stand? -- They first, denied the operations of the Spirit of
God; and then asserted impossibilities to support it.

This drove them into another barren place for rest; they next, carved out for
God: Master, we would see a sign from thee. They required him to work another
miracle, by their prescription, to prove those divine. He positively denied
them. For, if they would not believe in miracles, wrought in God's way, neither
would they, if wrought in their own way. And the dignity of the divine
perfections, forbid the working of miracles at human direction; or, for the
gratification of caviling and malicious spirits. This left them, seeking rest
and finding none. Thus, our text appears to be direct matter of fact; as
applied to the spiteful temper, and malicious conduct of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

And indeed, this is the case with all men, who go out against Christ, and his
gospel: they are like a troubled sea, never at rest. The light of reason and
conscience, continually disturb their resting places: they fear their own
reasoning; but are too wilful to attend to the checks of conscience, and the
evidence of revelation. Hence, they are always busy after rest; but to no good
purpose; except, to greater conviction and more disappointment.

Such is the state of those, who deny the being of a God: for the invisible
things of God are clearly understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and godhead; so that the very heathen are without excuse, for not
glorifying him as God. Here the atheist seeks rest against the works of
creation and Providence, and consequently, in dry places.

The deist also, who denies the divinity of Christ, and of his gospel, must
oppose sound reason and conscience; must run against the fulfillment of the
prophesies, and miracles, wrought evidently by the power of God; and these,
attested by the enemies of Christ, and sealed by the blood of his friends.

This class of rest-seekers, arise out of loose and profane characters; who, to
obtain rest against conscience, make partial interpretation of scripture; and
consequently partial denial of God's word. But certainly they may as well deny
the whole, as a part. The absurdity of a partial denial, is so obvious, that
they soon cast off fear, deny, the whole, and commence deists in full.

Human reason, unassisted by revelation or the influences of the Spirit of God,
is now their only guide. That reason, which at best, can only convince us that
we have lost the rectitude of our nature, are under the displeasure of God, and
unable of ourselves to return to our duty: that reason, which is but an
imperfect guide in any of our worldly concerns: I say, that reason is all they
can bring against infinite wisdom, and those evidences, which have obliged them
to retreat step by step into the barren fields of carnal wisdom.

They can now, only carve out for God. Carnal reason says, the scripture, with
all the fulfillment of prophesies, miracles wrought, and attested by credible
history, is no sufficient evidence of the divinity of Christ. Therefore (like
the Jews in the same case of inconsistency) they say, Master, we would see a
sign from thee. They deny credit to the gospel; unless God will condescend to
prove those prophesies and miracles, true; and those witnesses, who seal-the
truth with their blood, true witnesses, according to their prescribing. But it
is observable, that such condescension is below the dignity of God. No sign
shall be given, says Christ. Those given were sufficient: if they receive not
those given in God's way, neither would they though given in their own way. If
they believe not Moses and the prophets, neither would they believe, though one
arose from the dead.

Such persons are in the most alarming situation: they stand upon the brink of
hell: one step further in this way after rest, will be irrecoverable. If they
(like the Jews) make God's refusal to gratify their cavilling, the ground of
resolute and continued rejection, of the gospel evidence; they may probably
remain here, until the great day of account. Such grounded rejection,
effectually bars the door against any further conviction; and consequently,
damnation must follow.

To this, doubtless, Christ had a particular reference in the words before us.
It was the precise case of the Scribes and Pharisees, to whom they were spoken.
And we have reason to fear, it is the case of many of this day; who are going
out against Christ, in the boast of their own reason: they walk through dry
places, seeking rest and finding none.

And indeed, it is observable, that such is the case of every person in some
degree, while under spiritual illumination and conviction. The carnal mind and
Satan, will cast every possible objection, in the way of believing: hence,
various turnings after a quiet conscience; but no seeking rest, against light
of evidence and conscience, can give peace in the way or salvation in the end.

Hence we see, that a man may go far against Christ, with an unclean spirit:
and yet find no rest to his soul. -- This leads us to consider the effect of
this fruitless search, or the nature of the man's resolve, viz:

Thirdly, I will return into my house from whence I came out.

Here we note, that all who walk through dry places seeking rest, do not come
to this last resolve. Many, who have been under great spiritual alarms, and
resisted for a long time, have finally seen their error, repented, and received
the truth in the love of it.

Christ is here showing the state of the infidel Jews, who rejected him
wilfully, against clear light and strong evidence. We must therefore consider
the man as coming to this last desperate resolve; I will return to my house,
from whence I came out.

Two things are here worthy of consideration, viz. The nature of this resolve,
and the matter or end resolved upon.

With regard to the nature of this resolve, it is observable, that it is a
fixed and settled determination, without any proviso, limitation or condition.
He does not propose to wait longer, or seek further; he does not desire more
light; but is satisfied: and his resolve is emphatically decisive -- I will
return. I will seek no further: I will weary myself no more in this perplexing
search after rest: it is all a delusion, the work of an unclean spirit -- By
Beelzebub he casts out devils. The resolve is wilful and obstinate: he acts
not the part of a wise man, who embraces the truth, because the evidence is too
strong for him: but finding light and evidence too strong, he resolves to fly
from it: his works are works of darkness, and will not bear the light. He
knowingly and wilfully flies from his conviction; rejects the fulfillment of
prophesies; denies miracles wrought by the Spirit of God: and these,
acknowledged fact, by the enemies of the gospel; and sealed by the blood of its
friends. Thus the Jews, though they could not deny fact; yet wilfully cast off
their convictions, and demanded a sign, hoping to pacify their own consciences,
and blind the eyes of the people. Hence Christ says, ye serpents, ye generation
of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell.

This wilful resolve effectually bars the door against any further operations
of the Spirit of God. The man dies in obstinacy: not for want of mercy in God,
or merit in Christ: but by denying the Spirit of God, he shuts the door against
any reception of a spirit of conviction. And God has said, that such despite
toward the Spirit of his grace; shall not be forgiven, neither in this world,
neither in the world to come.

This resolve is no rash, inconsiderate act, without time to reflect; but it is
after going through dry places, seeking rest and finding none: after repeated
warnings and invitations; and after sufficient and reasonable evidence of the
truth. Therefore, the resolve is wilful and deliberate, mature and decisive,
against the light of conscience, revelation, and the influences of the Spirit.

The matter resolved on is, that he will go back, into his house from whence he
came out.

In order to know what this house is, we must enquire from whence the man set
out, viz. from a state of a carnal rest and security. A man before conviction,
feels very easy and secure: this is the state, or house, of every unawakened
sinner; for Satan takes care to keep it unmolested, until drove out by the
power of God. Hence our Savior says, when a strong man, armed, keeps his
palace, his goods are in peace. But when a stronger than he shall come upon
him, and overcome him, he takes from him all his armor wherein he trusted,
and divides his spoils. The man is at rest, while under the darkness of the
carnal heart, and Satan's influences: but when Christ comes upon him, being the
stronger man, his peace is destroyed. And he goes out against Christ, with a
carnal mind, assisted by Satan; which makes it an unclean spirit, walking
through dry places, seeking rest and finding none. And at length, rather than
submit to the light of evidence, and conviction of conscience, he violently and
wilfully casts off all restraint, and returns like the dog to his vomit: He
goes back to his house, or state of carnal rest, from whence he came out.

He says, all this alarm and fear is contrary to reason and common sense: a
piece of priestcraft to blind mankind: a mere enthusiasm, and delusion of the
Devil. All the influences of the spirit of God, he imputes to Beelzebub, the
Prince of Devils: and embraces his influences and dictates, as congenial to his
own perverse reason and carnal heart. He is determined, no longer to be a slave
to this uneasy mind: therefore, violently shuts his eyes, against the evidence
of the gospel, and influences of the spirit of God. Thus, the man falls asleep
in spiritual death: the way is no longer open to conviction: he can have
nothing of a spiritual nature to disturb his conscience; and God forbids us
even to pray for him. The Devil smiles; his palace and his goods are again in
peace: and for his own sake, he will take care that all things are agreeable to
the man's state of carnal security, for the better deluding others into this
state of final and irrecoverable ruin. -- This leads,

Fourthly, To consider the preparations made in this house, for the return of
this unclean spirit: -- And when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and
garnished.

This heart, or house of carnal rest, he finds empty: it has been left for a
season, while he has been wandering through dry places, seeking rest and
finding none. Christ, by his Spirit, had disturbed the strong man's palace: his
goods had been greatly discomforted; the spirit of Christ always makes the
carnal heart, the devil's kingdom, fear and tremble. Hence he went out against
Christ with pride and malice; and spitefully resolved against him.

But this state or house is now emphatically empty of the Spirit of God. The
man imputes all the influences and strivings of the holy Spirit, unto
Beelzebub; and thus shuts the door against himself: there is no room left for
further conviction. That this house becomes empty of the means of grace, as
such: they operate on him directly the reverse; they drive him further from
God. Thus the house is empty of all good; just fit for himself, or a blasphemer
of the Holy Ghost, and determined servant of Satan.

This house is also swept. This implies, a total absence of all spiritual
things; they are as swept out; there are no remains of the Spirit's operations;
but his conscience is as scared with an hot iron. It cannot feel the power of
spiritual things; he accounts them as dross and dung; as delusion, and
enthusiasm of the Devil. He has no feelings or conceptions of spiritual things:
but God has said of him, he is joined unto idols, let him alone. Thus he not
only denies the Holy Ghost; but God leaves him to the delusion of his own
heart, and his gods.

Again, This house is not only empty and swept; but garnished. It is made a
place of delight: not merely empty of disagreeable objects; but adorned with
many things, which give pleasurable entertainment. Although it is most certain,
that Satan can give no spiritual joy, or any approbation of conscience: yet he
can do much to stupify it. He blinds the mind; paints sin in gay colors; and
adds delight to sensual gratifications. Hence, the man feels no pain, from
bitter reflections on the turpitude of his heart and life. The Devil smiles; the
man is pleased; and carnal pleasures circulate in one continued round of
painted vice and diabolical rage; until he awakes to new sensations before the
throne of God. -- Or, in the style of our text; as men, when they set out on
family life, take care to have a dwelling fitted to their circumstances; that
it is clean, painted and adorned, for an agreeable reception: so this man, by
his own act, finds this house empty and swept of all good; and Satan, his
spiritual husband, has garnished it with diabolic pleasure, for his reception.
-- This leads us,

Fifthly, To consider the man's conduct, in taking a renewed possession of his
house.

He takes with himself, seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they
enter in, and dwell there.

This man does not return alone: he is not content to live in solitary mood;
but seeks company. He has long been restrained, by notions of priestcraft, and
religious whims (as he terms them) but now, having come to his reason again, is
determined to make up for lost time.

It is almost universally true, that persons, who have had great illumination
and strong convictions; when they lose these convictions, prove much more loose
and profane, than before. But the man who maliciously denies the Spirit of God,
and wilfully returns to his former state of sin and security; has no restraint
of conscience left: but spurred on by Satan, he gives full loose to all his
carnal appetites. Natural fear and ambition are all that control his
conscience, from acting out the spite and malice of devils, according to his
ability.

Hence, he is said to take seven other spirits more wicked than himself. It is
observable, that seven is used in scripture often, as a certain number for an
uncertain; thus seven devils are said to be cast out of Mary Magdalene. It is
also used, as a number of perfection: thus, we read of seven candlesticks,
seven viols -- trumpets -- seals, plagues, etc. Thus his taking seven other
spirits, implies, that he is totally left of God's Spirit; given up to the
dominion of devils; and the lusts of his own hard heart. He is now a fit object
for the Devil to vent his malice upon, against Christ: and certainly, he will
spare no pains, to raise his triumph against the Redeemer's kingdom. The man is
pleased with the service, and never more delighted than when railing and
scoffing at religion. Thus we find those, who have apostatised from the
Cristian profession, always harping on the inconsistency and unreasonableness
of the Christian religion: scoffing at the convictions of the Spirit, and
terrors of conscience, as mere enthusiasm and delusion: boasting of their own
knowledge, and high seize of living according to reason: consequently
endeavoring to lead others into the like courses; and thus running merrily
down the broad way of perdition.

The man, being thus given up to his own lusts, and the influences of Satan, is
said to take other spirits more wicked than himself. They are exceedingly
different from his feelings and endeavors before, and while under the
awakenings of the Spirit of God. He has now no spiritual restraint; but every
evil passion reigns uncontrouled. Like a bow doubly strained, he springs back
with double force. Having been restrained by conviction, and obliged to seek
rest in dry places, he returns, determined to make up lost time. His soul is
possessed with devils and lusts: his heart is hell in the beginning; pressing
fast on to perfection of misery.

These spirits are said to enter in, and dwell there. -- Before his wilful
apostasy, they were not settled and immovable, but were often disturbed by the
spirit of Christ: but now they are settled and fixed in the heart: not for a
month, or year; but for eternity. The man is left a prey to his lusts. He has
done despite to the Spirit of all grace: and God says (concerning him) there
remains no more sacrifice for sins.

I now pass to the last division of the words, viz.

Sixthly, And the last state of that man is worse than the first.

This is evident at first blush: he is now unalterably fixed in a state of sin
and security. At first, he was not absolutely determined against Christ, and
his salvation; but lay open to conviction: his heart admitted the Spirit, and
acknowledged his power; else, would never gone out against him, seeking rest.
That he has had his day of grace, even as others, and might have accepted: but
his proud heart would not bow to the cross of Christ. He valued his blind
reason, more than a divine revelation, and conviction of conscience. He
violently shut his eyes against the light: and with spite, rejected the Holy
Ghost; imputing his influences to Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. He hated
God, and the works of his Spirit: and therefore rejected them and went back to
his house from whence he came out: and finally, with other Spirits, has joined
against God, and his method of salvation.

Thus, he has sinned with his eyes open, and has no cloak for his sin. Pride,
infidelity and malice, are deep rooted in his heart, and prevent any further
convictions: the heart is bared by a wilful obstinacy. The Spirit, by which
alone God works efficaciously on the heart, he contemptuously calls Beelzebub:
consequently, the Holy Ghost can operate on him in no character but of the
Devil: and as such, must drive him further off from God; and plunge him deeper
into the gulf of hell. Agreeable to this, St. Paul says, it is impossible for
those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
partakers of the Holy Ghost, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance. -- not impossible for the want of merit in Christ, or good will in
God; but because he does despite to the Spirit of Christ, and computes his
influences to the evil Spirits; by which, he must drive the man from God: no
other effect can follow. Hence the man cannot be brought home to God on the
gospel plan; consequently, in no way at all: there is no way open for saving
conviction.

Moreover, this sin of wilful and malicious rejection of the Spirit, is of such
heinous nature, that God has declared, it shall not be forgiven neither in this
world, neither in the world to come. Thus, in whatever point of light we view
this last state of the man, we find it worse than the first.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. WE learn, that no striving against our convictions, and the gospel method
of salvation, can bring peace to the soul: yet, this search after rest, will
have very different effects upon different persons.

All mankind have natural desires of happiness, and aversion to misery. Hence,
under awakenings and convictions of the Spirit, they are in continual search of
rest. At such time, there is no peace in the soul: the strong man is disturbed
by the man who is stronger than he. Awakened sinners labor under a deep sense
of guilt, and direful apprehensions of punishment: to which we add, that the
Devil will by no means be idle on such occasions: his kingdom is invaded. While
Christ awakens on the one hand, Satan will strive on the other, by fallacy and
cunning, to lull into security, or despondence; or else, drive the man to
violent resistance. Thus, there is a constant uproar in the soul: contending
passions distract the man.

Some go out against their convictions, with strong passions and violent
efforts: others, more mild and trembling: but all, for a season, go through dry
places seeking rest and finding none. Infidelity and pride, will not close with
offered mercy: yet, no man can at once cast off all conviction, and persuade
himself that the influences of the Spirit are a falsehood and delusion of the
Devil. Consequently he hurries from argument to argument; from one ground of
trust to another; that, if possible, he may quiet conscience; have some merit
in his salvation; and maintain his carnal pride: or, as he flatters himself,
support the dignity of human reason, and free-agency. Although reason,
scripture and an awakened conscience, constantly stare him in the face, and
declare his utter inability to save himself; yet the Devil and carnal heart,
extol human reason and natural ability; press on to false argumentation and
works of self-righteousness. But alas, instead of rest to his soul, he finds
dreadful and alarming disappointment.

Just like a man famishing with thirst, in a dry and thirsty desert; who runs
from valley to valley, and to every place which has an appearance of a spring,
that he may drink and save life: but none is to be found So the awakened
sinner, runs to every thing but Christ, which has any appearance of possibility
or plausibility; but to no good purpose; except to clearer views of himself, as
wretched and undone: the further he goes in these dry places, the more
miserable he finds himself.

This fruitless search for happiness out of Christ, has very different effects
on the human heart.

Some grow fretful and angry against God, themselves, and fellow-men: they
resolve to bear these disappointments no longer; accuse God of partiality;
spite religion; abuse its professors; deride the operations of the divine
Spirit; call the awakenings of sinners priestcraft and delusion of the Devil;
violently cast off their convictions as diabolic; wilfully return to their
house, like the dog to his vomet; and run seven fold faster, in the way of
perdition, than heretofore. These are eternally lost, as we have just shown.

Others, seeking rest and finding none, grow melancholy, and fall into a kind
of mopish despondency: they tease themselves and dishonor God. They expected to
have found peace long ago; but are constantly deceived: their state grows
darker and darker: God will not regard them: He is a hard master: and they
cannot see, that it answers any purpose to serve him. In this state, they bury
their talent; neglect the means and advantages put into their hands; and set
down in the spiritual desert, purposing to go no further; but if they die they
die; if they live they live.

These are proud beggars, who serve God merely for hire; and not receiving
wages, they leave off work; accuse God of partiality, and backwardness to
pardon. Yet, in their fretful submission, they flatter themselves with gospel
humiliation and resignation. The whole, is melancholy fretfulness, and gloomy
despondence. And the ordinary means of conviction being neglected, renders it
very difficult to renew them unto repentance.

Again, others, through a naturally careless and indolent frame of mind, grow
remiss: or else, through a too confident disposition, think they have obtained
pardon, when they have not. The consequence in both is, that they grow dull in
duties; cold in affection; and in great measure, insensible to their former
fears and convictions: and so, live either in a careless, or over confident
round of morals. Such falls from awakenings, give great reason to fear, that
the spirit of conviction will not speedily return.

But again, this search after rest, has an opposite effect on others: they grow
more watchful, more fearful, more engaged to look for, and perform duty. They
see and feel the righteousness of God, in putting off: yet, like the
importunate widow, with the Judge, they incessantly ask and seek. They let
nothing divert them from the appointed means of salvation. While they
acknowledge the dog unworthy of the children's bread, they plead for the crumbs
which fall from the master's table.

These are humble beggars: though they see want, they do not feel deserving.
They cry for mercy: and any crumb, from the table of God's grace, is received
with thankfulness. -- This is the only proper use of our convictions. God is
glorified: the sinner is humbled, and in due time, may hope to be exalted.

Thus we find no resisting of the illuminations of the Spirit of God, can bring
peace to the soul: and yet, this search after rest, will have very different
effects on different persons: of which, one only, is absolutely fatal. All
others are pardonable; though in some cases difficult and improbable,

2. We infer, that great danger attends the setting up of our wills, in
opposition to the light of conscience and revelation.

This dethrones conscience, and denies Christ. It is a fearful step toward,
and near approach to, that sin which cannot be forgiven; yet much indulged in
the present degenerate age. Some openly deny a divine revelation; and many
others do it implicitly: setting up human reason against infinite wisdom. They
will not admit a revelation from God; because they cannot comprehend it: which,
if they could, would be a sufficient reason to disbelieve it. But such is the
pride and corruption of the human heart, that all religion must be brought up
to their standard. Not feeling themselves totally depraved, they infer, that
man may save himself: or at least, do that good which will obligate God to save
him.

Hence they walk by their own wills, rather than a revelation: strive to stifle
all convictions; and traverse all the fields of false argumentation, to prove
them absurd and ridiculous. No religion, no preaching, no convictions, or
experiences are of any consequence, unless squared by their rule, and made
subservient to their interest.

However unnoticed, this conduct is certainly highly criminal: and, though
gilded with the name of rational, that reason must be exceedingly perverse,
which is subject to the human will, and repugnant to the God of reason. To
which we add, that such conduct is a near approach to the unpardonable sin: the
next step will be irrecoverable. Let them but decidedly resolve to follow this
reason, in opposition to the light of revelation, and an awakened conscience;
then, the nature of things, and a divine revelation determine them eternally
lost So that it appears exceedingly dangerous to set up our wills, in
opposition to the light of conscience and revelation, and force our reason
against infinite wisdom.

3. We learn the peculiar nature of that sin against the Holy Ghost, which
cannot be forgiven.

A man may commit many sins and of great aggravation: he may be a long time
under spiritual conviction, and fall from this conviction into his former state
of ease and security: yet not commit the unpardonable sin. Though most
certainly, such sinning and such apostatising are exceedingly heinous in the
sight of God; and if persisted in, without repentance, will bring final death.
Yet, in their nature, they may be pardonable.

But this sin against the Holy Ghost, which is unto death, is of a peculiar
color: it is of the blackest die: It is a sin of knowledge, against great
light, repeated warnings, and strong evidence. It is a wilful, deliberate
contempt of the holy Spirit: a perverse denial of his operations, and malicious
imputation of them unto infernal spirits. By Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils, he casts out Devils, said the Scribes.

This most effectually bars the door against any further conviction; for the
spirit can operate on the man, in no character but of the Devil; consequently,
he lives at ease and security in sin. Yet, though he finds his house empty,
swept and garnished, his last end is worse than the first. As he feels no
troublesome convictions; so on the contrary he has no approbation of
conscience; therefore no real happiness. His pleasures are as the madness of
laughter, which lead down to death. He lives merely to fill up the measure of
his sins, that God, in ages to come, may make more full and glorious displays
of his power, in his eternal damnation. -- Therefore,

4. Let us examine ourselves, how we have conducted under our awakenings.

It is observable that we have had great sight, and great opportunity to know
God, and the truth of the gospel. We have strong proof of the fulfillment of
ancient prophesies and miracles, wrought in confirmation of the gospel of Jesus
Christ. The present dispersion of the Jews, their continued infidelity, and
state of religious polity, are a standing fulfillment of prophesy, and a living
miracle, in proof of the gospel.

The miracles of Christ, together with his last sign to the Jews, the sign of
the prophet Jonas, are attested by the enemies of the cross, and sealed by the
blood of its friends. It is ridiculous to suppose the enemies should
acknowledge, or the friends lay down their lives in proof of what they knew to
be a falsehood. That, allowing men common sense and common honesty, the facts
are true beyond reasonable doubt.

In addition to this, every one of us, who have arrived to years of discretion,
have felt the Spirit of God, witnessing on our hearts the truth of the gospel
revelation. But how have we conducted under this light and knowledge? have we
not shut our eyes, stopped our ears, and hardened our hearts, lest we should
see, understand, and be converted? have we not considered the service of God as
burdensome; of but little or no importance; a mere piece of policy and
priestcraft? Have we not considered seasons of spiritual awakenings, as
enthusiasm and delusion, detrimental to the honor, pleasures, and interest of
mankind? And have we not gone out against those convictions, with an unclean
spirit, designing to make them appear absurd and rediculous; and strove, by
false argumentation, to set aside the gospel method of salvation? And though we
have walked through dry places, seeking rest and finding none; yet, have we not
perversely followed our search, against light and reason, rather than embrace
the truth? -- But admitting that we have received the spirit of conviction; how
often have we grieved him to depart: how often strove to cast off convictions,
and lull conscience asleep, by going to our cups, our beds, our work or
diversion? -- And while we have pretended to cherish our convictions, did not
our dullness and inattention, give reason for self-condemnation? When God has
continued us under long awakenings, and delayed to answer our requests; have we
not felt heart-risings against him; been fretful, and set down in the spiritual
desert, neglecting the means of knowing God, ourselves and our duty? -- And at
other times, have we not been proud of our spiritual seize, and imagined
that we have obtained the peace of God; when we had not so seen our own hearts,
as to mourn for the deceitfulness and wickedness thereof?

These things call for speedy and serious attention. All opposition to, or
neglect of the Spirit, is an high provocation to God; and very dangerous to our
souls. They who refuse to be brought home to God, in his way, will never come
in any; but must die without mercy.

Let us then carefully examine our hearts, reform our lives, and bring forth
fruit unto God. Let us receive the spirit of conviction, with humbling and
self-abasing thoughts; and high and admiring thoughts of the divine love and
goodness. Let us be patient under the hand of God; wait his time, and in his
way, for a blessing: knowing, that if ever we receive, or whatever good we may
receive, it is of grace; and ought to be received with thanksgiving.

5. Let all who are seeking rest, and finding none, under their convictions
immediately embrace offered mercy.

It is impossible to find an approving conscience out of Christ: it is seeking
in dry and barren places. The evidences of the spirit, and gospel truth, cannot
be destroyed by carnal argumentation: the awakened conscience will never find
rest from carnal reasoning. How full of madness, then, to procrastinate, while
Christ is knocking at the door of our hearts? It destroys peace in this life,
and risks eternal happiness in the next. Now is the accepted time, now is the
day of salvation, while the spirit is striving: but the morrow may be too late.
Death may intervene; sin may shut the door of grace; or God may say, He is
joined unto idols let him alone.

The longer we put off, so much more is God offended, so much more is Christ
slighted, and so much more the Holy Ghost is grieved. We also grow more wilful,
more stubborn, and more perverse; consequently, more likely to fall away
irrecoverably. Let us then awake to a sense of our danger, and of our duty:
cease to oppose God and his salvation. Let us no more walk through the barren
fields of beclouded reason after rest: but let us consider our convictions as
the work of God; and humbly accept of offered mercy; fervently praying God,
that our convictions may be effectual to saving conversion.

But if any of you are resolved to go on in the way of your own hearts, and in
the sight of your own eyes, adding sin to sin; to make your brows as brass, and
your hearts as adamant; to stifle all conviction, and go back to your house of
carnal rest; then, go on -- take your own way. But be assured, that the day of
the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come: He
will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold on judgment: He
will render vengeance to his enemies, and reward them that hate him: He will
make his arrows drunk with blood; with the blood of the slain, from the
beginning of revenge upon the enemy Then shall the brazen brow be broke; and
the adamantine heart will burst into ten thousand pieces: stifled convictions
will have a fearful resurrection, as so many arrows of death, to torment the
soul throughout the endless ages of eternity.

Awake then, oh procrastinating sinner, awake! Be wise, and consider your
latter end. Improve the present moments, and accept of offered mercy. Drop all
your sins, your sorrows, your fears and doubts at the footstool of the cross
of Jesus Christ. Arise with him to newness of life, and bring forth fruit unto
God. Then the riches of God's grace will be glorified in your pardon and
salvation: you will be accepted in Christ the beloved, and admitted into the
society of the church of the first born of God in Heaven, to raise the
trophies, and sing the triumphs of redeeming love. -- Which, may God grant for
the sake of Jesus Christ, our ascended Lord, and Redeemer. -- AMEN.

ERRATA. -- Page 5, line 7, for the man, read a man; do. p. 7, l. 15. -- p. 6,
l. 11, for exercises, ex^rcisms -- p. 11, l. 20, for righteousness, righteous
-- p. 12, l. 20, in powers erases -- p. 22, l. 15, for or, as -- p. 28, l. 8,
for computes, imputes -- same p. l. 9, craft the.


