REFLECTIONS ON THE STATE OF THE UNION.

"Si quid novisti rectius istis,
"Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum."
PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF MATTHEW CAREY

MAY 9. -- M.DCC.XCII.

REFLECTIONS, etc.
"Si quid novisti rectius istis,
"Candidus imperti; si non his utere mecum."
NUMBER I.
DISPASSIONATE enquiries concerning the public interests, are attended ^ith
salutary effects, in every time and in every nation. In a country like that,
which we inhabit, such examinations are unusually interesting, and may be
rendered, it is believed, peculiarly beneficial.

To create the disposition requisite to the proper acceptance of such
disquisitions, it is necessary to call to the public mind the variant
characters of the several states when they were provinces of a more extended
empire -- the causes which produced that difference of character -- the means
which were devised to increase and perpetuate that variation and the ends to
which those characteristic differences were intended to be instrumental.
Reflections duly serious upon these circumstances will remind the people of the
several states, that they are natural friends, whose amity and union have been
too often viewed with jealousy by rival eyes. They will perceive the wisdom and
the high duty of cultivating a spirit of mutual allowance and concession; and a
careful examination of their actual situation will convince them, that greater
blessings will result from a perfect understanding, and sedulous cultivation of
their interests at home, than from almost any arrangements, which the
conceptions of foreign nations will probably lead them to propose.

The consideration of our present situation and of some interesting
circumstances which have grown out of it, is the object of this investigation,
in which the benefits to be derived from a liberal intercourse with foreign
nations will not be undervalued. As no apology is necessary for such an
endeavor, a miscellaneous enquiry into several matters, which are always
deeply interesting to nations, and into others which have resulted from our
public operations, will be prosecuted without further introduction.

Concerning the exports of the united states.

It has been apprehended by persons of observation, at home, and the idea has
prevailed in the councils of a foreign nation See the report of a committee of
the lords of the British privy council, pubished in the gazettes (of March) in
Charleston, South Carolina.
, that the exports of the united states for the year preceding October, 1790,
were greater in value than could be expected again, by reason of the prices for
grain which were consequent on the scarcity in France. The exports of the
subsequent year will aid us in te^^ing this opinion, which attracts the more
attention, because it is sometimes suggested that agriculture and trade have
been injured by the measures of the government in regard to the public debt.
The first return of exports, on which this conjecture was founded, includes a
term of thirteen months and a half, and amounted to 20,415,966 dollars. From
this aggregate value a ninth part is to be deducted, to equalize it with one
year's exportation, which reduces the sum to 18,147,526 dollars. It is very
well known, that the prices of our produce through the year lately returned,
and which ended with September 1791, had ^^llen to their antecedent rates, and
it will be perceived on a comparison, that our exports exceeded in their
aggregate value those of the former year. The last return, exclusively of two
quarters of Charleston, was Dollars 17,571,551 Those two quarters, at the rate
of the corresponding term in the preceding year, would be about 700,000
Dollars. 18,271,551

There remains not, therefore, the least cause to doubt, that our total
exportations were eighteen millions and a quarter, and consequently more than
in the antecedent year. It is to be observed, too, that the high prices which
were current through the time of the first return, must have produced an
exportation of all the grain, that could be got to market, and none of the old
crop could have been left as usual, to sell with the new. The obvious effect of
this must have been an unusual deduction from the exports in the last year. The
valuation of the exports of these states immediately before the revolution is
not p^^^^^^ly ascertained: but the whole exportations from N. America,
including the remaining colonies, Newfoundland, Bermuda, and the Bahamas, were
computed to have been in 1771* dollars, 15,280,000. In these were comprised the
shipments between those islands and the main, and from province to province, as
every vessel, which departed from one American port for another, was obliged to
clear out her cargo, as if destined for a foreign country. It will appear to be
safe to subtract for the difference produced by these two circumstances, one
half of the former exports, when it is remembered that two-thirds of the
quantity of tonnage is employed in the intercourse between the various parts of
the present union, which is engaged in that with foreign nations; and that the
British Newfoundland fishery alone, was estimated at more than 2,200,000
dollars in 1775. The increase of the tonnage employed in the foreign trade
affords another proof of the increment of our exports. About 330,000 tons were
laden in the present united states in the year 1770, part of which were
destined for ports now within the union. About 600,000 tons have been loaded in
each of the two last years for foreign ports, though our exports being in a
much greater degree manufactured, are now contained in a smaller compass: and
boards, scantling, and staves, which are our most bulky commodities, have not
increased in half the ratio of the tonnage employed.

An addition may be also made to the amount of the return for the increased
supplies in provisions, cordage, and other materials, for the use and outfit of
foreign ships. Since the prices of salt provisions have been reduced below
those of Ireland, and many articles applicable to ships' use, have been
manufactured here, this item has become very considerable; and so far as the
articles are sold to foreigners, they are essentially exports.

Under this head, the increased number of ships sold to foreign nations, may be
fairly mentioned, and although much has been said of the number formerly
disposed of abroad, it is not doubted that a greater value was sold in that way
in the time of the last return. Of this fact some further illustration will
probably be given in the sequel. It will be sufficient to observe here, that
the whole quantity of tonnage built, and native vessels repaired the last year,
exceed in value one million of dollars.

The enlarged consumption made within our country by foreign persons of every
description, who are certainly much more numerous than they formerly were, is
as profitable to the country, as the same value in exports would have been.
This item will appear to be very considerable, when the expenditures of foreign
ministers, consuls, transient and resident foreigners, fleets and seamen, mind.

The export trade of the united states and the great increase of the home
consumption have placed the American producers on a very advantageous footing.
The competition which exists in our markets, between the purchasers for the
account of foreigner, of various nations, for our own merchants, for the great
consumption in the seaports and parts adjacent to the coasts, and for the use
of the manufacturers, together with the occasional shipments made on their own
accounts by the southern planters, by the millers of the middle states, and by
the owners of the eastern fishing vessels, afford the cultivators and fishermen
so many alternatives, that they can always obtain the best prices which
circumstances will justify. In short, these several demands, at once various,
steady, and extensive, efficiently support our agriculture: and though peculiar
enterprise and faculties in commerce and manufactures, the power of capital,
and an intimate knowledge of our trade and interior system, enable a particular
nation to participate largely in the exports of the united states, the
remainder of the world receive from us a very considerable value, and the
variety of demand which the destination of our exports proves to exist, affords
us certain relief from the consequences of the commercial errors of any of
those countries, whose citizens are our consumers. Whenever such errors shall
occur -- or so far as they may have already taken place, to diffuse a knowledge
of our resources among all nations, to inspire them with confidence in our laws
and modes of dealing, and to convert our commodities by manufactures, into
every shape which their occasions may require, will prove the efficacious
corrective, by enabling us to obtain from wise nations a favorable market for
our productions.

It is satisfactory to observe the regular increase of manufactured goods in
our returns of exported commodities. The number in each of the two last years
is upwards of one third, in a list which amounts to near three hundred article.
Hence we may infer, that the time is really arrived, when foreign trade is
increased and enlivened by home manufactures. This idea, together with the
domestic commerce produced by them, will be more particularly noticed in
another place.

Concerning the manufactures of the united states.

In considering this subject it will be unnecessary to adduce any arguments to
influence the judgment of the eastern parts of the union. Many of our citizens
near the seacoast of the middle states are equally convinced of the beneficial
effects of manufactures. The cultivators in the southern and western country,
and a respectable proportion of our mercantile citizens are apprehensive of
injury to themselves and to their country from the pursuit of this object.
These are two descriptions of persons whom it is in every view our duty to
satisfy, if the truth and reason will permit; and it is principally from a due
attention to them, that the subject i^ proposed to be examined here.

An opinion has prevailed that the southern states will be sacrificed to the
eastern, and in some degree to the middle states, by the plan of manufactures.
It is plain, however, that as the soil of the eastern states is not equal to
the production of a sufficiency of provisions and raw materials for their own
use, they must resort to the more southern states for several raw materials and
for new supplies of provisions. It is known, too, that some valuable articles
for manufactures cannot be produced but in the southern states, such as cotton,
and indigo, and that tobacco is almost confined to them. The southern states
and western country will have considerable advantages in the support which the
home market of the manufacturers will give at all times, and especially in time
of war, (when freights will be high, and shipping scarce) to their agricultural
and landed productions. Even now, in profound peace, it is the case. Hemp was
delivered in the ports of the middle states, from the lands of the southern
states, at less than five cents per lb. in 1791. Nothing would have kept it up
to that rate, but the rope and twine manufactories of the middle and eastern
states. The breweries of Philadelphia draw nearly as much of their barley from
the Chesapeak as they derive from the lands of Pennsylvania. These and other
facts show the beneficial beginning of things. The manufacturers of ships and
cordage throughout the unio^ procure from the southern states all their tar,
pitch, turpentine, oil of turpentine, and rosin. The ports of Philadelphia and
New York, take three-fourths of their ship timber from them, justly preferring
vessels of live oak and red cedar to all others. The owners of the coal mines
of Virginia, enjoy the monopoly of all the supplies for the manufacturers of
the more northern states, who live in the sea ports: a demand which is
increasing rapidly. No lead mine of any consequence is yet worked, except one
near the superior waters of James river. The southern states abound with iron,
and have much more fuel of all kinds than the northern states, and they have
streams for the most powerful water works. Few or no very abundant deposits of
coal have been yet discovered further north or east than the waters of the Ohio
and Chesapeak, even in internal situations. The iron manufactures of the united
states are already important in value, and immensely so in point of utility, or
rather of necessity. Farms, manufactories, shipping, fisheries, fleets, and
armies, all demand them. In short, the all-important landed interest would
languish, and its progress in prosperity would be retarded in the counties of
the southern states, even near the sea, if our present manufactures were to be
abolished, and all future establishments of that kind were to be given up. But
their inland and western counties cannot be supported, unless manufactures
shall be promoted and introduced among them. In the counties of Pennsylvania
beyond the Allegany mountain, are 63,000 inhabitants, and probably 10,000 of
these are farmers. The wool of that country is yet very inconsiderable -- their
furs are more abundant. From these two raw materials, no less than 10,140 wool
hats, and 2,200 fur hats are manufactured yearly in thirty-three hatters'
shops. Sail cloth, (which, when manufactured, would be worth 30 cents per lb.)
could be made at Pittsburg, Winchester in Virginia, Hillsborough, and Salisbury
in North Carolina, Camden in South Carolina, and Augusta in Georgia, out of
hemp, the value of which, there, does not exceed 4 or 5 cents. To bring a ton
of hemp to the sea ports from those towns, except Augusta, costs from 35 to 40
per cent. of its value. To bring a ten weight of sail cloth from the same
places to the same ports would not cost above 6 or 8 per cent. and the
manufacturers' provisions and fuel are attended with similar savings. Deduct
for a moment the demand of foreign commerce from both Alexandria and
Winchester, and the latter would appear to be most vigorous and flourishing;
because it manufactures more, having not so high a market for its provisions
and raw materials. These observations apply with equal force to the whole state
of Vermont and to all our interior country. The nation that supplies us with
hempen, flaxen, and iron manufactures, takes immense quantities of hemp, flax,
and iron from Russia. These Russian raw materials are purchased at the eastern
extremity of the Baltic, are transported to another country and manufactured
there, are brought ^^ther, and haled through bad roads, 50, 10, 200, and 300
miles into our most productive counties, which yield the requisite raw
materials. These facts powerfully incite us to foster manufactures of the same
kinds, there and elsewhere. Till that shall be the case, we shall continue to
drag those raw materials through the same bad roads, and ship them under
charges of carting and freight equal to a third, an half, and two thirds of
their value, according to the distance. The present system of neglecting and
repelling the establishment of manufactures, appears to occasion immense
deductions from the profits of our lands; and due consideration, it is
believed, would convince us, that the best interests, nay the necessities of
our landholders require the introduction of some kind of manufactory in almost
every vicinity.

The countries south of Pennsylvania are remarkably rich in fossils. Coal,
copper, iron, lead, and other minerals are found in either Maryland, Virginia,
North or South Carolina, or Georgia, or all of them. Mineral appearances occur
everywhere. The promotion of manufactures is necessary to draw these forth; and
as they have immense forests of wood, and the most powerful mill-streams, there
can be no doubt, that they will be brought into use, as soon as those means
shall be adopted.

The family manufactures of the middle and interior counties of Virginia, North
Carolina, and the interior counties of Georgia, South Carolina, and Maryland
are said to be greater in value, than the articles of foreign manufactures,
which they use; and were they universally awake to the facility, profits, and
national importance of this mode of manufacturing, they might extend it much
further, without impeding their farming operations, while, at the same time,
they would provide a new use for their agricultural productions.

A single state, Pennsylvania, has upwards of fifty paper mills, which work up
materials of no value. The manufactures from those mills are computed at two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars -- the hands employed in them do not exceed
one hundred and fifty, or two hundred. That state contains about one ninth of
the people of the united states, and their contributions to the expenses of the
government and the interest of the public debt, are consequently about 400,000
dollars. Their paper-mills, therefore, indemnify them for five-eights of their
quota! It is the duty of government to encourage the other states to do the
same, especially as it can be done by water-means, and not by men diverted from
their farms. The southern states do not want a capacity for this manufacture,
which has acquired an establishment in Maryland, and has appeared as far to the
southward as North Carolina.

It may be safely affirmed, that the manufactures of leather in the united
states exceed in value all our annual burdens. We import few or no shoes. In
each of the two last years we have procured from abroad no more than 70,000
pair of shoes and boots for 4,000,000 of people. If we use only one pai^ and a
half per annum per person, at seventy-five cents, they will amount to 4,500,000
dollars, which exceeds every demand of the general and state governments. The
hides, skins, bark, lime, thread, bristles, and wax, nay, the very heel-pegs,
are all drawn from our lands and farms. Recollecting this, and similar facts,
we cannot question the utility of manufactures to the farmers, planters, and
landed interest. If the manufacture of shoes in this country, were abolished,
our annual debt to foreign countries would be increased to an amount equal to
all our public contributions. Similar observations might be made on several
other articles, though on none to so great an extent. Cattle thrive with little
attention in the mild winters of the south, and being more woody, they have a
greater quantity of bark than most of the other states.

The manufactures of wool in Great Britain have been stated by their ministers
at L. 16,800,000 sterling -- and the simple manufactures of liquors in that
country are said to consume twenty-five millions of bushels of grain. Were
there no other proofs, we could not doubt the importance of manufacture, to the
agriculture of that country. They nourish and support it. We make up all our
wool -- our lands produce cotton with great facility; and we manufacture
liquors as easily as Britain. There is no doubt, that the latter branch already
affords to our farmers an annual market for 1,0,000 bushels of grain. This
manufacture is well understood and carried on in all the southern states.

The objection, that manufactures take the people from agriculture, is not
solid, as elsewhere observed; since women, children, horses, water, and fire,
all work at manufactures, and perform four-fifths of the labor; and as many
manufacturers migrate to the united states, it may be fairly questioned,
whether the quantity of agricultural industry is not increased by the impulse
and demand a^^sing from manufactures, though a few cultivators should follow
them. And it may be asked, whether a farmer does not r^ise the more cotton,
flax, hemp, and wool, because his wife and daughters spin and weave them, or
because a water-work spins for them?

The employment of the new medium, the public certificates (which may be taken
at L. 15,000,000 sterling) in a country that formerly had no. L 3,000,000
sterling of medium, renders manufactures necessary at the time. It may be said,
lands will employ it. But farms sold well at the time when L. 3,000,000
sterling was probably the utmost ext^nt of our medium, and cannot therefore
give employment to the additional ^^^ve millions, though they might to a part
of it. The first application of this ^api^al is intended to be made to the
manufacturing of cotton, which is pecun^ar^ to the southern state. This is one
method by which those states will be benefited by even that part of the (...)
he debt, which they do not own. On this important point more will be said ne^^
after.

More money is employed in manufacture^, than in foreign commerce, because the
gross value of ^xported articles is much less than the gross value of
manufactured articl^. Th^^ will not be doubted, when it is tem^^bered, that
shoes alone amount to several mi^^ons of dol^ars. These manufactures cannot
therefore be deemed less important to the southern ^an^^h^lders than foreign
commerce; and ^pose pr^p^^eto^s will not be disposed to neglect foreign
commerce, nor will they consider it as irrelative to their local interests.

NUMBER II. Concerning the manufactures of the united states.
IN pursuing the consideration of American manufactures as beneficial and
necessary to the southern states, it will be useful to take a cursory view of
the indications of attachment and disposition to them, which are discoverable
in that quarter.

Virginia appears to be making a greater progress in merchant mills than any
state in the union, though some are yet far before her in those beneficial
works. Maryland and Delaware which are in the southern moiety, are second only
to Pennsylvania in this branch. There is little doubt that more pig and bar
iron is made to the southward of Pennsylania, than to the northward of it. A
lead mine has been opened in Virginia which is extending its supplies through
the union, and promises fair to be commensurate with the present demand: and
there is one, which is now worked, in the territory south of the Ohio. But no
lead mines are in considerable operation in the states north or east of
Virginia, though a small beginning upon one in the western parts of
Pennsylvania is made. An association in Virginia, another in the territory
south of the Ohio, and a company in the western district of South Carolina,
have provided themselves with carding and spinning machinery on the British
plan, to manufacture their native cotton. The planters in the southern states
raise quantities of this raw material, unthought of before the war, and until
the discussions of the subject of manufactures, which took place after the
treaty of peace. The family manufactures in cotton are much greater in the four
southernmost states, than in the four eastern states. There are not wanting
considerable numbers of sheep in the five southern states, yet by the two
returns of exports, it appears that no wool has been sent from thence to
foreign markets. It has been common to receive wool in Pennsylvania from the
eastern states, though they manufacture so much, but it is not known that any
is ever received there for sale from the southern states. Wool has been
transported to Salem in North Carolina, and to Winchester in Virginia, from the
city of Philadelphia, for the hat manufactory.

There has been full as great a current of emigration of flour millers,
blacksmiths, tanners, hatters, cabinet-makers, distillers, coopers, etc. to the
southern states from those north of them, in proportion to numbers as of
farmers; so that the workshops of the middle and northern states yield a double
benefit to their fellow citizens in the south, in supplying them with
manufactures, and artizans.

There is greater variety in distillation in the four southern states than in
the four eastern -- that is, the manufactory is established on a broader basis.
It is also more certain in the south than in the north. In the latter, melasses
is the principal ingredient and being from an external source, may be lost to
the eastern distillers. Their manufactory is even now at hazard, unless they
resort to the grain of the country to the southward of them. But in the
southern states they manufacture spirits from melaises, peaches, apples,
several kinds of grain, and probably will, as their country is cleared, extend
it to the grape. This has been tried with success in the experimental way, at
Galliopolis, near the Scioto.

The legislature of North Carolina made a loan of money since the late war to
assist introduction of the paper manufactory.

An association, containing forty of the most respectable planters and farmers,
in the western district of South Carolina, has been established within a few
years for the promotion of manufactures, and agriculture. A subscription to the
amount of about 25,000 dollars has been made in the territory south of the Ohio
for the purpose of carrying on the cotton manufactory. An indication of zeal
not equalled in any middle or northern state, considering that the whole
population of the government is 30,000 whites, and 5,000 blacks.

The preparation of tar, pitch, turpentine, spirits of turpentine, and rosin,
in North Carolina and its vicinity, may be deemed a manufacture as justly as
the making of linseed oil, potash, or ordinary tanning. A very small quantity
indeed, of these articles, will be made in the states north of Virginia,
^^^^^se nature forbals; but they will, from obvious reasons, increase in the
south.

During the existance of the state impost laws, two of the southern states
(Maryland and Virginia) imposed extra tonnage, not only upon foreign ships, put
upon those of the other states, by which they evinced a strong disposition to
encourage the manufacture of ships. The same two states laid duties on the
importation of spirits manufactured in the other parts of the union.

The state of Maryland imposed considerable protecting duties to encourage
their own manufactures. The legislature of Maryland have encouraged the glass
manufactory in that state by a considerable loan. That of Virginia passed a
special act since the peace, to encourage the manufactory of snuff and tobacco.

There are more factories of cordage and cables in two of the southern states,
Maryland and Virginia, than in any two of the states of New Jersey, New York,
Connecticut, and New Hampshire. Virginia laid a duty of two-thirds of a dollar
on cordage by her state impost law.

The important manufactory of ships has become greater in each of the three
states of Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, than it now is in New
Hampshire. The southern state of Maryland manufactured in 1790 as many vessels
as any two of the northern states of New York, Connecticut, and Rhode Island.

The paper-mill in the united states, which is most remote from the sea, is to
be found in the town of Salem, in North Carolina, three hundred miles from the
sea. No such manufactu^es as those of that vill^ge (a Moravian settlement) in
the southern state of North Carolina, exist in any part of the union north of
Maryland, equally remote from the sea.

There is one scene only, in the Atlantic counties, in which coal, iron, and
waterfalls are found together in abundance. That scene, is therefore,
peculiarly qualified for the iron branch of manufactures. The city of Richmond
on the banks of James river, in Virginia, which is the place contemplated, may
be considered in a permanent view as having an incontestable natural advantage
over any more northern seaport in this interesting branch. How profitable would
it be to Virginia, were all her pig and bar iron passed under the tilt hammers
or through the rolling and slitting mills which might be erected at that place.

Some of the produce of the fisheries, as before observed, are to be deemed
manufactures. The he^^ing and shad (or river and bay) fisheries, south of
Pennsylvania are very considerable. A barrel of herrings is worth, on a medium
at the fishing places, 250 cents. The manufactu^e of the cask, the p^cking,
curing, making pickle, and trimming, amount to more than one fourth of the sum
or twenty five per centum. The cask and manu^acturing of distilled spirits from
^^l^^sses, does not amount to more than one sixth of the va^ue of the
commodity, (...) 6 2/8 per cent. A barrel of pickled fish of the southern
states may be therefore as just^^ deemed a manufacture, as a cast of country
rum. A similar comparison might be made between this article and several other
simple manufactures of the middle and eastern parts of the union. It is not
intended to discuss the propriety of granting bounties, but if they were deemed
proper grants, there are points of view in which the southern states would
appear to have a greater interest in them, th^n the eastern states.

1st. As the southern states cultivate a greater variety of raw articles -- and
are capable of producing a much larger quantity of them, all that extensive
class of bounties, which are resolvable into an encouragement to the growth of
the raw material, will be much more beneficial to them, than to the eastern
states, which are more limited both in the kinds and quantities they can bring
forward for the bounty.

2dly. The southern states having extensive and very rich interior and western
counti^s, far from navigable rivers, (which the eastern have not) and the
productions of those scenes being liable to a long and expensive land carriage,
the bounty would soon be found to enable them to bring the simple manufactures
and raw materials to the markets on the sea coasts, which they would not,
without the bounty, attempt to transport. This will not be deemed a mere
suggestion of ingenuity, when it is remembered that the British and Irish give
bounties on their fabrics, and even on the bulky articles of flour, grain, and
biscuit, to enable the exporter to deliver them with advantage in foreign
markets.

It is an obvious truth, that every thing is more valuable in proportion to the
number and extent of its uses, or the purposes to which it can be
advantageously applied. Flax, hemp, wool, silk, cotton, indigo, tobacco, hides,
iron, wood, grain, and cattle, are valuable, where they are wanted merely as
exports; but they manifestly acquire a new value, when wanted to employ,
accommodate or nourish man^facturers. In places from whence those articles
cannot be exported, without a great expense of transportation, it is very
desirable to give them this second use but in situations too interior to be
affected by the demand for exportation, and where of course they are not
required for the purposes of external commerce, this new use must be created
for them, or they will not be produced, and agriculture will consequently
languish. This view of the subject suggests the indispensable necessity of
manufactures to the prosperity of the interior and western country as before
intimated. Nor will these ideas appear, on examination, to be merely plausible
conjectures. They are no less supported by the state of things, than by
probability and reason. The towns of Washington, Pittsburg, Bedford, and
Huntingdon, in Pennsylvania, (the nearest of which is 150 miles from a sea
port, exhibit the strongest proofs, that manufactures are the best support of
the interior landed interest, and are necessary at once to the accommodation
and prosperity of the cultivators of the middle and western country. The
following table contains an account of the population of those villages, which
is not exagerated.

Washington. Pursburg. Bedford. Huntingdon. Clock and watchmakers, 1 1 Silver
smiths, 1 (...) Coopers, 1 2 1 Skin-dressers and breeches makers, 1 1 Tanners
and curriers, 1 2 1 Tailors, 2 2 3 ^abinet makers, 2 4 (...) Washington.
Pittsburg. Bedford. Huntingdon. Blacksmiths, 2 5 3 4 Shoemakers, 2 5 2 4
Hatters, 2 2 1 2 Dyers, 1 Weavers, 2 2 2 Reed makers, 1 Sadlers, 1 3 2 2
Saddletree makers, 1 Sprinningwheel makers, 1 Nailers, 1 1 Malsters and
brewers, 1 1 Potters, 1 Tinners, 1 2 Distillers, 3 1 Wheelrights, 3 1 2
Stocking weavers, 1 1 Gunsmiths, 3 Ropemakers, 1 Whitesmiths, 2 Total of
manufacturers, 32 40 15 32 Total families, The population of Washington is
unknown but it is less than that of Pittsburg.
130 40 85

It appears from this table, that in those county towns (or seats of justice)
in the interior and western parts of Pennsylvania, the necessity for
manufactures has occasioned a little congregation of artizans, in the
proportion of twenty-seven parts in one hundred, of the whole village in the
smallest instance, and in the proportion of thirty-seven parts in one hundred,
in the largest. The town of Washington, which is the most remote, and is beyond
the Ohio, has been created since the late war. Its distance is about 300 miles
west of Philadelphia. The variety of its manufactures is striking, and it may
he safely affirmed, that at the seats of justice, in the counties of Delaware,
Bucks, Chester, and Montgomery, which are nearest to Philadelphia, as great a
number of manufacturers, in proportion to their respective population, does not
exist, though the family manufactures are more considerable in these, and
though they have numerous tanneries, iron works, powder mills, paper mills,
blacksmiths, hatters, shoemakers, weavers, and other valuable workmen, in their
villages and scattered throughout their populous townships. This, however, is
the case, in some degree, likewise in the townships of the western scene above
described.

In the midland counties of Pennsylvania, manufactures have resulted from a
flourishing agriculture, and, immediately on their birth, have contributed to
the prosperity of the cultivators. The borough of Lancaster, which is the
largest inland town in the united states, is sixty-six miles from a seaport,
and ten from any practiced boat navigation. The number of families was in 1786,
about 700, of whom 234 were manufacturers. The following is the list of them.
Fourteen hatters, thirty-six shoemakers, four tanners, seventeen saddlers,
twenty-five tailors, twenty-five weavers of woolen, linen, and cotton cloth,
three stocking weavers, twenty-five white and black smiths, six wheelwrights,
eleven ^^pers, six clock and watchmakers, six tobacco and snuff manufacturers,
four dyers, seven gun smiths, five rope makers, four tinners, two brass
founders, three skin dressers, one brush maker, seven turners, seven nail
makers, five silver smiths, three potters, three brewers, three coppersmiths,
and two printers in English and German. There were in 1786, also within
thirty-nine miles of the town, seventeen furnaces, forges, rolling mills and
slitting mills, and within ten miles of it eighteen corn mills, sixteen saw
mills, one fulling mill, four oil mills, five hemp mills, two boreing and
grinding mills for gun barrels, and eight tanneries. The increase since 1786,
must have been very considerable; for the attention of the united states has
been very much turned to manufactures since the year 1787. It may be safely
affirmed, that the counties of Lancaster (in which the borough is) York and
Berks are the most vigorous in Pennsylvania, perhaps in the union, and that
there are none in the state in which there are more manufactures, is beyond all
question. They are all fifty miles or more, from the nearest seaport.
Information through several channels, affords the greatest reason to believe,
that the interior of Frederick and Elizabeth towns in Maryland, Stanton in
Virginia, Lexington in Kentucky and other towns in the southern states, would
prove on examination, similar to those of Pennsylvania, and that the
improvements in necessary manufactures are as visible and as rapid, as those in
agriculture The following account of the size and of the manufactures of
Winchester, in Virginia, is furnished by a person lately a resident in that
place. It appears to exceed the towns of Pennsylvania in the proportion of
manufacturers. There are about two hundred houses in Winchester. Provisions and
wood are low.

There are four or five tan yards. The demand for leather is so great, that it
is generally sold unfit for use.

One rope yard carried on extensively.

One or two coachmakers. Few carri^ges are used, the country being stony and
hilly.

The bakers and distillers brew now and then.

There are three or four distilleries in town. In the neighborhood there are
many.

There are also several oil mills in the neighborhood. The price of flaxseed
is 2 s. and 2 s6 per bushel, Virginia money.

Grist mills are numerous in the neighborhood; and teams are constantly
employed in the transportation of flour to Alexandria: distance eighty miles
(...) carriage 1 dollars per barrel.

One coppersmith, who carries on his business very extensively.

Three tin plate workers.

Eight or ten hatters. Wool hats, of Winchester make, are in much repute, and
are vended in large quantities. Price eleven dollars per dozen. Single hat, one
dollar.

Note. Wool is one third of a dollar per lb. and is often ordered up from
Philadelphia by the Winchester basters.

Twelve or fifteen saddlers.

Note. This manufacture, as well as the hatting, is in a flourishing condition,
and carried on very extensively.

Five or six blacksmiths -- one employed in plating saddle trees.

Three or four wheelrights.

Eight or ten tailors.

Eight or nine shoemakers.

Four or five weavers. Two spinning wheel^makers.

Three or four saddle tree makers.


.

The reflections arising from these facts are highly satisfactory, and as they
open new and extended views of the resources and capacities o^ the united
states they must increase the prevalent disposition of the people to improve
the interior economy of our country. It is devoutly hoped that they may al^^
contribute to remove the apprehensions of our southern and western fello^
citizens, in regard to unjust sacrifices of their interests to those of their
brethren in other quarters, and that they may lead to such further examinations
as will finally evince those immense direct and indirect benefits from American
manufactures, which are sincerely believed to pervade the whole u^^on.

Concerning the manufactures of the united states, as they affect the
mercantile interest.

Many of the ship holders and merchants trading with foreign countries,
suppose, but it is believed erroneously, that they have no interest in the
promotion of manufactures. It is known that Great Britain with seventy millions
of acrea of cultivated land, ships fourteen millions (her whole exports being
near twenty millions, in her own manufactures. The foreign trade of that
kingdom, without manufactures, would manifestly be neither so great nor so
various -- for the value of the produce manufactured is increased from one
hundred to ten hundred per cent, as is also that of the imported raw materials,
which constitute a great portion of their trade. The foreign commerce of the
united states, is already enlivened by manufactures. Ships, boats, oars, and
handspikes, bar^i^on, steel, nailrods, carriages of all kinds, hats, shoes,
cordage, candles, soap, oils of several kinds, starch, hair powder, distilled
spir^ts, malt liquors, cabinet w^^e, plate, puncheon packs, gunpowder,
potashes, brick^, chocolate, mustard, tow ^inens, sail cloth, potter's ware,
sadlery and harn^ss, wool and cotton cards, paper and paper hangings, tanned
leather, books, snuff, manufactured tobacco, and iron manofactures are now
frequently exported to foreign countries. Coastwise there is also a great trade
in these and many other manufactured articles, and in raw materials and
provisions for the manufacturers within the united states.

An argument of great importance to the shipholders, exporters, and
underwriters, and, indeed to the cultivators of the earth, in support of
manufactures is to be drawn from their tendency to promote in an easy, certain,
safe, and cheap way, the naval capacities and strength of the united states.
The transportation of provisions, coal, raw materials, and other articles from
the southern and middle states to the northern, and the diffusion of the
manufactures, of the towns on the coast, throughout the union, already employs
many vessels. The rice, indigo, cotton, hemp, flax, iron, hides, furs, tar,
pitch, turpentine, rozin, wax, tobacco, wood and timber, flour and grain,
shipped from the states, on, and to the southward of the Chesapeak, for the
manufacturers in the middle and northern states, give employment at this time
to a very respectable portion of our tonnage. This cannot be doubted, when it
is remembered that our coasters are 1^0,000 tons, though our vessels in all the
foreign trades probably do not much exceed 150,000 tons; and the former are
entirely out of the reach of foreign restriction, consequently (with the
fishing vessels) are our most c^^tain dependence. The weight of this
circumstance, will be not a little increased by the recollection that the
coasting trade is uncommonly interesting to a nation without transmarine
colonies or dominions.

When we consider the fisheries as one of the modes of creating the powers of
offense and defense at sea, and that our agriculture and commerce, must
therefore be supported and defended by our fishermen, and fishing vess^ls,
among other means, it will be satisfactory to the cultivators, and merchants,
that they will be promoted by the success of our manufactures. Skins and tues
of sea animals, whalebone, and the head matter of the whale, are used by
various man

Washington. Pittsburg. Bedford. Huntingdon. Blacksmiths, 2 5 3 4 Shoemakers, 2
5 2 4 Hatters, 2 2 1 2 Dyers, 1 Weavers, 2 2 2 Reed makers, 1 Sadlers, 1 3 2 2
Saddletree makers, 1 Spinningwheel makers, 1 Nailers, 1 1 Malsters and brewers,
1 1 Potters, 1 Tinners, 1 2 Distillers, 3 1 Wheelrights, 3 1 2 Stocking
weavers, 1 1 Gunsmiths, 3 Ropemakers, 1 Whitesmiths, 2 Total of manufacturers,
32 40 15 32 Total families, The populaion of Washington is unknown but it is
less than that of Pittsburg.
130 40 85

It appears from this table, that in those county towns (or seats of justice)
in the interior and western parts of Pennsylvania, the necessity for
manufactures has occasioned a little congregation of artizans, in the
proportion of twenty-seven parts in one hundred, of the whole village in the
smallest instance, and in the proportion of thirty-seven parts in one hundred,
in the largest. The town of Washington, which is the most remote, and is beyond
the Ohio, has been created since the late war. Its distance is about 300 miles
west of Philadelphia. The variety of its manufactures is striking, and it may
he safely affirmed, that at the seats of justice, in the counties of Delaware,
Bucks, Chester, and Montgomery, which are nearest to Philadelphia, as great a
number of manufacturers, in proportion to their respective population, does not
exist, though the family manufactures are more considerable in these, and
though they have numerous tanneries, iron works, powder mills, paper mills,
blacksmiths, hatters, shoemakers, weavers, and other valuable workmen, in their
villages and scattered throughout their populous townships. This, however, is
the case, in some degree, likewise in the ^ownships of the western scene above
described.

In the midland counties of Pennsylvania, manufactures have resulted from a
flourishing agriculture, and, immediately on their birth, have contributed to
the prosperity of the cultivators. The borough of Lancaster, which is the
largest inland town in the united sta^es, is sixty-six miles from a seaport,
and ten from any practiced boat navigation. The number of families was in 1786,
about 700, of whom 234 were manufacturers. The following is the list of them.
Fourteen hatters, thirty-six shoemakers, four tanners, seventeen saddlers,
twenty-five tailors, twenty-five weavers of woolen, linen, and cotton cloth,
three stocking weavers, twenty-five white and black smiths, six wheelwrights,
eleven ^opers, six clock and watchmakers, six tobacco and snuff manufacturer,
four enough from the north of Europe, to make and distribute gin from Archangel
to Canton, which is really the case, it cannot be doubted that the united
states which have the greatest surphus of grain of any country upon earth,
which are rapidly increasing it, which are further from their consumers than
any nation exporting grain, which have the lumber to make the casks for it, and
the shipping to transport it, and are themselves great consumers of malt
liquors and distilled spirits, it cannot be doubted that a nation thus
circumstanced, must be able to manufacture those articles with facility and
advantage to any extent of the demand. The benefits to foreign trade from the
manufacture of ships, cordage, sail cloth, and anchors, as necessary
instruments, and from those articles and potash, soap, candles, steel,
carriages and other articles, for sale to foreigners here, or as payments or
remittances to them abroad are already too obvious to need more than to be
enumerated: but too much attention cannot be given to our situation,
qualifications, and prospects in regard to the home manufacture of liquors,
considering the disturbed state of the sugar islands, the increased consumption
and prices of all the productions of the cane, the impediments to the ordinary
importation of slaves, the objections to the slave trade which are appearing in
different quarters, the immense population of the manufacturing countries of
Europe, and their consequent necessity to employ in the culture of grain the
lands they recently appropriated to the vine, as well as the impossibility of
their sparing for the making of liquor all the barley, rye, and oats, which
were formerly consumed in that manufacture.

There is also a considerable portion of foreign trade created by the
importation of raw materials and other necessaries for the employment and
consumption of the manufacturers: cotton hemp, bar iron, sheet iron, copper and
brass in pigs and sheets, lapis calaminaris, lead, pewter, wire of every metal,
woolen, cotton, and linen yarn, hempen yarns, hides, skins, and furs, wool,
paper for books and hangings, dyers colors, and some others, varnish, printing
types, bullion for gold and silver smiths, gold and silver leaf, glue,
mahogany, and other cabinet woods, melasses, and crude sugars for distillers
and refiners, manufacturers tools and implements, such as vizes, screwplates,
anvils, hammers, axes, hatchets, knives, awls, pincers, grindstones, hatters
bowstrings, etc. glass plates for looking glass makers and coach makers,
callicoes and linens for printing, morocco skins, and many other commodities
which are expended in the workshops or families of our manufacturers, including
foreign articles of apparel, furniture, food, and drink.

NUMBER III. A continuation of the reflections on the manufactures of the united
states as they affect the mercantile interest.
SOME of the benefits to the coasting trade and other parts of the domestic
commerce resulting from manufactures, have already been intimated in treating
of the manufacture of liquors. Besides these, bark and hides for the tanneries,
iron, lead, steel, copper, hemp, flax, wool, cotton, silk, wood, timber, furs,
tobacc^, flaxseed, and gram, for the manufacturers of those articles, and
provisions, fuel, indigo, and other objects of their consumption and use,
together with the goods made by them, are, and constantly will be purchased,
transported from place to place, and sold, creating a great part of the
employment for 110,000 tons of coasting vessels, exercising a large portion of
commercial industry and skill, and affording a return of profits, on a very
considerable sum of mercantile capital, employed in the business. This branch
of our trade is of peculiar importance; because we have no transmarine
colonies, and while the redundancy of shipping owned by most nations, will
leave us but little chance of materially increasing our vessels in the foreign
trades, the extension we may give, in the course of ten years, to our home
trade and navigation, will probably be very great. We have brought cotton,
sugar, and saltpetre, to manufacture from India, sulphur from the Adriatic,
hemp, flax, and iron, from Russia, copper from Sweden, furs, indigo, and
mahogany, from the gulf of Mexico, and coal for our workmen from England: and
we cannot doubt, therefore, that we shall transport these commodities and
others, from such of the states as produce them, to those which shall create,
or have already established, a manufacturing demand.

Foreign commerce being limited by the combined value of our imports, and
exports, any mercantile capital, which accumulates beyond the sum requisite for
those purposes, would want employment of a commercial nature, if the merchant
were not able to have recourse to manufactures. This is not a mere speculation
in possible events; for considerable trading houses, and others of respectable
standing, have actually entered into such pursuits. Class-houses, rope w^^k^,
powder mills, iron works, steel works, s^tting and rolling mi^ls, grift mills,
naileries, sugar refineries, breweries and distille^ies, the manufactory of
sail ^^^th, and of woolen, cotton, and linen goods, exhibit at this moment
numerous proofs of the fact.

It is too well known to need more than a bare allegation of the truth, that
our ou^ward bound vessels are always completely (...), and that they do not on
a medium return half sail. It will, therefore, increase the profits of the
owners of ships, if the outward cargo can be rendered more valuable by
manufacturing, the goods to be exp^rted. This may be examplified in regard to
wheat and the simple manufacture of s^pe^fine flour. A vessel, which will carry
ten t^ousand b^^rels of the former, at the price of a dollar per busa^^, will
be lad^n for 10000 dolars: but the quantity of superine flour (3,000 barrels)
which the same vessel c^uld receive, will amount, at a proportionate p^^ce, to
the sum of 15,000 dollars. The same qu^^tity of ton^^ge, fi^led with b^ttled
port^r, ^^s^ied spirits, (...) ^^^dage, (...), p^^^l ash^s, ^ar^i^g^^, cabinet
wa^^^, plate, (...), soap, ^^^se^d o^^, paper, hats, shee^, (...), would (...)
m^^h ^^e^e^ v^^^^; and of (...) the ow^ers of the (...), w^u^d be able to
purchase more goods for the return carge, by which the sh^p being saller, would
make a greater sum in freight back. This circumstance is rendered of the more
consequence, by reason of our distance from the greater part of the consumers
of our surplus produce: and it is obvious, that ships will then be most
profitable, when the measurement of all our imports, shall be equal to the
measurement of all our exports. Vessels, which depart and return fully laden,
cannot fail to enrich their owners.

No arguments will be necessary to convince the judicious and reflecting mind,
that the employment of large capitals and of many merchants and traders is most
certain and easy, where there is the greatest number and variety of objects to
buy and sell. As our commercial towns, therefore, have offered manufactured
commodities to those who come thither to trade, they have increased in
business. Pot ash, pearl ash, country rum, domestic liquors, loaf sugar, etc.
have already contributed to swell their exports, by attracting foreign demand,
or increasing the number of profitable objects of shipment. These will
naturally multiply under the hands of our manufacturers, and instead of
markets, in which nothing but lumber, tobacco, stock, provisions, and raw
materials were formerly to be obtained, our seaports will be converted into
magazines, in which all those articles will be purchaseable, and the various
commodities manufactured from them. For these goods in whatever shape,
purchasers will never be wanting: cheap merchandise as certainly attracts
buyers, as water finds its level. Nor is this mere sanguine hope, or ingenious
suggestion; for it is an obvious truth, that the greatest manufacturing nations
in the old world, are the greatest traders to foreign parts. Holland, when most
remarkable for manufactures, traded to the amount of eighty millions of dollars
per annum in the commodities of other countries.

A few general reflections on American manufactures.

The political concord and attachments, which grow out of mutual benefits, are
the most rational and permanent. In this view, the cement, which will be given
to the national union, by the interchanges of raw materials, provisions, fuel,
and manufactures among the several states, is of inestimable value. If European
nations have shown dispositions of amity and mutual forbearance, on these
considerations, it cannot be doubted that sister states will evince equal
wisdom and virtue. If many parts of our union, from policy or temporary
necessity for manufactured supplies, have been willing to exhibit the greatest
liberality toward those foreigners, with whom they have been recently at the
widest variance, it must appear very desirable, that the capacity at once to
accommodate them and engage their regard, should be transferred from distant
strangers, to their own continent, and their own kindred. If the merchants and
manufacturers of the opulent nation with whom the united states so long waged
war, influenced by the hope of our consumption, cried aloud for peace, and, on
the moment of its return, pressed with all the courtesies of commerce to our
shores, the existing friendship of the several parts of the union for each
other must be strengthened by similar influences, as they shall be
progressively created.

The animated prosecution and liberal encouragement of manufactures, is at this
moment a great political duty. The national legislature has increased the
impost on foreign merchandise, to defray the expenses of the Indian war. The
continuance of a great part of the duties is to be no longer than that of the
hostilities which occasioned them to be laid. If the interval should be
diligently employed in the promotion of manuf^ctures, which these duties are
calculated to create and to protect, the temporary injuries of the Indian war
will be accompanied and followed by great solid, and permanent benefits. The
military expense is rendered less burden^eme, by the employment given to our
own workmen. The shoes, boots, horsemen's caps, hats, buckles, buttons,
sadlery, spears, rifles, gunpowder, and other articles for the use of the army,
are made by American manufacturers. It is perceived, that war, which often
interrupts foreign commerce and generally diminishes the prices of agricultural
productions for exportation, has in this instance no effects of that nature;
but by judicious arrangements, may be rendered instrumental to the greatest
support of the landed interest -- the national manufactures. The lamentable
havoc of the field must inevitably diminish the number of our cit^zens; but
there is every reason to beli^^e, that those, who, in the course of the present
war, may fall under the banners of their country, will prove inferior in number
to those who will be drawn, by the influence of the new duties, from foreign
countries, to the standard of American manufactures: and although the most
useful arts are no compensation for the lives of our compatriots, the
acquisition of a greater number of new citizens will counterbalance the
political evil resulting from such a loss, so far as it may unhappily occur.

It is detrimental to the united states that the manufactures they consume are
drawn from nations whose citizens pay much greater contributions to their
government than our manufacturers, and consequently that we so far forth are
subject to their taxes, imposts, and excises. In Great Britain, for example,
their national taxes are seven times as large as ours, in proportion to the
numbers of people in the two countries; and their poor rates and church rate
are each more than double our whole national contributions. The monopolies of
those countries fall heavily upon the consumers, among their citizens; and
those, who purchase their fabries, bear a part of this burden, which lies on
their manufacturers. The commercial charges paid by the English East India
company abroad, amount to one million of dollars per annum; the ^r^^ght and
charges in England are about two millions and two thirds more, exclusively of
duties. The company's civil and military charges would, in two years like the
present, pay all the expenses of our government, and discharge our national
debt. The restrictions on navigation and trade in the European nations also
enhance the price of raw materials and articles of consumption required by
their manufacturers, all which falls ultimately upon the people of the united
states, so far as their fabries are consumed here. Th^se considerations should
induce our most strenuous exertions, to diminish those indirect burdens, and at
the same time they hold out strong promises of a successful issue to our
efforts.

In taking a view of the aff^irs of the united states, and comparing them with
the situation of most of the great commercial nations of Europe, the mind is
immediately impressed with the peculiarity of their being without transmarine
colonies. Though sp^culative politicians have entertained doubts in regard to
favorable effects from such possessions, taking into view the expenses of
their improvement, defense, and government, no question has be^n made but that
the monopoly of their trade greatly increases the commerce of the nations to
which they are appertenant. Of such an advantage the united states do not enjoy
the benefit; and considering this circumstance, and the prevailing disposition
to restrict their commerce, the fisheries, the coasting trade, and manufactures
appear to merit extraordinary attention.

The consideration of manufactures, upon general principles, has been, for
several years, before the leg^slatures as well of the states, as of the union.
The estimation of their importance to the landed and national interest^ appears
to have been y^^^ly heightened by discussion and enquiries into facts.
Ho^sehold manufactures, have acquired universal and de^i^ed approbation. To
th^se which are conducted by labour-saving machinery and processes, by ho^^es
and oxen, and which consequently do not require manual operations, no objection
has been made. Such of them as can be carried on by the manufacturers now among
us, by those who may migrate hither, by the wives and children of our citizens,
and by black women, old men, and children, have not been considered as
diminishing the mass of agricultural industry, but as manifestly promoting it
by new and extensive demands.

The present discussion of the subject will be terminated by remarking, that
although this great subdivision of our political economy has been copiously and
freely treated in every mode, it has not only preserved its original importance
in the public judgment, but has risen in the estimation of the people in every
part of the union -- a fate that rarely attends unimportant truths or dangerous
errors in an enlightened country.

Concerning the imports of the united states.

This part of the national business has given rise to doubts, whether the
united states are really in a prosperous situation. The apprehension is
believed, however, to have proceeded from several errors. The estimation of the
imports has probably been made at the prices current in America, which is more
than the united states pay for them, by the total value of the following
particulars. 1st, Such part of the shipping charges abroad, as accrue to the
benefit of the citizens of the united states, who may be on the spot to make
the shipment: 2dly, that part of the freight upon them, which is paid to our
own vessels: 3dly, that part of the premium of insurance upon them, which is
paid to American underwriters or insurers: 4thly, the whole amount of the
duties, and custom-house sees, on the goods, which amount to several millions
of dollars. 5thly, the amount of the tonnage and fees on foreign vessels, which
are deductions in savor of the country, from the value of the goods imported
in them: 6thly, the porterage, storage, cooperage, weighing, guaging,
measuring, commissions on sales here and other incidental expenses on that part
of the imports which belongs to foreigners: 7thly, the profits of our merchants
on that part of the imports which belongs to them: 8thly, the wasteage of goods
belonging to foreigners between their arrival or time of valuation and the time
of sale: 9thly the benefit of credit, which is not less than two and an half
per cent. on the whole value of our imports: and 10thly, the value of those
importal goods which remain in the country, being the property of persons
intending to become, or who will ultimately become citizens of the united
states. But the apparent o^ conjectural disproportion between the exports and
imports of the united states, will be considerably diminished by the sales of
vessels to foreigners at home and abroad -- the sales of lands to them -- the
expenses of foreigners here -- the expenses of foreign vessels here, and the
cost of their sea stores -- the commissions on the shipments of their cargoes,
and on the disbursement of their vessels, as already observed in treating of
our exports. Besides these, the freight of goods ships to foreign countries in
our own vessels, (not less, probably, than three ^^^^^ns o^ dollars) and the
profits upon all the goods exported on the accou^^ (...) our own citizens,
contribute very much to increase the fund, wherewith ou^ imports are purchased
or paid for. An estimate, which shall compreh^^^ all these it^ras at their true
value, is necessary to form a satisfactory opinion of the balance on our trade.
From such an estimation (which has been made) th^^e would ^e^uh no reason to
doubt our prosperity: nor will this appear quesi^^table, when it is remembered,
that the outward freights in our own vessels, and the duties on goods imported,
amount together to 6,400,000 dollars, which is more than one third of our
exports. The balance of trade has been aptly denominated the metaphysies of
commerce. To determine it with induputable certainty re^ui^es as accurate and
elaborate an in^estigation as a metaphysical question: and though this
assertion proves nothing, it will inspire us with due caution against hastily
adopting unfavourable conclusions.

An opinion somewhat singular and of considerable importance will be hazarded
upon this subject. The united states, to make the utmost advantage of things in
their present improveable situation, should have little or no balance in their
favor on their general commerce. If their exports, outward freights, sales of
vessels and lands, etc. amount to twenty-four millions of dollars per annum,
they will find their true interest in importing the whole value in
well-selected commodities. It is better, for example, that they import
melasses, hemp, cotton, wool, bar iron, hides, skins, furs, saltpetre, sulphur,
copper, tin, brass, paper, mahogany, etc. to manufacture; tools for artizans,
and materials and utensils for constructing works, improving waste lands, and
cultivating farms, and breeding cattle, horses, and sheep; than that they
should bring back the equivalent in gold or silver. The sum we annually import
in articles of that nature, more precious to us than the most precious metals,
would constitute an immense balance in our favor: such, indeed, as would, in a
few years, oppress our country with too copious a circulating medium, or compel
us to export it.

That the exports and other means of paying for our imports are much more
adequate to the occasion, than they were during several years subsequent to the
peace, is manifest from the state of our private credit in Europe.

A distinction, and, it is conceived, a very important one, has been already
intimated in favor of such of our imports as are of a nature adapted to
enlance the value of our lands, or to employ or assist our citizens: and in
regard to those which are for immediate consumption, the quantity cannot be in
proportion to our former imports, considering the increase of population. We
have almost absolutely ceased to import shoes, boots, sadlery, coarse hats,
plate, snuff, manufactured tobacco, cabinet wares, carriages, wool and cotton
cards, hanging paper, gunpowder, and other articles; and we have exceedingly
diminished our impertation of coarse linen and woolen goods, cordage, copper
utensils, tin utensils, malt liquors, loaf sugar, steel, paper, playing cards,
glue, wasers, fine hats, braziery, watches and clocks, cheese, etc: and we
either make these articles from native productions, by which the whole value is
struck off from our imports, or we manufacture them of foreign raw materials,
which cost loss than the goods used to do, especially as they often yield a
great freight to our own vessels. Thus the freight of the melasses to make rum,
imported in one year, at two dollars per hhd. was not less than 140,000
dollars. The same observation occurs as to hemp, cotton, iron, copper, brass,
tin, saltpetre, sulphur, mahogany, hides, dye woods, and other raw materials.

From these circumstantial evidences, there would appear to be little danger of
mistake, in concluding, that our imports, on a medium of two or three years,
have not been disproportionate to our exports, and other safe and regular means
of balancing the amount of our supplies. But though the documents for a
comparison between the present imports, and those antecedent to the revolution,
are less perfect than is to be desired, some which offer are worthy of
attention. Our imports from Great Britain in 1770, making some addition for
those from Ireland and adding 20 per cent. to bring them to their market value,
were worth here above L. 2,400,000 sterling. In this item, the information
obtained from a report of the lords of the British privy council, is
principally relied on, though a part of it is supplementary estimation. To this
sum is to be added, a proportion of the imports into all the American colonies
in 1770, from all the rest of the would but Great Britain, which, after
deducting therefrom L. 73,000 ste^l. for the value imported into Bermuda, the
Bahamas, the northern British colonies, and Newfoundland, leaves L. 1,050,000
sterling, at the value here. The total value of our imports in 1770, would then
appear to have been more than L. 3,450,000 or about 15,000,000 dollars, as they
would have sold in the American market; exclusive of the contraband trade,
which was considerable. This will be seen by a reference to the first number of
these reflections, to be full seven millions of dollars more than our exports at
the same time. If then our imports were to bear the same proportion to
18,250,000 dollars (our present exports) the former might be above 34,000,000
dollars, without creating more alarm than we had then reason to feel. This view
of the subject may convince us, that our imports were too copious, at least in
some quarters, for several years before the war; and hence we find a heavy load
of private debt was created and remains upon the citizens of some of the states
at this day. Happily for the united states, the reduction of the priers of
supplies, by the present freedom of their commerce, by the agency of skilful
merchants instead of planters inexperienced in trade, by the introduction of
machinery in Europe, and by their own manufacturing industry, has kept down
their imports many millions of dollars below that sum, although the import and
tonnage have directly or indirectly contributed to enhance the nominal amount,
without increasing the ^um to be paid for them abroad.

A sketch of the general trade of the united states.

In taking a survey of the American commerce, the attention is pleasingly
attracted to the increase of ship-building, the new manufactories of articles
necessary to the equipment of vessels, and the improvement in the art of
shipbuilding, as well as the superior quality of the materials now used in
their construction. The largest number of vessels built in any one year before
the late war, as far as it can be ascertained, was equal to 24,358 tons; and at
least 32,000 tons of superior quality were built in 1791. The timber and plark
are more chosen, and iron is more copiously used at this time, because the
vessels are not intended for sale, and the sensible practice of salting them,
is becoming very frequent. It is important, too, that the art of ship-building
is diffused more generally than any other equally important one, which is
carried on within the united states.

The export trade in our produce is more beneficial than heretofore to the
landed interest, because the cultivators do not, as formerly, anticipate upon
their crops abroad, by ordering out supplies at the discretion of the European
merchant; to be paid for in shipments of their crops upon their own account and
risque. The pla^^rs in Maryland and Virginia, particularly the tobacco
planters, suffered extremely from an inconsiderate pursuit of that practice
before the resolution. The American merchant is now more frequently their
importer; and as he understands the mode of procuring goods cheap, the real
profits of the import and export trade of the country, are in a greater degree
divided between the planter and the trader.

The reduction of the prices of East India and China goods, of every species of
manufactures in which labor saving machmery and slight apply, and of wines,
occasion our imports to be obtained on more favorable terms. This beneficial
effect is increased by the freedom of our import trade, which lets in the
productions and manufactures of all countries by a direct intercourse with
them, which was formerly forbidden. From the same cause, superior prices for
our produce and manufactured artic^s have been obtained. If tobacco is becoming
an exception, it is to be remembered, that great prices were obtained for it
till lately, and that the extraordinary quantity raised is sufficient to
account for its f^l.

The coasting trade has become very great, and the derangement of the West
India trade must extend it exceedingly, during the current year, from the
failure of melasses. The increase of manufactures, and foreign res^^ctions on
other branches, have contributed to elevate this valuable part of our commerce;
and the former (manufactures) will continue steadily to increase its
importance. The vessels, which take supplies of flour, and many other articles
from the middle and northern states to South Carolina and Georgia, make very
frequent voyages, and they return lets than half laden: but if the planters
should pursue the cultivation of hemp, flax, hops, and cotton, they may come
trick with full cargoes. A similar remark may be justly made in regard to other
states.

The fisheries do not appear to have recovered their former value; but it is
plain, they have increased yearly since 1789: and they are even now more
valuable than they appear to be. The consumption of oil, ^h^debone, skins of
sea animals, spermaceti, and pickled and dried fish, is much greater in the
united states at this time, than it was twenty years ago. The outfits of the
fishing vessels, too, are more from the industry and resources of the country
than was formerly the case. Wherefore the general benefits resulting from the
f^sheries, are probably little less than before the revolution.

Remote as the united states are from all foreign nations, totally unconnected
with their po^itics, and having no temptation to wage war for territory, they
cannot but advance in commercial and agricultural prosperity, if they preserve
order and justice at home. Foreign restrictions will be necessarily less rigid,
as occasions for supplies and pacific services from the united states shall
arise: and these occasions must inevitably exist in every maritime nation,
which shall engage in war, even with a country, which is not itself maritime.

The profecution of manufactures has created some increase of our foreign
trade, and will extend it. If we did not pursue that branch of industry, we
should not import copper, iron, and hemp, from the Baltic; cotton, saltpetre,
and white callicoes from India; and cocoa, dye-woods, mahogany, cotton, and
hides from the West Indies, and the southern parts of the American continent.
Some of these importations are regularly and extensively made; others are
increasing. Without them we should have no intercourse with some of these
countries, and much less than we now have with others. In like manner, our
intercourse with reveral countries is increased by manufactured exports. The
demand for our potash, distilled spirits, ships and boats, steel, malt liquors,
cheese, bar iron, slit iron, steel, gunpowder, carriages, and other articles,
occasions a greater and more beneficial trade with many foreign ports. It is
impospossible to say how rapid and how considerable the progress of this part
of our commerce will be. The exported manufactures of Great Britain, in 1791,
were greater than those of fifty years ago, by twice the value of our present
exports.

It is extremely favorable to American commerce, internal and foreign, that a
variety of changes have taken place in the affairs of the would, which have
opened branches of trade formerly withhold from us by monopoly, or other
circumstances. The act of separation from Great Britain enabled us to trade to
China, Bombay, and Surat; and the enterprise of our citizens soon discovered
the way. The curious perfection of manufacturing machinery in Europe, has made
it the interest of the foreign India compames to fell us their piece goods in
the markets of the cad, without taking them at second hand. The m^^fortunes of
St. D^mingo have increased our commerce in indigo, and will have the same
effect upon cotton, and they are driving us rapidly into an internal trade in
native sp^^ts, which will of comse lead to external commence of the same kind.
This (...) appe^^ to be a matter of great importance, when it is remembered,
that ^^ce the late pea^^, the foreign spirits imported have in some years been
^qu^^ to one fifth of our exports. I h^ ^^lure of ship timber, which beg^^^ to
appear every where in Europe, is enabling the united states to carry on ship
bu^^^ing upon very advantageous terms. The profitable establishment of Several
banks of perfect credit with the most wary and judicious citizens and
foreigners, is at once a proof, and a great mean of commercial prosperity. The
growth of cities, towns, and manufactures, has given to the fisheries a more
substantial basis in a considerable home demand, than they formerly had in a
foreign one. The banishment of paper tenders, and ex post facto laws, and the
interdiction of laws impairing the obligations of contracts, have placed our
commerce upon a more honorable and solid footing, than it ever was before. The
mint, the laws regulating seamen and the fisheries, the appreciation of the
public debt, the spirit of improvement on roads, rivers, and canals, the
discovery of coal near navigable water, the late extension of the post office,
the constant increase of light houses on the coasts, the introduction of
auxiliary arts, and above all, the progress of agriculture, have given
facili^^es, stability, and extension to our trade, which were unknown before
the revolution, and which in the distressful derangements of 1786 and 1787.
appeared beyond the bounds of reasonable expectation.

(To be continued.)
FROM THE AMERICAN MUSEUM. Reflections on the state of the u^^^^n.
NUMBER IV. Concerning the banks established in the united states.
THESE valuable institutions were unknown to us before the revolution, being
added to the political economy in the latter part of the war. The paper
emissions in the times of the provinces, had yielded some of the advantages of
bank notes, though with less safety to those who received them. But the degree
in which they were unavoidably recurred to, in the course of the war, had
completely destroyed the utility of paper money in 1781. The state of public
credit, and indeed of the public affairs in general, as well as the exigencies
of the cultivators, merchants, and manufacturers, required an efficient
substitute for an instrument of negotiation and dealing, of so great compass.
The scheme of a bank presented itself in the manner, which is universally
known, as the most probable mean of accommodating the general necessities,
political, agricultural, and commercial. The promises, which the plan made,
were abundantly fulfilled; and at the same time a standard of public conduct
and action in regard to the rights of property, was unobservedly erected, at a
moment when the recent course of events had rendered it very desirable, as well
from political as moral considerations. It has been found, accordingly, that
the laws which concern property, in the places where banks have been
established, have quickly acquired a stability, if they were good, and have
meliorated, if they were before exceptionable, notwithstanding any supposed or
real errors in the plans or administration of the institutions.

In re^^ecting upon these establishments, one cannot but call to mind a
suggestion, which frequently occurs, that too large a portion of the capital of
the united states, has been applied to them. Few pecuniary operations are of as
much importance. In estimating the extent to which we might have gone with
prudence, an examination of the state of that business in a successful and at
the same time the best known scene of trade in Europe, may be of some use. In
the city of London, the bank of England (exclusively of that of Scotland) has
operated with a capital of more than fifty millions of dollars about forty-six
years. The population of England, on a medium, during that term, has been less
than double that of the united states at present, yet the capital of its bank
has been above five times the capital of our national bank, and near five times
the amount of all the subscriptions which are yet paid into all the banks in
the united states. There are, moreover, a great number of private banks in the
same city, probably not less than sixty in number, some of which have more
capital stock, than any bank in this country, except that of the united states.
The aggregate amount of their capitals is probably equal to that of the bank of
England. Besides these, there are very many considerable private banks
scattered through the kingdom. In addition to these, there are the public and
the private banks of Scotland. If the banks of England and Scotland, public and
private, out of London, be equal to the private banks of London alone, then the
capital of those institutions in Great Britain, will be 150,000,000 dollars, or
above fourteen times as many dollars as there are persons in that kingdom,
though the whole of the stocks of the banks in the united states, which are
paid in, are not equal to three times the number of their inhabitants. Again.
If the banks of Great Britain be measured by the exports of that island, it
will be found, that the latter, at their highest value (ninety millions of
dollars) are only three fifths of their aggregate bank capital, and that our
exports, at 18,250,000 dollars, are above two thirds more than all our bank
capital, which is actually paid in. Taking the British imports at 80,000,000 of
dollars, and those of the united states at 24,000,000, the comparison will be
still more in favor of the discretion, which has been observed in the united
states. But a very important measure of these institutions yet remains to be
applied, by which prudent men will be disposed to test the subject -- the
quantity of specie. The bank capital of Great Britain being, as above stated,
about 150 millions of dollars, and the quantum of specie being never estimated
at more than 22,000,000 l. sterling, or 97,700,000 dollars, the aggregate bank
capitals of the united states, as now paid in (ten and one half millions of
dollars) would be as prudently, and solidly founded on a quantity of specie a
little less than seven millions of dollars. Although it would be impossible to
ascertain the precise amount of the specie of the united states, estimates
carefully made, appear to warrant a belief, that it is equal to that sum. But
while examinations like these seem to abate and even entirely to destroy, the
apprehension that we may have pursued the business of banking to the injury of
agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, some circumstances of a prudential
nature are not to be overlooked. When forming these establishments, we may
commit errors, perhaps, in carrying into one scene too great a proportion of
the capital appropriated to their creation. Hence the sound policy of
subtracting from the mass of the bank of the united states, to establish
branches at New York, Boston, Baltimore, Charleston and (as is said to be
intended) in Virginia, ministering to the convenience, the necessities, and the
interests of government, the planter, the farmer, the merchant, the navigator,
the fisherman, the shipbuilder, the manufacturer and the mechanic, in six
several and variant scenes, instead of accumulating in one great mass, a
superabundant capital -- A political magnet attracting through devious courses
and attaching all things to its own vicinity.

It is possible to err, too, in the disposition of banking establishments, by
superadding to those which already accommodate a particular scene, rather than
introducing the new institutions into places hitherto without them. The united
states contain five or six great local subdivisions of trade, resulting
principally from the imperious dictates of the nature of things. In most of
those great spheres, there is more than one considerable and flourishing
trading town, though there is in each, one which has an acknowledged
pre-eminence. When a reasonable portion of bank capital has been introduced
into one of these commercial metropoles, the establishment of a new bank would
seem to be most expedient in the trading town of the next degree of
consideration. It is true, that so far as the operation is an employment, or
application of the property of individuals, it must be left, (within the laws)
to their own will; but as the act of incorporation places the subject within
the power of the legislatures, and within the sphere of their cares and duties,
so it is highly important that these institutions be modified in their original
formation, upon prin^ciples of distributive justice, in regard to the
reasonable accommodation of the marts of commerce within their sphere of
legislation, and of all the landed citizens, who resort to them for the sales
of their surplus produce, or the purchase of their supplies.

A precious consequence has resulted from the distribution of banks through
different parts of the united states. Like all great objects, these
institutions, while operating very beneficially in regard to the business of a
country, are liable to be rendered instrumental to local party views. Being
committed, as in the united states, to ten several boards of directors,
selected for the service on account of their property, integrity, talents, and
attention to business, and whose primary duties are the legal, discreet, and
beneficial execution of their trust, it is not probable, nor, indeed, is it in
their power, to deviate from their proper walk, into the ground of political
combination and intrigue.

A circumstance observable in the bank of the united states, will not fail to
attract the at^e^tion of cautious men. The portion of public debt, which enters
into the composition of their stock, is the particular contemplated. In this
respect, the bank of England, and the bank of Ireland (which are among the best
accredited of those institutions in Europe) exceed that of the united states in
the proportion of one third. It is very favorable to our institution, that the
national debt, and ordinary and extraordinary expenses of both Great Britain
and Ireland are much greater in proportion to wealth and numbers, than those of
the united states, and that our government is not less free from error, nor
more like to be disturbed than theirs. It cannot, therefore, be more unsafe to
conside in our institution, which contains three fourths, than in theirs which
is wholly composed of public debt. It is, moreover, true, and worthy of
observation, that most of the other banks in the united states (and
particularly the three largest) have voluntarily and by their own operations
placed considerable portions of their stock upon the credit of the united
states, by purchasing largely of the public debt, and by giving at this time
extensive credits founded upon its security. The market value of the public
debt, which is generally greater in specie than its nominal amount, renders
that part of the bank stock, which is composed of it, intrinsically more
valuable than that which is in coin.

Concerning the national industry.

An enquiry into the knowledge or skill, assiduity, economy, (...) frugality,
and good management with which the several descriptions of citizens in the
united states pursue their employments, has never been made. The subject is
copious, and would require much previous enquiry and detail. It is not
intended, therefore, in this place to attempt a developement of it: yet it may
be serviceable to bestow upon it a few brief reflections. The learned
professions will not be brought into view, as they are not strictly of the
nature of the object contemplated. The planters, the farmers, the merchants,
the navigators, the fishermen, the shipbuilders, the manufacturers and the
mechanic, with the persons immediately employed by them, are all which are
conceived to be comprehended in the subject. The body of the planters, that is,
those who cultivate tobacco, rice, indigo, and cotton, are, as a general
description of cultivators, the best informed in regard to the object of their
particular pursuit, though it is manifest that they have abundant matter for
increased attention in perfecting their cultivation, in ascertaining those
species of their valuable plants, which are most excellent, most certain, and
most productive, in the improvement of their implements of husbandry, in the
acquisition of auxiliary implements and machinery, in perfecting the modes of
curing their produce, and preparing it for market and particularly in the
attainment of an adequate substitute for the ordinary species of laborers, a
supply of which has become precarious. It appears to be worth their
considering, too, as well with an eye to profit, as humanity, whether an
advantageous variation in the employment of some of the blacks might not be
made, by introducing upon every estate some of the simpler manufactures to
employ children, old and invalid persons of both sexes, and particularly the
females during that term when two lives depend upon their health.

The merchants, navigators, fishermen, and shipbuilders of the united states
may be safely affirmed to be four descriptions of our citizens, whose industry
is as uniformly energetic and well directed, as those of any country in the
world, though it is certain that a much stricter economy prevails among persons
of some foreign nations engaged in those pursuits -- an example demanding
serious attention.

The manufacturers in some branches pursue their occupations under the
disadvantages of very few errors; yet those citizens would be sensibly
benefited, were they able to relieve themselves of certain parts of their
labor by the attainment of the auxiliary machinery, which are the purchase of
larger capitals than are yet engaged in their line. Circumstances, however, of
various kinds are daily contributing to remove this inconvenience. The bulk of
the manufacturers do not want industry, nor skill enough to succeed in those
simple manufactures, to which it is most their interest to apply themselves. It
may be rather said, that they manufacture ordinary kinds of fabries, from the
nature of the demand, than that they manufacture badly. Their business is,
moreover, progressively advancing, and has felt, on several occasions, some of
them recent, the fostering hand of goverument.

The mechanic branches have been, till this time, on nearly as good a footing;
but those employed in the erection of buildings ought now to seek the and of
such parts of science as have relation to their calling. Architecture has been
little studied. It ought not to be forgotten, that a competent knowledge of it
is no less conducive to economy and convenience, than to elegance and splendour.

The most important of all the employments of our citizens, that of the farmer,
remains to be noticed. It is very much to be feared, that in point of
execution, a candid examination would prove that this best of pursuits is most
imperfectly conducted. The proofs are, innumerable instances of impoverished
lands, bodies of meadow lands, in the old settlements, which remain in a state
of nature, an almost universal inattention to the making or preserving of
manure, the frequent inattention to the condition of the feed grain, evidenced
by the growth of inferior grain in fields of wheat, and by the complexion of
the flour in some quarters, the bad condition of barns, stables and fences, and
in some places the total want of the former, the deficiency of spring-houses or
other cool dairies in extensive tracts of country, the want, or a trifling
stock of bees, the frequent want of orchards, and the neglect of those which
have been planted by preceding occupants, the neglect of the sugar tree, the
neglect of fallen timber and fuel, accompanied with the wanton felling of
timber trees for fuel, the neglect of household manufactures in many families,
the neglect of making pot-ash, the non-use of oxen, and above all, the growth
in substance, of large bodies of farmers on lands of ordinary quality, while
the inhabitants of extensive scenes, hardly extract from much superior lands, a
miserable sustenance and more miserable clothing.

It is a fact very painful to observe, and unpleasant to represent, but it is
indubitably true, that farming in the grain states, their great best business,
the employment most precious in free governments, is, too generally speaking,
the least understood, or the least economically and attentively pursued, of any
of the occupations which engage the citizens of the united states. It is
acknowledged, however, with satisfaction, that great changes have been lately
made, and that the energy, spirit of improvement, and economy, which have been
recently displayed, promise the regular and rapid melioration of the
agricultural system. All other things have taken a course of great improvement
-- and it cannot be apprehended that the yeomanry of the united states will
permit themselves to be excelled by any of their brethren, in the most precious
characteristic of a good citizen -- usefulness in their proper sphere.

Concerning the laws which entrench upon the rights of property.

It is not remembered that the acts of the national legislature have been
deemed by any of the possessors of any description of property, unfavourable to
their rights, except the proceedings in regard to the public debt. It is no
less curious than true, that a part of the community affirm that the government
have injured the country by too much liberality, while another part charge the
legislature with impairing the contract.

In taking a view of this subject, it should be remembered, that the state of
things when it was taken up, was in every respect critical and uncertain. It
was difficult to say what the country could perform, and more so to tell what
they would comply with. It was perceived, on the one hand, that as such a state
of public ^re^^t as preceded the year 1789, would ruin a government more
energetic than that of the united states, so its immediate melioration was a
matter of the most imperious necessity. On the other hand, the nonexistence of
one single efficient funding system, yielding a full specie interest, in any
one state, and a number of painful facts in the financial operations of some of
the legislatures, created a conviction, that there was either an inability or
disinclination in all to render a specie payment in the full extent of the
explicit contracts. Some of the contracts were found not to be explicit
containing promises of large sums under the name specie, which it could not
have been the expectation of the government at their date to discharge, or of
the creditor to receive in coin; because they promised to pay as specie, what
was notoriously much less valuable than contracts previously liquidated at
forty nominal dollars for one in coin. The claims of the original creditors
also were strongly represented, while the conduct of every state in the union,
in its particular finances, had discountenanced a discrimination in their
favor; and the established laws of property were urged against a reduction of
the owners principal: questions were also raised about the original intrinsic
value of the money and property received by the ^nired states, leading to the
devising of a new scale of depreciation. By infusing into the propositions for
a settlement of the debt, two qualities -- a reduction of the interest and a
temporary irredeemability of the principal, which have cost the debtor nothing,
and the creditor very little; by vigerous and well devised efforts to recover
credit at home and abroad, an arrangement was formed, and executed, which has
given better payment to the creditor than could reasonably have been hoped. It
is plain to every observer, that, but for the indiscretions of some of the
public creditors, who superadded to the trials and fluctuations of a
convalescent state of credit the late unparalleled difficulties of the holders
of the stock, the three species of the public poper, taken at a medium, would
have been worth the nominal value in the market. Hitherto it never has been.

There yet remain, however, in the united states some laws which affect the
rights of property. The operation of instalment and valuation laws is not
terminated in two or three of the states. In two or three others, paper money
is a tender in all or in particular cases. In some quarters, real estate is
protected from execution for debt; and in others, the judgments of the courts
are suspended, if the income of the estate bears a certain proportion to the
creditors' demand. In some of the states, preferences are given to the claims
of citizens, before those of citizens of the other states, or of foreigners;
and a variety of ill exists in many quarters, in the form of insolvent laws.
The sederal constitution, and those of several of the states, have barred the
introduction of these evils in regard to new transactions; and the states which
are not chargeable with them, in regard to past affairs, have reaped, in the
last three years an ample reward for their wisdom and virtue. Property may
almost be called the palladium of communities. Their moral safety at least is
always at hazard, when that is unwarrantably invaded. In every case wherein
difficulties to obtain his own are interposed in the way of the honest and
industrious citizen, his loss is not all the public injury. A fellow-citizen --
perhaps a member of a legislature (and through him a legislature itself) is
corrupted in his principles.

Concerning the public debts.

When it is remembered, that the terms upon which the debts of the states were
assumed by cougress, are not more favorable than those on which the sedral
debt was funded, and when it is called to mind, that the unassumed debts of all
the states are less valuable in the market than those which were assumed, it
will appear, that the public creditors of the union have little reason to
complain. When the advantages of the temporary irredeemability, and of the
opportunity of investment in the bank are recollected, the little reason, if
any existed, appears to be dissipated. On the other hand, when it is
remembered, that long after the promulgation of the funding system and of the
bank, the possessors of specie might have procured certificates upon very
advantageous terms, that the united states draw a fifth of the profits of the
bank without furnishing any of the capital, that the grant of irredeemability
is temporary. and so perfectly nominal, that we have now a right to pay off
more than we have money to discharge; when it is also borne in mind, that the
terms given by congress to the public creditors, were exceeded (by law at
least) in several of the states, and that two of them have added to the
benefits of their citizens from the funding system, without discriminating in
favor of the original creditor, or against the present holder, the arrangement
of the general government appears to be consistent with the public interests
and with the wisdom of the state legislatures. If the funding system of
congress has been thus equally just and beneficial with those of the states, it
has been accompanied with many advantages which cannot be questioned. Public
credit is restored -- in consequence of that, the contracts for all public
supplies are made for cash on the deliveries or performance -- the money, thus
early promised, is paid by anticipation on the proffer of indubitable security
by the various coutractors; and interest in favor of the united states has
been allowed for the promptitude of her treasury -- half a million of dollars
of specie claims have been discharged; and purchases of the public de^t, which
bring the extinguished sum to about 2,400,000 dollars, have been made, or
provided for -- a series of payments since the mouth of September (required by
the most distinguished ally of the united states, in the late war) have been
made to serve the occasions of their unhappy colonists. Loans upon five per
cent. upon four and a half per cent. and upon four per cent. interest, have
been effected in two opulent scenes in Europe, solely by means of our restored
credit, to repay in the hour of need, to that ally, the moneys lent to the
united states in a like season. All that is due has been paid. ^^rt of that
which is not yet due has been anticipated. Mo^^ies anxiously desired by France,
have been discharged by means of loans at a lower interest. Both nations are
benefited and pleased; but our country is honored by the transaction. To have
neglected our public credit, would have been to lose these advantages.

It will not be questioned, that there is in every walk of life or business a
gr^^^er proportion of money, than was observable two years ago. Public works
and buildings of every kind, and of species and values ^^^^nown among us till
the present time, are undertaking every where. Private buildings, of equal
variety, and comparative value, are spring^^^ up. The price of lands is
advanced. The raw materials, though (...) greater abundance, sell for larger
prices To what on (...) so powerful, so adequate, can these things be ascribed
(...) to the (...) of part and re-animation of the whole, of a public de^^,
ten^^i^^ ^^^^^r than the amount of all the specie ordinarily c^^culating in the
country?

The relief of some of the states from their burdens, has been another
beneficial consequence of the funding of the debt. It is but a few years since
one of the most frugal, vigorous, and productive counties in Pennsylvania rose
against the collectors of the taxes. The appreciation and sale of the immense
mass of sederal securities, owned by that state, has enabled her to discharge
all her obligations, though she has abolished her general land tax, and
discontinued her excise, both of which she has collected for forty years.

Some anxiety has been created by the share of our debt, which foreigners have
obtained. But this was a powerful means of bringing the whole into its present
beneficial action, by elevating its actual to its nominal value. It is not at
all probable, that it will be drawn from the country. It has been observed, in
the most tranquil and prosperous state of Europe, that a great proportion of
the families of those foreigners, who have made large investments in the united
states, either in the times of the provinces, or since the revolution, have
become inhabitants of this country, even when in its rudest infant state. At
this serious moment, when almost every transatlantic country seels or
apprehends disorders, our chances are infinitely increased. The united states,
advanced in the means of subsistence comfort, and of elegance, now present to
them an object of greater desire in a tranquil liberty, which they are
struggling to obtain, a teeming agriculture, and a prosperous commerce, both
foreign and internal. Conformably with these reflections, we may affirm, that no
great object in our affairs has failed to attract the notice of the foreigners,
who have engaged in our funds. The internal navigation of South Carolina, North
Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York, are among
the witnesses of this truth. The banks, both national and state, the turnpike
roads, and toll bridges, the sales of city estates, of cultivated farms, and
particularly of unimproved lands, commerce, ship-building, manuta^tures,
confirm the fact. Let us continue to exhibit an honest spirit in our laws and
constitutions, an efficient execution of them, and due abstinence from
unnecessary wars, and there cannot exist a doubt, that we shall draw much more
copiously from the population, the arts, and the funds of Europe, than they
will draw from those of the united states.

There exists in the united states one description of private difficulties and
encumbrances, which must engage the solicitude of every feeling mind, which, by
an examination into the detail and interior of our affairs, has been led to
observe them. The cases alluded to are those of the citizens of two or three of
the states, who are burdened with heavy debts or claims, which originated
before the revolution. Whatever they may be finally adjudged to pay, the sum
must be so great, and due from so many persons, as to give it the resemblance
of a public debt: and as in one of those states i^^as already occasioned some
sacrifices of their principal landed estates, very far below their value, so it
will probably operate in the others, unless some extensive means, abundantly
adequate to the occasion, can be brought to operate, before or at least at the
time of executing the judgments of courts, which may be obtained. No resource,
competent to the purpose, appears at all likely to present itself, unless it be
the funded debt or stock of the united states and of the several states. The
method by which this description of property can be rendered most immediately
and effectually subservient to the interesting purpose of preventing the
destruction of many families, would seem to be the fixture of it at a stable
unfluctuating rate, adequate to its proper value, under the existing
circumstances of the united states. It is manifest, that in such a state of the
market, the dealers in the debt and others would sell out, and would not buy in
again, and that they would seek objects for their money in the trade, the
manufactures, the buildings, and the lands of the country, which might promise
them more advantage. A tenth part of the value of the public debts, applied to
the lands of the united states, would raise them every where to their real
value, so that the debtor who might be under a necessity to sell an estate,
could dispose of his property not only without a ruinous sacrifice, but
probably to uncommon advantage. The proprietors of lands and buildings which
might be under this probability of sale, would sustain no risque or injury in
selling their estates for the public stock.

It may be alleged, that the holders of the debt will not go into ^cenes so
remote to make investments: but there are facts, which appear to warrant a
different opinion. The funds of New England have been brought into
Pennsylvania, for investment in lands of several kinds -- the money of
Pennsylvania and Delaware has been invested in mills and lands in Virginia --
the greater part of the ironworks of Maryland (the most costly estates in our
country,) were bought and worked by the capitals of residents in Great Britain
before the revolution. The same fact existed in one great instance in New
Jersey. The greatest cedar swamp, on the waters of the Delaware, that supplies
the Philadelphia market, is owned in New England; and people and vessels from
that quarter, are annually sent to perform the business of it. The American
public creditors, citizens of the united Netherlands, have recently purchased
eight hundred tracts of land in a part of Pennsylvania, further from
Philadelphia than the banks of James's River, York, or Rappahannock. In short,
if the history of this country were examined, as it regards this subject, it
would demonstrate, that the landed property of it has been constantly animated
by the application of the moneys of distant capitalists.

FROM THE AMERICAN MUSEUM. Reflections on the state of the union.
NUMBER V. Concerning the foreign debts of the united states.
AT the commencement of the present government in 1789, the united states were
indebted to France, Holland and Spain, and to the foreign officers of the late
army, in a sum amounting to near twelve millions of dollars. Near a million and
two thirds of this sum, was due for arrears of interest, inattention to which,
would have been too disgraceful to have admitted of a hope of public credit,
until measures were taken for its discharge. Above a million and one third of
the principal sum had become due, and the time of other installments was coming
round. The resources of the country had been examined and considered, but not
tried. The claims of these foreign creditors, were, originally, the most
delicate in themselves; and in the case of France, the state of her revolution
in the summer of 1790, placed her demand in a situation peculiarly interesting.
It was perceived that the adoption of the federal constitution and the measures
taken to restore public credit, had made strong and favorable impressions on
the European money lenders: and it was not doubted, that the arrears of
interest and the principal due, might be discharged by loans, upon terms which
would produce very little loss. The requisite authorities were given by the
legislature, which resulted in the borrowing of a sum equal to the discharge of
all the exigible debt. But as the occasions of the French were likely to be
emergent, and there was reason to conside, that a firm and steady pursuit of
the financial system, which had by that time been adopted, and an adherence to
the upright spirit of the constitution, would rapidly meliorate the credit of
the united states, it was deemed expedient to extend the authorities to borrow,
to a sum equal to the whole of the foreign debt, provided the installments not
due could be discharged by means of loans advantageous to the united states.
The interest of above seven millions of the foreign debt, being at the rate of
five per cent per annum, it was not doubted, that the money might be obtained
so as to render the discharge of the part, not exigible, really advantageous.
It has accordingly happened, that a sum adequate to the principal and interest
due, has been borrowed within the terms of the law, so as to support the credit
and good faith of the united states, and critically to accommodate the people
of France. The further expectations of congress have also been fulfilled; a
considerable loan at four and on half, and two loans at four per cent, having
been effected, so as to realize an advantage in the discharge of a large part
of the principal, which was at an interest of five per cent. The united states
having thus commuted their foreign debt, further than is due, with honor, and,
on a medium of the whole, with advantage, are relieved by these operations from
any possibility of pressure to perform the remainder of their European
engagements. The friends of our public credit, of our national safety and
respectability, and of the revolution of France, among the citizens of the
united states, will reflect upon this actual course of events with cordial
satisfaction.

The conclusion: being miscellaneous thoughts on the government.

The people of the united states enjoy a peculiar felicity in the possession of
principles of government and of civil and religious liberty, more sound, more
accurately defined, and more extensively reduced to practice, than any
preceding republicans. There is not one iota of delegating or delegated power,
which is not possessed, or may not be acquired by every citizen. It is true,
that there are in practice, several deviations in the distribution of powers to
the various subdivisions of the country, and to the proprietors of certain
descriptions of property; but these are acknowledged departures from principle,
and are known to have arisen out of the antecedent state of things. They could
not be immediately corrected without violent struggles and disorders, and
without injury to the property of descriptions of citizens, too great for the
country at any former period to compensate. Mild remedies are, however, daily
applied to these partial diseases; and it is manifest, that the course of time
is diminishing, and will finally remove them. The right of legislative
interposition, on the part of the chief magistrate, which, in the practice of
another country, has been commuted for an unlawful and inju^^ous influence, is
here wrought into the essence of the constitution, and is not only exercised in
the independent and uncontrouled consideration of every resolution and bill,
but by the practical application of the negative.

The execution of the office of the chief magistrate has been attended through
a term of almost four years with a circumstance, which to this nation and to
the surrounding world requires no commentary -- a native citizen of the united
states, elevated from private life to that station, has not, during so long a
term, appointed a single relation to any office of honor or emolument.

The senatorial branch of the government has been created and continued in a
mode preferable to that which is pursued in any other nation.

The representative branch is equally well constituted.

The military code, for the government of such troops as are occasionally
raised and employed, is well calculated to produce discipline and efficiency,
when time is allowed for the purpose, and consequently to render the united
states respectable in the eyes of foreign nations.

All christian churches are so truly upon an equal footing, as well in practice
as in theory, that there are and have been in the legislative, executive, and
judicial branches of the general government, persons of the following
denominations -- episcopalian, presbyterian, independent or congregational,
quaker, Lutheran, reformed, Roman, and probably others, which do not occur.
There have been, and indeed yet are, a few ecclesiastical distinctions in the
state governments, which reason and time are rapidly destroying. It is easy to
perceive, that religious liberty, supported by the national constitution, and a
great majority of the state constitutions, cannot but attain, in a very short
time, the same theoretical and practical perfection in the remainder, which it
has acquired in them.

The independency of the judiciary, as well in the tenure of their stations as
in the permanency of their compensations under the federal constitution, and
most of those of the states, is an advantage over the ancient republics and the
generality of modern governments, of inestimable value in regard to liberty and
property.

The united states, being without transmarine or separated dominions, are
exempted from two inconveniences, which have resulted from them. An immense
naval force has been found necessary to defend such territories, and protect
the trade with them in time of war, and the difficulty of devising for them a
free legislation, has hitherto proved insurmountable. The British nation
declared, that they had a right to legislate for their colonies and dominions
in America, Asia, and Africa, in all cases whatsoever, and the revolution of
the united states, turned upon that cardinal point. When we observe, that the
French nation, devoted as they are to the pursuit of liberty, have not yet been
able to devise any system of government for their colonies without a dernier
resort to the legislature of France, it will be a source of comfortable
reflection to the friends of free and efficient government in these states, that
we are not perplexed by the necessity of so delicate, important, and difficult
an operation.

It has been unfortunate for most nations, as well ancient as modern, that they
have had no settled pre-existing mode of altering, amending, or renovating
their political system, to which they could resort without a deviation from the
legal course of things, hazarding the public tranquillity, and often freedom
itself. -- It is equally happy for the people of the united states, that in
their federal government, and in most of those of the states, there exists a
provision, by which those necessary and desirable ends may be obtained, with
whatever zeal, without recurring to irregularity or violence. Fundamental
principles being already settled by common consent, and being duly recorded in
the constituions, the people cannot long mistake the nature of a measure, a
law, or a political maxim, which is really opposed to them; and when their
judgment is decided upon any one or more derelictions of those principles, of
magnitude sufficient to induce an effort for reform, their will cannot be
successfully resisted. The consequence of this state of things will be, that
the mass of error will not easily accumulate so as to become insupportable,
being kept down by these orderly natural exertions of the community to relieve
themselves at an earlier stage of inconvenience. Too great a facility to change
would, however, be likely to produce fluctuations, injurious to order, peace,
property, and industry, if not to liberty itself: but as the mode of performing
the amendatory or alterative operations is slow, and consequently deliberate,
light or dangerous changes would be very difficult to accomplish. In this view
there appears to be very little probability, that changes from free or
representative government, will take place, or that any modification of
hereditary power will be introduced into the governments either of the states
or of the union. The people will never deliberately consent to the abrogation
of those clauses in the several constitutions, which explicitly provide both in
general terms, and in particular detail, for free or republican government: nor
does it seem easy, considering the degree of perfection we have obtained and
the constant and moderate operations of the amendatory clauses, to accumulate
sufficient public evil or grievance to produce one of those convulsions, which
the ambitous are wont to seize as the moment to introduce by force, a despotic
government. Even local circumstances conspire to favor the permanency of
liberty in these states. Being too remote from any foreign nation, to render a
war, requiring a great army, at all necessary, that instrument, so often used
by ambitious leaders, is not likely to be placed within the reach of the
enemies of freedom, while the union remains entire. It is worthy of the most
particular observation and remembrance, that a dissolution of our government
would immediately open a door to this danger, as the several states or little
confederacies, would each deem it prudent to maintain a larger army than is now
requisite for the whole. The history of Greece will instruct us that by this,
more than by any other possible measure, we should be prepared for the military
domination of some modern PHILIP, or some new ALEXANDER. A strong union and a
tranquil liberty would be miserably exchanged for such a state of things

It is an evident truth that the penal laws of these states, have been
gradually mitigated since the epoch of their independence; and it is no less
true, that the number of crimes does not bear so great a proportion to the
population, as was formerly the case, though an universal relaxation of the
police took place in the late war. It is, perhaps, an ill symptom of the state
of things, in a society, when mild laws, strictly executed, are incompetent to
the preservation of order and public happiness. Our penal codes are, upon the
whole, among the least sanguinary; and it is believed, they are not cruel, even
in those unhappy cases, which impel the community to extremities. The
constitution of the united states has extracted all the gall from the
punishment of offenses against the national safety, by correcting the power of
legislating concerning them with a mildness unknown to the systems of most
countries. It is honorable to the humanity and magnanimity of the American
people, that this proceeding flowed from them, almost unanimously, four years
after the revolution war. Future ages will do justice to a nation capable of
such an effort at a moment so particular.

Taking the united states at large, there are few or no countries in which, at
this time, the just demands of private creditors can be obtained by a more
certain, a more expeditions, or a (...) expensive course of legal process.
There are some local, and a very few general defects yet existing; but they are
vanishing before the spirit of the general and most of the state constitutions.
There is no part of the public conduct of this country more striking than the
firmness with which they have applied the caustic to some inveterate cancers,
which had been derived to their pecuniary system, principally from adventitious
causes. It proves the existence of that virtue and fortitude, which qualify a
nation for republican government. There are some exceptionable circumstances,
yet to be done away; but the successful efforts, which have been made, justify
a confident expectation, that they will yield ere long to the powers and
influences which have eradicated much greater evils of the same kind.


